An Exploratory Study of
Co-located Collaborative Visual Analytics Around a Tabletop Display
Petra Isenberg∗,† Danyel Fisher† Meredith Ringel Morris† Kori Inkpen† Mary Czerwinski†
∗ INRIA

† Microsoft

Research

(a) Analysts begin by searching for (b) A document is pulled out of a (c) A document is zoomed to be read (d) The workspace can be flexibly ardata.
search result list.
and analyzed.
ranged and shared.
Figure 1: Several different aspects of the Cambiera system in use during a document analysis task.

A BSTRACT
Co-located collaboration can be extremely valuable during complex
visual analytics tasks. This paper presents an exploratory study of
a system designed to support collaborative visual analysis tasks on
a digital tabletop display. Fifteen participant pairs employed Cambiera, a visual analytics system, to solve a problem involving 240
digital documents. Our analysis, supported by observations, system logs, questionnaires, and interview data, explores how pairs
approached the problem around the table. We contribute a unique,
rich understanding of how users worked together around the table
and identify eight types of collaboration styles that can be used to
identify how closely people work together while problem solving.
We show how the closeness of teams’ collaboration influenced how
well they performed on the task overall. We further discuss the role
of the tabletop for visual analytics tasks and derive novel design
implications for future co-located collaborative tabletop problem
solving systems.
Index Terms: K.5.3 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Group and Organization Interfaces
1

I NTRODUCTION

Visual analytics tasks can have amorphous structure, ambiguous
goals, and large amounts of data [14]. Many visual analytics problems, therefore, can be best solved by groups of analysts working
together, face-to-face. For example, Chin et al. [5] found that intelligence analysts highly value the ability to collaborate face-toface: “It’s when all of our analysts get together and work out the
differences and challenge each other with facts that we get to a better and more prominent answer.” Despite these benefits, we have
surprisingly few technologies to support co-located visual analytics: instead, teams typically share one screen or work on separate
∗ e-mail:petra.isenberg@inria.fr
† e-mail:{danyelf|merrie|kori|marycz}@microsoft.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

computers, side by side. New technologies, such as interactive surfaces, offer increased screen real estate and multi-touch capabilities to build novel face-to-face collaborative workspaces. Yet, there
have been few studies reporting on design and use of collaborative
visual analytics workspaces for interactive surfaces. We try to fill
this gap by providing a rich description of pairs working collaboratively, face-to-face, on a visual analytics task, using a tabletop
system designed specifically for these tasks. We studied teams of
two people solving the VAST 2006 Challenge, an intelligence analysis task that involves the exploration of a large text document collection. This task resembles many other scenarios in which pairs
collaboratively attempt to solve complex problems over a large text
corpus: for instance, lawyers making sense of a set of case files,
military intelligence analysts trying to comb through millions of
documents, co-authors researching old newspapers for help with
a new story, or historians browsing through historic texts to bring
past events into context. In these and many other tasks, analysts
have considerable experience working face-to-face on traditional
physical tables [5]. Our goal is to more fully understand the consequences of providing a digital tabletop analytics environment that
incorporates the benefits of a shared space for synchronous collaborative work as well as computational support for searching and
data sharing. Studying and formalizing the nature of collaborative
analysis activities within such an environment is valuable to inform
our understanding of digital tabletop visual analytics systems and
provides valuable design advice for future systems, as we shall discuss. We begin by reviewing the Cambiera system [10], and then
present a study and discuss our observations. Our goal is to address
the digital table as a context for co-located visual analytics: to describe how pairs approached the problem on the table effectively;
to discuss what features helped pairs with the analysis task, and to
describe what additional features would be even more beneficial in
supporting complex problem solving on the tabletop.
2

R ELATED W ORK

Our study is a rich examination of how teams communicate and
coordinate face-to-face around a visual analytics tabletop system.
While researchers have explored various tools for visual analytics
support, our focus on co-located tabletop collaboration is unique

179

and revealed novel patterns of interacting that have not before been
reported thoroughly. In this section, we discuss work that has inspired our own through a focus on collaborative work with complex
analysis tasks and visualization support.
2.1

Distributed Collaborative Problem Solving

Most research projects exploring collaborative problem-solving
have supported distributed, rather than face-to-face, collaboration.
For example, Balakrishnan et al. [2] addressed the question of how
teams can share visualizations remotely to solve a complex problem. They found that a visualization was most effective when both
partners had full access to the shared visualization and could both
synchronously interact with it; in a follow-up study [3], they further
found that collaborators were more effective when they each had
control over parts of the data. We include an implicitly shared context in our system, where we give each analyst independent access
to all data items and data interactions on the table. Brennan et al. [4]
take a slightly different approach by requiring explicit sharing and
merging of data views during distributed analysis. This way, team
members can work alone on a subtopic, and then switch to a shared
view that supports joint sensemaking. Like our system, Paul and
Morris’ search-oriented CoSense [16] provides collaborators with
awareness support: teammates can see each other’s web search histories, as well as the documents that they each have found, in order
to support collaborative information seeking. Keel’s system [13]
for distributed analysts provided awareness by analyzing information from a team member’s workspace and suggesting relevant data
to other remote analysts, allowing for implicit information sharing.
In contrast to these systems, ManyEyes [21] social visualizations
connect people who may not have any previous relationship. People can asynchronously share data, create visualizations, and collaboratively explore, annotate, and comment on the visualizations.
In contrast to these systems for distributed problem solving, our
work addresses face-to-face collaboration around a shared display
and fundamentally differs in terms of the workspace setup and the
ability for team members to communicate quickly and effortlessly
about the data on the surface. In addition, it allows team members to
distinguish themselves in meaningful and useful ways. We included
some of the features employed earlier for distributed systems—such
as support for parallel work and joint search histories—in our system and study, as they seem to be valuable.
2.2

Co-located Collaborative Problem Solving

Tabletop technologies can allow teams to easily share tools and information face-to-face, and researchers are still learning how best to
leverage tables for complex tasks. Research on collaborative visual
analytics on tabletop displays is still in its infancy (e. g., [11]). We
therefore discuss work from the Tabletop community that addresses
more complex analysis tasks.
WeSearch [15] is related to our work in that it supports search,
browsing, and sensemaking activities. Team members can share
web searches, snippets, and annotations during their investigations.
The DTLens system [6] demonstrates how focus+context techniques can be used for exploring large maps and diagrams on an interactive tabletop. DTLens addresses an important issue for collaborative problem solving: when multiple people simultaneously interact with information, parallel exploration may be hindered when
interests between team members differ. DTLens resolves this with
a notion of ownership, in which individuals can only edit their own
views of the data. In contrast, CoTree, a collaborative tabletop system for the comparison and analysis of hierarchical data [9] allows
collaborators to use multiple independent views and visualizations
of the same dataset. These can be explored in parallel or brought
together for comparison without any sense of ownership. WeSpace
[22] addresses the issue of providing individual views, and parallel
exploration by allowing researchers to bring their own visualiza-

180

Figure 2: Two search widgets. The top search widget (“bse” is minimized. The bottom widget is maximized; each vertical bar represents
a document that contains the word “fda.” The documents are ordered
by publication date. The fourth and fifth documents also have green
stripes and contain the word “bse.”

Figure 3: Overview of the system in use. Each person issues
searches starting from their own search button in front of them (highlighted by circles). Touching the button brings up a keyboard (Figure
1a) to type search terms and issue the search. Here the left analyst
issues blue, and the right issues orange searches.

tion applications on their own laptops to a multi-display environment. The table here is used to coordinate views from the different
laptops on a wall around which shared viewing, discussion, and interpretation can happen. However, as the display is controlled by
individual laptops, the system does not specifically facilitate simultaneous interaction with the shared views of the data. In our system
we combined several of these approaches. We allowed collaborators to share data and work with multiple views of the same data
source. We also made ownership explicit through color-coding but
did not restrict view access. The next section describes these features in more detail. Finally, while a number of systems have been
previously developed to support the complex tasks involved in intelligence work (e. g., [4, 13, 19]), to our knowledge there have been
no studies of other systems in use in a tabletop context supporting
visual analytics tasks.
3

C AMBIERA : TABLETOP S YSTEM D ESCRIPTION

Our study examines pairs analyzing a shared document collection
using Cambiera [10]. Cambiera is one of the first tabletop systems
designed specifically for co-located collaborative visual analytics.
It currently runs on the Microsoft Surface, a multi-touch tabletop
display. As a tabletop system, Cambiera encourages analysts to
face each other around the tabletop, while analyzing large text document collections collaboratively. Cambiera features four fundamental operations:

Search for documents: Each team member starts their analysis
with Cambiera by searching for relevant documents by calling one
of four on-screen keyboards from the search button in front of them
(Figure 1a and Figure 3). Each keyboard specific to and oriented
towards just one analyst returns a color-coded search result widget which holds virtual representations of the documents returned
(Figure 2). Frequency bars under each document represent the total
number of times the respective search term occurs in the document.
The color hue of the widget is determined by the team member who
issued the search. While hues between search words are only subtly different (and each analyst may not remember them in detail),
each person is vividly distinct; in addition, the analyst can touch a
document to see what words are associated with it.
Search result exploration: Each search widget can be expanded
to see the returned list of documents ordered by their publication
date (Figure 2). By running a finger across the document representations, detail-on-demand information is shown for each document.
This information includes who has previously issued the search,
what other search terms (regardless of searcher) found the same
document, and which sentences contained the search term.
Document analysis: documents can be pulled out of search result lists (Figure 1b) and then freely placed in the workspace. By
performing a zooming gesture the document’s text can be accessed
within a document reader (Figure 1c).
Workspace organization: All objects in Cambiera can be
moved around the table, re-oriented, resized, or closed. Each analyst can place and stack documents and search results on the tabletop as they find most useful (Figure 1d). An analyst can also spin
the documents around in order to push them to the other side, one of
the several ways that Cambiera allows people to share documents.
One of the unique features of Cambiera is its support for colocated awareness. Each individual search widget is tagged with
a unique, user-dependent color. Each document within the search
widget in turn is annotated with colored stripes corresponding to
the search terms that have been found within them. Because each
search widget has its own color, the colored stripes on the search
results indicate when they have been found by more than one
word. In Figure 2, for example, one team member has searched for
“FDA” (Federal Department of Agriculture); another has searched
for “BSE” (Bovine Spongiform Encephalitis). The colored stripes
indicate that the last two documents found by the search for “fda”
also contain the word “bse.” When documents are pulled out of a
search result list, they maintain the colored bars that indicate which
search generated them. In the document reader (Figure 1c), the text
highlights all search terms which have found this document, regardless of which team member issued them. In addition, all states of
a document include a specific icon (in the search result list, minimized in the workspace, and maximized in the reader) which indicates whether the document has been read, by whom and the shading of the document’s background color gives a relative indication
of read frequency. Since previous studies of collaborative data analysis have shown that team members frequently switch to phases of
parallel work [12, 20], these awareness features were designed to
encourage co-located team members to connect more closely with
others and to be able to more easily synthesize their individual analysis results. We refer to the accompanying video for an overview
of the Cambiera system in use.
4

U SER S TUDY

To design visual analytics tabletop tools for co-located collaborative work we need to understand how these systems are used by
teams. In particular, we need a better understanding of how teams
coordinate their activities over a tabletop and which specific system
features are best suited to support effective co-located collaborative
data analysis in this context. Our study was designed to provide a
rich description of collaborative visual analysis on a tabletop dis-

play targeting this information need. In this exploration, we were
guided by questions of understanding collaborative analytics on the
tabletop.
• How do teams work together and coordinate their work with
the tabletop?
• What patterns of collaboration do they carry out?
• How can their work patterns be used to inform the design of
future interfaces for collaborative problem solving?
4.1 Participants
It is extremely difficult to obtain professional intelligence analysts
for real-life intelligence analysis scenarios; therefore, we followed
the procedures used by the VAST 2006 Challenge [7], which provides a baseline task that closely models an analysis scenario, but
can be carried out by non-analysts. We describe the task further
below. We recruited 15 pairs of people who were familiar with
data analysis. Participants were required to have a Master’s (or
more advanced) degree, and to have self-reported as enjoying puzzles or mysteries. The members of each pair knew each other and
had previously worked together in some form; subjects were coworkers, friends, family members, and married couples. Participants ranged in age from 25–55; ten couples were mixed-gender;
three both women; two both male. On average participants spent
72 minutes (stddev(σ ) = 12) working on the task.
4.2 The VAST 2006 Challenge
We based our experiment around the VAST 2006 Challenge, codenamed “Stegosaurus” [7], a scenario that entails finding a hidden
weapons-smuggling plot. Stegosaurus was developed by the National Visual Analytics Center at Pacific National Labs. We chose
“Stegosaurus” because it is increasingly recognized as a standard
visual analytics task [1]. The dataset is available to the public to
download, and is usable by non-experts without training. Nonetheless, it is a complex task that requires participants to connect and
infer facts buried in a set of several hundred documents. We used an
extended version of the Stegosaurus document set containing 240
digital and 6 paper documents. Cambiera does not currently support search of non-textual materials like maps and images. Thus,
we preloaded Cambiera with all of the newspaper and fact sheet
articles but provided paper print-outs of the map and other images.
The task comes with a vague goal of figuring out a car crash;
from there, the analyst needs to work through the dataset. No single document tells the whole story—of the 246 documents, just ten
have true bearing on the story, while several others provide some
background information but are not necessary, and the rest are irrelevant. Solving the task requires carefully filtering out irrelevant articles, reading articles in detail, and making several intuitive leaps.
In between stories about fruit-picking season, one document tells
us that people who ate at an apple festival got intestinal poisoning,
probably from tainted meat. A second article says that a batch of
apples stored in a silo was contaminated with nerve gas. It requires
searching, reading, and intuition to recognize that the symptoms of
nerve gas were likely mistaken for intestinal poisoning, and that
they came from the same apples. Collaboration has the potential to
improve the effectiveness of the analysis in several ways. Teams
can cover more documents in the same amount of time, can discuss
evolving hypotheses and contribute facts they may have found individually. At the same time, collaboration can be a mixed blessing if
team members fail to share and/or synthesize their results. The goal
of our evaluation is to study more closely how teams work together
in solving this task with our tool, and to derive further requirements
and guidelines for tabletop visual analytics tools.
4.3 Procedure
Our study used the VAST 2006 challenge data loaded in Cambiera.
Participants were seated on opposite sides of the table, and re-

181

ceived a fifteen-minute tutorial on the features of Cambiera using
a sample dataset, during which they were encouraged to experiment with the system and ask questions freely. They were read an
introductory letter to the “Stegosaurus” problem, which explained
the task context. That letter includes a starting clue that suggested
a first document to read. Since our focus was on observing the
pairs’ collaborative interactions with each other and with the system, and less on performance outcomes, we wanted to ensure that
they were able to make progress in the task, and that they continued working. For this reason, we provided assistance to teams who
did not progress in the task. The experimenter running the study
was familiar with the dataset, and so was able to monitor teams’
progress. When teams stopped making progress, as judged by the
experimenter (e. g., reading and re-reading distracter documents or
reporting to be stuck) the experimenter provided assistance. During an assist, the experimenter did not provide new information, but
rather asked the participants to clarify previous ideas that they had
raised. We maintained consistency of assists by using only one experimenter, who followed a written protocol. Participants were also
provided with pens and notepads for taking notes, and a small set
of auxiliary images that are part of the “Stegosaurus” scenario. Participants reported their results verbally at the end of the study. We
terminated the experiment when the team could produce a coherent
story when asked for their hypotheses, and ended all experiments
at one and a half hours. After the study, participants independently
filled out a questionnaire (due to a technical error, three pairs did
not fill out the questionnaire). The questionnaire elicited information on participant demographics and subjective awareness experience. Finally, the experimenter interviewed the pair to understand
how they approached the problem and to get their feedback on the
technology. Originally, we designed three experimental conditions
that varied aspects of Cambiera’s visualization; in the different conditions, three different color schemes were used to subtly convey information about which documents one’s partner had read and which
terms they had searched for. In a formal statistical analysis of the
data we did not find significant differences between the number of
searches performed, documents read, documents/searches passed
between participants, or facts connected in each condition. Thus,
we report observations that apply to all pairs, regardless of condition.
4.4

Data Analysis

In order to fully describe the event, we captured a variety of sources:
each experimental session was video- and audio-recorded; in addition, the software captured a screenshot every minute and a timestamped event log for interactions with the tabletop. One experimenter took notes in real time; a second experimenter engaged in
a two-pass video coding in order to get a rich understanding of
the ways in which teams solved the task. During the first video
coding pass the following information was coded: collaboration
styles based on a code set by Tang et al. [20], roles adopted by
participants, use of awareness features, use of external information
(shared or private notes), breakdowns or conflicts in group work,
and how often workspace items were shared. After the first coding
pass it became evident that the code set from Tang et al. [20] had to
be extended to accommodate the different study situation. Whereas
the original code set was developed for a situation in which participants shared the same representation, our participants could work
with data, representations, and views of the data in parallel. Therefore, we extended the code set to more clearly distinguish when
people shared views of the same data and when they were looking
at the same data but using copies of the same information items
and thus had different views of the same information. During the
second coding pass, the video coder also took more detailed timestamped notes on when participants switched to different types of
collaboration styles using the extended code set as well as extended

182

notes on which facts and documents teams found as they progressed
through the task. Written transcripts of participants’ answers to the
post-session questionnaire were coded into higher-level categories
including awareness (e. g., which information was missing or helpful), work styles (strategies, roles, sharing, and collaboration), and
tool features commented on (liked and missing features). The log
data was further parsed and quantitatively analyzed. Notes taken
by participants and used during the experiment were also collected
and analyzed. Together, the detailed analysis of video, field notes,
system logs, and interview data provided a rich understanding of
how participants solved the task, worked with Cambiera, and how
they engaged with each other.
5 S OLVING A C OMPLEX P ROBLEM C OLLABORATIVELY
With the exception of some research papers [1, 5] and the VAST
contest reports, there are few descriptions of how users work on
complex analysis tasks, and none of them discuss collaborative aspects in detail [18]. In this section, we describe the major strategies
our participants adopted to solve the complex VAST challenge.
5.1 Starting from a First Clue
The introductory letter read to the participants explicitly mentioned
an initial document; all participants started by finding this initial
document. Next, teams chose different strategies to collaborate or
divide their work: in nine of the teams, both partners worked together to read the first article: either one member would wait while
the other found the article, or both searched for it in parallel. In
the other six teams, one team member volunteered to read the document; the other began to search for other terms they believed to be
relevant (“conspiracy”), or searched for interesting locations on the
provided map (“missile silo sounds interesting”).
5.2 Iterative Searching and Reading
After working on the first document, teams engaged in an iterative
process of searching for and reading documents they had found.
The task required participants to connect facts from a number of
different documents; this is reflected in the large number of documents that participants searched for, found, and read. Teams issued
on average 50 searches with 42 unique search terms. An average
of 90 of the 240 documents were then selected from these searches.
70% of these documents were opened and read by one or both team
members (63 documents on average). Interestingly, 58 documents
on average were read more than once. We observed that participants revisited previous documents after they or their collaborator
had an insight about their work so far, or found new information
in other documents. The remaining 30% of all documents pulled
out of the list were never opened but left on the tabletop. We suspect that these documents were kept as bookmarks or items to be
checked later, and then were later determined to be unnecessary.
5.3 Information Sharing and Collaboration
As participants worked on the dataset, they adopted different collaboration styles. At times, they would work on the same problem,
even reading a single document together; at other times, they would
separate to work on different problems. These different collaboration styles allowed them to flexibly investigate temporary hypotheses, test ideas, and continue to build a narrative. In order to more
closely understand which information and views of the data space
participants were sharing and collaborating on at a given moment,
we coded their interactions based on their data views and personal
interactions. We identified the following eight different collaboration styles and activities that participants adopted (see Figure 4 for
illustrations on each collaboration style):
DISC: Active discussion about the data or task. Limited system
interaction (e. g., pointing to items or scrolling in documents).

VE:

View engaged. One person is actively working; the other
watches and engages in conversation and comments on the
observed activities, but not interacting with the system.
SV:
Sharing of the same view of a document or search result.
Participants either look at the same document reader or the
same search result list together at the same time.
SIDV: Sharing of the same information but using different
views of the data. Participants for example read the same
document but using their own copies (views) of the document.
SSP: Work is shared to solve the same specific problem. Both
read different documents from a shared set. For example, participants issued a search for “injured driver,” divided the work and each person read one half of the documents.
SGP: Work on the same general problem but from different
starting points. For example, both participants search
for documents to find information about the injured driver
but start from different searches (e.g. “injured driver” and
“obituaries”) and consider different sets of documents.
DP:
Work on different problems, and hence different aspects
of the task. For example, one person is interested in the injured driver, the other searches for events around the missile silo.
D:
Disengaged. One person is actively working, the other is
watching passively or is fully disengaged from the task.
During the video coding we recorded time-stamped event-logs
for each of these collaboration categories. We further grouped them
into those describing ’close’ collaboration (the first five codes) and
’loose’ collaboration (the last three codes). Close collaboration was
generally characterized by active sharing of information and discussion of hypotheses. During phases of close collaboration, teams
shared these temporary hypotheses, looked at related information,
and pursued similar questions. During phases of loose collaboration, explicit verbal sharing of information and evolving hypotheses was less frequent as team members were looking at less related
information. Our coding revealed that teams showed high task engagement, with very little time spent disengaged (D) from the task
(under 1% of the time on average). Overall, we observed a tendency for groups to share information and hypotheses frequently,
with eleven (of 15) groups spending over half of their time in close
collaboration. We refer to those eleven groups as closely coupled;
the remaining four groups are loosely coupled.
In loosely-coupled teams, participants spent on average 60%
of their time working in parallel, and only infrequently interacted
with their team members. Loosely coupled teams spent the dominant portion of their time pursuing different searches and ideas,
but working on the same general problem (SGP). In SGP, teams
were trying to answer a common general question such as “what
is the involvement of Boynton laboratories” but starting from different searches. The video coding revealed that 43% of their total
task time was spent in this condition. In these groups, team members worked largely in their own part of the workspace with separate
search results and documents; they would discuss (DISC) what they
had found 7% of the time. The bottom row of Figure 5 shows one
loosely-coupled team.
Closely coupled groups spent on average 70% of their time
closely interacting with the other team members. They spent the
most time working from a shared set of documents (SIDV, taking
24% of their total task time). They were also likely to examine the
same views as each other (SV, 13%). Further evidence for close
interaction between participants in closely coupled groups is the
overall discussion time (DISC) with 11%, and the time spent discussing and analyzing the same views (SV) of the data with 13% of
the total task time, compared to just 5% for loosely coupled teams.
The top row of Figure 5 shows one closely coupled team. How

much information participants shared and how frequently they connected to others had an influence on how well teams were able to
connect the facts and progress through the task. We discuss this in
more detail in Section 6.
5.4

Presenting the Solution

Groups were successful in finding the documents required to solve
the task. Eleven of the 15 groups found all ten critical documents;
the remainder missed one or two. It is worth noting that while the
dataset was large, all teams successfully found most of the critical
documents in the first half the experiment. While participants had
found most of the relevant information by that time, however, they
had typically not managed to connect the pieces of information they
had into a coherent hypothesis. During the study, the experimenter
paused the teams half-way through to find out what they thought
was going on. Much to our surprise, members of several of the
teams had radically different working hypotheses from their partners: in one dramatic example, one participant had been pursuing a
hypothesis centered around a political intrigue, while the other was
working on a terrorism question. As a result, the checkpoint turned
out to be accidentally invaluable for several of the teams. The
checkpoint was sometimes the first time when participants would
link subtle details together: one person would express a hypothesis (“it was e-coli poisoning”) and the other would realize that an
intuitive leap had been missed (“no, the apples were poisoned!”).
After the checkpoint, however, teams began to better find the value
of coordinating; almost all of the teams had a unified story by the
last stage.
6

T HE VALUE

OF

C OLLABORATION

We observed a substantial degree of variance in how much team
members chose to work together. Groups spent anywhere from 32%
to 92% of their time in close collaboration. This variability manifested in different amounts of information sharing between groups,
impacted how Cambiera’s features were used, and also led groups
to be more or less successful the task overall. In order to illustrate
how different collaboration strategies impacted how well groups
performed in the task and how they used Cambiera, we begin by
discussing two different teams’ strategies in detail.
6.1

Strategy Examples

Group 2: Working Closely Together
The two participants in this group were close friends and coworkers. They found all ten critical documents, made all eleven
connections with no assists, and solved the complete task correctly
in 70 minutes. Both team members worked closely coupled for
92% of the time (Figure 5, top). They had a clear work strategy:
they searched and browsed the results in parallel but read interesting articles together, and exchanged 13 documents. They were able
to rapidly identify connections between facts, and moved through
the study very efficiently. Since these participants worked very
closely, with frequent communication throughout, they generally
had very good awareness of what each other were searching for.
Each made sure that their partner read important documents that
they had found, so Cambiera’s awareness features were less critical for this group. As a result, the pair used query coloring less to
track their own searches, and more as a way of finding documents
that looked to be information-rich. In particular, they preferentially
read documents that had several stripes (found by several searches),
and that had not been read before.
Group 5: Failing to Combine Knowledge:
Participants in Group 5 were friends, co-workers, and experienced puzzle solvers. They had coordinated multi-hundred-person
puzzle-solving competitions, and so felt very confident about their
ability to solve the mystery. During the 69 minutes of their work,

183

loose collaboration

close collaboration

DISC

VE

SV

SIDV

SGP

SSP

D

DP

Figure 4: Teams adopted eight different collaboration styles which influenced how much information was shared among them. In this image, the
item in SV represents one shared document (view). In SIDV both partners look at the same document (same color) but using their own views.
In SSP team members read different documents from a common search (same shade of color), in SGP team members read documents on a
common general topic but starting from different searches, and in DP both read documents on different topics (different color).

Group 2

92% Closely Coupled

Group 5

33% Closely Coupled
Task time

Figure 5: Times two groups spent in close (yellow) and loose (blue) collaboration the time of the task. The top group spent 92% of its time in
close collaboration while the group on the bottom just spent 33% of their time closely coupled. White bars indicate times groups spent talking to
the experimenter to summarize current hypotheses or ask questions.

6.2

Assists
0

0.90

4 most closely coupled teams

1

0.85

Group 2

2

0.80

3

0.75

4

0.70

5

0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40

loosely coupled teams

0.35
0.30
2

3

Group 5
4

5

6
7
Debriefing Score

8

9

10

11

Figure 6: Relation between debriefing score, percentage of time a
group spent closely coupled, and number of assists per group.

The Value of Close Collaboration

After closely studying the behavior of our groups we were interested to find out whether the overall pattern of collaboration was
linked to how successfully groups were able to solve the task. We
calculated a debrief score as proposed for judging the 2007 VAST
contest [17] from the debriefing of our participants. At the end of
the study we asked participants to report the current hypotheses they
had derived. We recorded correctly reported, incorrectly added, and
missing facts to form our score. Figure 6 gives an overview of the
percentage of time each group spent closely coupled (vertical axis)
and their debriefing score (horizontal axis). Except for two outliers,
groups that spent more time in close collaboration generally had a
higher debriefing score in our study.
Our study differed from the scoring of the VAST contest, however, in that some groups received assists during the study. Whether
a group required an assist is another indication of how well it was
able to work on the task. The four groups which required no assists spent over 69% of their time in close collaboration. Loosely

184

0.95

Percent Closely Coupled

they found all critical documents but only found five connections
and required assistance three times, which was among the worst
performance outcome of the study. Both participants reported that
they were accustomed to working separately, trying to figure out a
puzzle on their own. As a result, they adopted a loosely coupled
work style, working closely coupled only 33% of the time (Figure 5, bottom). After reading the initial document together, they
each chose a part of the problem that was of interest to them. As
they worked, they would look for documents that might help their
current approach, and periodically mentioned their thoughts aloud.
They spent substantial portions of the task unaware of each others’
work. It was not until the experimenter asked for a status update
that they began to realize what information they were missing. The
group spent much of the study working separately on different problems (DP), periodically checking in. During the task, both partners
issued 78 searches; they later reported that they had gotten lost in
the sheer quantity of results they had found. Because they spent
most of the time working on different problems, they infrequently
found overlapping documents; as a result, they almost never used
Cambiera’s awareness tools.

coupled team required between 2–5 assists. The results for our four
most loosely and closely coupled teams are presented in Table 1
and highlighted in Figure 6.
These results suggest that coupling style was linked to teams’
success in the task. Pairs that synchronized frequently on their discoveries, in general, did better than those that did not. They connected more facts and required fewer assists. In the task, many of
the connections between documents and ideas were subtle and required a leap of insight. For example, participants had to realize that
what seemed to be e.coli symptoms in one document might well be
a poisoning in another document. Pairs who worked on the same
problem (“let’s see if we can find other discussions of the poison”)
were better able to make these connections, while pairs who worked
completely independently (“I’ll work on the corruption story; you
work on the murder”) appeared to be less successful. For example, Group 5 (discussed in the previous section) is one example of a
group that did not work closely together, and did not perform well

Table 1: Debriefing score and assists for the four loosely coupled
teams (top) and the four most closely coupled teams (bottom).
Group

Debriefing Score

Assists

Closely Coupled

7
5
8
3

6
5
4
3

2
3
5
3

32%
33%
39%
46%

12
2
15
1

10
10
9
11

0
0
0
3

74%
90%
90%
92%

on the task overall (see Figure 6). The summaries that they gave
each other infrequently included the critical facts that they needed
to make connections. Similarly, working too separately was a detriment to other pairs.
Overall, teams that were more successful—that is, reported more
correct and fewer incorrect facts, and got fewer hints—were ones
that spent more time closely coupled. Note that this correlation
does not suggest causation: that is, it is unclear whether success on
the task leads to coupling or coupling leads to success. It is likely to
be a combination of both: in many teams, we observed pairs of participants working independently until one of them found something
that seemed promising. Frequently, finding a critical document during separate work led pairs to switch to a more closely coupled style
to discuss intermediate results, to read the critical document or other
related documents together, to interpret the facts found up to that
point, or to offer/ask for help. This was echoed during the debriefing session where eight of the fifteen pairs explicitly stated that they
tended to work in a form of divide-and-conquer style. They would
first go off and do individual work and then come together when
they had found a partial solution or hypothesis to report or wanted
to get the other person involved for validation.
6.3

Suitability of the Tabletop as a Collaborative Visual
Analytics Workspace

During the study, the tabletop was the collaborative center of users’
engagement in the task. Cambiera was designed to take advantage
of the tabletop setting through specific features that allowed participants to share and organize information freely similar to what
would be possible in a physical setting. Two key benefits arose
from using tabletop that would not have been as accessible in
either a multiple-display or a shoulder-to-shoulder configuration:
artefact-centered information sharing and face-to-face interactions.
Both sharing and face-to-face work enhanced collaboration: partners were able to point to and manipulate documents and searches
that they felt were relevant, and point to documents that their partners could see. During discussion (DISC) periods, team members
did not need to turn away from the table in order to talk face-toface but instead discussions stayed focused on the shared information artefacts, while being able to easily pull in and compare
related information. In the debriefing session, one team member
said: “sometimes [my partner] and I fight about who gets to use
the computer so it was nice to share that. One person standing and
another sitting that’s never a collaborative act, here we’re assembling a whole thing together.” Others stated that working face-toface helped them, “we kept talking the whole time and we assigned
things to each other.”
Several team members volunteered that they particularly liked
the direct-touch nature of the tabletop for sharing electronic documents. In the debriefing session, 11 of the 15 pairs highlighted the
ease of sharing documents as one of their favorite and most useful
features of Cambiera. Five pairs expressed that they particularly en-

joyed working in a face-to-face setting. Last, the tabletop seemed
to allow people to think about the task in a different way: “I liked
the direct touch: it’s more human, less technical.” While some of
this enthusiasm can be attributed to the novelty of touch input, all
teams approached the table without hesitation and felt encouraged
to interact with the system.
The face-to-face tabletop setting and the ability for both partners
to synchronously search and read was a strong benefit for the complex problem solving context. We observed several instances in
which the collaborative setting contributed to participants making
progress in the task. Team members shared and reflected on each
others’ ideas, cross-validated hypotheses by sharing documents and
results, and engaged in repeated discussion about current hypotheses and strategies on how to proceed further. We observed all pairs
talking to each other, gesturing toward searches and documents on
the tabletop, and generally utilizing the shared reference point of
having a tabletop in front of them. In the questionnaire, 23 of 24
participants “agreed” or “strongly agreed” that they knew what their
partners were working on, suggesting that the tabletop provided a
strong context for mutual awareness.
We note that some teams felt that the Microsoft Surface tabletop,
in its current form, was a constraint. At 2’×3’, and 1024×768 pixels, team members often felt cramped, wanting a higher-resolution
and physically larger display for document reading. The lack of
a physical keyboard meant that typing was more cumbersome and
error-prone than on a physical keyboard. While many of the tabletops on the market suffer from similar difficulties, some projects are
beginning to explore larger-scale work surfaces [8] and integrated
keyboards.
7

I MPLICATIONS

FOR

D ESIGN

In summary, our study found that working face-to-face around the
table was a successful way for pairs to solve the complex problem.
The setting allowed participants to approach the problem quickly
and effectively. All participants immediately immersed themselves
in the task and made use of the various features Cambiera offered.
One of the surprising findings of our study was that task success and
time spent working closely together were highly correlated. This
was not a challenge of information finding: every team found most
or all of the critical documents; the only question was whether they
were able to draw the connections between them.
Based on our findings, we draw some design implications for
improving Cambiera as well as other co-located collaborative
problem-solving tools.
7.1

Design for Transient Behavior

The complex problem required collaborators to react to emerging
information and hypotheses and required the team to frequently reassess and change their current work strategies. As there was no
obvious best way to solve the task, teams often started out with different strategies. The support of a wide variety of work styles and
collaboration strategies is a challenge for the design of collaborative
problem solving tools. It is insufficient to support just one strategy,
since different team members employ different strategies, often in
parallel, and pairs frequently shift strategies depending on the current stage of the task. Cambiera, for example, offered flexibility
through free workspace organization and repositioning of searches
and documents. Team members used Cambiera to engage in different analysis activities in parallel: to search, read, and extract
information at any given time without influencing others’ work. By
allowing team members to create their own copies of documents
and search results as needed, and by not forcing participants to explicitly share resources, these flexible work behaviors were able to
emerge. We recommend that collaborative systems continue to allow teams to smoothly choose which collaboration style best fits
their task requirements and work styles.

185

Cambiera, however, did not offer sophisticated storage or sharing mechanisms, but participants did request features for relating
data to each other and sharing partially-assembled conclusions. The
challenge in offering these mechanisms is to design them in a way
that they can easily and fluidly be changed, re-appropriated, or morphed depending on task progress and current questions that the team
is trying to answer. For example, we envision interactive mechanisms that can easily rearrange facts based on different semantic arrangements as well as team members’ preferred placements. Other
collaboration tools for complex tasks could similarly benefit from
flexible methods to arrange and share information, even outside of
an intelligence analysis task.
7.2

Encourage Closely Coupled Work

Pairs were able to take advantage of the unique affordances of the
tabletop—the face-to-face interaction and direct manipulation of
objects—to organize their thoughts, share ideas, and work through
the problem. Pairs that worked for too long in parallel were less
successful in connecting the facts they found, and so had trouble
solving the challenge. The awareness features built into Cambiera
were meant to bring teams closer together by encouraging conversation about documents that both team members had read or found.
While participants found this subtle awareness information useful
and valuable, we conclude that stronger indicators would be more
beneficial. These could make more obvious visual connections between common information that team members are reading, that are
placed in close proximity, or that have been stored in the workspace.
Collaborative annotations and notepads may also have encouraged
the loosely coupled teams to re-connect.
8

C ONCLUSIONS

We presented a detailed exploratory study of a complex collaborative problem solving activity around a digital tabletop display. We
studied Cambiera, a tool for collaborative analysis work with text
document collections. The contributions of this study were a set of
findings on our digital tabletop setting as a context for co-located
problem solving. We explored its suitability, identified eight collaboration styles which pairs adopted while solving the problem collaboratively, and described how collaboration impacted their success in the task. In particular, our study showed that Cambiera—
in the digital tabletop setting—was a successful work context for
complex problem solving. Our task required teams to constantly
react to new information, to re-interpret what they had found, and
to re-assess their strategies. Hence, participants worked together in
a variety of work styles, supported by Cambiera’s flexible collaborative search, organization, and sharing mechanisms. We found
that teams that connected most often about their individual findings,
and worked closely together throughout, were more successful at
the task and required fewest assists. Based on these observations,
we offered recommendations for features that could be used to improve co-located problem-solving tools more generally. In particular, support for teams to make ad-hoc changes to all aspects of their
current work strategies as well as features that encourage them to
share information and connect with each other frequently, are worth
considering.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank our participants for taking part in the study, our coworkers at Microsoft for participating in the pilot studies, Sheelagh
Carpendale for valuable feedback on the paper, and Chris North for
introducing us to the VAST challenge data and tasks.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. Andrews, A. Endert, and C. North. Space to Think: Large HighResolution Displays for Sensemaking. In Proc. of CHI, pages 55–64,
New York, USA, 2010. ACM.

186

[2] A. D. Balakrishnan, S. R. Fussell, and S. Kiesler. Do visualizations
improve synchronous remote collaboration? In Proc. of CHI, pages
1227–1236, New York, USA, 2008. ACM.
[3] A. D. Balakrishnan, S. R. Fussell, S. Kiesler, and A. Kittur. Pitfalls of
information access with visualizations in remote collaborative analysis. In Proc. of CSCW, pages 411–420, New York, USA, 2010. ACM.
[4] S. E. Brennan, K. Mueller, G. Zelinsky, I. Ramakrishnan, D. S. Warren, and A. Kaufman. Towards a Multi-Analyst, Collaborative Framework for Visual Analytics. In Proc. of VAST, pages 129–136, Los
Alamitos, USA, 2006. IEEE Comp. Society.
[5] G. Chin, Jr., O. A. Kuchar, and K. E. Wolf. Exploring the analytical
processes of intelligence analysts. In Proc. of CHI, pages 11–20, New
York, USA, 2009. ACM.
[6] C. Forlines and C. Shen. DTLens: Multi-user Tabletop Spatial Data
Exploration. In Proc. of UIST, pages 119–122, New York, USA, 2005.
ACM Press.
[7] G. Grinstein, T. O’Connell, S. Laskowski, C. Plaisant, J. Scholtz,
and M. Whiting. VAST 2006 Contest–A Tale of Alderwood. In
Proc. of VAST, pages 215–216, Los Alamitos, USA, 2006. IEEE
Comp. Society.
[8] B. Hartmann, M. R. Morris, H. Benko, and A. D. Wilson. Augmenting
Interactive Tables with Mice & Keyboards. In Proc. of UIST, pages
149–152, New York, USA, 2009. ACM.
[9] P. Isenberg and S. Carpendale. Interactive Tree Comparison for
Co-located Collaborative Information Visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1232–1239,
Nov./Dec. 2007.
[10] P. Isenberg and D. Fisher. Collaborative Brushing and Linking for Colocated Visual Analytics of Document Collections. Computer Graphics Forum, 28(3):1031–1038, Juni 2009.
[11] P. Isenberg, M. Sedlmair, D. Baur, T. Isenberg, and A. Butz. Proceedings of the VisWeek workshop on Collaborative Visualization on Interactive Surfaces—CoVIS 2009. Technical Report LMU-MI-2010-2,
Ludwig Maximilias University Munich, Munich, April 2010.
[12] P. Isenberg, A. Tang, and S. Carpendale. An Exploratory Study of
Visual Information Analysis. In Proc. of CHI, pages 1217–1226, New
York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM Press.
[13] P. E. Keel. Collaborative Visual Analytics: Inferring from the Spatial
Organization and Collaborative Use of Information. In Proc. of VAST,
pages 137–144, Los Alamitos, USA, 2006. IEEE Comp. Society.
[14] B. Mirel. Interaction Design for Complex Problem Solving. Morgan
Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2004.
[15] M. R. Morris, J. Lombardo, and D. Wigdor. WeSearch: Supporting Collaborative Search and Sensemaking on a Tabletop Display. In
Proc. of CSCW, pages 401–410, New York, USA, 2010. ACM.
[16] S. A. Paul and M. R. Morris. Cosense: Enhancing sensemaking for
collaborative web search. In Proc. of CHI, pages 1771–1780, New
York, USA, 2009. ACM.
[17] C. Plaisant, G. Grinstein, J. Scholtz, M. Whiting, T. O’Connell,
S. Laskowski, L. Chien, A. Tat, W. Wright, C. G¨org, Z. Liu, N. Parekh,
K. Singhal, and J. Stasko. Evaluating Visual Analytics at the 2007
VAST Symposium Contest. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 28:12–21, 2008.
[18] A. Robinson. Collaborative synthesis of visual analytic results. In
Proc. of VAST, pages 67–74, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2008.
[19] J. Stasko, C. G¨org, and Z. Liu. Jigsaw: Supporting Investigative
Analysis Through Interactive Visualization. Information Visualization, 7:118–132, 2008.
[20] A. Tang, M. Tory, B. Po, P. Neumann, and S. Carpendale. Collaborative Coupling over Tabletop Displays. In Proc. of CHI, pages 1181–
1290, New York, 2006. ACM Press.
[21] F. B. Vi´egas, M. Wattenberg, F. van Ham, J. Kriss, and M. McKeon.
Many Eyes: A Site for Visualization at Internet Scale. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5):1121–1128,
Nov./Dec. 2007.
[22] D. Wigdor, H. Jiang, C. Forlines, M. Borkin, and C. Shen. WeSpace:
The Design Development and Deployment of a Walk-up and Share
Multi-Surface Visual Collaboration System. In Proc. of CHI, pages
1237–1246, New York, USA, 2009. ACM Press.

