Keynote Address
How Will Big Pictures Emerge From a Sea of [...] Data?
Luis A. N. Amaral
Northwestern University

Abstract
Every year since the article “How Will Big Pictures Emerge
From a Sea of Biological Data?” appeared in Science, the
question becomes more compelling. We are now accumulating information about biological sequences, structures, and
interactions faster than we have the power to make sense of
them. For hundreds of years prior to this, practical considerations coerced biological research into reductionism. There
are simply too many components in a biological system
for a biologist to examine the whole picture with the tools
formerly available. Over the past decade this has rapidly
changed as biological information has become cheap and
plentiful due to the advent of high-throughput tools, making
it possible for the first time to ask questions on time and
length scales that were previously intractable. The relaxation of the practical limitations on systems-level analysis has
also brought a change in the philosophy of how we regard
biology, moving towards a holistic method of research and
interpretation.
This places systems biology in stark contrast to traditional biological research, and for good reason. In the words
of Denis Noble, “Systems biology is about putting together
rather than taking apart, integration rather than reduction.
It starts with what we have learned from the reductionist
approach; and then it goes further.” This shift from reductionism is essential, for as we know from studying complex
systems, the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. With
this new approach we are able to explore scientific territory
that has previously been untouched due to physical impossibility and philosophical differences.
The complexity of the tangled web of nonlinear interactions between genes, proteins, and the environment necessitates the development of simplified models to illuminate
biological functions. Merely generating networks of interactions is not enough, providing us with far too much information in a single view without emphasizing the important
features of the map. When we use Google maps and look
at a picture of the United States it doesn’t show us every
city, we would never see Evanston, Illinois being shown at
that level of detail. Only large and recognizable cities are
shown to help us orient the map. Once we zoom in other
smaller cities and features become visible, giving us more
relevant information in a manner that is usable. Simply gen-

erating networks without any type of analysis or visualization is akin to showing a map of the United States with
every state, city, and town marked on it. In my talk, I will
describe the advances we have made in developing new visualization methods and the challenges still remaining.

Bio
Professor Amaral, a native of Portugal, conducts and directs
research that provides insight into the emergence, evolution,
and stability of complex social and biological systems. His
research aims to address some of the most pressing challenges facing human societies and the world’s ecosystems,
including the mitigation of errors in healthcare settings, the
characterization of the conditions fostering innovation and
creativity, or the growth limits imposed by sustainability.
Recently, Amaral proposed the development of cartographic methods for the representation of complex biological networks. These methods will enable researchers to
accomplish something similar to what travelers now can
easily accomplish with, for example, Google Maps, that is,
to glean the important information on a given system at
the scale of interest to the researcher. These tools hold the
promise to enable biomedical researcher to design or reengineer biological systems for therapeutic purposes.
Professor Amaral has published over a hundred scientific peer-reviewed papers in leading scientific journals.
Those papers have been cited in excess of seven thousand
times; ten having accumulated more than 200 citations each.
His research has been featured in numerous media sources,
both in the US and abroad. Professor Amaral has received
a CAREER award from the National Institutes of Health
in 2003, was named to the 2006 class of Distinguished
Young Scholars in Medical Research by the W. M. Keck
Foundation, and has been selected as an Earlier Career
Scientist by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Amaral
holds a Ph.D. in physics from Boston University.
http://amaral-lab.org/

xiii

