GeneTracer: Gene Sequence Analysis of Disease Mutations
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 3 Award: Excellent Process Explanation
Hanseung Lee∗

Jaegul Choo†

¨ †
Carsten Gorg
Haesun Park†

Jaeeun Shim∗
Jaeyeon Kihm∗
John Stasko†

Zhicheng Liu†

Georgia Institute of Technology

A BSTRACT
Our visual analytics tool GeneTracer, developed for the VAST 2010
genetic sequence mini challenge, visualizes gene sequences of current outbreaks and native sequences along with disease characteristics. We successfully used GeneTracer in combination with data
mining techniques to solve the challenge.
Keywords: VAST challenge, visual analytics, gene sequence analysis
Index Terms:
H.1.2 [Information Systems]: User/Machine
Systems—Human information processing; H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications—Data mining
1

P ROBLEM OVERVIEW

The task of the VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 3 (Genetic Sequences)
is to find the country of origin for a disease outbreak, which patient
contracted the disease from the initial carrier, and the gene bases
that led to particular characteristics and mutations. The provided
data included the gene sequences from the current outbreak and
from native people in several regions/locations, as well as the disease characteristics. The current outbreak and the native sequences
each have two fields: a sequence identifier (or country name in the
native sequences) and the actual gene sequence. A gene sequence
consists of a list of gene bases coded as A, T, C, or G. The disease characteristic data has an identifier field and five characteristic fields: symptoms, mortality, complications, drug resistance, and
risk vulnerability. Each characteristic field’s value is a categorical
value taking on one of either two or three severity levels.
2

G ENE T RACER

The GeneTracer system provides three views, the Gene Sequence
View, the Disease Characteristic View, and the Graph View.
The Gene Sequence View (right view in Figure 1) presents the
current outbreak virus sequences and the native sequences as horizontal rows in a grid. The base for each gene in a row is colorcoded: A (red), T (green), C (purple), G (blue). A special heatmap
row vector (top row of the grid) represents how varied the gene
bases for that position (column) are across regions that have different characteristic values. Similarly, a special heatmap column
vector (leftmost column of the grid) represents how much each sequence (row) is different from the selected row. The user can interactively reorder and remove rows and columns from the grid.
The Disease Characteristic View (left view in Figure 1) presents
each sequence’s characteristics using shaded color cells. The different sequences are in the rows and the five characteristics are in the
columns. The color mapping is Symptoms (red), Mortality (blue),
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

{hanseung.lee, jaeeun.shim, jkihm3}@gatech.edu
{joyfull, goerg, zcliu, hpark, stasko}@cc.gatech.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Complications (green), Resistance (purple), and Vulnerability (orange). Darker values (cells) indicate more severe characteristics
for a particular gene sequence. Additionally, a total characteristic
weight is calculated and shown to the right by adding up the individual characteristics. The user can sort the sequences (rows) by a
specific characteristic or total weight.
These two views can be linked: when a sequence is selected in
one view, it is also selected in the other. Additionally, the row order
of the sequences can be synchronized across the two views.
Finally, the Graph View (not shown) visualizes the relations
among the sequences via a minimum spanning tree representation
where the weight of an edge between two sequences is the Hamming distance between the two. Selecting a node in the Graph View
will also select that node (sequence) in the other views.
3

A NALYTICAL P ROCESS

Initially, we viewed all of the current outbreak sequences and the
native (region) sequences in the Gene Sequence View. It showed
68 different sequences (rows) with 1404 gene bases (columns). We
used GeneTracer’s functionality to remove all gene bases that were
identical across all the sequences, thus resulting in a much more
manageable number of gene bases. With this reduced data, we directed GeneTracer to construct the graph and calculate the minimum spanning tree (MST) that shows distances between the sequences. From the visualization of this MST in the Graph View, we
observed that Nigeria-B was the nearest native sequence to the current outbreak sequences. Therefore, we suspected Nigeria-B as the
country of origin of the current outbreak. To check this hypothesis,
we analyzed the data in the Gene Sequence View and interactively
changed the order of the rows by dragging them upwards closer to
the outbreak sequences, making the comparison easier. In addition,
we filtered out some of the sequences that were clearly dissimilar.
By interactively exploring the data in this manner we found that
Nigeria-B was by far the most similar sequence to the current outbreak, which matched with the result of the Graph View.
To solve the second problem, we examined the strains identified
by sequences 583, 123, and 51. We dragged these three sequences
to the top of the Gene Sequence View. By observing the heatmap
column vector, we found that 583 was more similar (lighter color)
to 123 than to 51. We then filtered out the columns exhibiting the
same gene bases among the three sequences. From this analysis, we
found that sequence 123 has only one different gene base (column
index 269) whereas sequence 51 has three different gene bases (column indices 494, 842, and 946) compared to gene sequence 583.
Therefore, we concluded that the patient identified by sequence 123
is likely to have contracted the disease from Nicolai (sequence 583).
To identify the top three mutations that lead to an increase in
symptom severity, we used the Disease Characteristic View and the
Gene Sequence View together with interactions. At first, we sorted
and reordered the sequences based on the symptom severity in the
Disease Characteristic View. We applied this order to the Gene Sequence View, which then showed the boundary of different levels of
a certain characteristic with a blue thick line. Next, we reorganized
the Gene Sequence View by moving the columns (gene bases) with

291

Figure 1: The Disease Characteristic View (left) and the Gene Sequence View (right) are linked and synchronized after sorting the rows in the
Disease Characteristic View by symptom severity. Gene sequence 501 is selected.

the largest variance to the left side. We also changed the order of
sequences (rows) to place similar gene bases together within the
same category of characteristics. Through these interactive steps,
we could see the patterns of gene sequences and find some potential mutations that were critical for each characteristic.
Mutation A → C at position 269 only occurred in severe symptoms (at sequence 99, 118, 123 and 997), so it was strongly related
with symptom severity. The most common mutation in the severe
symptoms is A → T at 946 and T → C at 842. It occurred frequently
in the severe symptom sequences (9 times out of 14 sequences) and
also occurred five times in the moderate symptoms. If T → C at
842 occurs, but A → T at 946 does not occur, then this mutation
results in mild symptoms (e.g., in sequences 49 and 961). Therefore, if these two mutations occur at the same time, it increases the
symptom’s severity.
For the third mutation, we obtained three candidates, A → G at
223, A → C at 197, and G → C at 212. We considered them as
candidates since these mutations occurred in severe and moderate
symptoms more than twice. We finally selected A → G at 223 as
our third mutation, since the sequences of the other two candidates
overlapped with the other two mutations we first found.
For considering all the characteristics, our approach consisted of
three steps. First, we found some candidate mutations for each characteristic using the previously explained strategy. For each characteristic, we sorted the sequences and analyzed them using hints
from the heatmap and filtering interactions. As a result, we found
two to five candidates of critical mutations for each characteristic.
In a second step we applied the same process as in the first step, except that the gene sequence was sorted by total weight. We already
assigned a weight severity from one to three to each characteristic value, and the total weight was determined by aggregating all
the characteristic weights. We reorganized the resulting Gene Sequence View based on the total weights. We then focused on critical mutation candidates from the first strategy and analyzed again
by moving, removing, or filtering columns and rows.
In a third step we applied several data mining techniques, such
as decision tree and regression, to choose candidates of genes that
carry significant information. Regression and decision trees were

292

helpful to provide initial clues. From those, we chose the column
indices with the highest coefficient values and also examined a few
nodes near the root of the decision tree. This led to an improved
classification result. We used first-order and second-order linear
regression to explore initial column indices (gene base positions)
that could be potential genes carrying significant information. We
selected the top few coefficients with the corresponding column indices and started exploring the data with the views in the GeneTracer tool. Even though these data mining techniques did not directly provide the answers we expected, they still suggested some
column indices for closer examination in the visualizations. Finally,
we were able to verify that the hypotheses we formed from the qualitative decision making process were correct, based on the results
from the quantitative analysis.
4 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D EVELOPMENT
GeneTracer successfully facilitated the process of identifying the
country of origin for the current outbreak, similarity of a pair of
genes, and the top few mutations that led to an increase in a specified disease characteristic. For future development, implementing
algorithms that perform automatic reordering of matrices [1, 2] will
improve the effectiveness of GeneTracer. Since each position of the
gene sequence has at most two kinds of gene bases, we can model
it as a binary matrix and can easily solve the matrix reordering algorithm.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work of these authors was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation under awards CCF-0728812, CCF-0808863,
and IIS-0915788, as well as the VACCINE Center, a Department
of Homeland Security Center of Excellence in Command, Control
and Interoperability.
R EFERENCES
[1] I. Liiv. Seriation and matrix reordering methods: An historical
overview. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, 3(2):70–91, 2010.
[2] L. Wilkinson and M. Friendly. The history of the cluster heat map. The
American Statistician, 63(2):179–184, 2009.

