Integrated Visual Analytics Workflow with GeoTime and nSpace
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 1 Award: Outstanding Analysis and Accuracy
Pascale Proulx, Adeel Khamisa, Rob Harper
Oculus Info Inc.

ABSTRACT
This paper is a case study focusing on the analytical process
performed by three junior analysts using the nSpace/GeoTime
tools to investigate arms dealing activities from various text
records. Our integrated visual analytic applications created an
environment that supported systematic use of analytical methods
and helped junior analysts achieve the results that won an award
for ‘Outstanding Analysis and Accuracy’.
KEYWORDS: Visual analytics, analytic process, geo-spatial
information systems, predictive analysis.
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces – Graphical User Interfaces (GUI); I.3.6
[Methodology and Techniques]: Interaction Techniques.
1

INTRODUCTION

GeoTime and nSpace are two innovative visual analytic
applications that have been developed in collaboration with
analysts to support the investigation of large and complex multidimensional datasets.
nSpace2 is a web-based system combining TRIST (The Rapid
Information Scanning Tool) and the Sandbox for visual thinking,
while integrating advanced computational functions using Web
Services protocols [1]. TRIST is a data triaging tool with planned
query execution, automatic information extraction, and user
tailored multi-dimensional linked views to provide rapid scanning,
result characterization and correlation. Information gained from
TRIST (e.g. snippets, entities, relationships, imagery, maps,
video) is used in the Sandbox for evidence marshalling and sensemaking. The Sandbox is a flexible and expressive thinking
environment for analysts to visualize their cognitive mechanisms.
It supports both ad-hoc and more formal analytical sense-making.
It is a collaborative environment with linking and permissions.
For reporting, Sandboxes are exported to Wikis and MS Word
documents with automatic formatting and references.
GeoTime improves the perception of entity movements, events,
relationships, and interactions over time within a geospatial [2] (or
any diagrammatic or social network) context [3]. Events are
represented within an X,Y,T coordinate space, in which the X,Y
plane shows geographic or diagrammatic space and the vertical T
axis represents time. Events animate in time vertically through the
3-D space as the time slider bar is moved. For analysts,
GeoTime's single view representation of a combined temporalspatial three-dimensional space amplifies the concurrent cognition
of entity relationships and behaviors in both space and time.
Analysts can see the who and what in the where and when. A
recent extension to GeoTime allows the analyst to automatically
*email:{pproulx@oculusinfo.com,
akhamisa@oculusinfo.com, rharper@oculusinfo.com}

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

extract node-link network diagrams from the data and visualize
transactions within these networks over time.
2

ANALYSIS AND ANALYTICAL PROCESS

The VAST 2010 first mini-challenge required investigation of
global arms dealing activities from 103 text records of various
types. Supported by nSpace/GeoTime tools, three junior analysts
proceeded to methodically make sense of the evidence across
multiple dimensions, while avoiding bias by applying analytical
methods embedded or encouraged in the tools. As will be shown
below, the analysis did not stop with a picture of the current
situation: the tools also support predictive analysis where
conclusions were provided in the form of actionable information.
2.1
Information Triage in TRIST
TRIST was used to quickly explore the text records to determine
which countries seemed to be involved in illegal arms dealing,
and thus required thorough analysis. For example, selecting a
country in the Places dimension highlighted associated results and
related information from other dimensions (e.g. organizations,
arms related terms, swift codes, time, and document source).
When highlighted content convinced the analyst to examine the
activities in a country more closely, the country entity was copied
to the Sandbox to begin the sense-making process.

Figure 1. Analyst augments standard dimensions with tailored
dimensions such as "Arms Dealing".

2.2
Evidence Marshalling – nSpace2 + GeoTime
The process of building knowledge of the situation was efficient
with mixed-initiative content extraction. When copying a
dimension term of interest to the Sandbox, related documents
were automatically brought with it and arranged in a list with key
attributes automatically extracted (for example latitude and
longitude in the case of a place). The analysts continued to
structure and augment the extracted information with metadata
including communication type and entity involvement.
One analyst used the flow of money and weapons to determine
whether a country was a supplier, intermediary, or receiver of

273

weapons. This role-identification assessment structure was
exported as an outline so that co-workers could reuse the analytic
method for the other countries.
To examine geo-temporal behavior, the evidence in the
Sandbox was exported as a CSV file. Within 5 minutes the events
from all countries were shown in a single GeoTime view.
Examining conflicting data about a Ilyushin flight in a geotemporal context produced more insight about the weapon
recipients. Three hypotheses were derived from the information
observed in GeoTime and corresponding snapshots were exported
as HTML and imported back into the Sandbox. Sandbox
assertions are designed to subtly encourage consideration of
multiple competing hypotheses and the search for refuting
evidence. Evidence dropped into an assertion group from the right
weighs it positively; evidence dragged in from the left refutes the
assertion. Analysts systematically refuted two of the three
hypotheses by associating evidence found in the provided
documents.

period: a central meeting with all major suppliers, intermediaries
and receivers. By isolating this period in GeoTime's calendar
view, analysts could see who attended the meeting from each subnetwork, and when they arrived.

Figure 3. Countries linked via Money Transfers. In GeoTime, time
is in the vertical dimension.

Figure 2. Determining the final destination of the Ilyushin IL-76.

Examining the data associated with the Ilyushin flight is just
one example of the kind of simple, fluid workflow between
multiple analytic tools: GeoTime and nSpace2. GeoTime revealed
patterns in time and space, and the resulting insights were
captured in the Sandbox, in turn prompting further collection of
evidence.
2.3
Communications Analysis
To identify communication patterns within the social network,
links were filtered by type: phone calls, email, message board
posts and money transfers. This revealed the entities involved,
their locations, the timing, and the directionality of each
communication within GeoTime's space-time viewer. Analysts
were able to see, for example, that electronic communications
were used to communicate with the Russian mob when initiating
transactions, while direct phone contact was only made when the
transaction was finalized. These communication patterns were
useful in determining whether each country involved either had
made, or was in the process of making, weapons purchases.
2.4
Analyzing Cash Flows in GeoTime
Bank accounts were geo-located based on the swift code
associated with each account. A money transfer was visualized as
a dashed line with an arrow to indicate the directionality of the
transaction. The timing, sequence, and amounts of money
exchanged in a series of transactions portrayed the financial side
of the case.
2.5
Multi-dimensional Analysis Pays Off
Charting the total number of events by month pointed to a much
more active period for the network. Focusing on this time period
in GeoTime's space-time view showed a convergence of major
players from every sub-network in one location for a one week

274

Figure 4. Central meeting in Dubai linking all entities involved.

2.6
Actionable Information
Throughout the analysis process, key findings were synthesized in
a Sandbox that emerged as the picture of the current situation.
Leveraging this visible context, the analysts could make and
capture inferences about what to expect next, and highlight key
things to watch for. These analytic conclusions were supported
by an explicit chain of arguments. Hyperlinks to other Sandboxes
provided quick access to the detailed evidence marshalling. This
analytical process is an example of how nSpace and GeoTime can
be used to conduct the predictive analysis required by today’s
asymmetric and unconventional threats.
3

CONCLUSION

To solve this challenge, analysts were able to leverage the
complementary strengths of nSpace2 and GeoTime. These tools
provided an open and integrated analytical environment that acted
as a visual extension of their cognitive capabilities.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

Wright, William, D. Schroh, P. Proulx, A. Skaburskis and B. Cort,
The Sandbox for Analysis – Concepts and Methods, paper accepted
for ACM CHI 2006.
Kapler, Thomas, and William Wright, GeoTime Information
Visualization, IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2004.
Kapler, Thomas, R. Eccles, R. Harper and W. Wright, Configurable
Spaces: Temporal Analysis in Diagrammatic Contexts, IEEE Visual
Analytics Science and Technology VAST 2008.

