The State of Visual Analytics: Views on what visual analytics
is and where it is going.
Panel Organizer:
Richard May, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

Panelists:
Pat Hanrahan, Stanford University
Daniel A. Keim, University of Konstanz
Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland
Stuart Card, PARC and Stanford University
I NTRODUCTION
In the 2005 publication “Illuminating the Path” visual analytics was
defined as “the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by
interactive visual interfaces.” A lot of work has been done in visual
analytics over the intervening five years. While visual analytics
started in the United States with a focus on security, it is now a
worldwide research agenda with a broad range of application
domains. This is evidenced by efforts like the European VisMaster
program and the upcoming Visual Analytics and Knowledge
Discovery (VAKD) workshop, just to name two.
There are still questions concerning where and how visual
analytics fits in the large body of research and applications
represented by the VisWeek community. This panel will present
distinct viewpoints on what visual analytics is and its role in
understanding complex information in a complex world. The goal of
this panel is to engender discussion from the audience on the
emergence and continued advancement of visual analytics and its
role relative to fields of related research. Four distinguished panelists
will provide their perspective on visual analytics focusing on what it
is, what it should be, and thoughts about a development path between
these two states. The purpose of the presentations is not to give a
critical review of the literature but rather to give a review on the field
and to provide a contextual perspective based on the panelists’ years
of experience and accumulated knowledge.
Each panelist will have at most 15 minutes to present their
position in order to establish the context for the audience. The rest
of the time will be open for questions. The panel organizer will
oversee the panel and ensure there are numerous questions of the
panelists.
On August 6, 2010 this world lost Jim Thomas. His influence and
impact on our community were clear and profound with conferences,
funding programs, research groups, consortia, government agencies,
and industry. Through his intellect, energy, and passion Jim was
able to create an international movement and shape a new discipline
– visual analytics. This discussion on the future of visual analytics is
dedicated to Jim and his work. Jim will be greatly missed but his
influence and passion will always be felt.
1
1.1

P OS ITION S TATEMENTS
Pat Hanrahan

In the last five years, visual analytics has become a mainstream
research topic. Much of this initial research has focused on building
demonstration systems that show the potential of coupling visual
interfaces to analytical technologies in different domains.

After five years of work, it is worthwhile reflecting on the major
accomplishments of the field. What have we learned from these
demonstration systems? Has there been progress on the long-term
research problems of the field? What progress has been made on the
research agenda put forth in "Illuminating the Path"? Additionally,
should that research agenda be updated to reflect what has been
learned?
The original motivation was to rethink the principles of
interactive visualization given the needs of analysis. One insight was
to exploit a variety of computational analytics algorithms to create
more meaningful visualizations; another goal was to restructure
human-computer interaction to directly support complex decisionmaking tasks. The problems of scale were at the forefront. I'll argue
that we have made good progress, but we need to attack the
fundamental problems more directly, and to more creatively
conceive of ways to combine algorithms and techniques into
systems.
1.2

Daniel Keim

Visual Analytics techniques are needed in many applications,
including environmental, geo, and social sciences, as well as
engineering and economics. Visual analytics techniques are essential
to deal with the data sets which are growing fast in size and
complexity to gain understanding, to discover patterns, and to
optimize and steer complicated processes. Approaches that work
either on a purely analytical or on a purely visual level do not help
due to the dynamics and complexity of the underlying processes. The
multiplicity of research fields and applications, in which visual
analysis techniques are urgently needed, demonstrates their scientific
relevance and the potential economical utility. A combined
automatic and visual analysis is the only chance to capture the
complex, changing characteristics of the data and to take suitable
measures.
In the future, visual analysis techniques must satisfy a
multiplicity of new requirements, which result from the rapid
technological development in hardware, software and network
infrastructure. In addition to challenges such as high-dimensional
data, continuous data streams have additional constraints because
evaluation must take place immediately or in the context of a given
time frames. Challenges like these pose significant requirements on
the data analysis and visualization.
The graphical representation of relevant information from large,
complex, and fast growing data streams makes new demands,
particularly on the scalability of the techniques. Scalable visual
analytics systems should tightly integrate state-of-the-art automatic

257

data analysis methods with interactive visualization techniques and
be integrated smoothly into custom-designed processes.
One of the current challenges in the field of Visual Analytics is
that the automatic data analysis community (machine learning, data
analysis, statistics, etc.) is not as well represented in the visual
analytics research community as is necessary to quickly advance the
field. While fully automatic techniques only work if the problem is
clearly specified, they are key to the success of the field. The visual
analytics research community should ensure that more researchers
from the above domains join our efforts to develop visual analytics
systems. While a number of successful applications of visual
analytics have been developed over the last five years, the
development of tightly integrated data analysis and visualization
methods is still in the beginning and more research is needed to
make progress in this respect.
Due to the immediate demand for visual analytics solutions,
visual analytics approaches are being developed within application
areas, sometimes without involvement of our visual analytics
research community. In such cases, visual analytics is embraced and
considered part of the application area, as can be seen by recent
visual analytics workshops in the geo and bio domains. It is an open
question what impact this development will have and whether visual
analytics research will ultimately be embraced by the specific
application domains.
As part of the European VisMaster project, a visual analytics
roadmap is being developed, describing the state-of-the-art of the
field and outlining current research questions and future challenges.
The broad European perspective of visual analytics as represented by
the roadmap will be covered in the panel.
1.3
Ben Shneiderman
Existing process models for visual analytics can be simple four stage
processes, such as Gather Information, Re-represent, Develop
Insight, Produce Results. They can also be more elaborate 16-stage
sense-making models such as illustrated in the 2005 Book
“Illuminating the Path” edited by Jim Thomas and Kristin Cook.
These generic process models are a fine start, but different data types
(e.g., multi-dimensional, time series, hierarchical, network, textual)
require more tailored process models. Further challenges come from
dealing with varying information (e.g., real, ordinal, nominal) and
domain specific needs (e.g., genomic, financial, social networks).
This rich problem space means that careful definitions of inputs,
activities, and outcomes will accelerate the development of useful
process models, which then can be embedded in generic and domainspecific software tools.
Our experience with multiple tool development projects has given
us some experience in developing process models and support
software. Overviews of user efforts give a context for work, while
showing what has been accomplished and what has not. Then
history keeping, undo features, macro making, insight recording,
collaboration support, and report export services are part of what is
needed in every tool. This panel presentation will concentrate on
process models for social network analysis, illustrating our strategies
and suggesting new challenges.
1.4

Stuart Card

Visual analytics is an attempt to go beyond the use of Interactive
Visualization for gaining insight into data by adding Computational
Analysis + a methodology of Analytical Reasoning. But whereas it
was possible to layout a more or less coherent framework for
codifying visualization as a subdiscipline, this has not yet been
possible with visual analytics. The computational analysis part could
be anything and an analytical reasoning methodology has only
weakly been developed for tying the visual and analytic parts
together. There’s not enough structure for a coherent subdiscipline.
The field may be stuck in some ruts. Many systems have just
evolved into groups of different views on the screen + brushing.

258

I will argue that we should think some more about what this field
could be. We might start with defining on the analytic side a more
restricted set of analytical technologies to consider combining with
visualization. My candidates would be machine learning, network
theory, and very large databases. These are techniques that have their
own theories to contribute and which concern higher-level
abstractions, statistical reasoning, and scale—all useful on the visual
side. Then we really do need a methodology of reasoning for
individuals and groups that becomes the heart of what we identify
with Visual Analytics and coherently ties it together. Finally, we
need to understand what we can learn from neighboring disciplines
such as data mining.
2

B IOGRAPHIES

2.1
Pat Hanrahan
Pat Hanrahan is the CANON Professor of Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering at Stanford University where he teaches
computer graphics. His current research involves visualization,
image synthesis, virtual worlds, and graphics systems and
architectures. Professor Hanrahan has also worked at Pixar where he
developed volume rendering software and was the chief architect of
the RenderMan(TM) Interface - a protocol that allows modeling
programs to describe scenes to high quality rendering programs. In
addition to Pixar, he has founded two companies, Tableau Software
and PeakStream, and has served on the technical advisory boards of
NVIDIA, Exluna, Neoptica, VSee and Procedural. Professor
Hanrahan has received three university teaching awards. He has
received two Academy Awards for Science and Technology, the
Spirit of America Creativity Award, the SIGGRAPH Computer
Graphics Achievement Award, the SIGGRAPH Stephen A. Coons
Award, and the IEEE Visualization Career Award. He was recently
elected to the National Academy of Engineering and the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences.
2.2

Daniel Keim

Daniel Keim is Professor and Head of the Information Visualization
and Data Analysis Research Group in the Department of Computer
Science at the University of Konstanz, Germany. He has been
actively involved in information visualization and data analysis
research for more than 15 years and developed a number of novel
visual analysis techniques for very large data sets. He has been
program co-chair of the IEEE InfoVis conference and IEEE VAST
Symposium as well as the SIGKDD conference. He is an associate
editor of Palgrave’s Information Visualization Journal (since 2001)
and the Knowledge and Information Systems Journal (since 2006),
and has been an associate editor of the IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics (1999 – 2004) and the IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2002 – 2007). He
is coordinator of the German Strategic Research Initiative (SPP) on
Scalable Visual Analytics and the scientific coordinator of the EU
VisMaster Coordination Action on Visual Analytics.
2.3

Ben Shneiderman

Ben Shneiderman is a Professor in the Department of Computer
Science at the University of Maryland, Founding Director (19832000) of the Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory, and Member
of the Institute for Advanced Computer Studies at the University of
Maryland at College Park. He was made a Fellow of the ACM in
1997, elected a Fellow of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science in 2001, and made a member of the
National Academy of Engineering in 2010. He received the ACM
CHI (Computer Human Interaction) Lifetime Achievement Award in
2001. Since 1991 his major focus has been information visualization,
beginning with his dynamic queries and starfield display research
that led to the development of Spotfire. Spotfire grew to 200
employees and during Summer 2007 was bought by TIBCO. Dr.

Shneiderman developed the treemap concept in 1991 which
continues to inspire research and commercial implementations.
Later information visualization work includes the LifeLines project
for exploring a patient history, and its successor project,
PatternFinder, which enables search across electronic medical
records. Three current projects focus on network visualization.
2.4

Stuart Card

Stuart Card works on the theory and design of human machine
systems. Until his retirement from PARC, Card was a Senior
Research Fellow and the manager of the User Interface Research
group. His study of input devices led to the Fitts's Law
characterization of the mouse and was a major factor leading to the
mouse's commercial introduction by Xerox. His group has developed
theoretical characterizations of human-machine interaction,
including the Model Human Processor, the GOMS theory of user
interaction, the Windows Working Set Theory, Information Foraging
Theory, analyses of knowledge creation, and others. The group’s
work has resulted in a dozen Xerox products as well as contributing
to the founding of three software companies. Card holds more than
40 patents and has published more than 90 papers and three books.
He is a Fellow of the ACM, a member of the National Academy of
Engineering and the recipient the IEEE Visualization Career Award,
the ACH SIGCHI Lifetime Achievement Award, and the 2007
Bower Award and Prize from the Franklin Institute. He is currently
a Visiting Scientist at PARC and a Consulting Professor at Stanford
University.

259

