Enron Case Study: Analysis of Email Behavior Using EmailTime
Minoo Erfani Joorabchi, Ji-Dong Yim, Mona Erfani Joorabchi, and Christopher D. Shaw
Simon Fraser University

ABSTRACT
This paper presents a case study with Enron email dataset to
explore the behaviors of email users within different
organizational positions. We defined email behavior as the email
activity level of people regarding a series of measured metrics e.g.
sent and received emails, numbers of email addresses, etc. These
metrics were calculated through EmailTime, a visual analysis tool
of email correspondence over the course of time. Results showed
specific patterns in the email datasets of different organizational
positions.
KEYWORDS: Email, Enron, Case Study, EmailTime, Visual
Analysis.
Index Terms:
1

INTRODUCTION

Exploring Enron case study, we defined email behavior through
measured metrics using EmailTime [1]. The metrics were namely,
Sent emails, Received emails (as ‘To’ and ‘Cc’ fields, See Figure
1), numbers of the email addresses, numbers of the created folders
and Size of the sent emails. We defined the size of a Sent email as
the number of recipients in the ‘To’ and ‘Cc’ fields of that email.

are utilized to discover the impact of the organizational positions
on the email behavior of people by providing detailed quantitative
information about them.
2.2
Benchmark: Enron Email Dataset
Finding and working with a real world benchmark has been a
challenge especially when the nature of the data is private. Email
datasets of organizations are good examples of this private data
area. Enron email archive is a unique large dataset which contains
more than 200,000 emails [2]. The dataset used in this paper is
selected from two years of time span between January 2000 and
December 2001 as the email collaborations in this period of time
look most realistic (data of many Enron people are public).
Nevertheless, we still see that missing actors and emails in the
original dataset mostly for unknown or sensitive reasons. We
grouped the email users in the archive using seven categories
identified in the public dataset [3] including 35 employees, 4
CEOs, 4 presidents, 21 vice presidents, 12 directors, 14 managers
and 11 traders (See Figure 2). In the next section, we detail the
differences of email behaviors within organizational positions.
3.9%
3.9%
34.6%
20.7%

From:
Field
Determine
s Sender
To: and Cc:
Fields
Determine
Receivers
(Recipients)

Figure 1. An email processed by EmailTime. ’From’, ‘To’ and ‘Cc’
fields were specified. We used these terms throughout the paper.

2

CASE STUDY

2.1
Hypotheses
General research question is derived as whether there are specific
patterns in the way people use email. More specifically, metrics
SIAT, Simon Fraser University, 102 Avenue, Surrey, Canada
Send correspondence to Minoo.E.J.
Minoo.E.J.: E-mail: mea18@sfu.ca
J.D.Y.: E-mail: jdyim@sfu.ca
Mona.E.J.: E-mail: mea16@sfu.ca
C.D.S.: E-mail: shaw@sfu.ca

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 Crown

11.8%

10.8%
13.8%

Figure 2. Composition of Enron organizational positions.

3

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

3.1
Analysis on the Activity Level
From comparing activity levels of organizational positions, some
groups behaved similarly regarding number of Sent, Received,
and exchanged emails (sum of Sent and Received). From Figure 3
we divided them into three categories – Modest, Moderate and
Active (See Table 1). Figure 3-A graphically specifies the three
categories with dashed lines. Results identified Managers and
Employees were Active, Traders and Directors were Modest, and
the rest were Moderate. Employees have the highest average
number of Sent emails while Managers have the highest average
number of Received emails.
Table 1. Classification of organizational positions.
No of
Modest
Moderate
Active
Emails
Exchanged
[<1500]
[1500-3500]
[>3500]
(Sent+Recei
Directors,
CEOs, Presidents, Vice
Managers
ved)
Traders
Presidents, Employees
Sent
[<1000]
[1000-1500]
[>1500]
Directors,
CEOs, Presidents, Vice
Employees,
Traders
Presidents
Managers
Received
[<1000]
[1000-2000]
[>2000]
Directors,
CEOs, President, Vice
Managers
Traders
Presidents, Employees

235

Finally, there is a jump to CEO group where the executive officers
behaved as strong receivers.
On the other hand, Figure 4-B shows Cc-CI for organizational
positions where most of them except CEOs were near +1. This
means that they had received a little number of emails as Cc.

A.
B.
Figure 3. Results of exchanged emails. A) Average number of Sent
and Received (as Cc and To) emails for Enron organizational
positions from 2000 to 2001. B) Average number of Received
emails as To and Cc for each organizational positions.

3.3
Analysis on the Size of Sent Emails
We divided the Sent emails into four categories based on the
number of recipients; Single nodes (including only one recipient),
Small nodes (2-9), Medium nodes (10-29) and Large nodes (30
and up). We then calculated the normalized of Small, Medium and
Large to graph them with the organizational positions (See Figure
5). Comparing the ordinary and normalized graph we figured out
the normalized graph contribute more in terms of presenting the
habits of different positions in sending emails to group of people.
It showed a huge difference between CEOs and other groups in
sending Large size emails. Traders and then Managers sent
Medium size emails more than any other groups.

3.2
Analysis on the Roles
Another approach to interpret Figure 3 is to compare numbers of
Sent and Received emails to determine their role. Table 2
specifies the roles of different organizational positions.
Table 2. Organizational positions’ roles.

Relationship
#Sent < #Received
#Sent = #Received
#Sent > #Received

Organizational Positions
Presidents, Directors, CEOs and Vice
Presidents
Managers
Employees and Traders

Email addresses hold different roles within different period of
time. Gloor et al. defined Contribution Index (1) to specify the
role of email addresses [4].
emails sent – emails received (To+Cc)
(1)
total of emails sent and received (To+Cc)
This index is near to –1 for the receivers and +1 for the senders.
We expand this formula to received as To (To-CI) and received as
Cc (Cc-CI) to see the impact of To and Cc separately.

A.
B.
Figure 4. Contribution Index (CI) for organizational positions. A)
Average of CI and To-CI. B) Average of Cc-CI.

Figure 4 shows that the average Contribution Index of
administrative people tends to be lower than that of lower
positional staff. CI and To-CI follow a same trend while Cc-CI
has a different trend. It may be the result of the nature of their
positions (e.g. employees ask and report whereas administrators
are reported and make orders). Figure 4-A shows CIs of
Employees, Traders and Managers are near zero, which means
that they had same amount of send and received emails in
average. Then there is a jump to Director, President and Vice
President where the three groups behaved as weak receivers.

236

A.
B.
Figure 5. Results from size of Sent email. A) Average of normalized
number of Small, Medium and Large sent emails for organizational
positions. B) Average number of Medium and Large emails sent by
different organizational positions.

4

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

We presented a case study to analyze the activity level, role and
size of sent nodes by Enron people between January 2000 and
December 2001. We found some groups behaved similarly.
According to the results, since no relationship between the
numbers of created folders and organizational positions was found
in our dataset, we believe this is a subjective issue. Moreover 80%
of cases had the numbers of email addresses (with Enron domain)
within the range of 2 to 6.
We performed ANOVA (using SPSS) on the Enron dataset, where
the dependent variables were numbers of exchanged, Sent,
received as To and Cc emails, numbers of email addresses, CI,
To-CI, Cc-CI, numbers of Small, Medium and Large size for sent
emails. The independent variables were the seven organizational
positions. Results presented no significant differences. There was
only a significant difference for number of Email Address
between CEOs and other groups, F(6,94) = 2.67, p < .05.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

M. Erfani Joorabchi, J. D. Yim, C. D. Shaw. EmailTime:
visualization of the temporal email. GHC, October 2010.
B. Klimt and Y. Yang. Introducing the Enron corpus. First
Conference on Email and Anti-Spam (CEAS), Mountain View, CA.
October 2004.
W. W. Cohen, CALD, CMU. October 2004, from http://www2.cs.cmu.edu/~enron/
P. Gloor, S. Niepel, Y. Li. Identifying potential suspects by temporal
link analysis. MIT CCS working paper, January 2006.

