Gene Similarity Uncovers Mutation Path
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 3 Award: Innovative Tool Adaptation
Manuel Freire∗

Awalin Sopan†

´
Universidad Autonoma
de Madrid

University of Maryland

A BSTRACT
The VAST 2010 minichallenge 3 dataset scenario contains a set of
genetic sequences from a hypothetical disease outbreak. We describe how we used AC, a plagiarism detection tool, to find the
gene sequence similarity; and ManyNets, a network analysis tool,
to trace back the gene-mutations and identify the characteristics of
the sequences. Our analysis won the Innovative Tool Adaptation
award.
Index Terms:
H.5.2 [Graphical user Interface]:
Analytics—Gene Mutation
1

Visual

I NTRODUCTION

Given a set of originating and mutated viral strains of the deadly
Drafa virus, the tasks are to identify the origin of the current outbreak, trace back the evolutionary path, and characterize particular mutations that lead to worse outcomes. The (synthetic) minichallenge dataset contained the genomes for all viral variants, including 10 strains labeled with country names and 58 “outbreak
strains”, known only by their number, such as 583 or 531. An
additional file described, for each of the 58 outbreak strains, their
“reported” characteristics on infected patients, including mortality,
symptom severity, and drug resistance.
We used AC and ManyNets for our analysis. AC [1] is an antiplagiarism tool for programming assignments, designed to be used
as a deterrent for student cheating. It is also useful for general similarity analysis, although we made minor changes for this challenge.
After using AC to analyze the similarities between strains and their
likely evolutionary paths, we switched to ManyNets [2], a network
analysis and visualization tool. The tabular view in ManyNets provides overviews of node and edge attributes (in this case, strain
characteristics and likely mutations), and allows cascaded filtering
and user-defined expressions. Node-link diagrams for any network
table can be displayed using SocialAction [3], which provides rich
interactive filtering.
2

Figure 1: Dendrogram view from AC. Branch x-coordinate corresponds to the distance at which branches merge using complete linkage. Branches within the shaded area, controlled with the slider, are
visible in the network pane. Nigeria B is close to the outbreak strains
and far from other ”country” strains.

S IMILARITY BASED ANALYSIS

We first created separate files for each strain, and loaded these into
AC, running an exploratory similarity analysis with the default normalized compression distance test. All sequences in the dataset had
exactly the same length, 1406 characters, where each character (a
“base”) was either A, T , C or G. Many strain sequences were only
a single base-substitution apart from their closest neighbor. There
were no transpositions, insertions or deletions: all changes corresponded to single-base substitutions. With this in mind, we added
a new test to AC, specific for this mini-challenge, that would calculate the distance between two sequences as the number of singlebase mutations required to go from one to the other. This specialized test also provided a textual description of mutations in the
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

manuel.freire@uam.es
awalin@cs.umd.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Figure 2: Network view from AC, centered on 583 (country strains not
included). Thick, red edges correspond to smaller distances, such as
between 583 and 123, with 1 change. There are 3 changes between
583 and 51, represented with a thin edge.

format required for tasks 3.3 and 3.4, and generated a processed
dataset suitable for loading into ManyNets.
The network view from AC considers input files (strains) as

287

nodes and pairwise distances as edges (mutations paths from one
strain to another). Degree of similarity is encoded using width
and color: similar strains are connected with thick, red edges,
while thin, green edges represent lower similarities (longer mutation paths). Clicking any edge pops up a dialog showing a side
by side comparison of its endpoint sequences, and highlights the
largest matching blocks.
In the basic network view from AC, a histogram with all pairwise
distances is shown underneath the network. A slider allows the
selection of a portion of the histogram. All edges in the selected,
highlighted portion will be displayed in the network, as will any
node connected to these edges. Additional pruning is performed to
hide a few more edges, to prevent clutter. It is also possible to center
the network view on a single center node. In node-centric network
views, the histogram contains only edges from the center node to
all others, and additional edges are only displayed if they currentlyvisible nodes with a distance below the current threshold. Finally, it
is possible to build a dendrogram and filter a network it by selecting
appropiate cut-points. In this case, each branch below the cut-point
will be rendered as a network component. In the dendogram view
of Fig. 1, strain Nigeria B is closest to the outbreak strains (and
to strain 531 in particular), and relatively far from all other strains.
This answers task 3.1. Task 3.2 asks for the likely evolutionary
relation between strain 583 and strains 531 and 123. The network
view centered on 583 provides a clear picture (see Fig. 2). The edge
between 51 and 583 marks a single-base mutation, while the edge
between 123 and 583 requires 3 base substitutions.
3

A NALYZING VIRUS CHARACTERISTICS

The next step was to analyze the dataset in ManyNets, concentrating on the 58 outbreak strains. Again, we consider each strain as
a node and the shortest path between two nodes as an edge. Strain
characteristics are considered as node attributes, and mutations between each node-pair are treated as edge attributes. All attributes
are represented as columns in the node and edge tables. Each column has a histogram overview of the entire column placed over the
column header. For example, the edge table can show the number
of differences of its source and destination strains as a column, and
the corresponding overview will then represent the number of edges
in the table with each number of differences. The tabular interface
in ManyNets supports table cloning and cascaded filters, allowing
us to explore data from different angles.
For most of our analysis, we consider only the likely single-base
mutation path. This forms a tree where all strains are connected
to other strains through single-base mutations (except for a small
component with mild cases, as seen in Fig. 3). The best root for
this tree is 531, which is not only closest to Nigeria B, but also
has the highest network betweenness centrality. We used SocialAction, embedded in ManyNets, to performe interactive filtering to
ascertain that single-base mutations are enough to build a coherent
representation, display centrality and color nodes in the diagram according to characteristics. The result can be seen in Fig. 3; notice
that each edge in the tree represents a single-base mutation. As task
3.3 required the characterization of the mutations that produce the
most severe strains, we looked up the paths leading from 531 to the
highlighted branches of Fig. 3 in the corresponding ManyNets edge
table, and used the result as our answer. Notice that, in doing so,
we have avoided the need for statistical analysis to discover what
makes strains severe: from looking at the tree, we can see that these
3 mutation paths are both necessary and sufficient.
Finally, task 3.4 asks for the mutations to the 3 most overall dangerous mutations. We follow a similar procedure, after adding a
“dangerous” column to the strain table ( Fig. 4) that aggregates all
other strain characteristics. Now we see strains 501, 123 and 118
are at the top of the list, although they no longer correspond to large
branches in the tree.

288

Figure 3: Coloring the single base-substitution tree by symptom
severity. Red = Severe, Brown = Moderate, Blue = Mild. Our answer
to task 3.3 describes the mutations from 531 to the three branches
(highlighted in green) containing severe cases.

Figure 4: (top)Node table with strain characteristics. The last column
in the node table is formed by adding up the numerical mappings
of all strain-characteristic columns. (bottom)Edge table with 3 most
dangerous mutations. We used the edge table to look up the mutations from strain 531 leading to these 3 strains.

4 C ONCLUSION
We have demonstrated the use of similarity detection and network
visualization tools for gene mutation analysis. In AC, comparing
genetic sequences only influenced the choice of similarity test. In
ManyNets, we demonstrated the use of interactive filtering coupled
with access to node and edge tables. Reviewers appreciated visualization and interaction in both tools, and suggested a closer integration to allow brushing and linking between them.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Freire. Visualizing program similarity in the ac plagiarism detection
system. In AVI ’08, pages 404–407. ACM Press, 2008.
[2] M. Freire, C. Plaisant, B. Shneiderman, and J. Golbeck. ManyNets: An
interface for multiple network analysis and visualization. In CHI ’09.
ACM Press, 4 2010.
[3] A. Perer and B. Shneiderman. Integrating statistics and visualization:
case studies of gaining clarity during exploratory data analysis. In CHI
2008, pages 265–274. ACM Press, 2008.

