Enhancing Text-Based Chat With Visuals For
Hazardous Weather Decision Making
Moshe Gutman*, Gina Eosco, Monica Zappa, Chris Weaver
School of Computer Science and School of Meteorology, University of Oklahoma

ABSTRACT

2

We created a visual chat application for use during hazardous
weather events. The application, NWSChat2, allows National
Weather Service forecasters, media members, and storm trackers
to communicate with each other, basing their conversation on a
common shared radar map of the storm. Users can additionally
annotate the map with ‘pins’ or draw notes with a stylus. These
annotations are automatically shared with all other users. The
collaborative nature of NWSChat2 makes it well-suited for
disseminating information to all users during weather
emergencies.

When NWSChat went operational in 2008, it did so with the
following purpose:

KEYWORDS: Collaboration, coordinated multiple views, instant
messaging, emergency response, hazardous weather.

The current version of NWSChat (figure 1) generally meets
their set out objectives. The chat system is quick, as it allows
users to send instant messages, and it also creates a two-way flow
of information. Although a success from these standpoints, recent
criticisms have arisen during several NWS workshops, alluding to
the efficiency and effective aspect of the above goal. Discussions
with the stakeholders identified several major themes: the desire
for spatial grounding of weather events, ease-of-use, and the
ability to merge multiple information sources in a single view.
Placing the current NWSChat against these themes, it meets
some of them, but falls far short of the visual, spatial, and
geographic components. For this reason, we created NWSChat2, a
version of NWSChat having an interactive visual, spatial interface
alongside the chat. We designed NWSChat2 based on an iterative
stakeholder process informed by past related efforts [2-4].

INDEX TERMS: H.5.3 [Collaborative computing]
1

INTRODUCTION

During the last five years, the National Weather Service
(NWS), in collaboration with the University of Iowa, has
developed an instant messaging application. This tool, National
Weather Service Chat (NWSChat), allows NWS forecasters,
broadcast meteorologists, emergency managers (EMs), and other
stakeholders to discuss upcoming weather-related events. For
example, broadcast meteorologists can ask NWS questions about
new storm warnings, while EMs provide the status of tornado
sirens in their area. In addition, storm trackers can notify everyone
if a tornado is spotted.
Before NWSChat, this community used many older
technologies, such as the National Warning System (NAWAS), a
system designed in the 1950s to notify and prepare for a nuclear
attack. Telephone was another common way to communicate
during events. While not replacing such interpersonal
communication technologies, anecdotal evidence suggests that
NWSChat is becoming increasingly popular. At an Integrated
Warning Team (IWT) workshop, EMs unaware of NWSChat
were lining up to register, whereas those already registered were
raving about its success. The application was thought to allow key
weather enterprise communities, NWS forecasters, broadcasters,
and EMs, to communicate faster and more efficiently.
As NWSChat has become more popular, and more users are
providing feedback, its limitations have started to emerge. This
poster presents the current tool and its limitations, outlines
stakeholders’ ideas on a new tool, and describes our extended chat
system with visualization and annotation capabilities, NWSChat2.
*email: moshe@ou.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

BACKGROUND

NWSChat provides NWS operational personnel with a quick,
efficient means of exchanging hydrometeorological information
with media partners, emergency management officials, and other
members of the hazard response community. NWSChat fosters an
effective two-way flow of time-sensitive information between the
NWS and its partners during periods of hazardous weather, as well
as during other significant natural and human-induced events. [1]

Figure 1. Screenshot of the original version of NWSChat

3

NWSCHAT2

We implemented our tool, NWSChat2, to address the three
major issues brought up by the stakeholders.
3.1
Chat rooms
Each weather service office has the ability to create an
unlimited number of chat rooms. Additionally, each chat room
can be limited to certain users, or users of certain type. For

225

$
)
*

%
(

&

,

'

+

-

Figure 2.
Screenshot of NWSChat2: (A) Tab strip to separate between multiple weather service offices, (B) Categorized list of users in
the selected chat room, (C) Button to invite additional users to the chat room, (D) Main text entry box, (E) Annotation text entry box for a pin,
(F) Clearly distinguishable NWS weather bulletin, (G) Interactive roadmap overlaid with live radar imagery, (H) Hazard polygons and pins,
(I) Yellow dot indicating GPS position of storm spotter, (J) Toolbar buttons to add pins and ink annotations to the map.

example, a chat room may be configured to be open only to
emergency managers and NWS forecasters.
NWSChat2 provides tabs across the top of the window to
separate individual weather offices. On each tab, a dropdown box
is used to select between chat rooms within the weather office.
The main view is split into three sections. The left side contains
the list of users currently in the selected chat room. The list is
categorized by user role (media member, emergency manager,
NWS personnel, etc.). An icon representing the user’s status also
appears next to each item in the list. A button at the bottom of the
list allows the user to invite others into the chat room.
3.2
Chatting within a room
The chat room messages appear in the middle section. We
combined the idea of a chat room with a message board. This
allows users to add messages to the room but also add annotations
to any posted message. This organizes the structure of multiple
conversations occurring within the chat room. This is especially
useful when there are multiple simultaneous weather events. The
chat room/message board also displays automated weather alerts
that are issued by NWS.
3.3
The map viewer
The map allows users to zoom, pan, and select items placed on
the map. Users can add pins to the map to indicate a geographic
point of interest. When the user adds a pin to the map, a “pin
added” message also appears on the chat room message board
(figure 2E). This lets users add annotations to the pin. The map
displays several overlay layers: continually updated radar
imagery, live GPS locations of storm spotters, NWS weather
warning polygons, and user-added pins.
As an example, a forecaster can add a pin to the map so that a
storm spotter in the vicinity could investigate hail damage at that
location. The storm spotter could then further annotate the pin
with photos, video, and text about the hail damage.

226

4

CONCLUSION

NWSChat2 was designed based on iterative feedback from the
existing users of NWSChat. While NWSChat has engaged
interaction between forecasters, emergency managers, media and
other stakeholders during hazardous weather events, users
expressed several limitations of the existing tool. We developed
NWSChat2 to address these limitations, mainly adding an
interactive, geographic map-based interface as a visual component
to the tool. We met with NWS meteorologist, Rick Smith, and a
panel of 10 colleagues to evaluate our tool. The evaluation
process saw strengths of NWSChat2, suggesting that it leads to
better functionality and user satisfaction. One major limitation of
this study, and a future step, is to conduct a real-time evaluation in
a hazardous weather event to provide valuable insight to the
overall functionality of the tool. It is difficult to foresee the
challenges of group interactivity without a real-time analysis.
Although there are still many other design features as well as
analytic functions that can be incorporated into the tool,
NWSChat2 makes significant progress in enhancing text-based
chat with visuals for hazardous weather decision making.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

National Weather Service (2009). Service Description Document.
http://products.weather.gov/PDD/NWSChatSDD_G.pdf
Clark, H.H., & Brennan, S.E. (1991). Grounding in communication.
In L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine & S.D. Teasley (Eds.) Perspectives on
socially shared cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Schafer, W.A., Ganoe, C. H., & Carroll, J.M. 2007. Supporting
community emergency management planning through a
geocollaboration software architecture. Computer Supported
Cooperative Work. 16:501-537.
Crampton, J. W. 2001. Maps as social constructions: power,
communication and visualization. Progress in Human Geography.
25(2): 235-252.

