Describing Story Evolution from Dynamic Information Streams
Stuart Rose∗

Scott Butner†

Wendy Cowley‡

Michelle Gregory§

Julia Walker¶

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

A BSTRACT
Sources of streaming information, such as news syndicates, publish
information continuously. Information portals and news aggregators list the latest information from around the world enabling information consumers to easily identify events in the past 24 hours.
The volume and velocity of these streams causes information from
prior days to quickly vanish despite its utility in providing an informative context for interpreting new information. Few capabilities
exist to support an individual attempting to identify or understand
trends and changes from streaming information over time. The burden of retaining prior information and integrating with the new is
left to the skills, determination, and discipline of each individual. In
this paper we present a visual analytics system for linking essential
content from information streams over time into dynamic stories
that develop and change over multiple days. We describe particular challenges to the analysis of streaming information and present
a fundamental visual representation for showing story change and
evolution over time.
Index Terms: H.3.1 [Content Analysis and Indexing]: Abstracting
methods—; H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval]: Information
Filtering—; H.3.7 [Digital Libraries]: User Issues—; I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation—
1

I NTRODUCTION

Most information consumers interact with snapshots of an information space that is continually changing. Sources of information
streams, such as news syndicates and information services, provide
a variety of mechanisms for feeding the latest information by region, subject, or by user-defined search interests. However new
information that arrives eclipses prior information. Although there
are many interfaces for conveying the latest information, few if any
capabilities provide a temporal context longer than 24 hours. Accurately identifying and intelligently describing change in an information space requires a context that relates new information with
old.
Fundamental tasks, such as tracking down initial precursors to
an ongoing story can be problematic, particularly when stories span
multiple documents and time intervals. Stories develop, merge, and
split as they intersect and overlap with other stories over time. With
a search interface to archived information, a user may formulate an
effective query that recalls all documents related to a given story.
However, identifying and exploring potential story connections using an archive search depends on each users prior knowledge of a
related story and ability to formulate effective queries. Because it
is human nature to prioritize and retain information that supports
specific preferences, theories, or hypotheses, relying on individual
∗ e-mail:

stuart.rose@pnl.gov
scott.butner@pnl.gov
‡ e-mail: wendy.cowley@pnl.gov
§ e-mail: michelle.gregory@pnl.gov
¶ e-mail: hyunjoo.walker@pnl.gov
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

abilities to acquire and maintain full coverage of a story’s related
context may actually diminish the objectivity and comprehensiveness of the coverage. We therefore consider the research presented
here to provide a more effective means of discovering and maintaining coverage of information for a given analytic task as stories
develop.
This paper presents three contributions to the field of visual
analytics that together enable computation and presentation of a
lengthy temporal context in which new information can be situated with thematically related previous events. The first is a novel
text analytic framework that extracts essential content from individual documents and computes significant themes occurring within
documents collected into corpora or published within information
streams. Applied to information streams, the analytic framework
computes themes within time intervals enabling accurate detection
of stories and their temporal dynamics. The second is a data model
for describing and archiving the temporal context of significant
themes in a manner that readily adapts to story changes and enables
tracking of story evolution and dynamics. The third is a fundamental visual representation of story flow over time that conveys the
temporal dynamics for all stories in an information space, enabling
observation of story evolution, interaction, and flow over time.
We consider the visual representation presented to be fundamental in nature, representing a basis for conveying the historic context
and precursors to developing and ongoing stories. The data model
presented exists independently of any visual representation and was
developed to accomodate the dynamic nature of real stories. Stories
are identifiable only as repeated joint membership of documents in
the same sets. If documents do not repeatedly join up in the same
set then they are not part of the same story.
2 R ELATED W ORK
Our work relates to research on visual representations and analysis of structure and change in flows of information over time. Of
particular interest is prior work related to temporal analysis of information which we explore in the next two sections.
2.1 Visual Methods
In his book, Envisioning Information, Tufte [15] describes a
graphic time series produced in 1977 by Reebee Garofalo that
tracks artistic genealogy and production among recording artists
from 1955 to 1974. In Garofalo’s graphic, names of recording
artists are drawn on a two-dimensional cumulative trend plot, the
horizontal axis representing time, the vertical axis generally representing market share. Artists are grouped by style of music and
over time new artists are placed near those of similar styles. Tufte
writes:
The multiple, parallel flows locate music-makers in two
dimensions linking musical parents and offspring, and
listing contemporaries for each year. The illustration
presents a somewhat divergent perspective on popular
music: songs are not merely singles rather, music and
music-makers share a pattern, a context, a history.
Bearing some similarity to Garofalo’s graphic, ThemeRiver
[7, 6] provides a visual representation of the temporal rise and fall

99

of major themes in a document corpus. While ThemeRiver automatically detects themes and their trends in order to show their temporal characteristics, individual items that constitute those trends
are not visible, in contrast to the detailed labeling of artists in Garofalo’s graphic. As a result ThemeRiver has a much lower information density. Although direct relationships between themes may
exist in the corpus, they are not evident in ThemeRiver. Observation of the ThemeRiver visualization does not provide insight into
how or to what extent themes interrelate. While correlation among
themes may be inferred through observation of similar temporal
patterns in ThemeRiver, direct influence between elements is not
indicated.
Representing the history of an individual document, HistoryFlow
[17] presents a visualization of revision patterns made over the life
of a document. The visualization mirrors the linear structure of
the document, graphic representations of user revisions are shown
in their location relative to the entire document and in the larger
context of the document’s history. The authors note the aid that
the history flow visualization provides in understanding patterns of
revisions and collaboration over time. Although focused on a single
document, history flow effectively shows progression of all parts of
a document in relation to each other.
Themail [16] comprises a system for visualizing and exploring
relationships based on interaction patterns as revealed through an
individual’s email archive. The authors note two distinct user interaction modes with the visualization, exploration of big picture
trends and themes (haystack) and more detail-oriented exploration
(needle). Based on user studies, the authors note that displaying
large collections of keywords fostered user’s insight into the evolution of relationships over time as users’ past email exchanges were
placed within a meaningful context. They also note that each users’
familiarity with their respective email archives is essential in enabling efficient insight from the visualization. Single keywords in
the visualization bring back memories of events and associated context. A user unfamiliar with the data would likely need to dig deeper
into email content in order to resolve ambiguity associated with single keywords and to understand the context for particular keywords,
relationships, and trends.
A framework for tracking the popularity of quoted phrases
(memes) through on-line text is described in [11]. The authors
describe a framework for meme-tracking and demonstrate its utility in representing the news cycle and unique temporal patterns for
news media and blogs. A stacked plot is presented for displaying
the popularity of particular memes over time.
A system for visualizing tags is described in [3]. The system
characterizes the most interesting tags from an online image sharing community based on a sliding interval of time and provides an
interactive visualization that allows the user to observe the temporal interestingness of tags as they evolve, at arbitrary scales in real
time. Information about inter-relatedness of tags is not explored as
the authors’ focus is to show the latest, most interesting tags.
A common characteristic across this related research is a focus
on providing overview and generalization to a user through computational analysis and reduction of unstructured information to
a set of specific features whose characteristics are conveyed in a
high-level overview. Although HistoryFlow differs by focusing on
a structured set of information, and representing changes to that
structure, it effectively provides a high-level overview in which patterns of activity and dynamic changes are easily observed.
2.2 Analytic Methods
The analysis of unstructured information in order to select a set of
representative features is critical, as features that are not detected
can not be shown or measured. Previous research in the visual analytics and information retrieval community has focused on methods of selecting features through the application of corpus-oriented

100

methods that rate candidate features according to their ability to statistically discriminate between sets of documents within the corpus.
[13] and [9] describe positive results of selecting statistically discriminating words across a corpus to define an index vocabulary for
the corpus.
While these approaches are useful in many applications, features
that are significant for individual documents may be lost by such
corpus-oriented methods. In the context of time, stories that span a
week may be overshadowed by major news trends that span a year.
Because new features are likely to be less common than established
features, corpus-oriented methods are likely to overlook features as
they first appear.
A set of features based on corpus-oriented methods must be reevaluated when the corpus changes. Because corpora based on information streams change frequently, this incurs significant performance hurdles with real information streams. Reprocessing the entirety of the corpus may also wipe out mental models that a user
has developed to understand, explore, and explain an information
space.
Several of these challenges to analysis of streaming data were addressed in [8]. The authors describe a visual analytics system that
enables analysis of dynamic corpora. The system provides multiple
visual analytic tools for investigating the current state of a document corpus continually aging out old increments and adding new
increments for analysis. The system avoids scalability issues by
maintaining a sliding window over time, removing old documents
as time moves onward. As this limits how far back in time a user
can look, a feature is provided that allows a user to save a copy of
any current increment of an analysis. A limitation of that system is
that it only represents a single state, and provides no facilities for
tracking changes across multiple time increments.
The set of features for any increment are selected through
corpus-oriented methods, relying on overlap across and gradual
change between increments to transition the user across increments.
As a result, if many increments pass between a user’s last interactions with the system, they may spend significant time reorienting
to the new information and any change in context.
To avoid the limitations of corpus-oriented methods of feature
selection, we focus our interest on methods of keyword extraction that operate on individual documents. Such document-oriented
methods extract the same keywords from a document regardless of
the current state of a corpus. Document-oriented methods therefore
provide context-independent document features and are suited to
corpora that change
As commonly defined in the recent literature, keywords may be
single terms or comprise multiple words and phrases that reflect a
document’s content. Keywords provide a compact summary of a
document and have been applied to improve many information retrieval (IR) systems, such as digital libraries, by linking documents
via keywords, hyperlinks, citations, quotations, and key phrases.
Themail [16] provides an example of such a system as it enables exploration of email archives through keywords due to their
ability to trigger user associations to a larger context. Another system, Phrasier [10], lists documents related to a primary document’s
keyphrases, and supports the use of keyphrase anchors as hyperlinks between documents, enabling a user to quickly access related
material. Keyphind [4] uses keyphrases from documents as the basic building block for an IR system. As described in [14], key ideas
may also be extracted and used to augment a system for browsing
digital libraries of books using key terms extracted from popularly
quoted passages.
Linking documents through essential content such as keywords
enables exploration of associations between documents independent of a static and pre-defined corpus.

3 A NALYTIC F RAMEWORK
Within this section we first define our method of feature selection,
then we describe our method for computation and analysis of significant themes (CAST) and show application to a static document
corpus for clarity, then describe how the analytic framework applies
CAST to an information stream or dynamic corpus.
3.1 Feature Selection
Many text analysis techniques focus on what distinguishes a text
from its encompassing document corpus. When the information
is streaming, the corpus is dynamic and can change significantly
over time. Techniques that evaluate documents by discriminating
features are only valid for a snapshot in time.
In order to eliminate the influence of a transient context or state
in the larger information space we apply computational methods for
characterizing each document individually. Such methods produce
information on what a document is about, independent of its current
context. Analyzing documents individually also further enables
analysis of massive information streams as multiple documents can
be analyzed in parallel or across a distributed architecture.
In order to extract content that is readily identifiable by users,
we apply the technology Rapid Automatic Keyword Extraction
(RAKE) described in [12] to extract keywords from individual
documents. RAKE takes a simple set of input parameters to extract keywords from a single document. Figure 1 shows extracted
keywords as keywords of a news article from Voice of America.
We consider keywords to include one or more words such as
Pakistan Muslim League-N leader Nawaz Sharif and criticized
President Pervez Musharraf.
Keywords provide an advantage over other types of signatures
as they are readily accessible to a user and can be easily applied to
search other information spaces. The value of any particular keyword can be readily evaluated by a user for their particular interests
and applied in multiple contexts. Furthermore, the direct correspondence of extracted keywords with the document text improves the
accessibility of a user with the system.
3.2 Computation and Analysis of Significant Themes
For a given corpus, whether static or representing documents within
an interval of time, the extracted keywords are grouped into coherent themes by applying a hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm to a keyword similarity matrix based on keyword document
associations in the corpus.
The association of each keyword to documents within the corpus
is measured as the document’s response to the keyword, which is
obtained by submitting each keyword as a query to a Lucene index
populated with documents from the corpus. The query response of
each document hit greater than 0.1 is accumulated in the keyword’s
document response vector. Lucene calculates document similarity
according to the vector space model described in [13]. We refer the
reader to [5] for more complete implementation details. In most
cases the number of document hits to a particular keyword query
is a small subset of the total number of documents in the index.
Keyword document response vectors typically have fewer entries
than there are documents in the corpus and are very heterogenous.
The similarity between each unique pair of keywords is calculated as the Sorensen similarity coefficient of the keywords’ respective document response vectors. The Sorensen similarity coefficient
[13] is used due to its effectiveness on heterogeneous vectors and is
identical to 1.0 - Bray-Curtis distance [14], shown in equation (1).
∑ |ai − bi |
BCab =
∑(ai + bi )

Figure 1: Sample document from Voice of America and its keywords extracted by RAKE.

we apply Ward’s hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm
[18] which does not require a pre-defined number of clusters.
Ward’s hierarchical clustering begins by assigning each element
to its own cluster and then successively joins the two most similar clusters into a new, higher-level, cluster until a single top level
cluster is created from the two remaining, least similar, ones. The
decision distance ddi j between these last two clusters is typically
retained as the maximum decision distance ddmax for the hierarchy
and can be used to evaluate the coherence ccn of lower level clusters
in the hierarchy as shown in equation (2).
ccn = 1 −

(1)

Coherent groups of keywords can then be calculated by clustering keywords by their similarity. Because the number of coherent
groups may be independent of the number of keywords extracted,

ddn
ddmax

(2)

Clusters that have greater internal similarity will have higher coherence. Using a high coherence threshold prevents CAST from
selecting clusters that include broadly used keywords such as president that are likely to appear in multiple unrelated stories. Clusters

101

Table 1: MPQA Topics and CAST Themes. Each row contains the defined topic and description within the Defined Topics column and the
labeled theme and top keywords within the CAST Themes column.

Defined Topics
mugabe
2002 presidental election in Zimbabwe
guantanamo
U.S. holding prisoners in Guantanamo Bay
kyoto
ratification of Kyoto Protocol
venezuela
presidential coup in Venezuela
settlements
Israeli settlements in Gaza and West Bank
taiwan
relations between Taiwan and China
axisofevil
reaction to President Bush’s 2002 State of the Union Address
humanrights
reaction to U.S. State Department report on human rights
spacestation
space missions of various countries
argentina
economic collapse in Argentina

CAST Themes
mugabe’s re-election (46)
zimbabwe’s election, mugabe, mugabe’s, president mugabe, mugabe’s government
guantanamo prisoners (43)
detainees as prisoners, detainees prisoners, prisoners of war, war prisoners, prisoners
kyoto protocol on climate (40)
kyoto protocol, ratification of the kyoto protocol, 1997 kyoto protocol
venezuela’s president hugo chavez (37)
venezuelan president hugo chavez, president hugo chavez, president chavez, hugo chavez
israeli (34)
palestinian, israel, occupied palestinian, israeli occupation, palestinian people’s
china under which taiwan (31)
taiwan, united states and taiwan, taiwan issue, taiwan policy, taiwan affairs, taiwan strait
axis of evil (28)
north korea as axis, iran and north korea, iran or north korea, iraq and north korea,
human rights (28)
human rights report, annual human rights report, human rights violations, rights
space station (28)
international space station, space, international space, space shuttle, russian space mission
argentina (12)
argentina’s, help argentina, argentine government, argentine, worried argentina

with a coherence threshold of 0.65 or greater are selected as candidate themes for the corpus.
Each candidate theme comprises keywords that typically return
the same set of documents when applied as a query. These keywords occur in multiple documents together and may intersect other
stories singly or together.
We select the final set of themes for the corpus by assigning documents to their most highly associated theme. After all documents
in the corpus have been assigned, we filter out any candidate themes
for which no documents have been assigned. Keywords within each
theme are then ranked by their associations to documents assigned
within the theme. Hence the top ranked keyword for each theme
best represents documents assigned to the theme and is used as the
theme’s label.
Before elaborating on how CAST is applied to multiple time intervals, we briefly show application of CAST to a static corpus.
The following section presents results on application of RAKE and
CAST to the Multi-Perspective Question Answering (MPQA) Corpus [1].
3.2.1 CAST Themes for the MPQA Corpus
The MPQA Corpus consists of 535 news articles provided by the
Center for the Extraction and Summarization of Events and Opinions in Text (CERATOPS). Articles in the MPQA Corpus are from
187 different foreign and U.S. news sources and date from June
2001 to May 2002.
We applied RAKE to extract keywords from the title and text
fields of documents in the MPQA Corpus and selected keywords
from those extracted that occured in at least 2 documents. We then
applied CAST to compute themes for the corpus. Of the 535 documents in the MPQA Corpus 327 were assigned to 10 themes which
align with the 10 defined topics for the corpus as shown in Table 1.
The number of documents that CAST assigned to each theme is
shown in parentheses. As defined by CERATOPS:
The majority of the articles are on 10 different topics,
but a number of additional articles were randomly selected (more or less) from a larger corpus of 270,000
documents.

102

The majority of the remaining themes computed by CAST have
fewer than four documents assigned, an expected result given the
random selection of the remainder of documents in the MPQA Corpus.
3.3 Describing Stories
We developed our analytic framework to operate on streaming information; to extract essential content from documents as they are
received and to calculate themes at defined time intervals. When
the current time interval ends (one day in our evaluations), a set
of keywords is selected from the extracted keywords and keyword
document associations are measured for all documents published
or received within the current and previous n intervals (n = 7 in our
evaluations). Keywords are clustered into themes according to the
similarity of their document associations, and each document occurring over the past n intervals is assigned to the theme for which
it has the highest total response.
The set of themes computed for the current interval are persisted along with their member keywords and document assignments. Overlap with previous and future themes may be evaluated
against previous or future intervals by comparing overlap of keywords and document assignments. Themes that overlap with others
across time together relate to the same story.
Repeated co-occurrences of documents within themes across
multiple intervals are meaningful as they indicate real similarity and
relevance of content between those documents for those intervals.
In addition to the expected addition of new documents to an existing story and aging out of documents older than n intervals, it is
not uncommon for stories to gain or lose documents to other stories.
Documents assigned to the same theme within one interval may be
assigned to different themes in the next interval. This feature of
how we develop and apply the data model to define themes at each
interval enables our analytic framework to automatically adapt to
future thematic changes and accommodates the reality that stories
often intersect, split, and merge.
In order to show its utility, we applied our analytic framework on
documents within the TDT-2 corpus [2] tagged as originating from
the Associated Press’s (AP) World Stream program due to it’s similarity to other news sources and information services of interest.

Table 2: CAST Themes for 01/12/1998 and their document counts
Assigned Docs
< 01/12
01/12
1
5
0
3
0
3
0
2
0
1
1
2
3
2
3
1
5
1
6
1
7
1
9
3
15
4

Theme
chuan government
serena williams who is playing
men’s match
stabilizing japan’s shaken financial system
women’s race
news agency
five-kilometer race
northern ireland
japanese prime minister ryutaro hashimoto
world cup
president suharto
world swimming championships
hong kong

Table 2 lists the CAST themes on January 12, 1998 for AP documents in the TDT-2 Corpus. The first column lists the count of
documents assigned to each theme that were published before January 12. The second column lists each themes count of documents
that were published on January 12. Comparing these counts across
themes allows us to easily identify which stories are new for example chuan government, serena williams who is playing, men’s
match; which stories are the largest, for example hong kong and
world swimming championships.
In the following section, we describe two fundamental visual
representations that provide greater insight into the characteristics
of themes and stories over time.
4

V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION

The analytic framework we have described analyzes documents
within time intervals; generating for each time interval a set of
themes, each theme comprising a coherent set of keywords from
that interval’s documents, and having assigned documents from the
previous n intervals. We describe two visual representations that
yield insight to the temporal context of documents, themes, and
stories for an information consumer.
The first view, a portion of which is shown in Table 3, represents
the current time interval and its themes. The view presents each
theme as a listing of its member documents in ascending order by
date. This view has the advantage of simplicity. An observer can
easily assess the magnitude of each theme, its duration, and documents that have been added each day. However, lacking from this
view is the larger temporal context and information on how related
themes have changed and evolved over previous days.
To provide a temporal context we developed the story flow visualization whose structure follows that of Garofalo’s graphic mentioned previously and described in [15]. The story flow visualization, a portion of which is shown in Figure 2, shows for a set of
time intervals, the themes computed for those intervals, and their
assigned documents which may link themes over time into stories.
The visualization places days across the horizontal axis and orders
daily themes along the vertical axis by their assigned document
count.
For a given interval, each theme is labeled with its top keyword
in italics and lists its assigned documents in descending order by
date. Each document is labeled with its title on the day that it is
first published (or received), and rendered as a line connecting its
positions across multiple days. This preserves space and reinforces
the importance and time of each document, as the document title
is only shown in one location. Similar lines across time intervals
represent flows of documents assigned to the same themes, related

Table 3: Documents Assigned to CAST Theme iraq on 02/14/1998
Day
02-07
02-07
02-07
02-08
02-08
02-08
02-08
02-08
02-09
02-09
02-09
02-09
02-09
02-09
02-10
02-10
02-10
02-10
02-10
02-11
02-11
02-11
02-11
02-11
02-11
02-12
02-12
02-13
02-13
02-13
02-13
02-13
02-14
02-14
02-14

Document Title
U.N. to excavate weapons dumps in Iraq
Kuwaiti government to distribute gas masks in two days
U.N. to excavate dumps where chemical weapons and warheads buried
Saudi Arabia will not back military strike against Iraq
Egyptian Foreign Minister upbeat on diplomatic end to US-Iraq
Russian FM: Dispute over Iraq has not damaged U.S.-Russian
U.S. won’t ask Saudis to allow attacks from their territory
Iraq says talks on weapons destruction making progress
Citing regional tensions, Annan cancels visit to the Middle East
Canada: No decision yet on commitment against Iraq
byline
control on Yeltsin-Annan remarks, other new material
Iraq launches campaign to rally Arab support
Iraq crisis at ‘critical stage,’ U.N. chief pushes for peaceful
Report: Lebanon tells Iraq to cooperate with weapons inspectors
Iraqi foreign minister seeks Syrian support in standoff
Precede MAJDAL SHAMS
Iraqi ambassador says Baghdad cannot meet Annan’s proposed sales
Israel short on gas masks for children
Iraqi daily says Washington always determined to use force
Britain rejects latest Iraqi offer on weapons
Iraq puts oil export potential at 1.6 million barrels daily
Gulf foreign ministers meet to discuss unified stand on Iraq
BC-Iraq-Opposition
Santer says EU position will change if Iraq stays defiant
Iraqi foreign minister calls U.S. rejection ‘a bluff’
UN advises vacationing staff to stay away from Iraq
American, Russian defense chiefs hold cordial talks at military
Iraq accuses U.S. of psychological warfare
U.S. envoy meets with Japanese leaders on Iraq
Foreign Office urges ’higher degree of caution’ for travelers
Iraq dispute underlines strain in U.S.-Russia ties
U.S. envoy seeks China’s support on Iraq
Demonstrators at U.S. Embassy in Japan urge no military attack
Iraq urges diplomacy, releases Egyptian prisoners

to the same story. As stories grow over days, they add more lines.
A document’s line ends when it is no longer associated with any
themes.
Referring to Figure 2, which is showing computed themes for
four days of AP documents from the TDT-2 APW corpus, we can
see that the top story for the first three days is initially labeled pakistan and india but changes to nuclear tests on the following two
days. The theme pakistan and india loses two documents to other
themes on the following day. These are likely documents that do
not relate directly to the theme nuclear tests and therefore were assigned to other stories as the earlier theme pakistan and india became more focused on nuclear tests. No documents published on
June 2 are assigned to the nuclear tests theme. Another story that
is moving up over the days begins as ethnic albanians and quickly
becomes labeled as kosovo. Stories can skip days, as shown by the
documents related to the broader tokyo stock price index themes
that appear on June 2 and June 4.
Ordering schemes that take into account relative positions of related groups across days may minimize line crossings at interval
boundaries. However we have chosen to consistently order themes
for each interval by their number of assigned documents so that
the theme order for each day is unaffected by future days. This
preserves the organization of themes in the story flow visualization
across days and supports information consumers’ extended interaction over days and weeks. An individual or team would therefore be
able to print out each day’s story flow column with document titles
and lines, and post that next to the previous day’s columns. Such an
approach would be unrestricted by monitor resolution and support
interaction and collaboration through manual edits and notes on the
paper hard copies. Each foot of wall space could hold up to seven
daily columns, enabling a nine foot wall to hold two months worth
of temporal context along a single horizontal span.
On a single high-resolution monitor, seven days are easily rendered as each daily column is allocated 300 pixels which accomodates most document titles. Longer time periods can be made accessible through the application of a scrolling function.

103

06/01/1998

06/02/1998

pakistan and india

nuclear tests

India denies it plans another nuclear test, urges nuclear talks

06/03/1998
nuclear tests
U.S. ambassador: nuclear proliferation not only U.S. problem

kosovo
lebanon
ethnic albanian
More deaths reported in Kosovo; thousands flee
More deaths reported in Kosovo; hundreds flee

Fleeing ethnic Albanians describe destruction from Serb offensive
Romania and Macedonia ask for U.S. troops in Kosovo

lebanon

06/04/1998
kosovo
broader tokyo stock price index
Dollar rises, stocks slip in Tokyo trading

kosovo

child labor

child labor

water shortage

penalty corner

New Zealand claims world first of extracting pure water from thin

broader tokyo stock price index

imported trucks plunged 47.9 percent

dejammet urged butler

world cup

Dollar edges lower, stocks fall in Tokyo trading

nicole mott’s penalty corner drive

child labor

Imported autos sales in Japan down for 14th straight month
title

Child marchers breathe new life into old U.N. agency

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

high−speed rail link
Britain gets new deal to speed Channel Tunnel trains

U.N. inspectors challenge Baghdad’s claims it has destroyed illegal

imported trucks plunged 47.9 percent
high−speed rail link

Saudi prince holds more talks on summit, Jordan wants moderate

leader suharto
Indonesia’s new leader unconcerned about past corruption

nicole mott’s penalty corner drive
world cup

Figure 2: Story flow visualization on four low volume days from the TDT-2 APW Corpus.

5

D ISCUSSION

The following discussion explores the described analytic framework and story flow visualization on AP documents within the
TDT-2 Corpus. For cases in which multiple documents with identical titles occurred on the same day, we included only the latest
version within the analysis. The 10,671 analyzed AP documents
span a 6 month period from January 4, 1998 to June 30, 1998.
The AP documents span a range of subjects and primarily cover
international topics. Major stories include the olympics, the world
cup, iraq, kosovo, human rights, nuclear tests, and many others.
Figure 3 shows the story flow visualization on four weeks of AP
documents. At a macro level, it can be observed that a few stories
dominate the first two weeks presented in Figure 3a. On February
28, 1998, the top story essentially ends and only small themes are
visible until March 5, 1998, in Figure 3b when a new story starts
to accumulate new documents. Over the next seven days, that story
adds approximately 40 new documents. The motivated reader is
encouraged to acquire an electronic version of this paper and zoom
into Figure 3 at 500%. At this scale, the individual theme labels and
document titles can be easily read and story dynamics observed.
Figure 4 shows the story flow visualization on one week of AP
documents. The main stories include world cup, kosovo, eu, english fans, and japanese yen. On June 15, kosovo and nato are
separate stories that later merge on June 17. On June 20 the story
is relabeled as kosovo albanians suggesting a new development.
Also on June 20, the world cup game story splits out across multiple themes, iran, world cup finals, korea’s choi yong-soo, players
only to rejoin again on June 21. This is likely due to an increase
in the number of documents published on June 20 that individually
relate to specific sub-themes of world cup game such as specific
countries and players.
While story evolution for large stories is easy to identify, single
articles and stories that last two to three days are more difficult to
spot. This is not unexpected, as the story flow visualization is designed to show story evolution over time and gives priority to the
larger themes in the layout. Themes that do not develop into stories
are not optimally represented and would likely benefit from a selective filtering operation or a second visualization in which the main
stories play a less dominant role.
Anecdotal feedback from potential users suggest that a filtering
mechanism would be welcome in order to minimize line crossings
and enable investigation into specific stories and themes. It was also
suggested that in application, the story flow visualization would

104

likely be focused on a specific subject area, although the high-level
overview was considered effective for users that only need to understand the major story dynamics.
6

C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

We have described a novel analytic framework for automatically
computing themes and tracking stories as they develop over time
and have presented a fundamental visual representation upon which
user interface designers can iterate interaction refinements for specific applications.
We anticipate that systems applying these methods will enable
information consumers to more effectively integrate new information and understand developments over time. Future work to build
on the visual representation presented here will likely focus on
identifying preferred interaction and selection capabilities to support information consumers’ work flows.
In this paper we presented contributions to the field of visual analytics; a novel analytic framework for calculating themes based on
automatically extracted keywords and documents from information
streams, a data model that captures requisite temporal information
for tracking and adapting to evolving stories, and a visual representation of story flow that conveys temporal context for an information space, enabling information consumers to rapidly identify
change and investigate story evolution over time.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC), a U.S. Department of Homeland Security
Program operated by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.
R EFERENCES
[1] CERATOPS. MPQA Corpus, 2009.
[2] C. C. David, D. Graff, M. Liberman, N. Martey, and S. Strassel. The
tdt-2 text and speech corpus. In in Proceedings of DARPA Broadcast
News Workshop, pages 57–60. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
[3] M. Dubinko, R. Kumar, J. Magnani, J. Novak, P. Raghavan, and
A. Tomkins. Visualizing tags over time. In WWW ’06: Proceedings of the 15th international conference on World Wide Web, pages
193–202, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.
[4] C. Gutwin, G. Paynter, I. Witten, C. Nevill-Manning, and E. Frank.
Improving browsing in digital libraries with keyphrase indexes. Decision Support Systems, 27(1-2):81–104, 1999.
[5] E. Hatcher and O. Gospodnetic. Lucene in action. Action series.
Manning Publications Co., Greenwich, CT, 2004.

02/16/1998

02/17/1998

02/18/1998

02/19/1998

02/20/1998

02/21/1998

02/22/1998

02/23/1998

02/24/1998

02/25/1998

02/26/1998

iraq

iraq

iraq

olympic gold medal

iraq

iraq

iraq

secretary−general kofi annan

secretary−general kofi annan

secretary−general kofi annan

secretary−general kofi annan

Iraq warns Kuwait to keep Americans out, vow to defend presidential
Jordan determined to seal border to Iraqi refugees
Chinese president worried about escalating Gulf crisis

Bahrain refuses U.S. access to bases for Iraq attack
Yeltsin: Russia insists that Iraq meet U.N. resolutions
U.N. makes plans, Kurds abandon northern Iraq camp
Mubarak meets with Greek defense minister
Hamas leaflet threatens attack if U.S. attacks Iraq
Iraq blasts U.S. for interfering in Annan visit
Report: Israel told Iraq it won’t strike first

Palestinian police arrest pro−Iraq demonstrators; new rally held
In Romania, Italian president states opposition U.S. attack on
Malaysia opposes military strikes against Iraq, urges diplomacy
Iraqi opposition says ready to participate in change in Iraq
Russia welcomes U.N. secretary general’s planned visit to Baghdad

BULLETIN
Head of North American league says ouster of Americans not a
Finland a surprise entry in semifinals
Ld−Writethru,0564
With AP Photos
Ld−Writethru,0363
Germany wins women’s biathlon relay against archrival Russia

Iraq tells Annan to be impartial in last−ditch peace mission
Iraqi Kurds agree to exchange prisoners
Annan leaves for Baghdad
Gulf crisis keeping oil prices from sliding

Marchers Protest action against Iraq
Howard cancels overseas trip to follow movements in Gulf
U.N. secretary−general ‘rather optimistic’ on Iraq talks
U.N. secretary−general holds crucial talks with Iraqi leaders
20 injured as Jordanians clash with police in pro−Iraq protest
U.N. has no food reserves in Iraq if war disrupts supplies
Scattered pro−Iraq demonstrations in West Bank despite ban
French foreign minister admits failed talks would end diplomatic
Government gearing up to evacuate Filipinos from Middle East

Annan plan could offer Iraq and U.S. a way out
Foreign nationals preparing to leave Israel
With Iraq
Annan meets with Saddam for last−ditch talks to avert strike

France says Annan took big step forward with Iraq agreement
Yeltsin pleased with agreement between U.N. and Iraq
Cook says if there is Iraq deal it’s due to military pressure
Despite Iraq pact, Palestinians keep up pro−Baghdad protests
Cook says if there is Iraq deal, it’s due to military pressure
Mubarak hails UN−Iraqi agreement
With Iraq
U.S. air show presence cut 3rd time because of Saddam
China expresses relief at Iraq settlement
Annan signs deal with Iraq to ease crisis over U.S. strike
Israel prefers diplomatic solution to Iraq crisis
U.N. judge falls off horse, delays testimony of ex−U.N. commander
Iraq says deal with U.N. is a defeat for America
Britain says Saddam has ‘‘moved a long way’’

Clinton tells Israel Saddam will be forced to keep promises
Palestinian official: Iraq emerged the winner
India welcomes diplomatic breakthrough in Iraq
Report: Israel had prepared response to Iraqi missile attack
Israel had prepared response to Iraqi missile attack
Yeltsin discusses Iraq deal with Chirac, Blair and U.N. chief
Report: Two Kuwaitis released by Iraq return home
Iraq trumpets victory, predicts quick lifting of sanctions
Malaysian PM: Lift economic sanctions against Iraq
Annan: smiles, waves as leaves Paris for New York
Business as usual for U.S. soldiers _ along with hopes for peace
Philippine president enters hospital for checkup, then meets Iraqi

More Germans suspected of helping Libyan weapons program

Iraqi parliament holds special session on U.N.−Iraq deal
France, US supplied Iraq with anthrax spores in the 1980s
Inspectors will work quickly under new accord, Butler says

olympic gold medal
Chinese skier leading women’s aerials after preliminaries

olympic gold medal

olympic gold medal
combined downhill
Seizinger wins two downhill races; Wiberg second
Ld−Writethru,0279
Swedish minister ‘pessimistic’ over solution to Iraq crisis
Iraqi, Kuwaiti envoys hold talks on Gulf crisis
Iraqi foreign minister to meet with Chirac in Paris

world cup

BULLETIN
Gianni wins gold, another world record

human rights groups

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

Saudi beheaded for murdering wife
Chiapas draws international attention as Mexican government calls
Chinese dissidents demand political reforms, free unions

U.S. expected to announce Mideast peace ideas despite Iraq crisis
Thousands of Palestinians still under Israeli occupation

central bank

Rangers say PSV’s Advocaat is new coach; Gullit to PSV?
U.S. aerialist injured in fall

combined downhill

south korea

nigerian−led intervention force

South Korea’s president−elect denies meeting Taiwanese leader
Experts: North Korea appears to be easing stance toward Seoul

nigerian−led intervention force
armed forces
Former top military official suspected of corruption released
New military chief installed as riots flare again in Indonesia
New military chief installed as troops watch for trouble

georgian president eduard shevardnadze

Ecomog troops to extend control outside Freetown

harada needed
Japanese crowd cheers team to victory
Japan clinches gold after record leaps by Okabe, Harada

Johnstone holds on for victory in Dunhill PGA
Johnstone wins South African PGA
Fraud trial of disgraced ANC leader postponed

Cook says Security Council very close to agreement on Annan Trip

georgian president eduard shevardnadze

hun sen ousted ranariddh
Japanese envoy casts doubt on early Cambodian solution
Cambodian military court sets date for Ranariddh’s appearance

Two U.Stone, Bergoust sweep aerials gold

Cambodian resistance general looking for remains of missing Briton
King to return to Cambodia in April
Cambodian co−premier says fast admission into ASEAN will benefit

97 percent bosnian serbs

foreign minister mohammed saeed al−sahhaf

Western Bosnian town symbolic of NATO’s thorniest problem
U.N. investigates arson cases in Croat−held Drvar
U.N. investigate arson cases in Croat−held town of Drvar

south korea
South Korea’s Samsung to sell heavy equipment business to Volvo,

U.S. Commerce Secretary: Asia must change the way it does business

sinn fein

Sinn Fein faces banishment as others warn of IRA violence

Sinn Fein leaders hope judge can defend their seat in peace talks

human rights groups

France safer if it avoids striking Iraq, says minister

south africa

clerides’s 40.1 percent

hun sen

central bank
Philippine stocks, peso strengthen

Report: South Korean agents responsible for 1973 kidnapping of then
Report: South Korea’s president−elect kidnapped by his own

ayatollah ruhollah khomeini
gas masks

Indonesia’s Suharto dismisses central bank governor amid economic

clerides’s 40.1 percent

gas masks

suu kyi

Iranian cleric: U.S. wrestlers trip not a step toward diplomatic
Cleric says arrival of U.S. wrestlers not a step toward diplomatic

world cup season

Philippine police halt protest against Burmese leader

Shops burn in riot as students demand that government quit
Tokyo stocks mixed on receding hopes for stimulus package, dollar

97 percent bosnian serbs

1991 gulf war
Report: Iraqis attack U.N. officers, take away their car
Former defense minister: no chances of Iraqi attack on Israel

mobutu sese seko
Kabila visits Switzerland for ‘‘private’’ reasons
Kabili visits Switzerland for ‘‘private’’ reasons

worst economic crisis
Australia rejects request for temporary entry to Indonesian

broader tokyo stock price index

Barge smuggling Iraqi diesel sinks off U.A.E. coast

exit poll gave clerides 51 percent votes
police say
chinese traders

farrakhan

Two Russians, French astronaut return to Earth
Two Russians, French astronaut depart Mir

swedish law

title

Ld−Writethru,0718
Ld−Writethru,0457

international monetary fund efforts

japanese government

suu kyi
end canada’s seven−year reign atop women’s ice hockey
left south africa
nato−led peace force
japanese government
west bank
official antara news agency
united nations resolutions

Russian premier optimistic on loan after talks with IMF’s

Fire destroys 100 houses in Indonesian province

southeast asian nations
exit poll gave clerides 51 percent votes
west bank
world championship title games
military strike

97 percent bosnian serbs

japanese troops
Report: Japan says sex slave protest may result from

dutch flower growers
armed forces

interfax news agency reported

international space station

Media watchdog asks government to punish guilty

kidnappers

1991 gulf war

Power company concedes it may be at fault for city blackout.

Yeltsin−Hashimoto meeting set for April 11−13

Israel, Palestinians make progress on Palestinian airport

sunni muslim group

japanese prime minister ryutaro hashimoto

Three people killed in bloody gun battle
Pakistan police arrest eight men in wake of religious attacks

Government spokesman: Japan didn’t promise supplementary budget

gold medals

world cup standings

congo president laurent kabila

121 polling stations

kidnappers

worst economic crisis

chang

narita airport

Georgia vows peaceful end to U.N. hostage standoff

congo president laurent kabila

Philippoussis upsets top seed Rios, to meet Chang for title

united states 6−3
Miller, McNeil advance to USTA Challenger final

REPEATING to fix garble
U.N.’s Annan begins crucial talks with Iraqi leaders
Iraq urges America to stay out of Annan’s peace mission

Report: Taiwan’s vice president on visit to Middle East
Report: Taiwanese Vice President on visit to Middle East

Four−time gold medalist dismayed at track and field today

1991 gulf war

sri lanka

Coalition provides political weight more than military muscle

Separatist rebels attack military convoy, up to 70 reported killed

world record

chang

Gold for the Dutch, hope for the Americans

united states 6−3

delta patriot missile battery
wife lien fang yu
japanese minister
iraq’s 1990 invasion
news agency ctk reported
olympic history
iraq fired 39 scud missiles
weapons inspectors

tomba fans
world record
tomba fans
india’s foreign ministry quoted prime minister inder kumar
gujral
iraqi
deputy prime minister tariq aziz
dutch flower growers
iraqi president saddam hussein
president−elect kim dae−jung
Iraqis express relief, but fear attack could still occur
india’s
gujral
japanese
india’s foreign ministry quoted prime minister inder kumar
gujralforeign ministry quoted prime minister inder kumar
delta patriot missile battery
Weakened Asian tigers look for new Japanese investment
India says no to use of its space against Iraq
broader tokyo stock price index
Retransmitting to delete FEA designator
Patriot missiles ready _ but U.S. troops hope they won’t be fired
delta patriot missile battery
30−share philippine stock exchange index slipped 0.39 point
japanese foreign minister keizo obuchi arrived
lee told parliament
Philippine shares end mixed; peso weakens on Rubin comments
foreign ministry spokesman
Japanese foreign minister holds talks with Russian leadership
Philippine shares end mixed; peso weakens

Japanese foreign minister arrives for talks with Russian

Government warns Singaporeans against abusing maids

tomba fans

world record

vote counting begins march 2

dutch flower growers
women’s downhill monday
airport spokesman yoshitaka tokoyoda
Police say nothing found in suspicious suitcase at Japan’s Narita
POlice say nothing found in suspicious suitcase at Japan’s Narita

tokyo foreign exchange market
Shares up
Dollar higher against yen in Tokyo

asian currencies
civil aeronautics administration
Azores port denies entry to leaking oil tanker
Lisbon port denies entry to leaking oil tanker
thrilling men’s cross−country relay race
india’s foreign ministry quoted prime minister inder kumar gujral
tueting sprawled helplessly
India tells French envoy that it opposes military strike against
italy’s silvio fauner
Ira,0250q
arai
leaking crude oil tanker permission
Japanese lawmaker under investigation commits suicide
vienna allegedly entered children’s tents
14 parliamentary districts
senior burmese officials
Precede NEW DELHI
New polls ordered in violence−plagued eastern Indian state
arai
french president jacques chirac
united nations resolutions
France optimistic about Annan mission to Baghdad
olympic record
tueting sprawled helplessly
Former East German rowing coach under scrutiny in Britain
nato−led peace force
canada’s 18
official antara news agency
west bank
italy’s silvio fauner
powerful finance ministry
technology minister bacharuddin jusuf habibie
world cup events
world championship title games
vienna allegedly entered children’s tents
leaking crude oil tanker permission

George breaks women’s pole vault record

One killed in early voting in second phase of Indian elections.

airport spokesman yoshitaka tokoyoda
italy’s silvio fauner
portuguese navy corvette
vienna allegedly entered children’s tents
arai
world cup standings
french president jacques chirac
pink stucco guest house overlooking

airport spokesman yoshitaka tokoyoda
mapped iraq’s presidential sites
mass−circulation dong−a ilbo
leaking crude oil tanker permission
missile

interfax news agency reported
President released from hospital

government troops

Israeli prime minister to visit Norway, discuss peace process

More Burmese troops move into Thailand as stand−off continues

southeast asian countries

burmese troops
Australian troops to stay in Gulf until U.N. satisfied on

norwegian prime minister kjell magne bondevik
Netanyahu to discuss peace efforts during trip to Europe
Netanyahu to discuss peace process during trip to Europe

Ramos warns of Chinese currency devaluation
Asian finance chiefs meet in Jakarta to discuss economic crisis

summer’s world cup

japanese stocks rose

israel’s unconditional withdrawal

Israel holding intensive contacts with Switzerland following

japanese companies
New dlrs 1 billion undersea fiber−optic cable to link Japan, U.S.

wife lien fang yu
general staff tang fei
illegal logging scandal
iraqi missile attack
israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu
maryland murder suspect
soldier fired live bullets
iraqi deputy prime minister tariq aziz
regional economic crisis

Aid group: North Korea expects to run out of food in April
Judge proposes Sheinbein return to United States voluntarily
In twist, defense lawyer says he disagrees with extradition law

delta patriot missile battery
wife lien fang yu
illegal logging scandal
missile

Webb leads after course record 64

burmese government

police official

Taiwan’s ex−air force chief promoted to chief of staff
Taiwan ex−air force chief promoted to chief of staff

maryland murder suspect

Burmese refugees given one week to relocate or face expulsion

local police

dallaire

Prison riot ends with no injured
title

north korea

illegal logging scandal

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

general staff tang fei

nokia employs 36,600 people
Retransmitting to restore slugline.
title

Israel accused of foot−dragging on bid for Pollard’s freedom
Smuggled arms intercepted on Dead Sea

Palestinian population has grown to 2.89 million, census says

tirana’s high−security prison ended early thursday

Army arrests six Palestinians in sweep against stone−throwers
PRECEDE Jerusalem

chang

Police: False bomb threat made during Olympics

taiwanese leaders

president boris yeltsin

nokia employs 36,600 people
kalandia refugee camp north

Libyan and Arab League officials meet to coordinate on Lockerbie

israeli

nagano city

receiving 29 million yen

sunni muslim group

Oldest human footprints, damagaed by modern man, to go to museum
Oldest human footprints under man−made threat

Philippine stocks, peso weaken

israeli troop pullback

langebaan prints
nokia employs 36,600 people
israeli radio

langebaan prints

palestinians battered israeli army jeeps

Governor Schroeder wins re−election _ and chance to challenge Kohl
Governor Schroeder wins reelection _ and chance to challenge Kohl
Left−leaning state leader seeks chance to challenge Kohl

Bumps in the night are undoing of Israeli spy agency’s Swiss caper

israeli secret service mossad involving telephone bugging
kim
Report: Mossad agents made noise, alerted neighbors
power company mercury energy

sunni muslim group

EU grants Iraq dlrs 11 million in humanitarian aid

European police officials plot anti−hooligan strategy

Blacked−out New Zealand city to get back to work next week

Widow of Japanese lawmaker abandons plan to run in by−election

power supply company mercury energy

1991 gulf war

power supply company mercury energy

dallaire

Shevardnadze agrees to talks with kidnappers’s representative

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu
30−share philippine stock exchange index slipped 0.39 point

Amnesty: political killings continue in Cambodia
Khmer Rouge blasts Cambodian leader’s cease−fire proposal

hun sen

united states and britain
israeli secret service mossad involving telephone bugging

Army arrests six Palestinians in sweep of stone−throwers

japanese foreign minister keizo obuchi arrived

ASEAN asking U.N. for help to fight forest fires

lower saxony governor gerhard schroeder won

Government revokes printing license of weekly newspaper

power supply company mercury energy
soldiers fired live ammunition

hun sen

human rights

north korea

palestinian leader yasser arafat

Ex−U.N. commander in Rwanda says mission poorly supplied
Ex−U.N. commander in Rwanda begins testifying

israeli

japanese foreign minister keizo obuchi arrived
sri lanka

sinn fein

destroy iraq’s secretive weapons program

121 polling stations

Ld−Writethru,0675
Ld−Writethru,0672
SHIGA KOGEN: in 2:40.67.

russian space station

dallaire

kidnappers

Jordanian troops arrest activists, seize arms in riot−hit city

giant slalom

deputy prime minister lee hsien loong

swedish ice hockey federation

ayatollah ruhollah khomeini

Daehlie gets record seventh gold as Norway edges Italy
Ld−Writethru,0783

Russian and Japanese foreign ministers reported to agree on Iraq

Indonesian police arrest five accused of carrying gasoline bombs

tomba fans

Dutch flower exporters criticize Japanese award bouquets
Dutch flower exporters criticize Japanese bouquets

Former Filipino sex slaves ask Japanese royals for help in

japanese prime minister ryutaro hashimoto

worst economic crisis

italy’s silvio fauner

montserrat living
nato−led peace force
princess diana’s death
yaounde’s military hospital
chase millrose games
final 12 minutes
exit poll gave clerides 51 percent votes
united arab emirates
united states and britain

congo president laurent kabila
kidnappers

south korea

Mir’s crew travels around station, successfully re−docks

dutch flower growers

vienna allegedly entered children’s tents
unprecedented dlrs 4.5 billion petrochemical joint venture
Police investigating sex abuse charges involving children

president−elect kim dae−jung
philippine traders

russian space station

worst economic crisis

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

palestinian leader yasser arafat

Deposed premier’s ally receives 10−year prison sentence

strike iraq

olympic ice hockey tournament

interfax news agency reported

Indonesian troops patrol as police warn rioters will be shot

clap skates brought
ayatollah mohammad yazdi

president fidel ramos

hun sen ousted ranariddh

southeast asian nations

nagano

israel

Saudi septuplets’ parents refuse to take them home from hospital

First Exit Poll puts Hindu nationalist party ahead
First Exit Poll puts Hindu nationalist party ahead, but by less
Troops, protesters, but no voters in India’s Kashmir

weapons inspectors
dlrs 4 billion

Swiss say suspected Mossad operation uncovered
Precede GENEVA
Swiss say suspected Mossad operation in Bern uncovered

Mubarak, Arafat talk about Mideast peace as Iraq crisis eases

Counting of votes begins as India awaits new government

Nagano Paralympics tickets almost sold out

Deposed Cambodian premier declares unilateral cease−fire

saudi arabia

Court convenes legislature to test strength of rivals

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

Iraqis collect full ration for March

iraq’s deputy prime minister

Japanese stocks advance for third day, U.S. dollar drops

president kim

palestinian leader yasser arafat

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

nagano city

israeli secret service mossad involving telephone bugging
summer’s world cup
Furor in Israel over leaking of Mossad operation in Switzerland

Reports: controversial governor in Indian state may get axed

Israel worried that diplomatic solution won’t eradicate Iraq
Arab states welcome Annan accord to end Iraqi crisis
Dates in Iraq’s standoff over U.N. inspections

Arafat hopeful of diplomatic resolution in Gulf
Arafat hopeful of diplomatic resolution in Gulf; two injured in

russian space station

U.S. hockey players damaged rooms after losing

bjp government

03/01/1998
oil

Two British journalists said missing in Bosnia
Three policemen in northern Mexico arrested for alleged
13 killed as speeding train rams into bus

iraq’s deputy prime minister

Political test for Hindu nationalists amid general elections

Four North Koreans defect to the South

Two widows file suit against Hun Sen to fight for justice
Kim takes office with promises of democratic reforms

tokyo stock price index

02/28/1998
local police

police
north korea

south korea

iraqi president saddam hussein

Thailand’s Chatchai retains WBC flyweight title
Korea’s rival political parties break impasse over prime minister

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

Indonesian students rally against president, defying police ban
Philippines to give medicine to cash−strapped Indonesia

Olympic flame out, but afterglow burning bright
Where was the thrill in Nagano?
Olympic farewell: Images, stumbles _ and lots of weather

kim jong−pil

hun sen

worst economic crisis

1991 gulf war

Englishman Edward Fryatt wins Malaysian Open

Sinn Fein to be expelled from Northern Ireland talks

Mexican rebel supporters demanding implementation of peace accord

san cristobal de las casas

nagano olympics

hun sen

palestinian leader yasser arafat

sinn fein

president suharto installed

Grishuk−Platov win second straight gold

montserrat living
mysterious white fiat uno linked
killed cabdriver zlatko popovic
riyadh al−qaysi picked
killed princess diana
special commission
hun sen
yaounde’s military hospital
van roost
chase millrose games
san cristobal de las casas
united states and britain
security council resolutions
united arab emirates

south korea

Olympic gold medal match shows World Cup was no predictor

gold medals

Kim Dae−jung’s honeymoon ends in legislative spat over prime
Former dissident assumes South Korea’s presidency, promises
With BC−Skorea−President

nagano olympics

itar−tass news agency reported

deputy prime minister lee hsien loong

One American soldier injured in detonator explosion
Three American soldiers, one Swede injured in detonator explosion

pasha grishuk

olympic gold medal

hun sen ousted ranariddh

Singapore will give Indonesia export guarantees only if other
Singapore will give Indonesia export guarantees if other countries
Singapore banks face 30 percent drop in 1997 earnings

nato−led peace force

secretary general kofi annan

nhl players

nhl players

deputy prime minister lee hsien loong

georgian president eduard shevardnadze
sinn fein
end canada’s seven−year reign atop women’s ice hockey
unprecedented dlrs 4.5 billion petrochemical joint venture
Ld−Writethru,0580
unprecedented dlrs 4.5 billion petrochemical joint venture
polling stations
China calls anew on West to refrain from attacking Iraq
Americans claim first women’s ice hockey gold, 3−1

North Korea rejects ‘‘six−nation joint declaration’’

97 percent bosnian serbs

jakarta
tokyo stock exchange

Philippine president urges Sihanouk to return to Cambodia
Deposed premier to return next month to prepare for polls: aide

los angeles
worst economic crisis

human rights groups

Ethiopian Belay Wolashe wins New Airport Marathon

worst economic crisis

Police fire in the air to disperse pro−Iraq march

Clap, clap, clap not heard at the short track _ yet

south korea

Queen welcomes winningest Dutch Olympic team

kim

hun sen

Ranariddh’s former military advisor denies fleeing Cambodia

hong kong’s

Report: Police claim they have uncovered plot to disrupt election
Singapore paper: Suharto to postpone currency board

1991 gulf war

president−elect kim dae−jung

Israel has enough masks for tourists

Belgian king thanks Yeltsin for welcome in Russia
Nuclear reactor at power plant shuts down

palestinian leader yasser arafat

Buraas wins men’s slalom, Tomba watches from hotel room
Olympics shaken by moderate earthquake

indonesia’s president suharto

president−elect kim dae−jung

tokyo stock exchange

clap skates brought

itar−tass news agency reported

hun sen ousted ranariddh

palestinian leader yasser arafat

armed forces

ayatollah mohammad yazdi

Customs officers arrest two men and seize 555,000 fake VCDs
EU vice president calls for clear suffrage commitment in Hong Kong

slalom and giant slalom

slalom and giant slalom

philippine traders

secretary−general kofi annan

gas masks

hong kong’s

Europeans: China seen as stability source in Asian crisis

Anti−election strike, protest shut down Kashmiri capital
Pakistan warns India’s Hindu nationalists may destabilize region

gold medals

indonesia’s president suharto

hong kong’s

deputy prime minister lee hsien loong

secretary−general kofi annan

interfax news agency reported

Annan reaches agreement with Saddam in Baghdad
Britain reacts cautiously to report of Iraq breakthrough
U.N. spokesman: Annan on verge of breakthrough on Iraq

Two people killed in bomb explosion. Heavy security for vote

foreign minister mohammed saeed al−sahhaf

economic crisis

Asians succeed in their neighborhood’s Olympics
Daehlie wins eighth gold
Daehlie makes history while Russian women sweep

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

secretary−general kofi annan

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

south africa

farrakhan

Ld−Writethru,0512
Langen retains big lead in four−man heading into final run
Germany wins men’s closing relay of Olympic biathlon competition
BULLETIN

Group accuses officials of fueling anti−Chinese feelings
Indonesia’s new military chief warns of challenge as riot police

Britain promises new campaign to lift Rushdie death sentence

Dollar higher in Tokyo, Japanese stocks retreat

olympic gold medal

olympic gold medal

central bank governor

clerides’s 40.1 percent

harada needed
foreign secretary robin cook

Italy’s Compagnoni wins third gold with ease

combined downhill

hun sen

south korea

slalom and giant slalom

slalom and giant slalom
Gerg surprises field with victory in women’s slalom
Ld−Writethru,0228
SHIGA KOGEN: in 1980.

olympic ice hockey tournament

sinn fein
armed forces

Asian markets mostly rise with steep gains in South Korea
Billionaire Li Ka−shing to leave blue−chip company

foreign minister mohammed saeed al−sahhaf

jump

German finance minister praises South Korea for reforms
Korean−American radio journalist fined dlrs 2,000 for libel

foreign secretary robin cook

Ld−Writethru,0566
NAGANO: the bronze.
Hockey star is devastated by Canada’s loss
Rain forces cancellation of second heat of four−man bobsled
Hasek shuts out Canada in shootout, Czechs advance to final
Ld−Writethru,0503
Young Russian steals the show, becomes latest cross−country star
Norway scores easy win as Japanese reign ends
BULLETIN

hong kong’s

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

Tough−talking former general declares candidacy for governorship
Authorities close 14,700 illegal mines in China

south korea

U.N. relief workers start leaving as Iraq readies for Annan

combined downhill

Finland eliminates defending gold medalist Sweden 2−1

iraqi president saddam hussein
south africa

Blast damages American car dealership; Iraq protest suspected
Palestinian backlash could prove greater threat than Iraq attack
U.N. reducing staff in Iraq as precaution against attack

iraqi president saddam hussein

Devaluation fails to spark foreign currency market
Indonesia still planning for currency board, bank governor says

chinese news agency reported

yasser arafat’s palestinian authority
American troops conduct drills in Kuwait near Iraqi border

iraq

Ld−Writethru,0709

olympic gold medal

iraqi foreign minister mohammed saeed al−sahhaf

02/27/1998
secretary−general kofi annan

Political momentum gathers for Israeli pullout from Lebanon
Report: Syria wants to resume peace talks with Israel

sunni muslim group

palestinians battered israeli army jeeps

langebaan prints
yeo told parliament

north korea

Singapore parliament bans political party films
Singapore parliament bans all political party films

Cambodians express cautious optimism about cease−fire

Election officials prepare to begin counting of ballots

nokia employs 36,600 people
kurdish guerrillas

summer’s world cup

Gunmen wound 16 Turkish soldiers in raid
Gunmen raid military outpost in Turkey, wound 16 soldiers

government troops

yeo told parliament
kurdish guerrillas
thai army
political parties
dlrs 20 million
people’s action party

opposition parties
israeli radio
general staff tang fei
tirana’s high−security prison ended early thursday
receiving 29 million yen
iraqi missile attack
maryland murder suspect
dlrs 7.8 billion
people’s action party
west bank

hun sen

oil fields
dallaire
uttar pradesh’s chief minister

human rights
Paper: U.N. human rights chief prevented from meeting Khatami

543 contested seats

langebaan prints
amer mohammed rashid
Rashid: Iraq can’t take full advantage of oil−for−food deal
Rashid: Iraq can’t take full advantage of oil−for−food

dlrs 1.6 million
Pacific Northwest Ballet takes leap of faith in 25th season

yeo told parliament
general staff tang fei
tirana’s high−security prison ended early thursday
maryland murder suspect
regional economic crisis
U.S. commander stresses gravity of Indonesian situation

Report: Israel asking U.S. for expanded anti−missile funding

political parties
people’s action party
israel’s foreign ministry
west bank

iraqi deputy prime minister tariq aziz
news agency ctk reported
weapons inspectors

west bank
palestinian police
news agency ctk reported
missile
world cup race
british foreign secretary robin cook
including presidential palaces

Netanyahu urges Russian against cooperation with Iran

israeli

U.N.’s Annan holds crucial talks with Iraqi leaders

Israeli planes rocket guerrilla bases in south Lebanon

dlrs 9.96 billion
world war ii
lee told parliament
relay bronze
powerful finance ministry
human rights watch

french president jacques chirac

worst economic crisis
powerful finance ministry
world cup events
canada’s 18
international monetary fund efforts
world championship title games
gold medalist gianni romme

(a) 02/16/1998 - 03/01/1998
03/02/1998
secretary−general kofi annan
U.N. Council unanimously agrees on warning to Iraq
U.S. envoy: Iraq singled out for inspections because of its record

03/03/1998
secretary−general kofi annan

With India−Elections
Indians wrestle with conscience to vote BJP
Counting of votes begins as India awaits new government

southeast asian nations

03/04/1998
iraq

U.N. council agrees on warning to Iraq but no green−light for

Iraqi foreign minister due for talks on oil−for−food program

kim

mossad agents

Korean president names close aide as intelligence chief

hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party

german chancellor helmut kohl

Netanyahu appoints Halevy as Mossad chief
Israeli officials deny report of Swiss assassination attempt
Report: Netanyahu to appoint Jordan mediator as Mossad chief

REPEAT to fix garbled coding
Police blame anti−nuke protesters for railway sabotage

german chancellor helmut kohl

president suharto

bosnian serbs

Delays still hamper Iraq’s oil−for−food program
U.N. team under American Scott Ritter on its way to Iraq

kosovo albanians
PRISTINA: restore calm.
With BC−Yugoslavia−Kosovo
PRISTINA: Thursday’s sweep.
Serb police announce 20 ‘‘terrorists’’ killed in crackdown.
Ethnic Albanian militants threaten revenge on Serbs
British Foreign Secretary to warn Yugoslav president on Kosovo

03/06/1998

kosovo albanians

Albanians rebury victims; militants warn of new strikes
Prodi confirims Italy to back sanctions if Serbia doesn’t allow
Kosovo’s Albanians, outraged at common grave, rebury their dead
Russian Duma defends Serbs over Kosovo conflict
Kosovo’s Albanians to rebury their dead
International Red Cross receives threats, pulls back foreign staff
Kosovo’s Albanians try to rebury their dead; U.S. envoy holds

Ethnic Albanians reject Serb

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

American U.N. expert starts his first day of weapons inspections in

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu
Israeli leader arrives in Norway
Former army chief says as Palestinian, he’d have been a terrorist
Israeli leader holds talks with Kohl in Germany
Contradictory polls suggest public confused over Lebanon

itar−tass news agency

oil

deputy prime minister

hun sen’s forces

mossad agents

Strong economy boosts chemicals group’s net profit

Court finds deposed Cambodian premier guilty of arms smuggling

mossad agents

Taiwan’s vice president arrives for hushed visit

Swiss police reportedly looking for missing Lebanese man

After Mossad scandal fades, another spy agency hits headlines

Thai authorities curb East Timor conference

hun sen
kosovo albanians
Unrest among ethnic Albanians raises fear of war in Yugoslavia
Kosovo violence raises fears of wider war
Police breaks up demonstration of thousands in Kosovo

oil

security council

bharatiya janata party

world cup tickets

hasna mohammed humair

bharatiya janata party

Socialist who may join India’s government wants multinationals out

southeast asian countries

north korea

bosnian serbs

PRECEDE Brussels
French to hold on to tickets; foreigners condemned to small share
French to hold on to tickets; foreign fans condemned to small

Sri Lanka to lure American and British investors

hun sen’s army
Trial of deposed Cambodian premier Norodom Ranariddh underway

South Korea hints at early shipments of food aid to North Korea

norwegian prime minister kjell magne bondevik
party won

hun sen
Philippines urges Hun Sen to abide by Japanese election proposal

hasna mohammed humair

norwegian prime minister kjell magne bondevik

Inconclusive election leads to jockeying for power

president suharto

Mother of Saudi septuplets wants help before she takes them home

Turkish president arrives in Spain for talks

dlrs 5.2 billion

yeltsin’s spokesman sergei yastrzhembsky

yeltsin’s spokesman sergei yastrzhembsky

winter 1998−1999 italian fashion

Fast economy halts oil investments

Russia keeps up chorus of protest against Latvia

Israel’s Sharansky meets Russia premier for talks on trade
Only 10 Russian officials to retain personal bodyguards
Yeltsin names replacements to Cabinet members fired over weekend

Safe styles, futuristic fabrics mark Milan collections
Top models regain Italian runway

winter 1998−1999 italian fashion

world court

trade minister tim fischer

ambassador nizar hamdoon
U.S., Britain face opposition on Security Council warning to Iraq
U.N. takes up U.S.−backed resolution on Iraq

government troops

Report: Asian crisis to hit Australian jobs next year
Australian report: new barriers threaten world trade, including
Report: Asian crisis to hit Australian jobs in late 98/99

cape town

trade minister tim fischer

Cameroon urges World Court to end territorial dispute

babies home

north korea

united states and britain
cape town

Report: Documents show spy agency operated against Kim

hasna mohammed humair
Saudi mother of septuplets not ready to cope with newborns

Netanyahu sends envoys to Washington to try and block U.S. plan

Possible breakthrough in case of slain Swedish tourists

deputy prime minister

opium warlord khun sa

security council

won weizman

Yeltsin merges security agencies, appoints new chief
France vague on ‘‘severest consequences’’; air strike debate

trade minister tim fischer

Weizman re−elected as Israel’s president
JERUSALEM: legislators abstained.

emergency power

safari rally

dlrs 4 billion

noor ahmed shah

Britain’s Burns wins Safari Rally

poll broadcast

norwegian prime minister kjell magne bondevik

saudi arabia
united states and britain
south lebanon
malaysia’s prime minister
Malaysia says mass repatriation will not affect ASEAN ties

exit poll results
thai army

luggage handlers staged short walkouts
Precede BONN
Massive public worker strike delays German commuters, air travel

1991 council resolution
U.N. council agrees on warning to Iraq

5 million greek orthodox
Improvement in condition of ailing Greek Orthodox leader

united states and britain
israel’s unconditional withdrawal
u.n.−approved oil−for−food program
president bill clinton
interfax news agency reported
ambassador nizar hamdoon
major blocs began holding strategy sessions

Flash floods kill at least 75, another 250 people missing

puerto rico
Puerto Ricans wary of U.S. status deliberations
With Puerto Rico−Status

luggage handlers staged short walkouts
5 million greek orthodox
major blocs began holding strategy sessions
saudi arabia
Relative: No clue when British nurses will be freed

israel’s unconditional withdrawal
ambassador nizar hamdoon
president bill clinton
interfax news agency reported

winter 1998−1999 italian fashion

In Auckland’s heart of darkness, businesses at risk of going under

won weizman
noor ahmed shah
luggage handlers staged short walkouts
deputy prime minister
puerto rico
security council
food
butler told cnn
interfax news agency reported

03/12/1998

kosovo albanians

Don’t underrate Western powers, Britain tells Milosevic
Kosovo protests killing; relatives refuse bodies, demand autopsy
War Crimes Court says it is investigating Kosovo violence
In Kosovo, like Bosnia, Russia seeks to soften sanctions against

Confederation expels controversial Chechen warlord
Lebed given spot on ballot for Siberian governorship

human rights abuses

03/11/1998

kosovo

Kosovo protests killing; relatives refuse bodies, demand autopsy
Conference on Kosovo adopts immediate and longer−term measures
Greece condemns ‘secessionist tendencies’ and repression in Kosovo
Bosnian Serb pleads guilty to rape at war crimes tribunal
Largest demonstration in 10 years in Kosovo as world powers meet
Largest demonstration in 10 years in Kosovo as powers meet
Germany says no suspension of deportations to Kosovo

itar−tass news agency

prime minister benjamin netanyahu

03/10/1998

kosovo albanians

Demonstrations planned in Kosovo, world powers meet on crisis.
Serbs declare Kosovo siege over
Albania calls Moscow biased over Kosovo
Serbian police say Kosovo siege over
Precede PRISTINA
Serbian police maintain seal around targeted villages
Pope decries violence in Kosovo, oppression of women
Ethnic Albanians in Turkey protest Serb attacks in Kosovo

Norway wants Mideast sides to respect Oslo agreement

Serb war crimes suspect blames politicians

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

03/09/1998

kosovo albanians

Repeat
Serbia’s Kosovo crisis raises fears in other parts of Europe
Federal president predicts ‘slaughterhouse’ in Kosovo
International watchdog seeks probe into possible war crimes in
Albright demands ‘‘firm action’’ against Serbia
Serbian police: Search for ‘terrorists’ still on in Kosovo
Albright issues warnings to Serbia, Iraq

kosovo albanians

Tens of thousands attend funeral of slain Kosovo Albanians
Unrest among ethnic Albanians raises fear of war in Yugoslavia

03/08/1998

kosovo albanians

Annan expresses concern over Kosovo but UN to take a back seat for
Serb special police press Kosovo crackdown
Serb special police continue their crackdown in part of Kosovo
Serb police kill 20 Albanians in crackdown on separatists.

iraq

congress party

kosovo albanians

03/07/1998

kosovo albanians

In the fight against Kohl, this candidate represents new
Kohl faces tough, telegenic adversary for German elections
Germany’s unemployment protesters call demonstration this week

U.S. military will aid Asian stability amid economic crisis:

german chancellor helmut kohl

U.S. envoy delivers Clinton’s reform message to Indonesian

03/05/1998
iraq

Netanyahu ends four−nation Europe swing; Blair to visit
Austrian investors seek to build casino in Jericho
Netanyahu to present Blair with plan to reactivate peace process

King Hussein tones down proposal for U.S.−Iraqi dialogue
American−led team inspects suspected weapons sites

Jordan to ask Israel to abide by peace accords
Egyptian president: Netanyahu hasn’t kept any promises

suharto

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

Report: Annan bringing proposal for Israeli troop withdrawal from

human rights

weapons inspectors

Indonesia’s President Suharto: Asia’s longest serving leader
Indonesia’s Suharto gets new powers, is re−elected

Brazil’s Scherer sets South American record in 50 fly
France’s Burtin wins first DH; Maier clinches overall

Nearly 1,000 people hurt in falls on Moscow ice
Moscow mayor intent on restricting capital residents
Precede MOSCOW

bharatiya janata party

security council

saudi arabia’s king fahd

Hindu nationalists inch closer to power

mossad agents

world cup

human rights

chechnya’s two−year war

world cup tickets

Chechen president, headed for Britain, unharmed in car accident

chechnya’s two−year war

Fahd in stable condition after undergoing gall bladder surgery
Fahd in stable condition after gall bladder surgery

north korea

downhill

South Korean Red Cross proposes meeting with northern counterpart

Ld−Writethru,0699
Ld−Writethru
Street ambivalent about end to her ‘‘roller coaster’’ season

breakaway turkish cypriot state

north korea

itar−tass news agency

AP Photo available

security council

Three Chechens killed, livestock saved in gun battle

northern ireland

puerto rico

suharto
As outsiders worry, Indonesian legislators put confidence in
Suharto sees conflict between IMF reform and constitution:

Government frees IRA suspect wanted in Germany over mortar attack
Adams keeps Sinn Fein out of Belfast talks until he meets Blair

bosnian serbs

Several homes flooded by heavy rains
NASA to renew rocket launches

north korea

hans van den broek

cyprus
Survey: offshore sector to shrink after Cyprus EU membership

broader tokyo stock price index

world cup tickets

Japanese stocks fall, dollar edges higher in Tokyo

world cup tickets

world cup

chechnya’s two−year war

currency board plan

human rights

israeli

EU Commissioner leaves without breakthrough
AP photo NIC−101 available

broader tokyo stock price index

broader tokyo stock price index

Government will step up efforts to free Pollard

unseeded siemerink gave krajicek

Dollar, Japanese stocks rise in morning Tokyo trading

palestinian leader yasser arafat

world cup finals

Siemerink knocks lackluster Krajicek
Siemerink knocks lackluster Krajicek out of ABN AMRO indoor
Siermerink knocks lackluster Krajicek out of ABN AMRO indoor

israeli troops

Opposition chancellor candidate to visit Israel, Lebanon

hans van den broek

teammate david coulthard

Final session canceled because of heavy snowfall
Asian stock markets close generally mixed

state madeleine albright
Ukraine cancels nuclear deal with Iran, pleases U.S.
U.S. wins Ukrainian pledges of export controls

broader tokyo stock price index
trade minister tim fischer
security council
won weizman
noor ahmed shah
luggage handlers staged short walkouts
emergency power
puerto rico
potential weapons sites
American Ritter resumes inspections in Iraq

80 percent
interfax news agency reported

reigning world cup champion nicolas fontaine

US envoy arrives to promote resumption of stalled peace talks

Canada’s Nicolas Fontaine wins freestyle aerials competition,0308
Canada’s Nicolas Fontaine wins freestyle aerials competition
competition,0308

security council

told conference organizer kirby jones

monday israel’s trade minister natan sharansky
Israel’s Sharon meets Jordanian leaders for talks on projects
Israel’s Sharon arrives in Jordan for talks on joint projects

Commission should determine if Russia has claim to Chechnya

Chechnya: Release British hostages before president goes to London

state madeleine albright
told conference organizer kirby jones
peace

ahson

royal highness

Downhill winner crowned, but World Cup victory still coveted
In West Bank, burying the dead and bracing for new battle
Clashes in West Bank following roadblock shooting

war crimes tribunal

saudi arabia’s king fahd

hindu nationalist party
kurdish rebel group pkk

Japan Minister: No plans to delay aid earmarked for Indonesia

party won
unseeded siemerink gave krajicek

israeli
Israeli soldiers fire on Palestinian van at roadblock

security council resolutions
Head of Joints Chiefs says US troops ready to stay in Kuwait

nuclear waste

north korea
myanmar military

Iran says Ukraine big loser for pulling out of nuclear deal

Szabo sets 2,000 mark, two women break pole vault mark
Szabo breaks women’s indoor 2,000 indoor mark

crew members found diving gear belonging
Tourism official applauds charges against tour boat operator

palestinian leader yasser arafat
dlrs 43 billion economic bailout
palestinian economy
ritter’s team
U.N. team has visited six ‘sensitive’ sites

pope john paul ii
russian−designed nuclear reactors
italian foreign minister lamberto dini
russian ambassador sergey lavrov

Italian President cancels trips to Israel and Syria

Standoff continues over shipload of nuclear waste
Governor bars ship carrying nuclear waste, protesters keep vigil

unseeded siemerink gave krajicek
reigning world cup champion nicolas fontaine

italian foreign minister lamberto dini
russian ambassador sergey lavrov

Police break up pro−Kurdish demonstration in Istanbul
Police breaks up demonstration, tens injured in stampede

palestinian leader yasser arafat

state madeleine albright

Some royals reportedly wary of change

kurdish rebel group pkk

broader tokyo stock price index
breakaway turkish cypriot state

told conference organizer kirby jones

reigning world cup champion nicolas fontaine

world cup
suspected weapons sites
jordanian crown prince hassan
ethiopian−born saudi financier sheikh mohamed husseinpeace
al amoudi
kurdish rebel group pkk
African leaders, businessmen promote investment in continent
al−rai al−amm daily quoted sheik sabah al−ahmed al−sabah
romanian 5,000−meter world champion ran
Kuwait wants Iraq to admit invasion was a mistake, report
alicia alvarez gutierrez

Police say man who married for love should be freed

emergency power
russian−designed nuclear reactors

downhill title
israeli

Report: Turkish Kurdish rebels may withdraw from northern Iraq

state madeleine albright

Police crack down on alleged killers of Protestant, Catholic
Germany, denied extradition, asks Britain to prosecute IRA suspect

world cup

north korea

dlrs 43 billion economic bailout

president aslan maskhadov

EU using money and diplomacy to revive Mideast peace process
Spain to fight EU plans to place quotas on olive production
EU Commission adopts strategy on freer EU−US trade

meet british prime minister tony blair

teammate david coulthard

party won

peace

eu

peace

unseeded siemerink gave krajicek
reigning world cup champion nicolas fontaine

How India’s BJP may win the majority
Gandhi widow weighs political offer, as BJP musters needed support

northern ireland

Speculation turns to make−up of new Indonesian cabinet
Australian aid conditional on Indonesia accepting IMF program
Former Cabinet minister chosen as deputy to Indonesia’s Suharto
Philippine president: Suharto’s re−election will help Indonesia’s

itar−tass news agency

Israel’s Sharansky meets Jordanian king, signs trade accords

FIA rejects Australian GP protest but could ban arranged finishes

American businessmen look with longing at Cuba
Cuba urges U.S. businesses to oppose trade embargo

currency board plan

bharatiya janata party

Ailing Chinese dissident’s parents appeal for his release
China to sign U.N. covenant on civil and political rights
Philippine government, Communist rebels agree on human rights
Turkish court acquits 10 policemen in torture case

president suharto

monday israel’s trade minister natan sharansky

palestinian leader yasser arafat
Excerpts from Yasser Arafat’s speech to lawmakers
Lawmakers lambaste Arafat for failing to follow up reform pledges

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

Militant uses Israeli opposition leader’s comments to justify acts

itar−tass news agency

world cup

Report: Indonesia to decide economic plan after election
As rupiah slides, Indonesia’s Suharto meets economic team

philippine stock exchange index

03/15/1998

Chinese leaders congratulate Indonesia’s Suharto

Netanyahu expresses vague optimism after Oslo talks

weapons inspectors

hun sen

Seoul says no evidence to support rumors of unrest in North Korea

03/14/1998

president suharto

israeli prime minister benjamin netanyahu

currency board plan

hans van den broek

03/13/1998

With AP Photos
Karen refugees rebuilding camp in wake of attack

auckland’s mercury energy
Anger mounts over blackout; lawsuits and protest march in works

nyrup rasmussen
Social Democrats win narrow victory in cliffhanger election
Exit poll shows Social Dems, trying for reelection, in virtual dead

Kuwait wants Iraq to admit invasion was a mistake, minister says

Six months after Hurricane Pauline, Acapulco still struggling
australian grand prix
al−rai al−amm daily quoted sheik sabah al−ahmed al−sabah
kuwait wants iraq
Birmingham City manager withdraws resignation
royal highness
Paper: Iraq won’t accept Kuwaiti conditions for peace
german foreign minister klaus kinkel
trevor francis
jordanian crown prince hassan
pope john paul ii
romanian 5,000−meter world champion ran
kurdish rebel group pkk
royal highness
cuba paid
thai government
ethiopian−born saudi financier sheikh mohamed hussein al amoudi
german foreign minister klaus kinkel
Singapore’s DBS acquires Thailand’s Thai Danu Bank
romanian 5,000−meter world champion ran
police station
crew members found diving gear belonging
crew members found diving gear belonging
al−rai al−amm daily quoted sheik sabah al−ahmed al−sabah
palestinian leader yasser arafat
russian−designed nuclear reactors
nuclear waste
pope john paul ii
turkish foreign minister ismail cem
palestinian parliament
trevor francis
united front
alicia alvarez gutierrez
romanian 5,000−meter world champion ran
pope john paul ii
west bank town
military police
dlrs 43 billion economic bailout

trevor francis

b 03 02 1998 03 15 1998

F gu e 3 S o y flow v sua za on o ca cu a ed hemes and documen ass gnmen s o each day w h n a ou week pe od om he TDT 2
APW Co pus

6 S Hav e B He z e and L Nowe ThemeR ve V sua z ng heme
changes ove me n EEE Sympos um on n orma on V sua za on
2000 n oV s 2000 pages 115–123 2000
7 S Hav e E He z e P Wh ney and L Nowe ThemeR ve v sua
z ng hema c changes n a ge documen co ec ons EEE ransac
ons on v sua za on and compu er graph cs 8 1 9–20 2002
8 E He z e V C ow D Payne and A Tu ne Tu n ng he Bucke o
Tex n o a P pe n EEE Sympos um on n orma on V sua za on
2005 NFOV S 2005 pages 89–94 2005
9 K Jones A S a s ca n e p e a on o Te m Spec fic y and s Ap
p ca on n Re eva Journa o Documen a on 28 1 11–21 1972
10 S Jones and G Payn e Top c based b ows ng w h n a d g a b a y
us ng keyph ases n DL 99 Proceed ngs o he our h ACM con er
ence on D g a brar es pages 114–121 New Yo k NY USA 1999
ACM
11 J Leskovec L Backs om and J K e nbe g Meme ack ng and
he Dynam cs o he News Cyc e n Proceed ngs o he 15 h ACM
S GKDD n erna ona con erence on Know edge d scovery and da a
m n ng pages 497–506 ACM New Yo k NY USA 2009
12 S Rose D Enge N C ame and W Cow ey Tex M n ng chap
e Au oma c Keywo d Ex ac on om nd v dua Documen s John
W ey and Sons L d 2009 o appea
13 G Sa on A Wong and C S Yang A vec o space mode o au o
ma c ndex ng Commun ACM 18 11 613–620 1975

14 B N Sch and O Ko ak Exp o ng a d g a b a y h ough key
deas n JCDL 08 Proceed ngs o he 8 h ACM EEE CS o n con
erence on D g a brar es pages 177–186 New Yo k NY USA
2008 ACM
15 E Tu e and D Rob ns V sua exp ana ons G aph cs P ess Chesh e
Conn 1997
16 F V egas S Go de and J Dona h V sua z ng ema con en po
ay ng e a onsh ps om conve sa ona h s o es n Proceed ngs
o he S GCH con erence on Human Fac ors n compu ng sys ems
pages 979–988 ACM New Yo k NY USA 2006
17 F V egas M Wa enbe g and K Dave S udy ng coope a on and
confl c be ween au ho s w h h s o y flow v sua za ons n Proceed
ngs o he S GCH con erence on Human ac ors n compu ng sys
ems pages 575–582 ACM New Yo k NY USA 2004
18 J Wa d J H e a ch ca g oup ng o op m ze an ob ec ve unc on
Journa o he Amer can s a s ca assoc a on pages 236–244 1963

105

106

Figure 4: 06/21/1998

Residents in Louise Woodward’s hometown giving her breathing space

Elections official says St. Vincent and the Grenadines vote was
Poll shows solid support for major ‘agreement’ parties in N.

detroit red wings
Pope receives Mandela in Vatican

NBA to consider moratorium in labor dispute

west bank

diplomatic compound
Bizarre denouement in conflict over ambassadors’ homes in Belarus
Belarus’ president claims ownership of ambassadors’ residence

NBA players bounced from U.S. roster

germany’s chancellor kohl

shin bet chief ami ayalon recently withdrew

World Bank mission reviews programs in Ukraine
Xerox to invest up to dlrs 30 million in Russia before 2000

national team

paraguay jose luis chilavert

shin bet chief ami ayalon recently withdrew

palestinian authority
gave woodforde a second break
brian laudrup sliced open
jordan
tickets
military leader urged
5.2 seconds left
defense secretary william cohen
saudi arabia

Chief inspector: Iraq close to being free from U.N. sanctions

butler

Council meeting on Bosnia, expected to approve U.N. mission for a

newly reconstituted police forces

detroit red wings

5.2 seconds left
palestinian authority

Thai police: more than 100 arrested so far for World Cup gambling

jordan
butler
increasingly popular gambling vehicle

A mighty track team, and a turbulent time

dlrs 200 million

portuguese news agency lusa reported

french world cup organizing committee

tunisia chokri el ouaer

EDS: retransmits with tennis in slug
French player kicked out for verbal abuse

detainees and all prisoners

tear gas
tunisians tossed bottles
crowd booed pioline
germany’s chancellor kohl
strongman hun sen
airline suffered 4.2 billion yen
national team
premier sergei kiriyenko’s cabinet

germany’s chancellor kohl

tear gas
jordan
game 6
dlrs 50 million
national team
butler
foreign ministry
5.2 seconds left

Two airline unions call off strikes; third to walk off as planned

airline suffered 4.2 billion yen

financial crisis
12 players
increasingly popular gambling vehicle
foreign ministry

Communists denounce re−appointment of Chubais

Chubais calls for dlrs 10 billion to 15 billion in aid to Russia
BC−Russia−Economy, 1st Ld

Political killings condemned; opposition party to defy ban
Prince’s party condemns killing of party workers
German opposition leader holds Polish talks

interfax news agency quoted chubais

strongman hun sen

diplomatic compound

late dictator gen

crowd booed pioline

tunisia chokri el ouaer

NBA players might be bounced from U.S. roster

mario stanic put

World Cup: Denmark and South Africa draw 1−1 in ‘‘strange match’’

tunisians tossed bottles
crowd booed pioline
financial times−stock exchange 100−share index
strongman hun sen
airline suffered 4.2 billion yen
increasingly popular gambling vehicle
international financial organizations

U.S. looking for more from China in proposal for WTO membership

ernie els
tear gas
world’s financial markets

tunisians tossed bottles

mario stanic put
south africa

west bank

blue−chip nikkei index
germany’s chancellor kohl

yassin

Germany begins reluctant farewell to D−mark after 50 years

Report: Egyptian embassy tells Hamas leader he can enter Egypt

west bank

usa basketball

dlrs 50 million

06/21/1998

Spencer says Diana TV program drained him; controversy over

deputy treasury secretary lawrence summers
footed shot home
regional prefect jean−paul proust relented

World financial officials urge Japan to revive economy

sports fans
tunisians tossed bottles
crowd booed pioline
financial times−stock exchange 100−share index
ernie els
world currency markets

Police fire in air as protests in Yemen continue

blue−chip nikkei index
tear gas

Turkish students march to protest head scarf ban
Turkish students launch march head scarf ban

100 pro−islamic students began saturday

soccer game

yassin

stewart

cart

south african captain lucas radebe

time shot

world currency markets

U.N. envoy in Baghdad to discuss oil−for−food implementation

world food program wants

Iraq’s Aziz off to Madrid to lobby for lifting of sanctions

100 pro−islamic students began saturday
john jairo toro
nation party
fans
regional prefect jean−paul proust relented
asian nations

Giggling golfer earns first LPGA victory

south koreans
holes

Cabinet approves plan to extend Jerusalem authority to settlements
Egypt criticizes Israel’s decision to extend Jerusalem

extend jerusalem municipal authority

U.S. official arrives in Jakarta for talks on Indonesian economy

deputy treasury secretary lawrence summers

At least five dead as freak storm hits Moscow

sporadic power outages

World Cup: French policeman in coma after being hit by hooligan
French policeman in coma after being hit by German hooligan

blue−chip nikkei index
regional prefect daniel cadoux

Iraq blames foreigners for the killing of senior Iranian cleric

ayatollah mirza ali gharavi

Three injured as demonstrators clash with police in Yemen

150 riyals

players

time shot

south africa

One Nation makes Asian Australians feel ‘‘unwelcome:’’ Howard

nation party

Other nations urge Cambodian parties not to boycott election

korea’s choi yong−soo

interfax news agency quoted chubais

Janzen wins U.S. Open

stewart

Martin leaves U.S. Open with confidence

cart

ambassadors

AP Photos XWCLY103−107
World Cup: Iran wins political game 2−1

iranian fans

Czech socialists win elections, fear tough coalition talks ahead

social democrats

soccer team

asian crisis

Louise Woodward implies Eappens were responsible for baby’s death

ms woodward

Barnes wins Canadian senior event
Montgomerie can’t escape heckling fans
Woods looking to be ‘major’ contender again

final round

Thousands flee Bissau fighting, only trickle find refuge
Guinea−Bissau loyalists demand ceasefire before talks

president joao bernardo vieira

interfax news agency

Dollar rises, Tokyo stock prices edge higher in morning trading

tokyo stock exchange

North Korea denounces South Korea over Independence Day festival

south korea’s

Fighting for Kosovo roads rages despite calls for peace

kosovo albanians

Sampson’s future uncertain following Cup
World Cup: Iran defeats United States 2−1
World Cup: Germany grabs 2−2 draw with late comeback
World Cup: Cha fired as head coach
World Cup: Saudi coach, players miss sacked Brazilian coach

world cup

strongman hun sen

With Sports−Soccer−Germany−Yugoslavia

keeper edwin van der sar

Casey Martin rides into weekend play despite some poor driving

gambian foreign minister mohamed sedat jobe
Artillery shells rain down on Guinea−Bissau capital

players

interfax news agency quoted chubais

European Union ambassadors to leave Belarus

ambassadors

World Cup: Classy Dutch rout South Korea 5−0
World Cup: Dutch win 5−0 to eliminate Koreans
World Cup: Cocu, Overmars give Dutch 2−0 halftime lead

korea’s choi yong−soo

Czech socialists win elections, fear tough coalition talks ahead
Initial results show socialists ahead in Czech elections
Exit polls have socalists leading in Czech early elections

social democrats

Saudi Arabia fires Brazilian coach Parreira

cart

Danes in shock after referee expels three from World Cup match vs.

south african captain lucas radebe

Belarus cuts water and power to ambassadors’ residence

diplomatic compound

interfax news agency quoted chubais

dlrs 50 million

yassin

nba players

Israel says Palestinians stealing beehives

tunisia chokri el ouaer

London share prices lower at midday

financial times−stock exchange 100−share index

prominent political prisoners

Netanyahu: Israel is considering referendum on West Bank pullback

late dictator gen

west bank

late dictator gen

shin bet chief ami ayalon recently withdrew

sunday’s game

World Cup: Valiant loss gives Japan confidence against Croatia

mario stanic put

_REPEAT FOR ALL NEEDING_
Summit budget battle sidelines launch of ‘people’s Europe’,

Washington has no immediate solution for Ukraine’s Turboatom

nba players

frank de boer

usa basketball

interfax news agency

Britain gives muted welcome mixed with digust to au pair’s return

au pair louise woodward arrived

Louise Woodward arrives home
BULLETIN
Louise Woodward faces battle to rebuild life after conviction

au pair louise woodward arrived

interfax news agency

Dollar weaker, Tokyo stocks higher in morning trading

interfax news agency

weak yen

eritrean rebels

World Cup: French heavily favored against desperate Saudis

prominent political prisoners

south african president nelson mandela

coach aime jacquet

Stewart stumbles but holds one−stroke lead at U.S. Open
Stewart dances to first−round lead at Open

stewart

mandela

democratic party

Red Wings cap memorable season with a memorable finals

au pair louise woodward arrived

south african president nelson mandela

detroit red wings

An angry Nigerian dissident, worn after prison term, returns home

english fans

Soweto uprising remembered in rallies, peaceful gunfire

south african president nelson mandela

EDs: Combines previous and updates with quotes
Yzerman grabs two trophies as Red Wings win Cup
Red Wings sweep Capitals to win Stanley Cup

detroit red wings

eritrean capital asmara

Ld−Writethru,0813
World Cup: Some of the delinquents were goaded into action

national team

Nigerian junta frees nine prominent political detainees
URGENT

detainees and all prisoners

World Cup: In eye of the storm, England beats Tunisia 2−0
World Cup: England leads Tunisia 1−0 at halftime

tunisia chokri el ouaer

frank de boer

Seventy−two forest fires registered near Moscow over weekend

interfax news agency

portuguese colony

World Cup: English fans celebrate in Spain
Violence flares again after England beats Tunisia
English, Tunisian fans clash, thwarting police measures
Government leaders condemn ‘disgrace’ of English troublemakers
World Cup: English hooligans back in business

english fans

moshood abiola

zedillo

Yeltsin won’t attend czar’s funeral
Yeltsin to chair Cabinet meeting on anti−crisis program

russian president boris yeltsin

Iraq rejects resolution stipulating longterm oil−for−food program
Delegates gather in Rome to forge international court

security council

world cup finals

prime minister benjamin netanyahu

Newspaper mock referendum: two−thirds favor West Bank withdrawal

netanyahu adviser david bar−illan

eritrea
Chubais back, says Russia needs dlrs 10 billion to 15 billion in

russian president boris yeltsin

english fans

portuguese colony

Ethiopia deports 500 Eritreans

japanese yen

Post−colonial Guinea−bissau plunges into darkness
Rebels hold airport, gunfire rattles through Bissau

oust president joao bernardo vieira

World Cup: Bergkamp back, Kluivert out as Dutch take on South

detroit red wings

Marseille, Paris, Toulouse prepare security for matches
Marseille gets set for second World Cup weekend

south korea

interfax news agency

Louise Woodward has ’lots of answers,’ mother says

Kidnappers of Russian envoy make ransom demand

ms woodward

World finance officials meet to discuss Asian financial crisis
Trading in Long Term Credit Bank suspended after downgrade

interfax news agency

south korea

Hollway plays down dollar drop

asian crisis

No incidents reported in Toulouse as English fans trickle in

english fans

Tight security in place for Iran−U.S. match
Iran says one of its senior cleric has been killed in Iraq
World Cup: Much more than a game: Politics, second round at stake
Soccer brings together Iranians from all sides of the political

iran

japanese yen

english fans

eu

Kosovo leader calls for NATO help, admits no control over KLA
World Cup: Troubled Yugoslavs look for joy with win against
Yugoslav minister commits to dialogue; Says Belgrade wants to join

kosovo

06/20/1998
Four Serbian policemen held by militants, fighting goes on
Four Serbian policemen held by militants

kosovo albanians

english fans

Two Koreas may jointly celebrate liberation day in August
World Cup: Mexico prepares for Belgium, attacks reporters

south korea’s

eu

itar−tass news agency

Dollar edges higher, stocks fall
Precede LONDON
China welcomes efforts to strengthen Japanese yen
Asian rallies fail to impress European markets

japanese yen

security council

kosovo

06/19/1998
World Cup violent play worries Brazil
World Cup: Nigeria into second round with 1−0 victory
World Cup: U.S. players happy at attention; Iran going for victory
Already qualified, Brazil still has revenge for motivation
World Cup: Japan seeks life−saving upset against Croatia

world cup game

Dollar plunges against yen in Tokyo, stocks rally
London share prices higher at midday

Kremlin and Moscow sign power−sharing agreement
Government to launch program to help coal miners

06/18/1998
Nearly 15,000 tickets stolen; state phone company probing fraud
World Cup: Norway unbeaten in 16 games but disappointed

world cup game

tokyo stock exchange

russian president boris yeltsin

EU back to the drawing board to make itself more people−friendly
Greek veto dooms EU effort to revive relations with Turkey
Money and power wrangles cloud EU drive to reunite Europe
Finland ratifies Amsterdam Treaty, Schengen Pact

Eritreans, Ethiopians welcome end to air raids

russian president boris yeltsin

Resolution submitted on Iraq spare parts
U.S. opposes independent world court prosecutor

security council

eu

Montenegro distances itself from Milosevic’s Kosovo policy
Albanian president calls border shootings a provocation

kosovo

eu

security council

EU leaders to urge Indonesia to free East Timor leader
Clinton phone call fails to lift EU−Turkey ties from deep freeze
EU says goodbye to Mandela _ amid plaudits and trade prods
EU bans fish, mollusk imports from Turkey

eu

nato

Yugoslav leader agrees to talks over Kosovo, but settlement still
More influence for Montenegro reformists in Yugoslav parliament
Milosevic agrees to negotiate with moderate Kosovo Albanian leader
Milosevic refuses to negotiate with KLA, says not affected by NATO
Milosevic agrees to negotiate over Kosovo political leader

kosovo

06/17/1998
Iran coach: Iran−US both need win in their big match to advance in
World Cup: Late Vastic strike earns Austria another 1−1 tie
Belgian captain Van der Elst injured in training
Asprilla dismissed from squad
World Cup: Croatian captain pulls muscle, out for Japan game
Consultant, two others arrested in ticket scam case

world cup game

Emergency program, Chubais’ possible appointment to fight crisis
Russian government defends plans for czar’s funeral

ethiopia and eritrea

American named new head of South African Airways

south africa’s

Officials disagree on whether U.N. mandate needed for Kosovo
Russian defense minister rebukes U.S. commander over Kosovo
NATO allies trying to give Milosevic a lesson in power
UNHCR says helicopters may be used to help Kosovo refugees
Some Albanians say NATO shor of force is not enough

nato

EU adds ban on commercial flights to Serbia sanctions over Kosovo
Macedonians say NATO action brings sense of security

kosovo

World Cup: Hooligans could lose jobs, club membership
Thai police: More than 100 arrested so far for World Cup gambling

06/16/1998

world cup

World Cup: Moeller header puts Germans 1−0 ahead at halftime
World Cup: Romania beats Colombia 1−0
World Cup: France guards against concentration lapse ahead of Saudi
World Cup: unconvincing win sobers Yugoslavs

06/15/1998

world cup

