VIScover: Visualizing, Exploring, and Analysing Structured Data
VAST 2009 Flitter Mini Challenge Award: Novel visualization of effect of rule application
Thorsten Liebig'

Olaf Noppenst

Friedrich von Henkel

Ulm University
derivo GmbH
Germany

Ulm University
derivo GmbH
Germany

Ulm University

ABSTRACT

Today's challeng ing task in intelligent data processing is not to store
large volumes of interlinked data but to visualize, explore, and understand its explicit or implicit relationships. Our solution to this
is the VIScover system . VIScover combines semantic technologies with interactive exploration and visualization techniques able
to analyze large volumes of structured data. We briefly describe
our VIScover system and show its potential using the example of
the VAST 2009 social network and geospatial data set.
Index Terms:
1.2.4 [Computing Methodologies]: Artificial
Intelligence-Knowledge Representation Formalisms and Methods; H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Storage And
Retrieval-Information Search and Retrieval H.5.2 [Information
Interfaces And Presentation] : User Interfaces-

1 INTRODUCTION
Access to knowledge within documents, databases, etc. has become
a critical factor at a time where electronically stored data doubles
at decreasing time frames. Many relevant pieces of information or
correlations are stored electronically but archived in a way which
prevents their access. Furthermore, common retrieval systems only
offer insufficient search, analysis and visualization options.
The underlying problem is twofold. First, the currently used
data representation mechanisms are extremely weak in preserving
the meaning of the stored information. Data typically is stored in
documents or tables without any meta-data which states their relationship between each other in an explicit and machine processable
way. Second, traditional interfaces and presentation techniques do
not provide adequate support for browsing through large volumes
of interlinked data repositories or to uncover important coherences .
Our VIScover system solves this problem by combining semantic technologies with an innovative exploration and visualization
approach enabling users to reveal and understand encoded knowledge. Pure data is enriched by a knowledge net whose hidden relationships and facts are unlocked by an inference process. Its interactive visualization interface supports even non-expert users in
analyzing and exploring significant qualitative correlations. Novel
content-aware abstraction, aggregation and filtering techniques allow to grasp complicated chains of dependencies effectively.

2

Germany

nearby relationship amongst cities. We have encoded these kind
of textually expressed (and therefore only implicitly given) data
constrains as well as the data itself as ontology axioms using W3C's
Web Ontology Language (OWL) [2] as representation language.
This is the source of an inference process which automatically
makes hidden findings explicitly available. We used the RacerPro
[I] inference engine as our underlying reasoning system because
it showed the best performance and service features for this social
network ontology.

3

MEANINGFUL SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS

On top of this infrastructure there is our exploration and visualization system VIScover [3] that displays significant correlations
within an ontology in a clear and concise manner using modem
visualization and analysis techniques . It visualizes hidden information dependencies, abstracts from detail information when needed,
and automatically groups data by its meaning. Even long chains of
correlations and causalities can easily be tracked. With respect to
the social network data, VIScover allows to incrementally explore
branches of the flitter connectivity network in parallel. Relationships are graphically depicted as clubs originating from the set of
source entities to the relationship's fillers. The "club visualization"
metaphor of VIScover also displays quantities of relatedness and
allows to qualify clubs with help of logical as well as numerical
filters in an on-demand fashion.
4

GAINING INSIGHT INTO THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE

The main task of the VAST 2009 social network and geospatial
challenge was to identify the most likely social structure from some
given hypothesis. In order to identify such a hypotheses we defined
the supposed social sub-structures as formal concepts of our ontological model. For instance, the suspected employee is assumed to
have about 40 Flitter contacts where three of these contacts are his
"handlers" which probably itself have between 30 to 40 Flitter contacts. Figure I shows this definition of Suspected-Employee
MiniOO-contacts

TREATING THE SOCIAL NETWORK SEMANTICALLY

The provided social network and geospatial data has been enriched
to a knowledge net (aka. ontology) which reflects implicitly given
character istics of the domain in terms of ontological axioms. For
instance, some ofthe relationships ofthe provided data set are symmetric, such as the fl it ters relationship amongst persons or the
•e-mail:thorsten.liebig@uni-ulm.de

t e-mail:olaf.noppens@ uni-ulm.de
te-mail:friedrich .von-henke@un i-ulm.de

Suspected-Employee
• Person
and f1ittersm in 3

f1ittersm in 30 Thing
and f1ittersmax 40 Thing

and t1ittersm in 37 Thing
and f1ittersmax 43 Thing

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25 .00 ©2009 IEEE

Figure 1: Ontology concepts for solving this mini challenge

259

.....

ers : In

-eon cs
Person (1)
szemeredi

Person (33)
kushnir
pettersson
reitensp.ies

Person (92)

good

Figure 2: Identified soc ial structure withinthe challenge data

(light-blue background), which formally characterizes this pattern
using one of the OWL syntaxes as rendered with our tool. Figure 1
also depicts the remaining four other concepts (hiding their detailed
definitions) solely needed to solve this challenge .
The set of individuals which comply to the definition of a suspected employee is computed (inferred) by the underlying reasoner
as a logical consequence of the formal ontological axioms . When
dropping the concept onto the explorer pane this set is visualized as
a disk covering all the individuals as blue circles. This set of eleven
persons, out of overall 6000, is shown in Figure 3.

•••••
.·.1
.•. . .
SUSpected-Employee (11)

concept on the correspond ing club expansion. A consequence to
this is a cut down from 401 to 33 potential handlers (cf. leftmost
club expansion in Figure 2).

••••••!.;I.e------_~
Suspected -Employee (11)
petter sson
ramiliar

schaffter
terekhov

Figure 3: The set of suspected employees
To validate one of the hypothes is it is necessary to expand the
flitter contacts of those employees, so that we can identify the related handlers. This can be done by clicking on the set which then
shows a preview of potentially expandable relations (those which
actually have fillers wrt. the originating set). Figure 4 displays the
relationship preview for the set of eleven suspected emp loyees.

Figure 5: Graph after expans ion of contacts of suspected employees
We finally can approve one of the social structures of the challenge (namely A) with just two more expansions and three additional filters. The resulting social network graph is depicted in Figure 2. It shows a structure consisting of an suspected employee
(schaffter) , three handlers (reitenspies, pettersson , kushnir), a middleman (good), and Fearless Leader (szemeredi) .

5

Figure 4: Preview of potentiallyexpandable relations
As a result of expanding the flitters relationship, a club with all
related Flitter contacts appears as shown in Figure 5. This allows
users to interactively browse even through large volumes of interlinked data. At any time of interaction, a user can branch his exploration by expanding a second relationship or dig into the network
by expanding any of the succeeding clubs.
Some of these 401 persons do have Flitter contact with up to
four suspected employees. This sort of quantity (amount of related
individuals of preceeding club) is shown by a number within the individuals circle in VIScover as can be seen in Figure 5. In addition
the connect ivity chain ofrelated individuals in preceeding clubs are
highlighted and their label are listed as an mouse-over effect (see
green circles and lists of labels in Figure 5).
Now, hypotheses A assumes that the three handlers of the employee have 30 to 40 own Flitter contacts. We can easily narrow down the initial expansion by using the concept description
Min30max40-contacts as a restrict ing filter by dropping this

260

CONCLUSION

Our exploration and visualization system VIScover displays significant correlations within a knowledge net in a clear and concise manner using modem visualization and analysis techniques. In combination with Semantic Technologies it visualizes hidden information
dependencies and automatically groups data by its meaning. Even
long chains of correlations and causalitie s can easily be tracked .
Using semantic filters information can be refined from the perspective of its content. Furthermore, VIScover has more analysis features not mentioned here. For instance, its sliders allow to filter
individuals with respect to associated numerical data ranges, such
as time, age, etc.
REFERENCES

[I] V. Haarslev and R. Moller. Racer: A Core Inference Engine for the
Semantic Web. In Proc. of the 2nd Int. Workshop on Evaluation of
Ontology-based Tools (EON 2003) , pages 27-36, 2003.
[2] B. Motik, P. F. Patel-Schneider, and I. Horrocks. OWL 2 Web Ontology
Language: Structural specification and functional-style syntax. W3C
Working Draft, II April 2008, World Wide Web Consortium , April
2008.
[3] O. Noppens and T. Liebig. Understanding Large Volumes of Interconnected Individuals by Visual Exploration (System Description) . In
Proc. of the 4th European Semantic Web Confe rence (ESWC 2007),
pages 799-808, Innsbruck , Austria, June 2007.

