BEADS: High Dimensional Data Cluster Visualization
Soujanya Vadapalli
Kamalakar Karlapalem
Centre for Data Engineering, International Institute of Information Technology-Hyderabad, INDIA.
email: {soujanya, kamal}@iiit.ac.in

Visualization of high dimensional data clusters is non-trivial. The
data points within a cluster will have some shape (structure of the
cluster) and size (spread of the cluster); though, exactly determining the shape is feasible for two or three dimensional data sets.
In this poster presentation, we demonstrate BEADS System that
uses the standard two dimensional shapes like, square and circle as
metaphors to build and describe the actual shape and size of higher
dimensional clusters. In this poster, the features of BEADS are
emphasized by showing visualizations of various high dimensional
data sets. Users can also test the utility of BEADS with their custom
data sets to understand the data and evaluate it.
1

2 BEADS System
The input to the system is a set of already computed clusters to be
visualized and the output is a set of 2-D visualizations, one for each
cluster. The approach of the system is shown in Figure 1.

Data Cluster

Cluster Division

Beads

Bead Shape
Identification

Shapes

Cluster Shape
Composition

Introduction

The BEADS visualization system focusses on representing the
shape and the spread of a high dimensional cluster on a 2-D plot.
Shape of the cluster is defined by structure of relative placement of
points in the original d-dimensional space. The spread of a cluster
is defined by the region covering the points of that cluster in the
d-dimensional space. BEADS has a new visualization scheme that
is based on break and build approach. Each cluster is broken into
small pieces. From a set of standard shapes like circle, rhombus,
and square, the shapes that best fit the pieces of the cluster are identified. These standard shapes are then used as building blocks to
construct the overall cluster structure.
We use the notion of metaphors to develop a 2-D image representation of high dimensional cluster. The metaphors are shapes in 2-D
which are meaningful in higher dimensionality. For example, by
referring to shapes like circle, square and rhombus, one can get a
conceptual visualization of such regular structures in higher dimensions. Thus, a random shaped cluster is presented as a composition of primitive shapes. Our technique relies on already computed
clustering results to display the data cluster-wise. This key idea is
developed in this system with formalism for defining shapes, shape
matching and shape composition.
Heidi [2] is a data visualization system that also focusses on displaying information cluster-wise; bringing out the inter-cluster
and intra-cluster interactions across various subspaces. Heidi and
BEADS complement each other: Heidi gives a global view and
interactions, while BEADS gives the next level of detail in each
cluster.
The highlights of BEADS system are:
1. Visualize high-dimensional data cluster focussing on shape and
spread.
2. Intuitive correlation between the d-dimensional standard shapes
(depicted by L p -norm envelopes) and the 2-D signature images
used as metaphors.
3. Different levels of granularity (different number of beads) of
visualization for hierarchical exploration of high dimensional
clusters.
4. Ability to handle clusters of random (complex) shapes (due to
building the cluster shape from pieces of cluster).

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

2-D BEADS
Visualization

Figure 1: Beads Approach

Cluster Division: A subset of cluster points close to each other,
such that the shape-fitting for this group of points could be easily obtained through a mathematical framework, is referred to as
a bead. Such a group of points close to each other is obtained by
using a partitional clustering algorithm. Each partition is a bead.
Bead Shape Identification: After forming beads, a shape that bestfits each bead is identified from a set of standard shapes. A set of
mathematical propositions and conjectures on space occupied by a
mathematical function is used in developing the L p -norm Identification Algorithm. Due to space limitations, these propositions,
conjectures and the algorithm details are beyond the scope of the
paper.
Shape Composition: Representing cluster as a set of spatially connected beads on a 2-D plane, by using 2-D shapes as metaphors for
the standard shapes identified in the original d-dimensional space
is the key idea. Since the corresponding L p -norms that best-fit the
beads are known, the idea is to use corresponding L p -norm envelope for 2-D space, as a metaphor to represent the d-dimensional
envelope. For instance, a 3-D sphere’s shape in 2-D is a circle and
a 10-D hyper-cube’s shape in 2-d is a square.
All the 2-D shapes of the beads are placed with respect to each
other on a 2-D plot, called Beads Plot, based on:
1. Orientation of the beads along various dimensions with respect
to the center of the cluster, by dividing the Beads Plot into sectors.
2. Relative placement of the beads in the original space
3. Distance of the bead’s center to the center of the cluster
4. Size of bead (defined by the radius of the L p -norm identified)
3 Interpreting Beads Visualization
The bead closest to the origin is the part of cluster closest to the
center of the cluster in its original space. The position of beads

235

around the origin and in various sectors indicate the position and
orientation of the beads in various axes divisions. By axes division
it denotes the division of d-dimensional space by the orthogonal
d-axes.
A current limitation in the BEADS approach is the result obtained
from the partitioning algorithm. Though, we used k-means algorithm to obtain beads, any another appropriate partitional algorithm
could be used at the discretion of the user.
Technical details: Beads is implemented in C++ and heavily uses
gnuplot software (Linux distribution) to obtain the Beads visualizations. All experiments are conducted on a system with 1.73 GHz
CPU and 2 GB RAM.
Computational Complexity: The complexity of BEADS approach
for each cluster C i is O(|C i |2 ), |C | being the number of points in
the cluster. The BEADS visualization system took not more than
1-2 minutes in generating the BEADS 2-D plots.
4

10-D Cluster

Hyper-cube (b=10)

Hyper-cube (b=10)

Random (b=10)

Random (b=10)

BEADS Visualization Snapshots

Beads has been tested on a number of synthetic data sets generated
with various cluster shapes and sizes [4], and a few real data sets.
We present a sample BEADS visualization for a 2-D data set for a
visual check on the nature of the beads and their orientation for 2-D
data cluster. The Bead plots are meant more for higher dimensional
data clusters which could not be visualized. A textual representation of beads informations are also presented to the user in a tabular
format.
Beads is performed over CHAMELEON dataset 1 [1]; the dataset
has 8000 points and six clusters of random shape. The clusters are
divided into 25 beads. The Beads visualization for one of the clusters is displayed in Table 1. The center of each bead is highlighted
using a black dot. It can be noticed that the resulting composition
of bead shapes on the Beads Plot share close resemblance with the
original structure of the cluster.

Table 1: Beads Visualization: CHAMELEON data set1

SynDECA generated high dimensional datasets: Beads Visualizations on a couple of high dimensional datasets are shown in Table 2. Beads Visualizations of two 7-D and 10-D clusters (having
hyper-cube and random shapes) are displayed. The center of the
beads are highlighted with small black circles. It is interesting to
observe that in Beads Plot of 10-D hyper-cube, the shapes of all the
beads are either square or rhombus. It can be observed that the 7-D
random shaped cluster is hollow at its center; inferred by absence
of a bead at the origin of the Beads Plot.
Results on Real-life data set: Beads is also used to visualize NBA
players’ data set. The data set contains the average match statistics
of 310 players and employs RECORD algorithm [3] to obtain the
prior clustering results needed by Beads. RECORD identified 4
clusters and the Beads visualization of two of the four clusters are
shown in Figures 2 (a), (b). It is interesting to note that cluster
represented by Beads Plots in Figure 2(a) has all circular beads and
it is hollow to some extent at the cluster center, as there is no bead
right at the origin of the Beads Plot. In the Bead Plots of cluster
displayed in Figure 2(b), an interesting observation in these figures
is the different sizes (radii) of the beads.

236

7-D Cluster

Table 2: Beads Visualization on 7-D and 10-D datasets

Figure 2: NBA Data Set: Beads Visualization on (a) Cluster 1 and
(b) Cluster 2, b=10

5 Summary
In this poster paper, we present BEADS, a high dimensional data
cluster visualization by having a 2-D representation of shape and
spread of the cluster. The Cluster Division component, the Bead
Shape Identification and Cluster Shape Composition form the core
of the system. BEADS visualization consists of a 2-D plot, standard
2-D shapes which are used as metaphors to represent corresponding high-dimensional shapes of beads. The final resulting images
convey the relative placement of beads with respect to the cluster
center, the shape of the beads. We give a textual summary of the
beads and their 2-D placement on the Beads plot in tabular format
along with the image. More information on BEADS is available at:
http://cde.iiit.ac.in/˜soujanya/beads/
References
[1] G. Karypis, E. H. Han, and V. Kumar. Chameleon: Hierarchical clustering using dynamic modeling. pages 68–75. IEEE Computer 32(8),
1999.
[2] S. Vadapalli and K. Karlapalem. Heidi matrix: Nearest neighbor driven
high dimensional data visualization. In VAKD, pages 83–92. ACM,
2009.
[3] S. Vadapalli, S. Valluri, and K. Karlapalem. A simple yet effective data
clustering algorithm. In Proc. ICDM, pages 1108–1112, 2006.
[4] J. Vennam and S. Vadapalli. Syndeca: Synthetic generation of datasets
to evaluate clustering algorithms. In COMAD, 2005.

