ProcessLine: Visualizing Time-Series Data in Process Industry
Xiongfei Luo1,2, Hongan Wang2,3, Feng Tian2

Wei Liu1, Dongxing Teng2, Guozhong Dai2,3

1: Graduate University,
2: Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
ABSTRACT
In modern process industry, it is often difficult to analyze a
manufacture process due to its numerous time-series data.
Analysts wish to not only interpret the evolution of data over time
in a working procedure, but also examine the changes in the
whole production process through time. To meet such analytic
requirements, we have developed ProcessLine, an interactive
visualization tool for a large amount of time-series data in process
industry. The data are displayed in a fisheye timeline. ProcessLine
provides good overviews for the whole production process and
details for the focused working procedure. A preliminary user
study using beer industry production data has shown that the tool
is effective.
KEYWORDS: Visual analytics, Time-series data,
visualization, Visual design

Business

INDEX TERMS: H.1.2[User/Machine Systems]: Human
information processing – Visual Analytics; I.6.9 [Visualization]:
information visualization. H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and
Presentation]: User Interfaces—Graphical user interfaces
1

INTRODUCTION

Process analysts are responsible for 1) monitoring the process to
determine which unit manufactures defective products and 2)
examining whether the unit is operated correctly. To achieve these
goals, analysts analyze a large amount of time-series data, which
comprises production logistics, unit operation, and quality test
data. The data is usually collected through various enterprise
application systems in the manufacture process of modern process
industry. The key challenge for process analysts is to identify the
evolution of data over time. To achieve this target, many analysts
still rely on traditional line charts. However, such charts hardly
help analysts to analyze the manufacture process efficiently with
the increasing scale and complexity. Currently, few visualization
techniques used in process analysis applications. One of them is
McNames’s work, [1], which described a graphical display of
semiconductor manufacturing processes. They aimed to identify
which tools in the process cause the most parametric variation and
the worst yield.
To meet the data and analytic requirements, we have developed
ProcessLine, an interactive visualization tool for a large amount of
y
y
y
y
y
y

Xiongfei Luo: lxf@iel.iscas.ac.cn
Hongan Wang: wha@iel.iscas.ac.cn
Feng Tian: tf@iel.iscas.ac.cn
Wei Liu: water_wei@263.net
Dongxing Teng: tengdongxing@ios.cn
Guozhong Dai: dgz@iel.iscas.ac.cn

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

3: State Key Lab. Of Computer Science,
Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
time-series data. ProcessLine combines multiple effective
visualization techniques to display the data at multiple levels of
detail. And we used animation to convey the data selection
changes through time. Furthermore, we also provided interactive
techniques to support the manufacture data analysis in a visual
way. We applied our prototype to an application of a beer industry,
and the result showed that it is useful for effective visual analysis
in such a complex application area. The system can be also used
in other application areas, e.g., other process enterprises or
drainage area environment.
2

MANUFACTURE ANALYSIS

In this section, we take beer industry as an example of process
industry to introduce manufacture process, data and associated
analytic tasks.
Beer industry is a typical process industry. In our sample beer
industry, the whole manufacture process is divided into 5 working
procedures: gelatinization, saccharification, fermenting, filtering
and filling. The time span for a whole production process is about
30 days, and the scale for time-series data of beer production is
minute.
The data contains production logistics, unit operation, and
quality test data during the manufacture process of beer.
Production logistics data is used for describing logistic processes
within an industry. It is composed of working procedure data with
the preceding-posterior relationships among units and production
data that describes a Unit U is working for a product P from time
Tstart to time Tend. Unit operation data is used for describing unit
operation event including the operation action, timestamp,
operated unit. Quality test data focus on product quality. The
quality of production will be tested at critical control points of
manufacture process according to quality standards.
In collaboration with a senior analyst, we started with task
analysis. We found that the main user task is track and tracing that
trys to know what is going on in the whole manufacture process.
There are at least three challenges in designing such a tool. Firstly,
it should support establishing a direct visual connection between
multiple variables and the time axis, and enable direct interactive
exploration and browsing of time-series data, which is essential
for a successful visual analysis [2]. Secondly, it should be scalable
enough to handle a large amount of time series while remaining
interactive. Thirdly, it should be cognitively tractable: allowing
the analyst to explore complex associations such as those that can
be derived from temporal entities and their relationships. We
address these challenges through the design and implementation
of ProcessLine.
3

PROCESSLINE

Visually, the ProcessLine interface is composed of three major
parts: a DOILine, a Fisheye TimeSlider, and a search interface.
DOILine (see figure 1a) is a main part of ProcessLine and is
used to display a snapshot of a manufacture process. In order to
accommodate larger timelines and more content in the nodes, we
combined the ideas of LifeLines [3], logical filtering [4],
geometrical distortion [5] and cluster nodes far from the point of

231

Figure 1: The exploration of time-series data in beer industry using the ProcessLine prototype.

focus [6] to determine how to show a focus + context timeline.
Fisheye TimeSlider (see figure 1b) is much like a standard
slider widget and provides a fisheye time axis. It divides DOILine
into three types of zones horizontally: the regular free layout zone,
the compression zone, and the aggregation zone.
Search interface (see figure 1c) provides a function of finding
rather than discovering information. It supports keyword search
against time-series data.
Then we choose a simple usage scenario to highlight the visual
analysis ability of ProcessLine. An analyzer was supposed to track
the process for unit “F11#”. Initially, He clicked on node “F11#”,
and ProcessLine reacted to the click by expanding the clicked
node. Then he found the time span of whole process was fit within
the space. And the focused filling procedure, adjacent procedures
and far procedures were displayed at the free layout zone,
compression zones and aggregation zones respectively. Splitters
between different zones helped him comprehend these larger and
smaller time scales clearly. Because the complete temporal
context relationship and the continuous time are ensured, he could
easily aware important quality test results which should be
carefully checked further, such as red alarms, yellow notices.
Thus, he checked the defect quality of dimethylglyoxal at
10/21/2008 0:00:00 by zooming it in the ferment procedure for
observing carefully. Therefore, he could clearly found following
unit operations, including Cool and Keep, make final qualified
dimethylglyoxal, displayed as green. Furthermore, he observed
the ferment beer of “F11#” was moved to unit “Q12#” for
continuous filling. He clicked “Q12#” for further track. Once he
clicked a node, the node became new focus node and its zone
became regular free layout zone, thereby allowing him to peruse
them. From the above scenario, we could easily get that visual
changes such as location and size of nodes were animated when
the view was changed in the process of analyzing. It is useful as it
provides continuity. And the analyst can reuse his or her spatial
memory of the process layout, maintaining an understanding of a
process although parts of it were being modified.
4

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We evaluated ProcessLine preliminarily by asking 3 analysts to
rate it on the ability to help solve analysis tasks. The evaluation

232

result shows that ProcessLine is an effective and valuable tool to
analyze manufacture process. In the future, a formal evaluation
will be conducted.
The visualization and analysis techniques described in this
paper can be applied to various fields of process industry, such as
oil refinery industry manufacture analysis, and the drainage area
environment analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project is supported by the National Basic Research Program
of China under Grant No. 2006CB303105; the National HighTech Research and Development Plan of China under Grant No.
2006AA04Z182. We would like to acknowledge Yingying Jiang
and Fei Lv, Intelligence Engineering Lab., Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

J. McNames, D. Abercrombie, D. Turner, and T. Shannon.
Semiconductor manufacturing process visualization. In IEEE
International Conference on Proceedings of the Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, pages 4940-4944, 2003.
W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. MÜller, H. Schumann and C. Tominski.
Visualizing time-oriented data - a systematic view. Computers &
Graphics, 31: 401-409, 2007.
C. Plaisant, B. Milash, A. Rose, S. Widoff, and B. Shneiderman.
LifeLines: Visualizing Personal Histories. In Proceedings of the
ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 392-393, 1996.
G. W. Furnas. The FISHEYE view: a new look at structured files. In
S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, editor. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, pages 312-330.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 1999.
M. Graham, and J. Kennedy. Combining linking & focusing
techniques for a multiple hierarchy visualization. In Proceedings of
5th International conference on Information Visualisation, 2001.
K. M. Fairchild, S. E. Poltrock, and G. W. Furnas. SemNet: Threedimensional representations of large knowledge bases. In R.
Guindon, editor, Cognitive Science and Its Applications for HumanComputer Interaction, pages 201-233. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1988.

