Professional Analysts using a Large, High-Resolution Display
Traffic Mini Challenge Award: Contributions to the VAST Challenge Contest
Alex Endert'
1 Virginia

Christopher Andrews

1

2

Glenn A. Fink

Polytechnic Institute and State University

2

Chris North

1

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

ABSTRACT

Professional cyber analysts were observed as they attempted to
solve the VAST 2009 Traffic Mini Challenge using basic
visualization tools and a large, high-resolution display. We
discuss some of the lessons we learned about how analysts
actually work and potential roles for visualization and large, highresolution displays.
KEYWORDS: VAST contest, large high-resolution displays, visual
analytics, cyber analytics, information visualization.

INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information
Interfaces and Presentation-User Interfaces

1

INTRODUCTION

Our team's non-traditional approach to this challenge arose from
working with the team developing the VAST 2009 dataset. Thus,
we knew the solution before the contest was released but retained
our independent viewpoint. During the final stages of de~eloping
the dataset, we used this study as a means for testing and
validating the dataset for accuracy and realism. Four professional
cyber analysts from a large government laboratory provided
feedback by solving the challenge using the same processes they
would use for their everyday work. Since the synthetic data was
different in some ways from their normal data, we provided the
analysts guidance when appropriate.

2

Figure 1. The large, high-resolution display used for this
study , totaling nearly 33 megapixels, from [2).

EXPERIMENT SETUP

Each of the four analysts was given a two-hour session to explore
and analyze the dataset to find the threat. Since our aim was to
validate the dataset and to study cyber analysts using large, highresolution displays rather than to develop special purpose cyber
analytic tools, we let them use Microsoft Excel, their n0'?1al tool
of choice, to display and manipulate the raw data. In addition, we
provided the general-purpose visualization tool Spotfire
(http://www.spotfire.com). Spotfire is capable of importing ~xcel
data with ease (i.e. click-and-drag) so it was a natural choice to
inject visualization into the cyber analysts' processes.
Each analyst was given a two-hour session to solve this
challenge. We chronicled their progress via video recording,
think-aloud protocol, and an automated tool that captured a
screenshot every minute. We followed the study with an interview
where we asked a series of questions regarding their experience,
as well as their typical workspaces and tools. All analysis was
performed using a large, high-resolution display running
Windows XP. The display consists of eight 30-inch LCD panels,
tiled in a 4x2 configuration (Figure 1). We chose this workspace
setup based on previous work where we learned the benefits of a
larger display space [1]. The analysts were able to display all of
the information relevant to the challenge without minimizing any
windows. This meant that they could physically navigate to gain
an overview of the dataset, examine details, switch tasks, and
rapidly consult multiple views and tools.

3

PROCESSES OF ANALYSTS

All the analysts started the study by performing their personal
series of standard searches and questions based on their prior
domain knowledge. These included queries on specific IPs,
sorting by largest flows, creating pivot tables in Excel to highlight
unique IP-to-IP connections, and more. However, this dataset
challenged the analysts to go beyond their normal methods to
thinking strategically about the problem. This is partly because the
challenge required use of some data sources (prox records and
office maps) that are not normally available to them. The analysts
all commented that finding the proper relationship among all the
data sources was very important. Analysts' backgrounds strongly
dictated the tools they used. For instance, one analyst was very
skilled in Excel, and she performed the majority of her work by
creating different views of the data within Excel. To preserve
branch points within her investigation, she saved versions of the
data, each representing a "working state" of the investigation. The
other analysts mainly worked back and forth between the
visualization and the data in Excel, with one analyst doing the
majority of his work within Spotfire. We believe this occurred due
to his previous experience with such a tool, as he felt very
comfortable with manipulating the visualization. Keeping the data
synchronized between the two tools was difficult, so analysts
would often use the visualization for exploration and discovery,
then use Excel to "quantify and reconfirm" what they saw. One
analyst kept a separate "note file", where she pasted interesting
information from time to time.

3.1
Physical Navigation and Correlation
We observed analysts frequently relating information between
different tools or windows distributed throughout the space.
Figure 2 illustrates a typical workspace layout of an analyst
performing this task. Analysts would correlate information .by
physically pointing at some data in one window and then finding
it in another window with a different view. Even after we blanked
the screen at the end of the study, they would frequently use
phrases such as "this data here" or "what I found over there"
while pointing to the different regions of the display where they

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

273

Figure 2. A screenshot of the spatial workspace layout as personalized by the analyst. All the data is spread out in the space , with the
analyst being able to correlate from one view to another with ease .

had placed particular views. When the analysts felt they were not
discovering interesting findings in one Excel window, they would
switch to a different window and manipulate that data. Later, they
would relate information from one window to another,
immediately remembering the state of the data in a table they had
not worked on for some time. This spatial navigation appeared to
alleviate the disorientation they reported using small displays that
forced minimized or stacked windows.
During one session, we had two analysts collaborating to
analyze the dataset. Although the display was set up with only one
keyboard and one mouse, the analysts collaborated by taking turns
actively working with a tool and statically analyzing a
visualization to make sense of the data shown. Then, they would
synchronize the information they found from their separate
analyses, again physically pointing to data in one view, while the
other analyst attempted to find the data in another view.
3.2
From Textual to Visual Investigation Strategies
A challenge analysts faced during this study was the
environmental change from a textual approach that concentrated
on query-driven manipulation of individual tables, to a visual
approach that operated holistically. This did not come easy to
most analysts. Often, when we would point out something to them
within the visualization, they would glance at it, and then move
directly back to Excel and continue their work there. Cyber
analysts clearly distrusted visualizations. Our post-study interview
revealed that they believe visualizations "hide the data" via overaggregation. Some claimed they were unable to "save states of
what [they were] working on" in visualizations, causing them to
be very tentative with their visual exploration for fear of losing
their way within the investigation.
A critical point in the analysts' investigations occurred when
they made the connection between the prox and IP data. Joining
these sources provided a way to easily visualize where an
employee was located when their assigned IP was active. The pair
of analysts joined the sources manually, with one pointing to the
visualization of the IP data, while the other checked physical
office locations. Another analyst made the key discovery after two
hours of unproductive search in Excel by merely glancing at a
visualization of the join, spotting an outlier, and further
investigating it. However, as we found out in the interviews, cyber
analysts are unaccustomed to joining other data sources with
network data. Their job often deals with network and host data,
but prox was new to them. Thus, some remarked that joining the
two "had never occurred to them".

4

CONCLUSION

The four professional cyber security analysts performed the task
well. Although three out of the four were reluctant to use either
visualizations or the additional display space at first, they all

274

became comfortable with the setup as the study progressed. After
the study, they remarked how visualization provided them with
"interesting findings" much more quickly than working with raw
text data. Through this study, we received strong feedback from
cyber analysts regarding their view towards visualizations and
their general style of work. We learned that cyber analysts:
l. Generally do not work holistically, but are used to dealing
with a homogenous set of data (i.e, network traffic data
only).
2. Use a personal query set developed through years of
experience.
3. Want to save the state of their investigation.
4. Have an inherent distrust of visualizations.
5. Demand deep access to the data, both by detail on demand,
but also to edit and manipulate the data in a tabular format.
By observing analysts and their natural analytic process, it
became clear that saving a particular state of their investigation is
critical. This safety net enables analysts to investigate alternatives
without fear of losing their orientation within the investigation.
Their current method of saving versions of their data is
cumbersome, yet they have trained themselves to do so, further
highlighting the importance. In addition to determining a set of
requirements for them to perform their work, we were able to gain
insight into their view towards large, high-resolution displays as
well. They felt that the added display space enabled them to:
1. Physically navigate their workspace to find correlation
between the different and diverse data.
2. Physically navigate their workspace to switch between
different views oftheir data with ease.
3. Display a large quantity of data at once, without
aggregating or "hiding" as much data.
Overall, the analysts voiced their appreciation of the large,
high-resolution display. We feel it was beneficial to their task, as
well as applicable to their daily work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors are grateful to the Information and Infrastructure
Integrity Initiative (14) and the National Visual Analytics
Capability (NVAC) located at Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory for their support of this work.
REFERENCES

[1]

Ball, R., C. North , et al. (2007) . Move to improve : promoting
physical nav igation to increase user performance with large displays.
[2] Fink, G. A., North, C. L., Endert , A., Rose, S.: 'Visualizing Cyber
Security: Usable Workspaces' . VizSec 2009.

