Timeline Analysis of Undercover Activities
VAST 2009 Traffic Mini Challenge Award: Good Analytical Technique
Jaegul Choo∗

Emily Fujimoto†

Hanseung Lee‡

Pedro R. Walteros§

Georgia Institute of Technology
266 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

A BSTRACT
Our visualization tool for the VAST 2009 traffic mini challenge,
Timeliner, visualizes badge and network traffic data together in a
single timeline. The two views of Per-employee and Per-day with
various filtering interactions enable users to analyze easily employees’ activities at a particular moment of interest as well as their general daily patterns. Using Timeliner, we present several hypotheses
for the task at hand and their validation processes, which reveals
various aspects of the data.
Index Terms:
H.1.2 [Information Systems]: User/Machine
Systems—Human information processing; H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications—Data mining
1 P ROBLEM OVERVIEW
The task of the VAST 2009 Traffic mini challenge is to identify the
spy and the network traffic used in sending out the classified information. The given data is composed of badge log of 60 employees and the network usage of their computers. The badge log data
has three fields: a timestamp, an employee ID, and an event type,
either prox-in-building, prox-in-classified, or prox-out-classified.
The network data has six fields: a timestamp, a source IP, a destination IP, a port number, a request data size, and a response data
size. Additionally we have an office map, where each room is occupied by two employees.
Figure 1: Per-employee view of employee 30

2 TOOLS : T IMELINER
Timeliner visualizes various types of data, e.g., badge and network
data, along a single timeline. It was developed specifically for the
traffic mini challenge. It is composed of Per-employee and Per-day
views. Per-employee view (Figure 1) visualizes a particular employee’s data where horizontal and vertical axes denote hours and
dates respectively. Per-day view (Figure 2) shows data in a particular day where horizontal and vertical axes correspond to hours
and employee ID/source IP, respectively. In both views, data can be
filtered out based on:
• Either of employee ID or date
• Port number, e.g. email (25), http (80), and proxy (8080)
• Minimum request and response sizes
• Destination IP
The legend includes:
• Blue ‘x’: prox-in-building
• Short vertical line: network data instance. Green, yellow, and
orange colors correspond to port number 25, 80, and 8080,
respectively.
∗ e-mail:

joyfull@cc.gatech.edu
efujimoto@hmc.edu
‡ e-mail: hanseung.lee@gatech.edu
§ e-mail: prangel@math.gatech.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

• Red horizontal line: presence in the classified area by matching prox-in-classified and prox-out-classified
• Red ‘x’: prox-in-classified or prox-out-classified that cannot
be matched, i.e., in case there are two prox-in-classified’s or
two prox-out-classified’s in a row.
The interaction features are as follows.
• Once the mouse pointer is located, the details of the entry are
shown in the top.
• Clicking a particular network instance filters based on its destination IP. By checking the checkbox named as ‘mark IP’,
those entries are highlighted with white circles while all the
other entries are still shown.
• Right-clicking displays a long vertical line for easy comparison along the timeline.
3 A NALYTICAL P ROCESS
Initially we looked into the network instances with large request
sizes for suspicious computer usage, and recognized a few cases
among them where the computer was used while its owner was
in the classified area, which proves that somebody else used the
computer. We call those cases DeceptiveUsages. All of them were
found to share the destination IP, ‘100.59.151.133’, and the port
number, ‘8080’.
Next we listed all the network instances with this destination IP,
all of which were shown to have the same port number, ‘8080’,
with large request sizes in common. We call them SuspDstUsages,

245

Figure 2: Per-day view of day 15

an acronym for usages with a suspicious destination IP. SuspDstUsages includes DeceptiveUsages. However, their source IPs varied, allowing us to believe the spy probably used other computers
to hide his identity.
To pinpoint the spy, we excluded the computer owners in DeceptiveUsages from the suspect list since they have an alibi. Notice that
this inference is based on the assumption that there exists only one
spy. Those not in DeceptiveUsages but in SuspDstUsages, however, are possible spy candidates. Our analysis indicated most of
SuspDstUsages occurred on the computers while their owners were
absent. Naturally we can think of their officemates as alternative
suspects since they can easily access their officemates’ computers
without being noticed. Investigation with those suspects led us to
employee 30 as the most plausible spy. In what follows, we present
the details of such analyses.
To begin with, we looked into Per-employee view of each employee whose computer was used in SuspDstUsages. Figure 1 visualizes the data of employee 31, one of the most frequent source
IPs in SuspDstUsages. In Figures 1-2, SuspDstUsages are highlighted using white circles by destination IP filtering. In Figure 1,
blue ‘x’ marks indicate he usually arrives at the office around 1011am, returns from lunch around 4-5pm, and does not piggyback,
or enter the building without using his badge by entering right after
someone else, too often. No network activities in the late afternoon
indirectly shows when he leaves the office. Among the highlighted
entries, the second one from the top is one of the DeceptiveUsages
since it overlaps with his presence in the classified area, i.e., a red
horizontal line right over it. The other two look somewhat isolated
from near network usages at the corresponding day. Although he
entered the building 18 minutes and 39 minutes before the first and
the third entries, respectively, if we ignore these two highlighted
entries, there are noticeable gaps in timeline between such ‘proxin-building’ and the closest network usages shown later. It means
he probably did not get back to his room for a while even after entering the building, possibly giving the spy the time to use his com-

246

puter during his absence. He may have spent some time in places
other than his office and the classified area for meeting or something. Similar explanations can be made from Per-employee view
of employee 18. In this case, the highlighted entry looks even more
isolated from the near network usages in the corresponding day,
since he does not show network usages after 3:43pm, and then suddenly the highlighted network usage occurs at 5:57pm. This means
he probably left the office at 3:43pm, and the spy used his computer
at 5:57pm. Per-employee view of employee 13 has another type of
such SuspDstUsages that occurred about an hour before he entered
the office in the morning. Such analysis for every entry in SuspDstUsages shows that none of the computer owners in SuspDstUsages
could be the spy, which means the spy never used his own computer
for spy activities.
Next we focused on their officemates as alternative suspects.
Figure 2 shows Per-day view of day 15, where we can see other
employees’ activities at a specific time. The horizontal timeline
was made thicker for employee 30, who is our final suspect. Long
vertical lines are used as a reference time of interest interacted by
right-clicking. Among the highlighted entries from Figure 2, the
first entry is one of DeceptiveUsages, and more importantly, we observed there are no activities from his officemate, employee 17, as
well. Since the room was vacant, it might have enabled employee
30 to access the room, and use an either computer. The computer
of the other highlighted entry belongs to employee 30’s officemate.
employee 30’s network usage before and after this entry means that
he was in the room at that time. He could have easily used his officemate’s computer once his officemate was absent, which is why
employee 31’s computer was shown frequently in SuspDstUages.
In Per-day view of day 17, an interesting case is found where employee 30 shows ‘prox-out-classified’, but there are no matching
‘prox-in-classified’, which is shown as a red ‘x’ mark. There were
only three such cases in the entire data, all of which are from employee 30. He may have wanted to hide how long he stayed in the
classified area. In Per-day view of day 29, for the two entries from
SuspDstUsages, employee 30 shows about a 30 minute gap among
his network usages, which makes it reasonable that he left the desk
in search for a computer to use and then came back after such usage.
Performing these analyses on each entry of SuspDstUsages did
not always give reasonable explanation. For instance, employee
30 showed network usage just 1 second later than a particular entry,
and it would be impossible for him to come back from another room
within 1 second. In addition to this, the computer owner came back
only 2-3 minutes after some entries in SuspDstUsages in case of
day 29. It might indicate that he had accomplices though it was not
easy to identify any of them from the various approaches tried.
4 C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE D EVELOPMENT
Timeliner successfully facilitated the process of identifying the spy
activities from the data at hand. However, we could find some minor contradictions against the found answer as well, which may
be due to the synthetic data. For future development of Timeliner,
more advanced interactions such as horizontal or vertical zoomin/out functionality would significantly improve the effectiveness
of Timeliner.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Carsten G¨org for tool development and
Prof. Haesun Park who lead the effort of VAST challenge study
and supervised the team throughout the process. We would also
like to thank Profs. Richard Fujimoto and Alexander Gray. The
work of these authors was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation grants CCF-0732318 and CCF-0808863. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

