Palantir: A Visualization Platform for Real-World Analysis
VAST 2009 Grand Challenge Award: Analyst's Tool Cho ice
Traffic Mini Challenge Award: Intuitive Visualization & Video Description of the Analysis Process
Brandon Wright

Jason Payne

Scott Stevson

Matthew Steckman

Palantir Technologies

ABSTRACT

Palantir is an analytic platform currently used worldwide by both
governmental and financial analysts. This paper provides a brief
overview of the platform, examines our 2009 IEEE VAST
Challenge submission, and highlights several key analytic and
visualization features we used in our analysis.
Palantir, VAST 2009, visual analytics, data
integration, collaboration

KEYWORDS:

H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information
Interfaces and Presentation-User Interfaces
INDEX

1

TERMS:

,._- i
tt'!"" -"""?=.::: ;~-: .-::-......;...

I 0 ':- ~fJ

~~~~I

THE PALANTIR PLATFORM

Palantir is a platform for information analysis. Palantir was
designed with the input of operators and analysts in the field.
Their feedback enabled the creation of a versatile analytic
platform that provides integrated relational, statistical, temporal
and geospatial analysis. Even more importantly, it allows users to
do more work, in less time, while also providing a higher level of
analytic insight. The Palantir platform can be categorized into
three subplatforms: Analysis, Data, and Computing Platforms.
Analysis Platform: In the Graph workspace, analysts create
semantic views of their data while using Helper applications to
obtain simultaneous statistical, temporal, and other views of the
data. Objects on the Graph can be dragged directly to the Map
workspace for geotemporal analysis. The platform's open API
also allows organizations to create customizable Applications,
Map Layers, and Helpers that address their unique analytic needs.
Data Platform: Palantir is also designed to integrate numerous,
heterogeneous and disparate data sources into a single analytic
environment. For the VAST Challenge, this meant that the
Challenge data was seamlessly imported, integrated and then
analyzed within Palantir.
Compute Platform: Palantir's cloud-based backend scales
linearly on commodity hardware up to thousands of users and
billions of data records. Palantir leverages highly optimized
versions of Map Reduce and Lucene to achieve this level of scale.

2

and the data imported. Palantir's Dynamic Ontology Manager
enables an organization to define all objects, events, properties,
and links with a GUI, allowing the organization to accurately
model its problem space, mission, or mandate. After a VASTspecific Ontology was built, data was imported with Palantir's
Import Wizard, which, based on our analysts' schema mapping,
automatically created objects and links, as well as resolved
duplicate objects. The data importer leverages a Bayesian Net to
improve accuracy of data import seeding over time.

ANALYTIC PROCESS

Before analysis begins in Palantir, an Ontology must be created
100 Hamilton Ave Suite 300 Palo Alto, CA 94301
inquiries@palantirtech.com

----

--

I Dat a source file I

,::::=.-...

-,.--

,- ,- ~
~'-

~.-

~.-

.,

, ~

- .- _ -- -,-

~

F

=

-'- '_..

~.

--:=_
-:= - , .:11.,.
-=--=--=-:=----

-

T~ D ' ~-.
.-

I Ddta im port button I
. "C"c.

. ..

I

,-

--

sample impor t of a row.o f data
based on schem a m dppmg ,

I

I

"hem. m.pp 'o" where user

- . _.
!Ii

chooses ta ble ty pe , ma ps columns
to proper ties. and specifies links to
o ther obJects.

[ -- -

I

.

--

I

2.1
Search Functionality
One challenge working with large datasets is how to search the
data. Palantir's Search Around application allows analysts to
create searches around objects based on properties or links and
can then filter those results based on selected criteria. This was
particularly useful in the Flitter Mini Challenge because it enabled
highly efficient searches for linked Flitter accounts with defined
numbers of contacts. With this search functionality, combined
with spatial and chromatic manipulation of the objects on the
Graph, our analysts rapidly identified potential suspects and
quickly ruled out networks that did not match the described
network structure. The objects in the matching network were then
dragged to the Map workspace-where we loaded the Challenge
map into our tile set-for geographical analysis.
This search did require a minor data pre-processing step.
Search Around does not enable filtering by number of links, so we
added a "link count" column to the Flitter data and imported it as
a filterable property on the Flitter account objects. We plan to add
link count filtering to a future version of Palantir.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

249

Handlers

2.2
Visualizations of Disparate Data
Oftentimes the "solutions" to real-world analytic problems are not
contained in a single dataset or type. In fact, attribution is often
only possible through analysis combining disparate datasets. The
Traffic Mini Challenge represented this problem well because the
solution could only be found with both the network and proximity
card data. We imported these data types into Palantir as different
event objects linked to the respective employees and computers,
which enabled seamless and simultaneous processing of the
information.
Palantir's search functionality again played an important role in
this challenge. After identifying a suspicious data transmission,
we used a depth-two search on the external IP address to link it
back to all other internal computers that communicated with it and
the respective computer owners. The ability to create a temporal
filter search based on the times of the suspect transmissions
allowed us to rule out potential suspects by identifying which
employees were in the classified space during at least one suspect
transmission.
The integration of the Timeline with the Graph and the ability
to color-code different objects types provided an intuitive
visualization of the data. With a suspect data transmission and all
other events-network and proximity-associated with the
respective employee on the Graph, the Timeline provided an
effective means to logically evaluate whether a suspect event was
authorized, as overlapping events or an employee being out of the
office were immediately apparent.
Although this view was highly intuitive, this particular
workflow did require some repetition for analyzing different
employees and thus would not scale well beyond the VAST data.
The time required to perform the workflow was somewhat
reduced by the ability to save searches. Nevertheless, some sort
of automation or the ability to distinguish multiple employees'
events on the Timeline simultaneously would save time. Another
possible improvement might be to allow users to identify these
patterns, then use data mining techniques to find other instances
of the selected pattern automatically. With Palantir's open APIs,
an organization could easily create such analysis or visualization
plug-ins to run common tasks and avoid repetition by human
analysts.

250

2.3
Video Analysis Workaround
Palantir presently lacks an integrated application for video
analysis, but we still managed to demonstrate how separate
analysis of video content could be effectively brought into an
investigation.
Our workaround involved importing video
metadata as Sighting events with a 10-minute duration and URLs
that launched the respective video clips. The practical result in
Palantir was the ability to bring the suspect embassy employee
and all associated events to the Graph and then create temporal
filters to search for Sighting events based on times when the
suspect would have had time to leave the embassy. We then
reviewed just those times rather than the entire video. Upon
identifying a meeting, an analyst could then create and source the
respective event within the same investigation and even publish it
to the broader organization.
Although video can be stored as media attached to objects in
Palantir, the ability to import and create tags directly in a videothe same way objects, events, and links presently can be tagged in
documents-though less useful for the 2009 VAST Challenge,
would be valuable for real-world law enforcement and
intelligence analysis.

3

CONCLUSION

With users spanning the law enforcement, defence, healthcare,
and regulation and oversight communities, Palantir is a powerful
enterprise investigative platform that enables analysts to interact
with data at the conceptual level to uncover relationships and
patterns hidden within disparate data sources. Openness and
flexibility are key to addressing not only with the demands of a
broad range of analytic tasks, but also the challenge of combining
different types of information into a single collaborative
environment. Our experience with the VAST 2009 competition
has reinforced our belief in Palantir's utility as a highly extensible
analytic platform, and helped us identify areas for future research
and improvement.

