Solving the Traffic and Flitter Challenges with Tulip
Award Traffic Mini Challenge: Innovative Visualization and Excellent Description
Award Flitter Mini Challenge: Representation of Uncertainty in Rules & in Visualization

´ eric
´ Gilbert∗
Paolo Simonetto∗
Pierre-Yves Koenig∗
Faraz Zaidi∗
Daniel Archambault†
Fred
∗
∗
∗
Trung-Tien Phan-Quang
Morgan Mathiaut
Antoine Lambert
Jonathan Dubois∗
∗
∗
∗
Ronan Sicre
Mathieu Brulin
Remy Vieux
Guy Melanc¸on†
INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest and LaBRI, Universit´e de Bordeaux I

A BSTRACT
We present our visualization systems and findings for the Badge
and Network Traffic as well as the Social Network and Geospatial challenges of the 2009 VAST contest. The summary starts by
presenting an overview of our time series encoding of badge information and network traffic. Our findings suggest that employee 30
may be of interest. In the second part of the paper, we describe
our system for finding subgraphs in the social network subject to
degree constraints. Subsequently, we present our most likely candidate network which is similar to scenario B.

(a) Suspicious Activity

Index Terms: H.5.0 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—General; F.2.2 [Theory of Computation]:
Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems—Pattern matching;
1 I NTRODUCTION
In order to determine the most likely candidates for the embassy
leak and the pattern in the social network, we developed two visualization systems using the Tulip [1] graph drawing libraries and
software. The first system, presented in section 2, describes our
time series visualization to understand the situation at the embassy
using a time series of widgets. Section 3 describes our system for
finding patterns in the larger social network.
2 BADGE AND N ETWORK T RAFFIC C HALLENGE
Our visualization technique, shown in Figure 1, is based on a timeline view. The horizontal axis encodes the time of the day at hour
intervals, while the vertical axis encodes the employee ID and IP
address. The horizontal lines in the grid group employees into offices. For example, in Figure 1(a), employees 14 and 15 are in the
same office because they are in between the same horizontal lines.
The timeline of each employee collects four kinds of data. First,
the upwardly directed glyphs, the teal circles and bars, encode the
door log events. Circles are badge-in events. Bars between two
vertical lines encode the time interval between a badge-in-classified
event and badge-out-classified event for an employee. The central
blue bars show when the employee’s computer is active. Downwardly directed circles represent transmissions and the size of the
circle is proportional to transmission size.
A green background shows the average daily activity of an employee over the thirty-one days. A more saturated green indicates a
higher probability that the employee is at work. The colour of this
∗ {paolo.simonetto, pierre-yves.koenig, faraz.zaidi, frederic.gilbert,
phanquan, mathiaut, antoine.lambert, dubois, sicre, mathieu.brulin, vieux
}@labri.fr
† {daniel.archambault, guy.melancon}@inria.fr

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

(b) Classified Zone
Figure 1: Two suspicious transmissions. (a) Employee 13’s computer
is used for a large upload on day twenty-two before the employee
usually arrives at work. (b) A case where an employee’s computer is
used while the employee is in the classified zone.

green background can be changed to red, highlighting suspicious
activities. The most suspicious activities occur when an employees
computer is active but he or she is most likely not at their desk.
We found three exceptionally suspicious transmissions in the
data. In our first case, Figure 1(a) shows a large transmission from
employee 13’s computer on day twenty-two, forty minutes before
the employee usually arrives at work. The employee had yet to
badge into the building and the badge-in-building event recorded
was typical for this employee. In our second case, a large transmission is sent less than a minute before employee 20 badges into
the building on day twenty-nine, indicating the employee is probably not at their desk. Finally, a large transmission is sent from
employee 18’s computer over two hours since it was last active on
day seventeen. In all three cases, the office was most likely empty
as the computer activity and the green background in the visualization indicate. A leak could have been sent from this computer by
someone who is not assigned to this office.
Subsequently, we looked for transmissions sent from an employee’s computer when the employee was in the classified zone.
During this time, the employee’s computer should not be used, because they are away from their desk. Figure 1(b) shows an example,
but, in reality, we found eight such cases.

247

(a) Query Interface

(b) Degree Selection

(c) Candidate Solution

Figure 2: Task 2 visualization system. (a) Visual Query Generator interface with the tool bar showing Employee(EMB), Handlers(Hi), Middlemen(BMH), Fearless Leader(FL) nodes and required or optional edges. (b) Histogram view allowing user to choose the range for the number of
connections for each role. (c) Our best candidate solution for this task.

All eleven of these suspicious transmissions were sent to the
same IP address, 100.59.151.133, and on the same port, 8080.
We figured that this machine is where the leaks were uploaded.
Subsequently, we highlighted all transmissions to this IP address
and found seven other transmissions. The office was probably
empty in all cases with one interesting exception: employee 30 was
most likely in 30/31’s office when three of the suspicious transmissions were sent from employee 31’s computer. After plotting all
suspicious transmissions on the embassy map, we found that they
were clustered around office 15: employee 30’s office.
Finally, we found five cases where an employee either badged
into the secure zone without badging out or vice versa, and employee 30 was involved in three of these five infractions.
3

S OCIAL N ETWORK AND G EOSPATIAL C HALLENGE

The interactive query generator, shown in figure 2(a), enables the
user to generate the pattern to be found in the larger graph through
a visual interface. Using the supplied input, the system applies constraints to the graph, simplifying the search for the given pattern.
The tool bar contains nodes with different roles and edges, allowing the user to construct patterns. The user can choose any number
of handlers, middlemen, and fearless leaders. These nodes are connected through optional or required edges. Required edges play
an important role in filtering as they impose minimum degree constraints for each role. The Employee (EMB), handlers (Hi), middlemen (BMH) and fearless leader (FL) all have different degree
constraints. Through a histogram view, shown in figure 2(b), the
user chooses degree ranges for each role based on the degree distribution in the entire graph.
For example, in the task description, the degree of an employee
is about 40. In the histogram view, few nodes have a degree above
45. Therefore, we take 45 as an upper bound for employee degree and the same level of uncertainty as a lower bound. Handler
candidates have a degree range between 30 and 40. We enter the
range [27, 43], ensuring that no solution near these bounds would
be missed. We estimate that the degree of a middleman is about
6. These middlemen communicate with one or more handlers and
there are 3 at most. Middlemen have one or two more contacts, one
of them being the fearless leader. Therefore, a middleman has a degree of about 5 (3 handlers + 1 or 2 other contacts). Thus, we set a
maximum degree of 6, which allows for some uncertainty. Finally,
the fearless leader has over 100 contacts which we use as a lower
bound.
To search for the patterns in the graph, the algorithm creates sets
of possible candidates for each role based on the degree constraints
and iteratively removes elements from these sets based on connectivity constraints. The induced subgraph of the union of these sets is

248

computed to filter the network. Additional connectivity constraints
are applied from the given pattern drawn in the query generator.
For example, an employee must be connected to three handlers,
thus, any node having a degree less than three is removed. Similar
constraints can be applied to handlers, middlemen, and the fearless
leader.
Connection constraints exist between all roles: the employee is
connected to the handlers, the handlers to the middlemen, and the
middlemen to the fearless leader. We use these constraints to filter
the network further. Once complete, our system constructs separate
graphs for each possible candidate network.
From this point forward, we manually filter the candidate networks. The system uses shape to encode each role: squares for
employees, circles for handlers, triangles for middlemen, and pentagons for fearless leaders. The constraint that allowed us to eliminate the most candidate networks was that handlers had to be directly connected to the employee and must communicate with the
fearless leader through a middleman. In any of the candidate networks, if we see a fearless leader doesn’t communicate with exactly
three handlers then the candidate network is rejected.
To filter this list of solutions further, we use the geospatial information. Nodes in the candidate network are coloured by city size
according to the legend on the Flovania map. Distances between
cities are mapped to edge width where thicker edges correspond to
nodes that are close geospatially. Our best candidate solution to the
Flitter challenge is shown in figure 2(c). As the leader is in a larger
city, the fearless leader must be coloured either yellow or red. Middlemen are in a city geospatially close to the employee or to the
handler, and, thus, should have thick edges in these connections.
4 C ONCLUSION
We believe that employee 30 probably caused the embassy leak,
because most of the suspicious transmissions were sent from locations near the employee’s office, and he or she is one of the few
employees who could have sent all of these transmissions.
We, also, believe that employee working at the embassy has a
Flitter name @terekhov. Our candidate solution matches scenario
B where each handler has his or her own middleman. The fearless
leader in this network has Flitter name @irvin.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the INRIA the Gravit´e project for supporting this work.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Auber. Tulip : A huge graph visualization framework. In P. Mutzel
and M. J¨unger, editors, Graph Drawing Software, Mathematics and Visualization, pages 105–126. Springer-Verlag, 2003.

