Building and Supporting Shared Understanding
in Collaborative Problem-solving
N. Deshpande; B. de Vries; J.P. van Leeuwen
Design Decision Support Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
{N.Deshpande@bwk.tue.nl, B.d.Vries@bwk.tue.nl, J.P.v.Leeuwen@bwk.tue.nl}
Abstract
Over the last decade the level of interest in the field
of Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW)
has grown enormously to support various
collaborative activities. Basically they all support
argumentation in one or the other way. While many
environments do support the process of bringing
people into collaboration, the participants often fail to
understand each others' activities, knowledge, beliefs
or communicating contextual information. We propose
an interface for the interactive construction of a
Bayesian Belief Network for not only inferencing in
uncertainty, but also for enhancing the deliberation of
argumentation, and visualizing
the insights of
collaborative discourse to build and support shared
understanding.

1. Introduction
With the purpose of providing computer support for
decision processes, be they formal or informal,
specifically in the design domain (where success of
problem solving sessions in the early stages of the
project becomes critical in further actions to be taken),
our area of interest falls under the category of design
and decision support systems (DDSS). From the
collaborative design and problem solving viewpoint,
while most of the research in group decision support
systems focuses on distributed operations [1], some
others have addressed the problem of co-located
operation [2], [3], [16]. This project focuses on the
support for co-located synchronous operation (sametime/same-place) in a small group design problemsolving scenario. Argument visualization can be traced
back to the Chart Method [17] which was used for
analyzing the evidence presented in a legal case. In a
chart, each numbered node has an explanatory entry
summarizing the evidence. The Uses of Argument [18]
describes the analysis of the logical structure of

arguments leading to a graphical format. Augmenting
Human Intellect [19] lays out a framework for
enabling people to augment their intellectual faculties
by manipulating externalized “concept structures”.
This pointed the way forward for computers as
personal, intellectual aids, capable of updating flexible
symbolic displays making possible a new coupling
between one’s thinking, and what was reflected back
from the display [20]. A parallel stream of work goes
under names such as Concept Mapping and Mind
Mapping [21], [22] and both emphasize the “visual” as
fundamental. The argumentative design perspective
[23] motivated the development of Issue Based
Information Systems (IBIS) [24] as a medium to
encourage the open deliberation of issues. Visualized
as a graph, the IBIS grows into a network with key
entities as Issues, Positions and Arguments. Most of
the first generation tools and methods force the
crafting of arguments into linear form for visualization
making it difficult to see alternate interpretations and
points of view [25]. Subsequent researches motivated
tools [26], [27] as a way to represent design
argumentation explicitly, but with group process
adding another dimension.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in the
use of causal maps to represent domain knowledge of
multi-disciplinary problem solvers [5], [28]. A causal
map represents a decision maker’s beliefs concerning
the relationships between various factors of interest
among team members. In a general sense, the goal of
problem solving is to select the optimal of possible
actions. In the collaborative view of problem-solving,
the active participation of conversants is required to
achieve sufficient grounding of the discourse [16].
Achieving a solid grounding or shared understanding
in problem-solving strategies is the foundation of a
systematic means for the support of collaborative
design. Our research differs in the sense of not straight
mapping of argument structures but visualization of
ever changing dynamic situations that arise out of
discussions in relation to individual as well as team

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

beliefs and assumptions. We hypothesize that the
collaborative and interactive process of constructing a
Bayesian Belief Network (BBN) [10], [11] and
visualizing the cases of interests will help build and
support shared understanding. The idea is that problem
solving is supported by the construction of a situation
specific belief model in a synchronous interactive
environment. We believe that the process of
converting causal knowledge of team members into a
belief network and inferring those beliefs as an
iterative and interactive process will not only help the
team understand joint probability in terms of the
solution but also build a shared understanding among
the
team
by
encouraging
reasoning
and
communication.

2. Collaborative problem-solving
shared understanding

and

Shared understanding is an objected state achieved
through interactive processes by which common
ground between individuals is constructed and
maintained. Any negotiation requires much shared
information to be successful, i.e., mutual knowledge of
beliefs and assumptions. This information is called
common ground and conversational partners are
constantly coordinating with each other to ground the
content of their conversation. They try to elaborate the
mutual belief that their partner has understood what
they meant [12]. This is then called their shared
understanding, which is assessed by a criterion that is
agreed to be relevant for the current situation. To build
shared understanding of each other’s selected beliefs
and interests in groups, participants not only hear each
others versions but must also integrate such
contributed pieces of work to understand the overall
theme of the discussion. In a collaborative session, as
an argumentation takes place, participants offer ideas,
and make repairs or offer alternative descriptions in
response to indications of lack of understanding [13].
Participants seek and provide evidence of
understanding. Evidence is a contribution that a person
makes during a conversation that both carries some
content and assists the participants in establishing a
mutual belief [15]. The development of common
ground or shared understanding takes place as a
continuous process through arguments, elaborating and
reasoning on evidences constantly correcting and
revising shared beliefs between the participants. The
conceptual framework for building and supporting
shared understanding can be described as follows.

The framework in Figure1 explains that every
participant holds a set of beliefs and assumptions in a
problem solving situation. Though this is a thin line of
difference between the two, their differentiation is an
important one in uncertainty. A belief can be defined
as a degree of conviction of the truth of something
especially based on a consideration or examination of
the evidence. It is an awareness or understanding and
knowledge. An assumption is accepted as true without
proof. In a collaborative situation it can be seen as a
requisition of knowledge from others. Two beliefs
involved in an argument either result in an updated
belief, a new belief or an assumption or remain in their
initial state. An assumption which has turned into a
belief can be seen as a proven assumption. The
Collaborative Problem-solving Space (CPSS) that is
currently under development will be described in more
detail in the following section.

Figure 1. Conceptual framework for
building
and
supporting
shared
understanding

2.1. The collaborative problem-solving space
As any place to set up collective activities, The
Collaborative Problem-solving Space is primarily an
environment for problem solving and decision making.
The CPSS supports the process of converting causal
knowledge of team members into a Belief Network
and inferring those beliefs as an iterative and
interactive process. This helps the team to understand
joint probability in terms of the solution. It also
supports the team to build a shared understanding by

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

encouraging reasoning and communication. The CPSS
supports requirements such as creation, transformation,
relation, updation, and deletion of beliefs, assumptions
and evidences.
Here beliefs, assumptions and
evidences are seen as the entities of the argument,
those can be discussed upon. We regard annotations,
images, drawings, sketches, movies and other artifacts
used in the argument as evidence. The interface and
interaction focuses on natural and direct manipulation
techniques and tools.

Figure 2. Schematic representation of CPSS

The CPSS can be divided into three spaces. They
are, Personal Space, Shared Activity Space and the
space for the visualization of belief structures that we
call a Common Ground.
A Personal Space in the CPSS environment is the
digital knowledge bank of an individual with
supporting personal tools and data. It is also a place
where individual beliefs are constructed and
transferred into the shared activity space. The Personal
Space is implemented by a Tablet PC with handwriting recognition functionality.
The Shared Activity Space supports the basic
negotiation, argumentation, and reasoning process. It is
a space where knowledge is constructed, shared and
acquired. This is the place where team members are
interactively involved in causal mapping and
construction of the belief network. The Shared Activity
Space is composed of three layers of activity that
support three stages of the process. The first layer
supports the activity of elicitation and the second layer
supports the activity of determining the causes and

consequences. The third layer is used for the
preparation and construction of the Bayesian network.
The Shared Activity Space consists of original
components from the Visual Interaction Platform
(VIP) that was developed in the preceding research at
Eindhoven University of Technology [6],[7]. The VIP
uses a video projector to create a large computer
workspace on the horizontal surface of a table.
Projecting a computer display onto the surface of a
table has been explored by many researchers [8],[9].
With the VIP system users can interact (perform their
actions) using small physical blocks known as bricks.
These bricks are coated with infrared reflecting
material and there is an infrared light source located
above the table next to the projector. A camera located
next to the infrared light source and the projector
tracks the movements of the interaction elements. The
user interacts with the system by modifying the
location and orientation of these bricks.
The Common ground is a dynamic visualization
space. This space supports not only visualizing the
current state of probability distribution of the problem
situation and status in a team perspective but also helps
in visualizing the process that took place in reaching
the present status which is known as procedural
context. Procedural context is extracted from the
Shared Activity Space by triggering an event during
negotiation and argumentation. The visualization
scheme is under development.

2.2. Process of problem-solving in the CPSS
The process in the CPSS follows the line of
inferencing. We classify three stages where Shared
Understanding in a problem solving session becomes
critical.
Stage 1:
Shared Understanding at problem
definition stage. At this stage most of the activity
consists of identifying goals and objectives of the
session and trying to figure out each other’s interests.
It is assumed that a certain level of shared
understanding about the problem formulation is
necessary and a team holds a certain amount of
understanding on what they would like to discuss prior
to the beginning of the session. This stage helps
participants in understanding the team structure,
selection of initial data and formulation of individual
beliefs and mental models that might be used in the
discourse.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Stage 2: Shared Understanding at individual

perspective stage. This stage mainly deals with
individual perspectives exchange. This level can be
sub-classified into three stages. They are Elicitation,
Elimination, and Externalization. In Elicitation, team
members draw out the contextual knowledge to
explicate a situation. In Elimination, team members try
to merge concepts that are already having the same
meaning and perspective. In Externalization members
construct causal and consequential relations between
issues and reason about them. We adopt a Causal
Mapping technique to achieve that. Causal mapping
refers to representing a set of causal relationships
within a system. Causal mapping has the advantage of
allowing team members to develop a shared
representation for causality or situation.
Stage 3: Shared Understanding at Team
perspective stage. Shared Understanding at the team
level is to reflect on the combined effort and beliefs on
the process that results in a situation described by a
commonly agreed probability distribution.

require enhanced safety for all newly built tunnels. A
team of eight tunnel design experts of a tunnel
consortium and their client gets the assignment to
redesign the entrance of a tunnel because of this
sudden change in health and safety awareness. The
time pressure is high: production is due to start in a
few weeks! The team has only three days to redesign
the entrance of the tunnel. The team has to prove that
their new design fulfils the new regulations and is
more valuable and cost effective than the original
design.
After a short discussion and overview, members of
the team had draw out a number of beliefs related to
the problem from one’s own perspective. They create
beliefs in their personal spaces by scribbling on the
tablet pc, and drag-and-drop [14] them into the shared
activity space to share viewpoints. They are in the first
layer of their shared activity space. Each dropped
belief or assumption in the shared activity space
becomes a node in the belief network later. After a
short discussion similar interests are identified and
merged by moving them on to each other using a
reflective marker. Few beliefs are deleted by dragging
issues into a trash bin situated at four corners of the
space. Initially the team comes up with 15 beliefs and
as the result of discussion they are down sized to 9
beliefs. Objectives and decisions to be made are
identified. Visualization of interaction with beliefs is
shown in figure 4(a) and initial beliefs on the common
ground (the vertical display) are shown in figure 4(b).
Interaction is established through direct manipulation
using a digital pen and gesture input. Each of the
beliefs on the visualization screen displays its title,
name of the creator and other information graphically.

Figure 3. Process in the CPSS

3. A scenario

Figure 4(a). Visual interaction with beliefs

The following scenario illustrates the process and
interactions in the CPSS. During the design of a tunnel
project, a tragic accident happens in a recently finished
tunnel of a similar construction type. Politicians

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 4(b). Initial beliefs on the common
ground

Figure 5. Entering values into CPT using a
digital pen

Finally, 9 beliefs are transported to the second layer
for reasoning and constructing causal and
consequential relations. Each of the belief worth
considering is specified as decision, nature, and
objective nodes by simply selecting or entering
information in a popup table (includes Conditional
Probability Table (CPT) of the Belief Network in later
use) using a digital pen. At this stage, every issue has
become a node type with initial beliefs values. As the
discussion progresses, team members reason out on
their beliefs by attaching a supporting document to a
belief. The supporting documents are obtained from
personal space or created in the shared activity space.
Whenever a belief is selected on the shared activity
space, its evidence and contextual information is
displayed on the Common Ground Space for
visualization. As the next step team members identify
causes and consequences and linked them by moving
two issues very close to each other. A transparent
arrow appears suggesting their direction. All the
connected nodes are transferred to the third layer to
prepare for a Bayesian Network. For each belief
evidence values are entered into CPT tables using a
digital pen as shown in figure 5. The belief network is
compiled by pressing a button. The resulting
probability distribution is then visualized on the
Common Ground. This result gives rise to new
insights, new beliefs or agreements and the session is
continued until the team is satisfied with the outcome
of the session.

4. Conclusion and future work
In this paper we discussed collaborative problemsolving and a procedure to build and support shared
understanding during the discourse of a collaborative
problem-solving session. We presented the
conceptualized environment; the Collaborative
Problem Solving Space and outlined the process. As
the research project is in its initial stages, we are
confined to present only the conceptualized space
while other issues are under study. They are:
developing techniques for extraction of procedural
context, developing metaphors and a schema for
visualization in shared understanding space, and a
coding scheme for accessing shared understanding. At
the moment, to support the stage 1 of the process, we
are implementing the personal and shared activity
spaces. We hope to report on this in the near future.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank the Dutch Organization for
Applied Scientific Research (TNO), in particular Bart
Luiten for their support in this project.

5. References
[1] Beca.L., “Building Collaborative Problem-Solving
Environments as Shared Places”, 34th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-34),
Volume 9, 2001.
[2] Russel,D.M,. Streitz,N.A., Winograd,T., “Building
disappearing computers”. Communications of the ACM,
Vol48, No.3, 2005

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[3] Streitz,N.A.,
J.GeiBler, T.Holmer, S.Konomi, C.
M.Tomfelde, W.Reischl, P.Rexroth, P.Seitz, R.Steinmetz, “iLAND: An interactive Landscape for Creativity and
Innovation”. Proceedings of the ACM conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI,Pitsburg, 1999, pp.120127
[4] Cramton,C.D., “The mutual knowledge problem and its
consequences for dispersed collaboration”, Organization
Science, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2001, pp. 346-371
[5] Shenoy,P., S.Nadakarni, “A causal mapping approach to
construction of Bayesian networks”. Journal of Decision
Support Systems, Vol. 38, Issue 2, 2004, pp. 259-281
[6] Aliakseyeu.D., A Computer Support Tool for Early
Stages of Architectural Design, in Dept. of Industrial design,
Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands, 2003
[7] Subramanian.S., Tangible interfaces for volume
navigation, in Dept. of Industrial design, Eindhoven
University of Technology, Netherlands, 2003
[8] Patten,J., H.Ishii, J.Hines, G.Pangaro, Sensetable, “A
wireless object tracking platform for tangible user
interfaces”. Proceedings of CHI, 2001, pp.253-260
[9] Underkoffler, J., H.Ishii, “A luminous-tangible
workbench for urban planning and design”. Proceedings of
CHI 1999, pp.386-393
[10] Kadie, C.M., D.Hovel, A component-Centric Toolkit for
Modelling and Inference with Bayesian Networks. A
Technical report, Microsoft research, 2001
[11] Moole, B.R., Parallel Construction of Bayesian Belief
Networks, in Dept of Computer Science.University of South
Carolina: Columbia, SC, USA, 1997
[12] Clark, H.H., Brennan, S.E., Grounding in
Communication, in Lauren B. Resnick, John M. Levine, and
Stephanie D. Teasley (eds.) Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition, 1991, pp. 127-149

[16] Deshpande, N., B. de Vries, and J.P. van Leeuwen,
“Collocated, Multi-Disciplinary, Collaborative Designspace:
An overview”, in Van Leeuwen, J.P. and H.J.P. Timmermans
(eds.) Developments in Design & Decision Support Systems
in Architecture and Urban Planning, 2004, pp.253-268
[17] Wigmore, H.J.A., The principles of judicial proof as
given by logic, psychology, and general experience and
illustrated in judicial trials, Boston: Little Brown, 1931
[18] Toulmin,S., The Uses of Argument, Cambridge
University Press, 1958
[19] Engelbart, D.C., Augmenting human intellect: A
conceptual framework. Stanford Research Institute, 1962
[20] Kirschner, P. A., Simon J. S, and Chadd,C, (eds).
Visualizing Argumentation: Software Tools for Collaborative
Education and Sense-Making, 2002
[21] Novak, J.D., Learning,creating and using knowledge:
Concept maps as facilitation tools in schools and
corporations. Mawah,NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum and
Associates, 1984
[22]
T.Buzan.,
“Mind
http://www.mind-map.com

Maps”,

available

from

[23] Rittel, H.W.J., Second generation design methods.
Developments in design methodology, N.Cross (eds), 1984
pp. 317-327
[24] Isenmann, s., Wolf D. Reuter, “BIS—a convincing
concept…but a lousy instrument?”, in proceedings of the
conference on designing interactive systems: processes,
practices, methods, and techniques, The Netherlands , 1997,
pp.63-172
[25] Brown.J.S., From cognitive ergonomics to social
ergonomics and beyond, User centred systems design,
D.Norman, S.Draper(eds). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1986

[13] Mitchell,A., Communication and shared understanding
in collaborative writing, In Dept. of computer science
University of Toronto, 1996. pp,15-20

[26] Stefik, M., Foster, G., Bobrow, D., Kahn, K., Lanning,
S., Suchman, L., “Beyond the chalkboard: computer support
for collaboration and problem solving in meetings”. CACM,
1, 1987, pp. 32-47

[14] Rekimoto, j., “Pick-and-Drop: A direct Manipulation
Technique for Multiple Computer Environments”.
Proceedings of the 10th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, 1997, pp. 31-39

[27] Conklin, J., Begeman, M., “gIBIS: A hypertext tool for
exploratory policy discussion”. ACM Transaction on Office
Information System, 6, 4 , 1988, pp.303-331

[15] Novick, D.G., L.Walton, K.Ward, “Contribution graphs
in multiparty discourse”. Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Spoken Dialogue, 1996, pp.53-56

[28] Druzdzel, M.J., Qualitative Verbal Explanations in
Bayesian Belief Networks, in Artificial Intelligence and
Simulation of Behaviour Quarterly, Special issue on
Bayesian Belief Networks, 94: 1996, pp.43-54.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

