Beyond Guidelines: What Can We Learn from
the Visual Information Seeking Mantra?
Brock Craft, Paul Cairns
University College London Interaction Centre (UCLIC), Remax House, 31/32 Alfred Place
London WC1E 7DP, UK
{b.craft@cs.ucl.ac.uk, p.cairns@ucl.ac.uk}

Abstract
The field of information visualization offers little
methodological guidance to practitioners who seek to
design novel systems. Though many sources describe the
foundations of the domain, few discuss practical methods
for solving visualization problems. One frequently cited
guideline to design is the “Visual Information-Seeking
Mantra”, proposed by Shneiderman in 1996. Although
often used to inform the design of information
visualization systems, it is unclear what use this has been
for visualization designers. We reviewed the current
literature that references the Mantra, noting what authors
have found useful about it and why they cite it. The results
indicate a need for empirical validation of the Mantra
and for a method, such as design patterns, to inform a
holistic approach to visualisation design.
Keywords – Guidelines, Patterns, Visual Information
Seeking Mantra, Visualization Methodology.

1. Introduction
In the field of information visualization, one notable
theoretical development is the “visual information seeking
mantra” described by Shneiderman in his seminal paper at
the 1996 IEEE Visual Languages conference [20]. It
offers two contributions for understanding information
visualization methodology, namely, the “Visual
Information Seeking Mantra” and the “task-by-data-type
taxonomy”. While the task-by-data-type taxonomy (TTT)
offers useful categorization of data types in the context of
information visualization, it is not unprecedented in the
literature, as there are efforts by many other authors [23,
29, 11] to describe data taxonomies for the purpose of
visualization design. More interestingly, the Visual
Information Seeking Mantra (hereafter, simply the
“Mantra”) offers guidance to practitioners based upon
Shneiderman's
extensive
experience
designing

information visualization software. The Mantra,
“Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-ondemand”, describes how data should be presented on
screen so that it is most effective for users.
Shneiderman has described the ideas in this paper as
“descriptive and explanatory” rather than prescriptive [9].
This caveat notwithstanding, the Mantra has been widely
cited by researchers developing novel information
visualization tools as a justification for their
methodological approaches. In effect, the Mantra has
become a prescriptive principle for many information
visualization designers, either implicitly or explicitly.
Furthermore, although numerous authors cite the Mantra,
there are no reasonably obvious studies that have
validated Shneiderman’s recommendations. While the
methodological suggestions are generally accepted as
valid, they have not been subjected to adequate and
rigorous assessment. The Mantra appears to act as an
inspiration and guideline for practitioners rather than a
scientifically studied methodological approach.
That interesting and useful information visualizations
are developed in spite of this attests to the effectiveness of
his techniques. For most designers, the Mantra works.
However, we believe it is important to validate the
recommendations in a more rigorous manner and to
situate them in a design context that is more useful for
practitioners than guidelines alone. For example, the
visualization design patterns proposed by Wilkins [27]
attempt to overcome such limitations of guidelines.
Formal research would yield clearer understanding of the
Mantra's strengths and weaknesses and suggest the most
appropriate contexts for its use. This would support a
design framework that would account for and prevent
conflicting recommendations that are common to
guidelines. Thus, we believe such study would provide a
reliable foundation for future visualization designers to
begin their work. Card and Mackinlay call for just this
sort of analysis in their notable methodological discussion

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

of information visualization design, “As for any
technology area, [it] is necessary to develop abstractions
that rise above particular point designs in order to
allow...codification of art into technology to occur.”[9]
Increasing the urgency for such validation is that
practitioners both within and outside the domain of
information visualization have few methodologies to
choose from. The Mantra is one of those few. Among
papers that describe methodological approaches to
information visualization, the 1996 paper is usually cited.
Those who develop information visualization systems and
who conduct new research recognize it. Notably, those
who work primarily outside the information visualization
community also cite the paper when they describe novel
systems that they are creating. This suggests that the
Mantra has substantial value for practitioners who may
not be intimately familiar with ongoing work within
academia. It is incumbent upon domain experts in
information visualization to validate and improve upon
guidelines that are useful to a wider audience. Moreover,
they should situate this knowledge in the context of a
robust design method. It is upon their expertise that others
rely.

2. The Mantra, dismantled
To understand why and whether the Mantra is an
important methodological contribution, why other
researchers and practitioners frequently cite it, and what
makes it an important subject for research, it is first
necessary to dissect the several components into discrete
parts so that they may be better understood. Here, we
describe each of the different elements of the Mantra,
relying on Shneiderman's initial articulation, but
clarifying certain points and adding relevant details, as
they are appropriate. It is important to note that we focus
this analysis on the user tasks and not the data types.

2.1 Why “overview first”?
Overview provides a general context for
understanding the dataset; it paints a “picture” of the
whole data entity that the information visualization
represents. Patterns and themes in the data that may be
helpful can often be seen only from a vantage point that
comprises the whole view. From this perspective, major
components and their relationships to one another are
made evident. Simply the overall shape of the data itself
can provide assistance in understanding the information
that is encoded. Significant features can be discerned and
selected for further examination. Such features might not
be readily viewable from another part of the data
representation or might be obscured from certain vantage
points. Revealing these features at the outset can aid the
user in filtering the extraneous information so that they

can complete their task more efficiently by excluding
unimportant aspects of the representation.

2.2 Why “zoom and filter”?
Zooming and filtering both involve reducing the
complexity of the data representation by removing
extraneous information from view and allowing for
further data organization. “Zooming” refers to the
adjustment by the user of the size and position of data
elements on the screen. “Zooming-in” enlarges smaller
data elements of interest and usually simultaneously
removes from view or reduces the size of larger data
elements that are not of interest. “Zooming out” effects
the opposite result. Significantly, while the results of both
adjustments are symmetrical, i.e., zooming-in and
zooming-out are procedurally and visually symmetrical;
they have quite different implications for cognition.
Zooming can be regarded as filtering by navigation
and change of representational vantage point. Zooming
facilitates two different cognitive tasks, depending on
whether it is zooming-in or zooming-out. In the case of
zooming-in, it removes extraneous information from the
visual field, allowing higher processing centres to further
organize the information into meaningful patterns for
interpretation and decision-making. The significance of
this is described by Resnikoff’s Principle of Selective
Omission [9], which posits that organisms require that
information from the sensory organs be aggregated into
manageable inputs by simplification and organization. In
the case of zooming-out, it reveals hidden information,
usually contextual information that is already known, but
which is cannot be recalled. This allows the user to
rediscover his location within the information space, so
that newly learned details about the data representation,
usually discovered by close inspection though zoomingin, can be integrated into a larger understanding.
Unfortunately, “zooming” is often used as a generic,
shorthand expression for either “zooming-in” or
“zooming-out”. This dilution of precision in the meaning
of the term can lead to confusion precisely because the
cognitive activities that it facilitates are so different. The
term “zooming” is often employed by users to refer
generically to scalar changes in representations of
elements on the screen, rather than changes in vantage
point. Anecdotal examples are found in conversations
about dynamically changing toolbars that can be exploded
or contracted to reveal more finely grained levels of
adjustment, or the scalar change of menu items that are
represented with a fisheye type distortion to accommodate
limited screen real-estate [6]. This vagueness of the
meaning has probably evolved because of a lack of
colloquial terminology about scalar changes, and a lack of
distinction between scalar changes of space (i.e., vantage
point) and scalar changes of discrete screen objects, such

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

as text or icons. Filtering accomplishes much the same
reduction of complexity in the display, but without
changing the data representation or the user’s view of it.
The adjustment of widgets in the interface allows for
control of which data points are visible. The user can
thereby selectively hide or reveal data of interest so that
the information can be simplified to aid cognition.
However, this is hindered if there are long delays between
the cause and effect relationship of adjusting a widget and
seeing the results in the display. Thus, the best
implementations of filtering are those that immediately
update the display as widgets are adjusted. These dynamic
filters allow users quickly see how the changed variable
affects the data representation. If the widgets adjust the
parameters of a database query in order to return results,
these are referred to as dynamic queries [1]. Card, et al.,
provides a thorough review of the numerous examples of
the efficacy of dynamic queries [9].

2.3 Why “details-on-demand”?
In a typical information visualization, many data
points are visible in the overview, often from more than
one vantage point. Depending on the visualization, the
number of represented data items can number from
dozens to millions. Limitations of screen real estate and
visual complexity make it difficult to provide
supplementary information that a data point represents, as
providing in-depth detail about all of the displayed items
is impractical. The details-on-demand technique provides
this additional information on a point-by-point basis,
without requiring a change of view. This can be useful for
relating the detailed information to the rest of the data set
or for quickly solving particular tasks, such as identifying
a specific data element amongst many, or relating
attributes of two or more data points. Providing these
details by a simple action, such as a mouse-over or
selection (the “on-demand” feature) allows this
information to be revealed without changing the
representational context in which the data artefact is
situated.

2.4 Why “relate”?
This allows the user to view relationships between
the data items. Selection of a particular data item can
reveal, by changes in representation, items that are related
by similarity. Supporting discovery of relationships is
particularly important where comparisons need to be
made among the characteristics of different data objects in
the display.

2.5 Why “history”?
Users should be able to easily return to a previous
state in the process of exploring the data. It is very
common that comparing the current state of
representation to a previous state can yield a better
understanding of the data. In addition, if the user makes a
mistake, he should be able to easily recover from it. An
optimal interface permits these activities by providing an
easily accessible history of the commands issued or a
widget that returns the interface to a previous state. In
addition, history supports the ability to replay a sequence
of changes and assist the user in progressively refining
data exploration.

2.6 Why “extract”?
In the process of using information visualization
tools, users are frequently engaged in lengthy and
complex operations. Information and knowledge that they
discover may be important for several different tasks or
ongoing work projects. Accordingly, they should be able
to extract important findings for use in other computing
systems. Extraction can also provide a means of saving
work, thereby preventing the need to repeat data
manipulations for future projects.

2.7 But why?
Understanding these techniques, one must ask for
what kinds of visualization design problems can these
several techniques provide the most benefit? Indeed, other
guidelines may conflict with the Mantra’s suggestions. It
is not clear whether all elements should be designed into a
given implementation, whether some elements are more
appropriate than others are, or what compromises should
be made when constraints of the system or the supported
activity require them. Neither is it clear whether they are
useful for all of the different data types. In his 1996 work,
Shneiderman provides little guidance regarding these
questions. Several authors have recognized these
shortcomings (described below), even as they praise the
Mantra’s utility. To understand why people use the
Mantra, and how they deal with these contradictions, we
performed a comprehensive literature review.

3. Literature Review
Were it not a frequently referenced article, the utility
of validation might be less obvious. However, there are
many citations of the Mantra in the literature. At the time
of this writing, there are at least 52 citations of the 1996
paper. They are found in many different publications,
including conference proceedings, peer-reviewed journals
and symposia, Master’s theses, and Doctoral dissertations.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Thus, the population of authors is very diverse, as are
their skills and familiarity with methods of information
visualization design. This diversity is significant. As the
Mantra represents summary knowledge gained by
experience, occasional empirical evidence, and practice in
designing visualizations, it can be considered a heuristic
or guideline. As such, it offers benefits to novices by
highlighting important concepts and to experts by further
defining the domain of visualization methodology. This
wide appeal and the relative scarcity of methodological
knowledge may account for the frequency of the Mantra’s
citation.
Roughly, these citations can be placed into 5 different
categories: implementations (34), methods (7),
evaluations (6), taxonomies (4), and other (1). It is useful
here to discuss these different categories in more detail.
We refer to all of the documents as papers, for the sake of
convenience.

3.1 Implementations
Implementations papers describe novel information
visualization systems where the Mantra or Task-by-Data
Type Taxonomy contributed to the design method used by
the authors. In a typical example describing a document
analysis visualization tool, the authors detail how each
aspect of the Mantra forms their design approach, writing
that it is “a central principle for information
visualization”[12]. In another example, the design for a
software visualization tool, the authors write, “Our
analysis is based on Shneiderman, who presents seven
high level tasks that an information visualization
application should support”[17]. Another group writes,
“We designed our interface to support the visualization
tasks described by Shneiderman.” before going on to
describe how each part of the Mantra was realized in their
system [24]. Still other authors use techniques of the
Mantra to propose design implementations [4]. A small
number of papers within this category cite the Mantra
primarily in the context of describing previous research
that has informed information visualization design, often
describing its importance as a methodological guide (for
example, [23] and [20]). Overall, these implementations
papers all rely on the Mantra as a design justification,
though they rarely describe why the Mantra, in particular,
was selected as a methodological guide. Presumably, the
stature of the author and the scarcity of lucid
methodological guides motivate authors to build upon the
clear and simple recommendations made by the Mantra.
Those few papers that do not explicitly state that the
Mantra informs implementations do recognize its
significance in the evolution of information visualization
systems.

3.2 Methodologies
Methodology papers describe methodological
approaches to designing information visualization
software or describe new models of interaction in
information visualization. Laying the groundwork for
their approach, Amar and Stasko write that,
“Shneiderman’s mantra of ‘Overview first, zoom and
filter, details-on-demand’ nicely summarizes the design
philosophy of modern information visualization systems.”
[3] Hetzler et al. recognize the Mantra as important,
though they suggest, “no single paradigm or visual
method is sufficient for many analytical tasks” [16]. In an
unusual example that describes a method for development
of a specific task-model, Becks and Seeling [5] combine
Shneiderman’s work with the task-models of Wehrend &
Lewis [25] and Belkin et al. [7] to create their own novel
task-model for analysis of collections of documents
within the domain of knowledge management. While the
authors do not describe a methodology for information
visualization, their paper is notable because they describe
Shneiderman’s work as a “domain-independent model[s]
for visual retrieval and analysis tasks.” The high level
nature of the Mantra is of particular utility because its
coarse granularity allows them to develop a more specific
domain-dependent model. This approach, leveraging the
Mantra toward further ends, is typical for those authors
who describe new methods.

3.3 Evaluations
Evaluation papers use the Mantra as a metric by
which to measure the effectiveness of information
visualization implementations or refer other authors’ use
of it as such. Citing Shneiderman’s contributions, Miller,
et al., note that the identification of data types is important
for evaluation, because such identification makes it easier
to compare the similarities and differences of a variety of
different visualization types [18]. Wiss, et al., use the
Mantra as a specific measure against which three different
3D visualizations of hierarchies are measured [29]. In
their evaluation design of these hierarchy browsers, they
write, “Our task analysis is based on Shneiderman, who
presents seven high level tasks that information
visualization should support” (emphasis added).
Interestingly, these authors are perhaps unaware of
Shneiderman’s caveat that his recommendations were not
meant to be prescriptive. Constructing a matrix by which
to compare the tasks against the three interfaces, they
evaluate each one based on whether it conforms to the
tasks described by the Mantra. They conclude that, aside
from considerations of data type, the design of a particular
visualization may not always be able to support all of the
tasks, suggesting that several different designs might have
to be implemented in the same application. This

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

conclusion echoes the motivations described by the
authors of the Snap-Together Visualization environment
[20]. Among these papers, a common complaint is that
beyond usability studies, there are few established metrics
by which to measure the effectiveness of various
visualizations.

3.4 Taxonomies
Taxonomy papers describe ways of classifying
information visualization, its characteristics, and salient
concepts. Not surprisingly, as “The Eyes Have It” [21]
describes a taxonomy, other authors who catalogue the
artefacts of information visualization in taxonomies refer
to this work. These papers involve developing
frameworks for organizing and understanding ideas in
information visualization or offer categorizations of
existing tools. Ed Chi's oft-cited taxonomy [11] references
Shneiderman's paper as one of the previous contributions
in this area. Notably, Tory and Möller [23] problematize
classification based on data type alone. They suggest a
system that divides visualization into Discrete or
Continuous models, dispensing entirely with the
distinctions between “scientific” and “information”
visualizations. Their proposal represents a substantial
departure from descriptions proposed by Card, et al. [9]
and therefore, highlights potential shortcomings of the
Mantra that warrant further examination.

3.5 Others
One type of citation that does not fall into one of the
above categories is the general discussion of information
visualization as a discipline. For example, Chen [10] cites
Shneiderman in his 2002 editorial column for the journal,
Information Visualization, though he does not specifically
address it in the text. We are certain that similar examples
exist that were not uncovered during our review.

4. Analysis
What is interesting in most of these cases, but
particularly the implementations, is that while the authors
cite the Mantra as an important starting point for
designing their tools, many don't actually specify how
they use it; they do not cite specifics of its application.
With noted exceptions (above), there is rarely a
relationship described between the specific tasks or data
types Shneiderman details and the particular
characteristics of the visualization system under
discussion. Most often, the Mantra is cited as a guiding
principle for information visualization design. Indeed, this
is what its author intended. However, if this is the case,
that the Mantra is used as a “guiding principle” in
implementation, it is reasonable to question which aspects

of it are particularly relevant and can be proved to
demonstrate an improvement in the final information
visualization design, as measured by specific indices.
Also, while implementers developing new
information visualization tools recognize that the Mantra
is important for their work, those writers discussing
Methodology or Taxonomy per se, suggest that it is an
only a single component in a much larger puzzle. This
may reflect the utility of a recommendation that is
immediately useful to many practitioners precisely
because it is high-level and domain-independent. It is a
guideline. Paradoxically, these same characteristics are
problematic for theorists who are involved in
understanding and precisely describing models,
taxonomies, and methods. In this light, it is useful
describe guidelines and their shortcomings.

4.1 The Mantra, applied
We have described the Mantra as a guideline.
Colloquially, guidelines serve as recommendations for a
certain approach to particular problems. They are
typically described by domain experts and based on
summarised knowledge gained from years of experience,
on evidence from practice, and on successes and failures.
They are therefore succinct, precise, and practical. These
benefits are particularly appealing for naïve designers in
search of quick solutions to problems that arise in
processes of visualization design. However, these benefits
are limited in the type and complexity of the problems
they can address, particularly as the nature of the
visualization design means that difficulties will arise in
areas as widely varying as representational semantics,
navigation, interaction, data retrieval, etc.
While guidelines have proved useful for many
designers and play an important role in the design
process, they have some shortcomings as noted by Welie,
et al. [26]:
• They are numerous and difficult to select.
• They are usually compact, but their validity
depends on their design context.
• They do not always tell the designer when, how,
and why they should be applied.
• They do not include a rationale.
• They are often too simplistic or too abstract.
• They can be difficult to interpret.
• They can conflict with other guidelines.
• Their validity may not be proved.
Overcoming these limitations requires providing a
framework to unify the recommendations so that they are
consistent with one another. We must also clarify the
problem context and a rationale must be given for
decisions taken. Such a rationale should be supported by

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

examples known to work and these solutions should be
related to one another whenever possible.
Drawing on the work of Alexander [2] and Gamma,
et al. [13], Fincher [14], and Griffiths and Pemberton
[15], Wilkins [27] proposes a pattern-supported
methodology for visualization design, incorporating
aspects of the Mantra into design patterns for use in a
user-centred software development life-cycle. This work
is an important step toward developing ideas in the
Mantra into a fully-articulated methodology for design
that addresses developer needs and the design process, as
a whole.

5. Beyond Guidelines
We recognize that guidelines can be useful for the
development of novel visualizations. The frequent use of
the Mantra is evidence that many practitioners find it
helpful in different design scenarios. It could be proposed
that the utility of guidelines for design problems justifies
their use. However, we argue that validation by further
research which demonstrates the usability of the resulting
systems is essential to the development of visualization
methodology. Such research is only occasionally
performed.
Further, to describe a robust methodological
approach that will address a wide variety of visualization
design problems, guidelines alone are not sufficient.
Recognizing this, others such as Chi and Wilkins have
studied frameworks and patterns, respectively. While we
recognize that software patterns address these needs, to be
fully effective in a visualization design scenario, design
patterns must overcome their own limitations. We call for
a holistic design methodology to remedy the problems we
have described. Such a methodology would:
• take into account the useful techniques that
guidelines and patterns suggest
• have measurable validity
• be based upon a user-centred development
framework
• provide step-by-step approach
• be useful for both novices and experts
Currently, these characteristics are poorly represented
or absent in the literature on information visualization
methodology. Many practitioners, particularly novices,
are finding guidance from fragmented and varied sources,
applying this knowledge in a patchwork fashion. We
advocate further research into techniques, such as
patterns, which attempt to overcome these problems. A
more lucid approach is needed. We believe the very
success of the Mantra demonstrates this need and
advocate research toward a holistic methodology of
information visualization design to address it.

6. Mantra Bibliography
We provide here a full list of the papers we reviewed
for this analysis, arranged by category. In addition to
documenting our categorization of the data, we hope the
reader will find it useful as a reference of citations of the
Mantra, and easier interpret than endnotes.

6.1 Implementations
Attfield, S., Blandford, A., Craft, B.,“Task Embedded
Visualisation: The Design for an Interactive IR
Results Display for Journalists”, in Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Information Visualization,
London, UK. July 2004, pp. 650-655.
Börner, K. 2000. "Visible Threads: A smart VR interface
to digital libraries", in Proceedings of IST/SPIE's
12th Annual International Symposium: Electronic
Imaging 2000: Visual Data Exploration and Analysis
(SPIE 2000), San Jose, CA, 23-28 January 2000.
Chittaro L., “Information Visualization and its
Application to Medicine”, Artificial Intelligence in
Medicine, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 81-88, May 2001.
Chittaro L., Combi C., “ Visualizing Queries on
Databases of Temporal Histories: New Metaphors
and their Evaluation,” in Data and Knowledge
Engineering, vol. 44, no.2, 2003, pp. 239-264, year:
2003A.
Chittaro, L., Combi, C. “ Visualizing Queries On
Databases Of Temporal Histories: New Metaphors
And
Their
Evaluation,”
Data
Knowledge
Engineering, Vol. 44(2): pp. 239-264, 2003.
Christel, M. and Martin, D., “Information Visualization
within a Digital Video Library”, Journal of Intelligent
Information Systems 11(3): 235-257 (1998).
Christel, M.G., Hauptmann, A.G., Wactlar, H.D., and Ng,
T.D, “Collages as Dynamic Summaries for News
Video”, Proceedings of the ACM Multimedia
Conference (Juan-les-Pins, France, December 1-6,
2002), pp. 561-569.
De Chiara, R., Erra, U., Scarano, V., “VENNFS: A VennDiagram File Manager”, in Proceedings of the 7th
International
Conference
on
Information
Visualization (IV'03) July 16 - 18, 2003, London,
England.
Foltz, M., Designing Navigable Information Spaces.
Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 1998.
Govindarajan, J., Ward, M. “GeoViser - Geographic
Visualization of Search Engine Results”, DEXA
Workshop 1999: 269-273.
Graham, M., Kennedy, J., Hand, C., “ A Comparision of
Set-Based and Graph-Based Visualisations of
Overlapping Classification Hierarchies”, Advanced
Visual Interfaces 2000: 41-50.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Greene, S. , Marchionini, G., Plaisant, C., and
Shneiderman, B., “Previews and Overviews in
Digital Libraries: Designing Surrogates to Support
Visual Information Seeking,” Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, vol. 51,
no. 4, 2000, pp. 380-393.
Hauser, H., Ledermann, F.,, Doleisch, F. “Angular
Brushing of Extended Parallel Coordinates”, in
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis 2002), Oct. 28-29, 2002,
Boston, MA, 2002.
Handel, M. and G. Wills. “TeamPortal: Providing Team
Awareness on the Web. in proceedings of the
International Workshop on Awareness and the
WWW”,
ACM
CSCW'2000
Conference,
Philadelphia, PE., December 2000.
Jankun-Kelly, T.J., Visualizing Visualization: A Model
and Framework for Visualization Exploration. PhD
thesis, University of California – Davis, 2003.
Johnson,C.J. Speirs,F., “Validating the Visualisation of
Incident Statistics: A Case Study Involving Signals
Passed at Danger (SPADs)”, Workshop on the
Investigation and Reporting of Incidents and
Accidents, Dept of Computing Science, University of
Glasgow, 2002.
Kanungo, T, Lee, H., Czorapinski, J., and Bella, I.
“TRUEVIZ: a groundtruth/metadata editing and
visualizing toolkit for OCR”, in Proceedings of SPIE
Conference on Document Recognition and Retrieval,
Jan. 2001.
Kosara, R., Metaphors of Movement --- A User Interface
for Manipulating Time-Oriented, Skeletal Plans.
Master's Thesis, Vienna University of Technology,
May 1999, Vienna, Austria.
Kosara, R., Miksch, S., “Visualization Techniques for
Time-Oriented, Skeletal Plans in Medical Therapy
Planning” in Proceedings of the Joint European
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and
Medical Decision Making (AIMDM'99), Springer
Verlag, pp. 291-300, 1999.
Lanzenberger, M., “The Interactive Stardinates - Design
Considerations”, Vienna University of Technology,
Institute of Software Technology and Interactive
Systems, Vienna, Technical Report, Stardinates-TR2003-Feb-1, 2003.
Lanzenberger, M., Miksch, S., Ohmann, S., Popow C.,
“Applying Information Visualization Techniques to
Capture and Explore the Course of Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy”, in Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC 2003,
March 9-12, 2003, Florida, ACM, 2003, pp. 268-274.
Lee H., Smeaton A.F and Furner J. “User-interface Issues
for Browsing Digital Video” , IRSG 99 - 21st Annual
Colloquium on IR Research. Glasgow, UK, 19-20
April, 1999.

M.F.Costabile, G. Semeraro, "Information Visualization
in the in Interaction with IDL", D-lib Magazine,
Jan.1999, Vol. 5 No.1.
Maletic, J.I., Leigh, J., Marcus, A., Dunlap, G.,
“Visualizing Object Oriented Software in Virtual
Reality’, in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International
Workshop on Program Comprehension (IWPC'01),
Toronto, Canada, May 12-13, 2001, pp. 26-35.
Ng, G. K., Interactive Visualisation Techniques for
Ontology Development. PhD thesis, University of
Manchester, 2000.
North, C., “Robust, End-User Programmable, MultipleWindow Coordination”, Proc. ACM CHI '98, pg. 6061, 1998.
North, C., Conklin, N., Indukuri, K., and Saini, V.,
“Visualization Schemas and a Web-based
Architecture for Custom Multiple-View Visualization
of
Multiple-Table
Databases”,
Information
Visualization, Vol 1, Issue 3-4, p.211-228.
Priss, U., and Old, L. J., “Modelling Lexical Databases
with Formal Concept Analysis”, Journal of Universal
Computer Science, 2004.
Salisbury, L., Automatic Visual Display Design and
Creation. PhD thesis, University of Washington,
2001.
Shneiderman, B.: Designing Information-Abundant
Websites: Issues and Recommendations. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 47 (1).
Academic Press, 1997.
Skupin, A., “Cartographic Considerations for Map-like
Interfaces to Digital Libraries,” First ACM+IEEE
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL '01).
Workshop on Visual Interfaces to Digital Libraries.
June 28, Roanoke, Virginia. 2001.
Skupin, A., “On Geometry and Transformation in MapLike Information Visualization”, in Proceedings of
InfoVis 2000 (Salt Lake City UT, October 2000),
IEEE Computer Society, 91-97.
Tory, M., Potts, S., and Möller, T., “A Parallel
Coordinates Style Interface for Exploratory Volume
Visualization”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 2004.
Wang, Y., Xie, L., Chang, S.-F., “VisGenie: a Generic
Video Visualization System”, a Project Report
available at http://www.ee.columbia.edu/~ywang/
Research/.

6.2 Methods
Amar, Robert and Stasko, John. “A Knowledge TaskBased Framework for Design and Evaluation of
Information Visualizations”, in Proceedings of the
2004 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization,
October 2004.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Becks, A., and Seeling, C., “A Task-Model for Text
Corpus Analysis in Knowledge Management”,
Proceedings of UM-2001 Workshop on User
Modeling, Machine Learning and Information
Retrieval, 8th International Conference on User
Modeling, Sonthofen (Germany), July 2001.
Granlund, Å., Lafrenière, Carr, D., “A Pattern-Supported
Approach to the User Interface Design Process”,
Proceedings of HCI International 2001 9International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, August
5-10, 2001, New Orleans, USA.
Hetzler, B., Whitney, P., Martucci, L., Thomas, J., “Multifaceted Insight Through Interoperable Visual
Information Analysis Paradigms”, in Proceedings of
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization,
InfoVis '98, October 19-20, 1998, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina. pp.137-144.
Maletic, J., Marcus, A., Collard, M., “A Task Oriented
View of Software Visualization”, in Proceedings of
the 1st IEEE Workshop on Visualizing Software for
Understanding and Analysis (VISSOFT 2002), S. 3240, Paris, 2002.
Pattison, T., and Phillips, M., “View Coordination
Architecture
for
Information
Visualization”,
Australian symposium on Information Visualisation,
Volume 9, Sydney, Australia, pp. 165 – 169, 2001.
Thomas, J., et al., “Human Computer Interaction with
Global Information Spaces – Beyond Data Mining”,
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Research
Report,
http://www.pnl.gov/infoviz/papers.html,
15/7/04.

6.3 Evaluations
Cribbin, T. & Chen, C., “Visual-Spatial Exploration Of
Thematic Spaces: A Comparative Study Of Three
Visualisation Models”, Robert F. Erbacher, Philip C.
Chen, Jonathan C. Roberts, Craig M. Wittenbrink,
Matti Grohn (Eds.) Visual Data Exploration and Analysis
VIII, 4302, 26. Proceedings of SPIE- The
International Society for Optical Engineering.
January 21-26, 2001. San Jose, CA. pp.199-209.
Freitas, C. M. D. S.; Luzzardi, P.; Cava, R. A.; Winckler,
M. A.; Pimenta, M. S.; Nedel, L., “Evaluating
Usability of Information Visualization Techniques”,
IHC2002, V Simposio sobre Fatores Humanos em
Sistemas Computacionais, 7-10 October, Fortaleza,
Brazil, 2002.
Knight, C., “Visualisation Effectiveness”, in Proceedings
of the Workshop on Fundamental Issues of
Visualization, in Proceedings of The International
Conference on Imaging Science, Systems, and
Technology (CISST, June 25-28), Las Vegas, 2001.
Leroy, G., and Chen, H., “MedTextus: An Ontologyenhanced Medical Portal”, in Proceedings of 12th

Annual Workshop on Information Technologies and
Systems, Barcelona, Spain, December 2002.
Miller, N., Hetzler, B., Nakamura, G., and Whitney, P.,
“The Need For Metrics In Visual Information
Analysis”, Proceedings of the 1997 Workshop on
New Paradigms In Information Visualization And
Manipulation, pp 24-28, Las Vegas, 1997.
Wiss, U. and D. Carr, “An Empirical Study of Task
Support in 3D Information Visualizations”,
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Information
Visualization, London, UK. 14-16 July 1999, 392399.

6.4 Taxonomies
Card, S., Mackinlay, J., “The Structure of the Information
Visualization Design Space”. Proceedings of the
1997 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis '97), pg. 92.
Chi, Ed. H., “A Taxonomy Of Visualization Techniques
Using The Data State Reference Model.” In Proc. of
the Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis '00), pages 69--75. IEEE Press, 2000. Salt
Lake City, Utah.
M. Tory and T. Möller, “A Model-based Visualization
Taxonomy”, Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, October
2004.
Nguyen D., and Mynatt, E., “Privacy Mirrors:
Understanding
and
Shaping
Socio-technical
Ubiquitous Computing Systems” Research Report,
Georgia Institute of Technology, College of
Computing, GVU Centre, available as of 31/7/04 at:
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/
gvu/reports/2002/

6.5 Other
Chen, C., “Information Visualization”, Editorial, Journal
of Information Visualization, Vol. 1, pp.1-4, Palgrave
Macmillan Ltd., 2002.

7. References
[1] Ahlberg, C., Williamson, C., and Shneiderman, B.,
“Dynamic queries for information exploration: An
implementation and evaluation”. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGCHI'92, pages 619--626.
[2] Alexander, C, et al. A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings,
Constructions. Oxford University Press, New York, 1977.
[3] Amar, Robert, Stasko, John.“A Knowledge Task-Based
Framework for Design and Evaluation of Information
Visualizations”, in Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, October 2004.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[4] Attfield, S., Blandford, A., Craft, B.,“Task Embedded
Visualisation: The Design for an IR Results Display for
Journalists”. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Information Visualization, London, UK. July 2004, pp.
650-655.
[5] Becks, A., and Seeling, C., “A Task-Model for Text Corpus
Analysis in Knowledge Management”, Proceedings of UM2001 Workshop on User Modeling, Machine Learning and
Information Retrieval, 8th International Conference on
User Modeling, Sonthofen (Germany), July 2001
[6] Bederson, B. B., “Fisheye Menus”, Proceedings of ACM
Conference on User Interface Software and Technology
(UIST 2000), pp. 217-226, ACM Press (November 2000).
[7] Belkin, N. J., Stein, A., Thiel, U., “Cases, Scripts, and
Information-Seeking Strategies: On the Design of
Interactive Information Retrieval Systems”, Arbeitspapiere
der GMD No. 875, Sankt Augustin, 1994.
[8] Card, S., Mackinlay, J. “The Structure of the Information
Visualization Design Space”, in Proceedings of the 1997
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis
'97), pg. 92.
[9] Card, S., Mackinlay, J., and Shneiderman, B. Readings in
Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufman,
San Francisco, California, 1999.
[10] Chen, C., “Information Visualization”, Editorial, Journal of
Information Visualization, Vol. 1, pp.1-4, Palgrave
Macmillan Ltd., 2002.
[11] Chi, E., “A taxonomy of visualization techniques using the
data state reference model”, in Proc. of the Symposium on
Information Visualization (InfoVis '00), pages 69--75.
IEEE Press, 2000. Salt Lake City, Utah.
[12] Costabile, M.F., Semeraro, G., "Information Visualization
in the in Interaction with IDL", D-lib Magazine, Jan.1999,
Vol. 5 No.1
[13] Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, John
Vlissides, Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable ObjectOriented Software, Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0-201-63361-2,
1994.
[14] Fincher, S. “What is a Pattern Language?”, Late-Breaking
Papers, Chi’99 Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 15-20 May 1999.
[15] Griffiths R.N., Pemberton, L. “Don’t Write Guidelines
Write patterns” Available on the web as of 1 March 2005 at
http://www.it.bton.ac.uk/staff/lp22/guidelinesdraft.html
[16] Hetzler, B., Whitney, P., Martucci, L., Thomas, J., “Multifaceted Insight Through Interoperable Visual Information
Analysis Paradigms”, in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization, InfoVis '98, October 19-20,
1998, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. pp.137-144.
[17] Maletic, J.I., Leigh, J., Marcus, A., Dunlap, G.,
"Visualizing Object Oriented Software in Virtual Reality",

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Workshop on
Program Comprehension (IWPC'01), Toronto, Canada,
May 12-13, 2001, pp. 26-35.
Miller, N., Hetzler, B., Nakamura, G., and Whitney, P.,
“The Need For Metrics In Visual Information Analysis”,
Proceedings of the 1997 workshop on New paradigms in
information visualization and manipulation, pp 24-28, Las
Vegas, 1997.
North, C., Conklin, N., Indukuri, K., and Saini, V.,
“Visualization Schemas and a Webbased Architecture for
Custom Multiple-View Visualization of Multiple-Table
Databases”, Information Visualization, Vol 1, Issue 3-4,
p.211-228.
North, C., Shneiderman, B., "Snap-Together Visualization:
A User Interface for Coordinating Visualizations via
Relational Schemata", Proc. Advanced Visual Interfaces
2000, (May 2000).
Shneiderman, B., "The eyes have it: A task by data type
taxonomy of information visualizations", Proc. IEEE Visual
Languages '96, pp. 336-343, (1996).
Skupin, A., “On Geometry and Transformation in MapLike Information Visualization”, Proceedings of InfoVis
2000 (Salt Lake City UT, October 2000), IEEE Computer
Society, 91-97.
Tory, M., Möller, T., “A Model-based Visualization
Taxonomy”, Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, October 2004.
Tory, M., Potts, S., Möller, T., “A Parallel Coordinates
Style Interface for Exploratory Volume Visualization”,
IEEE
Transactions
on
Visualization
and
ComputerGraphics, 2004.
Wehrend, S., and Lewis, C., “A problem-oriented
classification of visualization techniques”, Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization ’90, pp. 139-143, IEEE Computer
Society Press, 1990.
Welie, M., Veer, G.C., Eliens, A. “Patterns as Tools for
User interface Design”, Proc. International Workshop on
Tools for Working with Guidelines, Biarrtz, France,
October 2000. pp 313-324.
Wilkins, Barry. MELD: A Pattern Supported Methodology
for Visualization Design, PhD Thesis, University of
Birmingham, 2003.
Wiss, U. and D. Carr, “An Empirical Study of Task Support
in 3D Information Visualizations”, Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Information Visualization, London, UK. 1416 July 1999, 392-399.
Wiss, U., and Carr, D., “A Cognitive Classification
Framework for 3-Dimensional Information Visualization”,
Research report LTU-TR—1998/4—SE, Luleå University
of Technology, 1998.

