Beyond Excel and Powerpoint: Knowledge Maps for the Transfer and
Creation of Knowledge in Organizations
Remo Burkhard, Michael Meier, Matthias Smis, Jill Allemang, Laura Honisch
University of St.Gallen, vasp datatecture GmbH, RootLearning, UBS
Remo.Burkhard@unisg.ch, Matthias.Smis@unisg.ch, mm@vasp.ch,
Jallemang@rootlearning.com, Laura.Honisch@ubs.com

Abstract
This paper presents a framework and three case
studies on Knowledge Maps in Organizations. In
organizations speed, clarity, and effectiveness are
essential for the transfer of knowledge. Today, mainly
text is used. This paper illustrates how Knowledge
Maps, a subset of Knowledge Visualization, help to
transfer strategic knowledge in organizations. First,
we introduce a framework that structures Knowledge
Maps.
Secondly,
we
describe
with
three
complementary case studies how organizations
profitted from the various functions of Knowledge
Maps. The findings are important for researchers in
the fields of knowledge visualization, information
visualization, knowledge management and for
practitioners from different industries.

1. The Potential of Knowledge Maps
The transfer of knowledge is a core process and
difficult to manage [1]. For the transfer of knowledge
the following difficulties need to be solved: (1)
Information depth: Trade off between an overview
and details that need to be communicated. (2)
Reduction: Limited time, attention, and capacity of the
recipients. (3) Different backgrounds: Different
cognitive, educational, and cultural backgrounds. (4)
Relevance: Providing the relevant information to
different stakeholders.
One method that offers solutions to these
challenges are Knowledge Maps. Knowledge Maps use
cartographic conventions to visually reference
knowledge. A map generally consists of two elements:
a ground layer that represents the context (e.g. a
network, a project, a city) and individual elements that
represent details (e.g. experts, project milestones,
streets). Knowledge Maps illustrate both an overview
and detail, and interrelationships among these details.

Various researchers investigate in Maps or Knowledge
Maps [2, 8, 15, 19, 27, 32].
Knowledge Maps are one subset of the new
research focus Knowledge Visualization [5, 6, 11, 14].
Knowledge Visualization stresses one key process
which is important in a knowledge oriented culture:
The transfer of knowledge. In contrast to information,
which is explicit, knowledge has to be re-constructed
by each individual. This process happens through
communication and interaction with explicit
information - verbal or visual. In contrast to
information visualization Knowledge Visualization
concentrates mainly on (1) the recipients (i.e.,
customizing the visual formats to the needs and
backgrounds of the different stakeholders), (2) on other
knowledge types (i.e., distinguishing different types of
knowledge, such as "know-why" or "know-how"), and
(3) on the process of communicating this knowledge
by use of one or more visual formats (i.e., to combine
the visual formats with verbal information and to
embed them into the overall communication and
knowledge transfer strategy.
The next section introduces the related literature.

2. Related Literature
This section discusses three relevant fields that are
important for Knowledge Visualization and hence for
Knowledge Maps.

2.1 How can our innate visual system be
exploited? Manifold.
A majority of our brain’s activity deals with
processing and analyzing visual images. Various
researchers investigate our visual channel. While the
related literature has already been described in other
publications [5, 6] we concentrate on the references
that we can directly use for the creation of Knowledge
Maps: Researchers in the Gestalt School [12, 21]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

provide descriptive insights on how we perceive form.
For the creation of Knowledge Maps, the Gestalt Laws
are helpful for the spatial depiction of information.
Researchers in neuroscience of vision [16, 18]
investigate how information is processed in the eye an
the visual cortex. A third group of researchers
investigate the benefits and functions of visual
representations; the related literature can be found in
[5, 6, 14]. Summarizing those references, the main
benefits of visual representations are: They help (1) to
address emotions, (2) to illustrate relations, (3) to
discover trends, patterns, outliers, (4) to get and keep
the attention of recipients, (5) to support remembrance
and recall, (6) to present overview and detail, (7) to
facilitate learning, (8) to coordinate individuals, (9) to
motivate people to establish a mutual story, or (10) to
energize people to initiate actions by illustrating
options to act.
Concluding, this section introduced the function of
visualizations as a first corner stone or perspective for
the successful creation of Knowledge Maps.

2.2 What can we learn from Communication
Sciences? About the Recipient.
In successful communication the key is to know
your audience. First, is it a single person, a group of
persons, or a whole organization that we address?
Second, what are the cultural, educational, or
functional backgrounds of the recipients? In
Communication Sciences various models give insights
that are important if the goal of the knowledge map is
knowledge transfer or knowledge creation. That's why
we briefly touch the main five models: (1) Laswell's
[22] formula "Who says what in which channel to
whom with what effect?" highlights the linear
transmission from an active sender to a passive
ignorant receiver. For the mapping of knowledge, we
learn about the importance of the audience. (2)
Shannon and Weaver [30] extend Laswell's model by
the noise factor and focus on the medium. For the
mapping of knowledge, we learn that people may read
a message differently than intended by the sender and
that the best medium has to be chosen with care. (3)
Gerbner's model [17] emphasizes the dynamic nature
of communication and that human beings do not
communicate about objects with fixed identities, but
about subjective perceptions. We learn that the correct
use of conventions eases successful communication.
(4) Newcomb's ABX model [25] presents a
psychological communication phenomenon: In the
presence of peers, individuals might adjust their
opinions about a communication content to that of the
peers. For the mapping of knowledge we learn: Know

the disposition of the audience towards your theme. (5)
According to the Uses and Gratifications model [26] an
active receiver requests information in order to satisfy
his desires. We learn that a communicator needs to
meet the expectations of the receiver.
Concluding, this section introduced the recipient as
a second corner stone or perspective for the successful
creation of Knowledge Maps.

2.3 How many main visualization types exist?
Seven.
If we know which function we want to exploit and
have insights on the audience we need to find out
which visualization type is the most suitable one. To
do so, we can learn from architects that differentiate
seven visualization types [4]: Sketches, Diagrams,
Images, Maps, Objects, Interactive Visualizations, and
Stories. The same types can be found in other
disciplines when it comes to the transfer of knowledge:
Artists and designers use sketches to map the essence
of an idea (e.g., Leonardo da Vinci). Business
consultants or lawyers use diagrams for the mapping
of information (e.g. BCG diagram) or arguments to an
underlying structure or sequential logic. Various
researchers [2, 19, 32, 35] provide excellent examples
on the mapping of knowledge with static images and
maps. Architects or Dentists map spatial concepts in
three dimensional physical objects (e.g. a building or
teeth). Information architects [13, 29] map information
in interactive structures, similar to information
visualization [9, 33] or knowledge domain
visualization researchers [3, 23, 34] who use
interactive visualizations for the mapping and
exploration of data. Finally, different researchers [1,
24, 28, 31] use stories or mental images for the
mapping of knowledge. This section introduced the
third corner stone or perspective (visualization type)
for the successful creation of Knowledge Maps.
Concluding, the three backgrounds lead to the three
main perspectives which are essential for a first generic
framework for Knowledge Maps.

3. Towards A Framework for Knowledge
Maps
Based on the related literature three questions need
to be considered for the creation of a Knowledge Map:
(1) Which of the various functions of visual
representations should be exploited? (2) Who is your
recipient? (3) Which is the most appropriate
visualization type?
Answers to these questions lead to a first
framework with three perspectives as seen in Table 1,

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

which is a subset of the knowledge visualization
frameworks [6, 14]. The Map Type is deduced from
the visualization types, i.e., each one corresponds with
one of the seven visualization types in knowledge
visualization [6]. These are: sketch, diagram, image,
map, object, interactive visualization, story.
Function Type
(What?)
Coordination

Recipient Type
(Whom?)
Individual

Map Type
(How?)
Heuristic Map

Attention

Team

Diagramm. Map

Recall

Organization

Metaphoric Map

Motivation

Network

Elaboration

Geographic
Map
3D Map

New Insight

Interactive Map
Mental Map

Table 1: Framework for Knowledge Maps

3.1 Function Type Perspective
CARMEN is an acronym for the six main functions
of visual representations. Generally visualization have
social, emotional, and cognitive benefits. Secondly,
they can be divided into different levels of details as
discussed in Eppler and Burkhard [14]: Coordination:
Visual representations help to coordinate individuals in
the communication process. Attention: They allow to
get the attention by addressing emotions, to keep the
attention, and to identify patterns, outliers, and trends.
Recall: They improve memorability, remembrance,
and recall. Motivation: They inspire, motivate,
energize, and activate viewers. Elaboration: They
foster the elaboration of knowledge in teams. New
Insights: They support the creation of new insights by
embedding details in context, showing relationships
between objects, or lead to a-ha effects.

3.2 Recipient Type Perspective
The Recipient Type Perspective aims to identify the
target group and the context of the recipient. The
recipient can be an individual, a team, an
organization (one culture), or a network of subjects
(different cultures). Knowing the context and the
educational, emotional, and cultural background of the
recipient is essential for finding the right visualization
method. In the business context, graphic design and
information design [2, 32] do not focus enough on this
perspective. The designer often concentrates on how
information can be visually depicted instead of
investigating the audience and then finding the best
visual means.

3.3 Map Type Perspective
The
Knowledge
Map
Type
perspective
distinguishes different types of knowledge maps that
are based on the strength of the seven visualization
types. Heuristic Maps (e.g. large group sketches in
workshops), Diagrammatic Maps, such as Strategy
Maps by Kaplan and Norton [20], Metaphoric Maps,
such as Project Tube Map by Burkhard and Meier [7]
(Figure 1), or the Learning Map (Figure 2) ,
Geographic Maps, such as the world map, Threedimensional Maps, such as tin figures for the mapping
of troops in the war in earlier days, Interactive Maps,
such as Knowledge Domain structures [10, 11], and
Mental Maps.
The goal of such a distinction is to bridge the gap
between computer-based maps as topic maps and noncomputer-based maps as the examples in the next
section.
While various examples on Knowledge Maps exist
in research, only few examples in real business
situations have been discussed so far. That's why we
describe next three examples in real business
situations.

4. Case Studies in Business Situations
Each of the three Knowledge Maps we describe
next had a different goal. Together they present an
overview on predominant challenges in today's
organizations.

4.1 Goal 1: Attention and Coordination
In an education centre for health care professions a
quality development process had to be established.
Traditional project plans, flyers, and mails did not
manage to get attention, presented the information
overview and detail insufficiently, and did not activate
the employees. Because visual metaphors are effective
for knowledge communication, a customized
knowledge map based on the tube system metaphor has
been developed.
The Tube Map Visualization (Figure 1) illustrates
the whole project, where each tube line represents a
target group and each station a milestone.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 1. Tube Map Visualization
The visualization was printed as a poster and
displayed at prominent locations in the organization.
The findings of a first evaluation [7] indicate that the
Tube Map Visualization is a powerful metaphor to
communicate a complex project to different target
groups and to build up a mutual story for the
coordination of the employees. The employees
considered it useful because it provides overview and
detailed information in one image and because it
initiates discussion. The Tube Map Visualization is
therefore helpful to complement traditional project
plans of (1) long-term projects where (2) different
stakeholders are involved.
Concluding, the Knowledge Map was helpful to get
and keep the attention, to engage the employees by
illustrating overview and detail and to introduce an
inspiring visual metaphor that leads to a shared
understanding of the project milestones and overall
goal.

4.2 Goal 2: Elaboration and Recall

on meeting the changing needs of clients who now
place a higher priority on service when choosing a
banking relationship. These differing client needs
require new mindsets and actions from all UBS
employees based on commitment, not just intellectual
understanding, that change matters to them and their
futures.
To help employees understand why its strategy is
critical to driving results, this business group decided
to employ an innovative methodology to visualize its
story (Figure 2). This methodology called a Root
Learning Map, focuses on small group interaction
with a large visual, data cards, and dialogue based on
open-ended questions. It encourages employees to
consider “why change” and to connect the
organizational strategy to both UBS-WM&BB’s vision
and to their own roles.
The new approach – even when the visual was used
as part of a presentation instead of in small group
interaction as designed – convinced managers as well
as employees right from the start to engage with a
more active role. However, employees participating in
the visualized dialogue experience together noted that
the approach allowed them to better relate the UBS
strategy elements to each other and to the UBSWM&BB Vision by engaging them directly in a big
picture view of the world as UBS leaders see it today.
Again by using a visual metaphor (this time the
journey metaphor), employees could better connect
their own possible actions to a logical end result for the
bank overall – the individuals’ own contribution came
into focus. The visual caused people from across the
organization to share their perspectives, creating a
common view of how various roles work together to
contribute to the same progress forward. The
visualized dialogue increased employees’ emotional
involvement in the conversation as they compared
interpretations of the metaphor and shared both their
own factual and emotional perspectives.
Concluding, the interactive use of the map in
supervised learning sessions helped greatly to elaborate
the strategy by each persons and led to a better
understanding and recall of detailed information.

4.3 Goal 3: Interrelationships and Motivation
Figure 2. Learning Map
Whereas in the first case study the map was used in
a static way, in the second case study the map was used
in an interactive setting with additional material. UBS
Wealth Management & Business Banking is one of the
world's largest wealth managers and the market leader
in Swiss retail and commercial banking. To ensure
future growth employees must be aware that it will rely

The goal of the third example was to illustrate
potential scenarios to various different stakeholders.
The Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) is
planning a new campus project. The challenge was to
illustrate this multifaceted project, in a way that
illustrates the interrelationships among the different

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3: This map illustrates influences, scenarios and the effects of the project Science City ETH
at a global, metropolitan or local level (http://www.sciencecity.ethz.ch/vision/vernetzt.php).
conceptual parts and subprojects and motivates various
stakeholders for the project.
To do so, we created a Knowledge Map (Figure 3)
that is based on the power of storytelling. The huge
poster (2 by 5 meters) was used in small exhibitions
and conveys central ideas by combining different
graphic elements (Figure 4), such as geographic maps,
building plans, statistical information, text, arrows,
hotspots, or fictitious stories . Each story (located at
the top and bottom of the poster that layed on a table)
describes for each stakeholder a fictitious scenario how
the finished project could look like in 2010, and how
each stakeholder would benefit.

Figure 4. Zoom-In with textual depictions.
Interviews and observations from persons that
studied the map in an exhibition made clear that the
average reader studied the map for around 5-10
minutes. Because the high density of individual
elements of the plan constantly caught the attention
and interest. The individual short explanations (in the
plan or next to the connecting lines) were easy to
understand, gave a deep understanding of the project
and allowed each reader to develop an own mental
picture of the project. The visualization is inspiring and
natural and conveys how every person can contribute

to it's realization. The spatial localization of the
different ideas and concepts helped to better imagine
how living in Science City ETH could look like.
Concluding, the readers identified themselves as part
of the project which motivated and involved them. The
participants could understand how the different
conceptual elements interrelate which led to a-ha
effects. As a consequence, they could build an
individual mental model of the project which then
allowed them to explain the project to others by telling
stories.

5. Conclusion
This paper introduced a framework and three case
studies on Knowledge Maps in Organizations. The
three examples make first clear that each map was only
successful by also relating and integrating textual
information (such as cards or stories). What we
secondly learn is that for successful maps visualization
experts, storytellers, business consultants and the
customer need to form a team and elaborate the result
in this team. The third insight is that in all three
projects two phenomenon were predominant. First a
feeling of mistrust that such methods belong into
serious business environments that were addressed
with comments such as "Does this belong to a serious
organization?". Secondly, an immediate interest by the
same persons when the process started, and finally a
feeling of proud for the final result. Concluding,
Knowledge Maps do not only need to be seen as
graphic depictions of explicit information but as
catalysts for change processes and the implementation
of strategies. That's why they will remain an important
part in our future research.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

6. References
[1] Baker, A. and Greene, E., Storytelling: Art and
Technique, New York, Bowker, 1977.
[2] Bertin, J., Sémiologie Graphique, 2nd ed., Paris,
Gauthier-Villars, 1967.
[3] Börner, K. and Chen, C., "Visual Interfaces to Digital
Libraries: Motivation, Utilization, and Socio-Technical
Challenges", Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2539. New
York: Springer Verlag, 2002, pp. 232.
[4] Burkhard, R., "Learning from Architects: The Difference
between Knowledge Visualization and Information
Visualization", in Proceedings of Eigth International
Conference on Information Visualization (IV04), London,
July, 2004.
[5] Burkhard, R., Knowledge Visualization - The Use of
Complementary Visual Representations for the Transfer of
Knowledge. A Model, a Framework, and Four New
Approaches., Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH),
Zurich, Ph.D. thesis, 2005.
[6] Burkhard, R., "Towards a Framework and a Model for
Knowledge Visualization: Synergies between Information
and Knowledge Visualization", in Knowledge and
information visualization: searching for synergies, Tergan,
S.-O. and Keller, T., Eds., Heidelberg / New York Springer
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2005, [to appear].
[7] Burkhard, R. and Meier, M., "Tube Map: Evaluation of a
Visual Metaphor for Interfunctional Communication of
Complex Projects", in Proceedings of I-KNOW '04, Graz,
Austria, June 30 - July 2, 2004, pp. 449-456.
[8] Burkhard, R., Meier, M., Rodgers, P., Smis, M., and
Stott, J., "Knowledge Visualization: A Comparative Study
between Project Tube Maps and Gantt Charts", in
Proceedings of I-Know '05, Graz, Austria, 2005.
[9] Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. D., and Shneiderman, B.,
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to think,
San Francisco (CA), Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.,
1999.
[10] Chen, C., "Domain Visualization for Digital Libraries",
in Proceedings of International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV2000), London, England, 19-21 July 2000
2000, pp. 261-267.
[11] Chen, C., Mapping Scientific Frontiers: The Quest for
Knowledge Visualization, London, Springer, 2003.
[12] Ellis, W. D., A Source Book of Gestalt Psychology, New
York, Harcourt, Brace & World, 1938.
[13] Engeli, M., bits and spaces: architecture and computing
for physical, virtual, hybrid realms, Basel, Boston, Berlin:
Birkhäuser, 2001.
[14] Eppler, M. and Burkhard, R., "Knowledge
Visualization", in Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management,
Idea Group, 2005, pp. [to appear].
[15] Eppler, M. J., "Making Knowledge Visible through
Knowledge Maps: Concepts, Elements, Cases", in Handbook
on Knowledge Management, Volume 1: Knowledge Matters,
Holsapple, C. W., Ed. Berlin Springer, 2002, pp. 189-206.
[16] Farah, M. J., The Cognitive Neuroscience of Vision,
Oxford, Blackwell Publishers, 2000.

[17] Gerbner, G., "Toward a General Model of
Communication", Audio Visual Communication Review, vol.
3, 1956, pp. 171-199.
[18] Goldstein, B. E., Sensation and Perception, Pacific
Grove, Cole Publishing (6th edition), 2001.
[19] Horn, R. E., Visual Language: Global Communication
for the 21st Century, Bainbridge Island (WA), MacroVU
Press, 1998.
[20] Kaplan, R. S. and Norton, D. P., "Having Trouble with
Your Strategy? Then Map It", Harvard Business Review, vol.
78, no. 5, 2000.
[21] Koffka, K., The Principles of Gestalt Psychology,
London, Lund Humphries, 1935.
[22] Lasswell, H., "The structure and function of
communication in society", in The Communication of Ideas,
Bryson, L., Ed. New York Institute for Religious and Social
Studies, 1948, pp. 37-51.
[23] Lin, X., White, H. D., and Buzydlowski, J., "Real-time
author co-citation mapping for online searching",
Information Processing and Management: an International
Journal, vol. 39, no. 5, 2003, pp. 689-706.
[24] Loebbert, M., Storymanagement : Der narrative Ansatz
für Management und Beratung, Stuttgart, Klett-Cotta-Verlag,
2003.
[25] Newcomb, T., "An approach to the study of
communication acts'", Psychological Review, vol. 60, 1953,
pp. 393-40.
[26] Palmgreen, P. and Rayburn II, J. D., "An expectencyvalue approach to media gratifications", in Media
Gratifications Research, Rosengren, K. E., Wenner, L. A.,
and Palmgreen, P., Eds., London Sage Publications, 1985,
pp. 61-72.
[27] Peterson, M. P., Interactive and animated cartography,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1995.
[28] Ready, D. A., "How Storytelling Builds NextGeneration Leaders", MIT Sloan Management Review, vol.
43, no. 4, 2002.
[29] Schmitt, G., Information Architecture; Basis and Future
of CAAD, Basel, Birkhäuser, 1999.
[30] Shannon, C. and Weaver, W., The Mathematical Theory
of Communication, Illinois, University of Illinois Press,
1949.
[31] Snowden, D., "The Art and Science of Story or Are You
Sitting Uncomfortably?" Business Information Review, 2000.
[32] Tufte, E. R., Envisioning Information, Cheshire (CT),
Graphics Press, 1990.
[33] Ware, C., Information Visualization: Perception for
Design, San Francisco (CA), Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
[34] White, H. D., Buzydlowski, J., and Lin, X., "Co-Cited
Author Maps as Interfaces to Digital Libraries: Designing
Pathfinder Networks in the Humanities", in Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Information Visualization
(IV00), London, 18-22 July 2000 2000, pp. 25-30.
[35] Wurman, R. S., Information Architects, Zurich, Graphis
Inc, 1996.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

