RP-aided production of physical models from frozen dynamic sequences
Naai-Jung Shih
Department of Architecture, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology
shihnj@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
This is a report of course efforts in exploring and
visualizing shapes made by movements. A pedagogical
attempt was made to visualize forms made by
transition. The forms were made by 3D scans of body
movements in playing Tai Chi and by applying a
“stitch” or “blend” function between two profiles.
This exercises showed the result of form which was
originally difficult to comprehend in a virtual world. A
rapid prototyping (RP) tool was used to build the
models to clarify the modeling process and details. The
exercises contributed to a valuable pedagogical
experience in communicating design concepts between
students and instructor.

1. Introduction
Information technology has shown its influence on
the design of digital architecture in terms of
philosophy and forms. Information comes in different
forms, creation methods, and human-media interface.
The forms made by frozen dynamic sequences over
time have become one of the most distinguished
themes applied by many designers. Lynn states that
animate design is defined by the co-presence of motion
and force at the moment of formal conception. Force
contributes to motion and particular inflections of a
form [2]. Form represents the record of interaction
between the designer and spaces with the “cause” that
initiates interface. As metaphorization concerns most
of today’s architecture, a new way of expressing
language is created [3]. The expression, that can be
seen in design examples [1], was considered as the
fusion and superimposition of ideas, media or image
types, and technologies as digital hybrids [7]. While
information
revolution
has
metamorphosed
architecture, digital technologies are blurring the
relationships between the real and the virtual [8].
Innovative forms are emerging and inspiring not just in
a virtual world, but through a formal manner of

representation or process that retrieves the data and
defines procedures in real world.
A formal study of “Morph” considered it is a way to
interpolate 2D images between two given images with
reference to control points and lines [4]. The function,
which can create images contents similarity yet
difference to the source images, also represents a
mechanism to create intermediate contents do not exist
before. Similar concept is used in 3D interpolation in
which the locations of points change as the key frames
move forward. The morphing to the computer models
created in virtual world is usually applied to the same
object or the objects with similar geometries (like the
number of vertices). The transition is made by
algorithmic calculation which can achieve a great level
of smoothness.
The rapid prototyping (RP) machine originated
from industrial design. Computer models were sent to
RP service shop and picked up when prints were ready.
Similar concept can be found in building factory for
mass-produced parts. In the visualization of design
concepts, it seems the nature of each individual design
is so different and needs to be customized. An officefriendly RP machine we used is more like a personal
fabrication machine located next to students or a
design team to fulfill output needs. The name of the RP
machine is also called 3D printer.

2. Goal
This is a report of course efforts in exploring and
visualizing shapes made by the movements of profiles.
A pedagogical attempt was made to visualize forms
made by transition as a way to interpret shapes. The
exercises intended to show the result of forms which
were originally difficult to comprehend in a virtual
world. As a response to the interaction with
surroundings, two problems have to be solved, first,
capture the geometries made by behavior; second,
define a form-creation process from bottom-up.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3. Forms made by as-captured point clouds
When a 3D long-range laser scanner was used to
record activities occurred to a construction site in
previous study, laser beams were often blocked by
moving vehicles, workers, and machinery from
reaching the target. The interferences often retrieved
unwanted points, which are called “noise”, between
the scanner and site. Because the movement of an
object was relatively faster than the sweeping speed of
scan lines, only partial configuration was recorded.
Later the “noise” was inspected and found to actually
record the dynamic changes of objects in terms of
locations and configuration over a period of time. This
finding was later used to record the profile change in
basement excavation on campus. The result was layers
of profiles overlapping with each other to show the
progress of excavation every minute.
The finding then lead to a pilot exploration of the
final configuration by scanning people’s movement:
Tai Chi. The slow motion of Tai Chi players was an
excellent case that matched the speed of scan lines. We
found people’s movements have created shapes by
transitions between the beginning and the end of scans,
or between the initial and the final gestures. The result
was called the intermediate state of two configurations.
The state was initially difficult to comprehend because
only sets of point clouds were shown (see Fig. 1).
Laser scans were made from left to right and from
top to bottom. Although the resolution can make up to
999 dots per vertical lines, we usually select 200 lines
to speed up scans. Each line took about one second to
complete from top to bottom. When the group of
people was scanned from left to right, the movements
recorded to the left would be 3 minutes and 20 seconds
earlier than the movements to the right. What it shows
in the middle of Fig. 1 is a continuous record of
movements over that period of time. Due to the low
resolution of 200 scan lines, body movements are only
shown as abstract forms. The appearance of each
person can still be identified as different.
To visualize the intermediate state among the point
clouds was challenging. The problem was solved by a
“wrap” function to enclose close-located points into
polygons. Some of the final shape departs from the
original shape dramatically. One way chosen to
accomplish the visualization was to make physical
model. Because most part of the boundaries were freeformed, a RP machine became a perfect tool to output
the shape as close to the original as possible. In the
case of Tai Chi, the region all the human bodies swept
over in that period of time is shown to the right of Fig.
1 as a RP output.

Figure 1. People’s movements in point clouds,
computer model, and RP output

4. Forms made by profiles and transitions
The body movements played by Tai Chi were
captures of as-captures data that were different from
the form-creation process made by profiles and paths.
The experience in handling continuous scan records
lead to the study of shape transitions from adjacent
locations to create or explore configurations. In
defining figure and method of transformation,
experiments were carried out in courses, “3D
Modeling” and “Independent Studies,” in which
students were asked to define profiles and transition
mechanism. The mechanism, in terms of modeling
functions, was “blend” and “stitch” options found in
3D programs (TrueSpace, in this case). Both functions
create NURBS surface between a series of profiles.
Students were asked to map image to make the
appearance self-explainable (Fig. 2).
This exercise was designed to let students gain
more control in creating building forms instead of a
casual result. Similar to the shapes came from real
people, a student was inspired by the elegant gestures
of ballerina by tracing vertical profiles from pictures to
formulate a mixture of poses along a path (see Fig. 3).
The result, that looks like a ribbon flies through space,
represented the track which was interpreted as the
merge of actions. Fig. 4 shows the management of
profiles from another student. The process was applied
to design high-rise building as another way to
interpretation forms.

5. Discussion
The visual data creation process is rather diversified,
especially with images applied.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

created, it’s difficult to judge if the results came from
the original profiles or the other way around from the
inspiration of the final shape (the physical form). The
verification of final shape (digital form) was rather a
reversed process in which the whole configuration was
differentiated by profiles and links. The Tai Chi came
from the collection of shapes along a period of time
with discrete movements identified. Nevertheless,
CAAD course exercise came from defining
components and links before creating a final shape.
The Tai Chi exemplified a data visualization manner
made to live form by scans. The CAAD class
exemplified another manner made to artifacts by
tracing profiles and creating connections among them.
Both approaches created 3D forms that we don’t
usually perceive.

Figure 2. Computer models (left) and RP outputs (right)

Figure 4. Profiles and the perspectives of a high-rise
building
The development of building form in digital
architecture usually comes from urban context. The
buildings, traffics, and landscape all contribute to the
components of forms. Although seeking for
meaningful sources of profiles among urban context
needs careful observation, the 3D shapes exists in
between can be explored with the boundaries or edges
of buildings given. As a responsible building form
designer, the proposed method is only a start in
meeting pedagogical requirement.

5.2. RP + images
Figure 3. The images that contributed to the profiles
and the stepwise link process

5.1. Diversified data creation processes
Regarding the contrast between morph and dynamic
shapes, the record of as-captures geometries is more
interesting than artifact-like interpretation for more
unexpected varieties would occur. When a shape was

When NURBS is folded in opposite direction along
a path, the direction of normal vector is changed
reversely. Although both sides could be seen on screen,
it’s not clear how the folded faces actually ran through
adjacent faces until a RP model was made. The visual
depth from a physical model was much more
convincing. Additionally, images with grids were
purposely applied to show the curvature of surfaces.
The mapped image appeared to be more
comprehensive in reading the expanded or squeezed

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

surfaces. Text image was also found to be a good
manner to enhance the appearance of curvatures.
Some limitations were met during RP output.
Folded faces reversed the orientation of normal vectors
and left holes on RP output on the ballerina case. In
order to strengthen RP output, the original polygons
were thickened. A drawback occurred when thickness
created unexpected polygons probing out from over
crowded polygon regions. Thickness was adjusted later
with least variation to original shape.

6. The application of RP tool
The application of RP tool has been very useful in
design studio and 3D modeling course. The studio
works were visualized in physical form with the
assistance of a 3D printer [5] for those free form
designs were virtually impossible to be made by hands.
A more diversified application was made in 3D course
in which students created shapes by individual
interpretation of a point cloud of 6000 dots [6].
Our machine (Z406 from Z-Corp) is the cheapest
type so far with color output function available. The
RP process is rather straight-forward like a plotter: it
even uses the printer heads from HP to spray binder on
layers of gypsum-based powder. However, the
maintenance and material of a RP machine is costly,
comparing to a plotter with similar concept and
mechanism. Those who use it need to pay service fees
like color plotter. The experience comes from the
author indicates that the visualization of physical
model is by far the most exciting interaction ever
occurred to the students and the instructor. It really up
to the user to determine whether the cost is worthwhile.
For now the author paid all the fees for students in
order to keep the outputs so other students can share
the experience in the future.
The RP technology empirically is better used to
print free form objects with color textures or images
applied. Most of the forms created in digital
architecture are far more complicated to be made by
hands. The effort and time needed to make the models
would be too long to have an immediate feedback to
the design than the modeling of orthogonal shapes. A
RP output with colors, with proper handling to the
modeling data to enhance material strength, can make
models in a relatively less period of time and meet the
appearance of original design. A color model of
15mmX11.5mmX5.8mm took about one hour and 53

minutes. Printing time was reduced to half at least
when monochrome was selected. Larger model, which
may take up to 6-10 hours, would be left to print
overnight.

6. Conclusion
This study took the simplest and the most straightforward approach to show the creations made from ascaptured data and formal design procedures. With the
vague characteristics of data and process, the physical
models help clarify design details and create feedback
to original components and process. The associated
exercises contributed to a valuable pedagogical
experience in communicating the students and the
instructor. The visualization of dynamic movements in
architecture made us rethink the origin of architectural
design concept may come from a real model as well.

10. Acknowledgement
The author would like to thank NSC to sponsor this
project with the number of 93-2211E-011-025. The
models presented in Fig. 2-4 are student works.

10. References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Burry, M., Introduction, Cyberspace – the world of
digital architecture, The Images Publishing Group Pty
Ltd., 2001.
Lynn, G., Animated form, Princeton Architecture
Press, 1998.
Puglisi, L.P., Hyper Architecture – spaces in the
electronic age, Birkhauser, 1999.
Shih, N.J., Image Morphing for Architectural Visual
Studies, CAADRIA'97: Proceedings of the Second
Conference on Computer Aided Architectural Design
Research in Asia, April 17-19, 1997, National Chioa
Tung University, 397-406, , SinChu, Taiwan, 1997.
Shih, N.J., The Application of Color-image-mapped
Rapid Prototyping in Architectural 3D Modeling,
Proceedings of the 21st Conference of eCAADe, 347350, Graz, Austria, 2003.
Shih, N.J., Digital architecture - What would 6000
points turn out to be? Proceedings of ACADIA22
Conference 2003, 67-73, Ball State University,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, Oct. 23-26, 2003.
Uddin, M.S., Digital Architecture, McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Zellner, P., Hybrid Space - new form in digital
architecture, Thames & Hudson, 1999.

