Understanding the Evolution of NSAID: A Knowledge Domain Visualization
Approach to Evidence-Based Medicine
Chaomei Chen1, Yunan Chen1, Russell C. Maulitz2
Drexel University, 1Drexel University, 2CHI Systems, Inc.
chaomei.chen@cis.drexel.edu, yc337@drexel.edu, maulitz@chisystems.com
1

Abstract
Finding the most rigorous, updated, and well received
clinical evidence is a crucial and challenging task in
the practice of Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM). In
this article, we describe a knowledge domain
visualization-based quantitative approach that is
designed to support the task of searching for highquality clinical evidence in the medical literature. We
illustrate the use of this new approach with the
knowledge domain of Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory
Drugs (NSAIDs). A sample of the literature is
visualized in a base map depicting structural and
temporal properties of emerging themes and references
made by such themes over time. In addition, the
visualization highlights the rigorousness of a published
clinical trial in terms of the type of study design
retrieved dynamically from PubMed. The contribution
of this approach is that it offers users an integrated
search environment so that the rigorousness,
recentness, and consensus of clinical evidence can be
assessed with the support of visual exploration
facilities.

1. Introduction
In September 2004, Merck & Co. announced an
immediate worldwide withdrawal of its best-selling
arthritis drug Vioxx after a three-year colon cancer
clinical trial revealed an increased risk of heart attacks
18 months after patients started taking the drug [1]. It
was estimated that Merck's Vioxx liability could reach
$38 billion.
This withdrawal has prompted researchers to reexamine the biomedical literature in order to establish
whether available clinical evidence might have led to
the withdrawal sooner. Many patients are now
wondering what would be the best alternative for them
[2]. Is there a consensus in the medical literature?
What is the big picture of all the available evidence?
Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) emphasizes the
fundamental role of rigorous evidence in making

clinical decisions and training [3]. The most rigorous
types of evidence include randomized controlled trials
(RCTs), systematic reviews (SRs), and meta-analyses
because of the least amount of biases in these types of
evidence. The general practice of EBM typically
follows a 5-step procedure [4, 5]:
1. Identify clinical questions,
2. Search for the best external evidence,
3. Clinically appraise the validity and importance of
the evidence,
4. Put it into clinical practice, and
5. Evaluate the performance.
In this article, we focus on the second step, i.e.
searching for the best evidence. In addition, we also
address the role of clinical evidence in understanding
the evolution of a pharmacological field, which is
intrinsically evidence-based medicine. The goal of the
study is to identify the special needs from the
perspective of evidence-based medicine and how
knowledge domain visualization can facilitate some of
the tasks.
Searching for the best evidence is a critical
component of EBM. The complexity of the task is
largely due to three factors: 1) the overwhelming size
of the search space, 2) the time-critical nature of
clinical evidence, and 3) the evasive context to assess
the perceived value of specific evidence. The number
of medical publications indexed in Medline, for
example, has been growing by hundreds of thousands
each year. The size of a search space of RCTs along
would be still too large. We will give a concrete
example of the size problem in subsequent sections of
this article. The time-critical nature implies that we
need to find not only the most rigorous evidence, but
also the most recent and the most valuable ones as
perceived by others in the field.
We propose an approach that could potentially
compliment conventional search methods with a
reduced complexity and reduced costs. In addition to
using the type of study design as a search criterion for
high-quality evidence, we propose that the citations of
a clinical trial article can be used as an additional

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

indicator of quality. Furthermore, we believe that the
position of such articles in networks of other evidence
and other articles is also a potentially valuable clue of
quality.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. We
explain the motivations of our work and introduce the
basic concepts and techniques. We describe the
implementation of the new method and discussed the
findings of preliminary results with reference to
existing approaches. The scope of underlying
assumptions and their limitations are discussed.
Finally, we identify challenging issues to be addressed.

2. Background
2.1. The Strength of Clinical Evidence
In EBM, the quality of clinical evidence is
measured by its strength, primarily in terms of its
methodological rigorous. A number of widely known
classification schemes are outlined below.
Oxford Centre for EBM recommends five levels of
evidence, from level 1 (the strongest) to level 5 (the
weakest). SRs with homogeneity of RCTs are
classified at level 1a. RCTs with a narrow confidence
interval are the second best (level 1b).
National Cancer Institute [6] regards randomized,
double-blinded controlled clinical trials as the gold
standard, i.e. the best evidence. However, it does not
give meta-analysis a higher status than randomized
studies because of various known weaknesses of metaanalysis [7, 8].
A highly regarded source of evidence is the
systematic reviews prepared and maintained by the
Cochrane Collaboration [9, 10]. Cochrane reviews’
reputation is partly drawn from their regular updates
and revisions. Medline, through its web-based interface
PubMed, is probably the most widely used source of
evidence. A Medline record contains a publication type
field to index the type of study design, including
randomized controlled clinical trial, clinical trial, and
meta-analysis. The provision of the publication type
[pt] makes it possible to search for RCTs related to a
given topic.
In a recent study of general thoracic surgery, the
publication type in Medline records was used to
identify meta-analysis and RCTs [5]. They followed
the strategy described in [11] by searching for metaanalysis in the publication type field. Similarly, the
publication type was also used for searching for RCTs.
Selection criteria based on study types are widely
used. However, the task could be further simplified by
taking into additional criteria.

2.2. Additional Criteria of Quality
A potentially effective criterion for high-quality
evidence is how frequently a clinical trial article or a
meta-analysis article has been referenced by
subsequent studies of others. The assumption is that
clinical evidence reported in a highly cited article tends
to be more important than one in a less frequently cited
article. We acknowledge that articles can be cited for
many reasons, including both positive and negative
citations. The rational of our assumption is, regardless
of varying citation motivations, if an article has drawn
sufficient attention, then it in effect has a place in the
knowledge structure.
The citation-based quality indicator is derived from
citation analysis of scientific literature. The widely
known source of scientific citations is the Science
Citation Index (SCI) maintained by the Institute for
Scientific Information (ISI).
Citation counts of articles can be seen as the firstorder measurements of the perceived values of these
articles. One could compile a list of evidence along
with citation counts to corresponding articles.
However, such lists do not reveal salient relationships
between clinical trials. From such lists, we would only
know that two clinical trials are highly cited, but we
have no way to tell whether the two have ever been
considered together and, if so, how frequently.
Co-citations are higher-order relationships that can
reveal more insights into a broader context of an
article’s role in a knowledge domain. Co-citations are
instances in which two articles are referenced together
in subsequently published articles [12, 13].

2.3. Visualizing Emerging Trends
CiteSpace is a series of design, implementation,
and refinement efforts [14-17]. Its primary goal is to
enable users visually identify emerging trends and
transient patterns in scientific literature. CiteSpace
visualizes the evolution of citation and co-citation
patterns associated with a knowledge domain over
time.
CiteSpace is built on two basic concepts: research
fronts and intellectual bases [17]. A research front is
defined as a cluster of topical terms that have a sharp
increase in their usage. A detected sharp increase is
called a burst. Therefore, these terms are called burst
terms. A research fronts corresponds to an intellectual
base.
We used CiteSpace in a number of domain
visualization studies of paradigm shift and abrupt
changes, including the superstring revolutions in
physics, the mass extinction debates, and emerging
trends in research of terrorist events. However, we
have not applied the approach to a domain like EBM,

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

where it is essential to understand the consensus
concerning available evidence and how the consensus
changes in light of new evidence. To our knowledge,
we are not aware of visual exploration tools designed
for searching specific types of evidence in the context
of their home domain. We propose a conceptual
framework to extend the knowledge domain
visualization techniques to support evidence search
tasks in EBM.

3. Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework aims to facilitate the
search for the best evidence in the medical literature by
simplifying the assessment process concerning the
rigorous, recentness, and consensus of evidence in a
visual exploration environment. In this article, we
focus on integrating various cues that can be retrieved
from PubMed and the Web of Science. The framework
can be extended to incorporate additional sources.
A practical issue is that although PubMed is openly
accessible, the Web of Science is subscription-based
and it does not permit programmatic access. As the
first step towards supporting EBM, we design and
implement the following method to easy this problem.
Suppose our aim is to locate the best evidence
regarding lung cancer treatments. The procedure is as
follows:
1. Search for articles in the Web of Science on lung
cancer (the search is intentionally broad).
2. Visualize the search results in CiteSpace,
including emerging trends and temporal patterns.
3. Automatically annotated articles with specified
publication
types,
namely
meta-analysis,
randomized controlled clinical trial, and clinical
trial.
4. Explore the visualization map and select articles
for critical appraisals.
5. (Repeat the procedure periodically or as needed).
In our current implementation, the automated
annotation is made possible by retrieving the
publication
type
information from PubMed
simultaneously as the system layouts the network. The
major advantage of this method is its non-intrusive
nature. The only way the user can tell the behind-thescene search is when an increasing number of articles
are annotated with publication types retrieved from
PubMed. Because the additional search is so costeffective and efficient, the user does not even have to
save the information locally.
Given the assumption that highly cited clinical
evidence tends to be the strongest evidence, we focus
on several types of relationships between high-quality
evidence and its first- and second-order properties in
bibliographic networks. By visualizing various
structural and temporal properties of such

relationships, we expect that our method can provide a
useful tool for EBM practitioners to find the best
evidence with improved efficiency.
We expect that the best evidence should
demonstrate unique features in the visualizations of
associative networks of articles and topic terms. For
example, evidence reported in highly cited publications
tends to be more valuable than evidence in less
frequently cited publications. Evidence appears as hubs
of co-citation clusters of articles should be more
significant than peripheral ones. We expect to find
Meta-analysis as a hub more often than other types of
studies.
In the new visualization, the publication type of
three types of EBM evidence are marked as ‘r’ for
randomized controlled clinical trial, ‘c’ for clinical
trial, and ‘m’ for meta-analysis. PubMed allows both
‘r’ and ‘c’ to be assigned to the same article, hence we
may see articles marked with rc’s in the map.
According to the general consensus in EBM, articles
marked with r’s or m’s are top-level evidence. In
addition, rc’s and m’s with unique topological
properties in co-citation networks visualized by
CiteSpace should be particularly important, including
positions such as hubs and bridges as well as visual
attributes such as the size of citation tree rings.

4. Case Study
We illustrate the approach with an analysis of
clinical evidence in the literature of Non-steroidal
Anti-inflammatory Drug, or NSAID (1990-2004).
NSAID has a complex history and it is also involved in
recent headline news. More importantly, it is a topic
that will continue to evolve. Note that the following
background information regarding NSAID was based
on a study of the resultant visualizations and a limited
number of follow-up searches guided by these
visualizations, but we present them earlier so that it
gives the reader a meaningful context.

4.1. NSAID
The goal of research in NSAIDs is twofold:
improving the effectiveness of anti-inflammatory drugs
and reducing adverse side-effects [18]. Vioxx is a
member of a family of drugs called Cox-2 selective
inhibitors [19]. Cox-2 selective inhibitors were
originally introduced as a replacement of an earlier
generation of drugs known as non-selective inhibitors,
which indiscriminately suppress cyclooxygenase-1
(COX-1) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). However,
one of the major adverse effects of inhibiting COX-1 is
the lower stomach prostaglandin levels, which in turn
may cause stomach ulcers and internal bleeding.
Compared with non-selective inhibitors, selective

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

inhibitors of COX-2 do not upset the stomach as much
as their earlier counterparts.
Both proton pump inhibitors and histamine H2receptor blockers can be used to suppress gastric acid.
Proton pump inhibitors were found to be more
effective. More importantly, proton pump inhibitors
have minimal side effects and few significant drug
interactions, and they are generally considered safe for
long-term treatment. Therefore, proton pump inhibitors
are often given as co-prescriptions of non-selective
inhibitors. We will return to this topic when we discuss
the visualizations.
NSAIDs are widely used not only for their antiinflammatory, but also analgesic, antipyretic, and (as in
case of aspirin) anti-coagulating activity. Studies
suggest that NSAIDs prevent colorectal cancer and
may protect against the development of Alzheimer's
disease. As it was later reported in the mass media on
December 22, 2004, the same colon cancer clinical
trial that led to the Vioxx withdraw found that Vioxx
prevented precancerous colon polyps in some patents.

5. Results
5.1. The Profile of the NSAID Literature
Figure 1 depicts the volume of annual publications
in NSAID. Articles at Level 0 were cited once or more
within the sample of 3,512 articles retrieved from the
Web of Science. Articles at Level 3 were cited three
times or more. Articles at Level 5 were cited five times
or more. It is clear that Level 5 articles are
exceptionally rare in comparison to the vast volume of
less frequently cited articles. Visualizations generated
by CiteSpace typically feature the thin layers only – the
cream of the crop – rather than the entire sample.

4.2. Data Collection
Bibliographic records were retrieved from the Web
of Science using a search query of (NSAID or (Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drug)). We use the
systematic review and meta-analysis [20] as our gold
standard. The NSAID dataset consists of 4,921 records.
Among them, 3,514 records have cited references.
These records are known as citing records.
Visualizations represent references cited by these
records. Citing records are included if themselves are
cited by others.
CiteSpace imports datasets directly and selects the
terms of up to four consecutive words from titles,
abstracts, and descriptors of citing records. The
subsequent analysis includes burst terms only, which
are terms with sharply increased frequencies over time.
CiteSpace divides the entire time interval into a
number of sub-intervals, or time slices. A snapshot
network is derived for each time slice. The resultant
time series of networks are subsequently merged into a
global network. Technical details of the algorithms are
described in [14, 17]
CiteSpace supports two visualization views: cluster
views and timezone views. Cluster views show
networks as the commonly seen types of node-and-link
diagrams, whereas timezone views arrange articles and
terms in correspondence to the time of their publication
or their peak time.

Figure 1. The cream of the crop by citations.

Figure 2. The proportions of various types of
Level 3 and Level 5 clinical trial articles in the
NSAID literature.
Figure 2 shows the proportions of various types of
evidence in the NSAID literature. The average
percentage of RCTs among Level 5 and Level 3
articles is 16.6% and 12.2%, respectively. The average
percentage of Meta-analysis among Level 5 and Level
3 articles is 2.3% and 1.5%. These figures suggest that
evidence papers tend to be cited more often than other
types of papers.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

5.2. Cluster Views and Time-zone Views
CiteSpace supports two types of visualizations:
cluster views and time-zone views. Cluster views
visualize a network as a patchwork of a series of
snapshot networks taken in consecutive time intervals
known as time slices. Common nodes between
networks in adjacent time slices are shared in the
merged network.
Time-zone views are generated based on a
modified force-directed placement algorithm such that
nodes are placed in a series of parallel strips known as
time zones. CiteSpace also supports visualizations in
grayscale as well as visualizations in full color to
depict temporal patterns. The tree-ring like circle

surrounding a node represents the citation history of
the underlying article. The history progresses from the
center outwardly.
The type of clinical evidence is marked as rc, c, or
m. The position of an evidence node and the size of its
citation tree ring can be used as additional search
criteria by an EBM practitioner.
Figure 3 shows an example of the visualization of
clinical evidence in the literature of NSAID (19952005), including four RCTs in unique positions in
terms of the network topology and one meta-analysis
in a similar position. In essence, papers in such
positions have high betweenness centrality, which
measures how often an arbitrarily chosen shortest path
in the network goes through such nodes.

Figure 3. RCTs (rc) and meta-analysis (m) available in a synthesized network visualization of the
NSAID literature (1995-2005) (Nodes=399, Links=734). Articles in this visualization must have at
least 6 citations. Clinical evidence at strategic positions (in terms of high centrality) is marked by
arrowed lines. The sharply increased use of the term proton pump inhibitor is identified.
In CiteSpace visualizations, a line between a term
and an article denotes that the article is cited by the
hosting article of the term. The colors of lines are timestamped with earlier connections in blue and the latest
in red. The nature of each cluster can be identified by
the most prominent term associated with it.
In CiteSpace, one can use a function called
marquee selection to select and analyze a cluster of
nodes by dragging a rectangle area around nodes of
interest. Figure 4 shows five clusters selected in such
way. For example, the left-most cluster of 19 nodes is
about Alzheimer’s disease in relation to NSAID. The

upper right cluster of 65 nodes is about selective cox-2
inhibitor.
The overall colors of a cluster indicate its age,
either as an emerging one or a long established one.
The Alzheimer’s disease cluster in Figure 4 has many
light-colored lines, suggesting its relatively young age.
Similarly, the selective cox2 inhibitor cluster is also
relatively young. There are three clusters in the center
of the cluster view. We refer them as the upper center,
the lower center, and the cluster on the right. The upper
center cluster contains 160 nodes, including both
articles and terms. It is a long established cluster,

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

containing terms such as H2-receptor. The lower center
cluster is much recent, containing terms such as proton
pump inhibitor and non-selective NSAIDs.

65
22
20
18
16
14

103
46
Figure 4 Five clusters selected in a network
visualization of the NSAID literature (19902004) (Nodes = 499, Links =2,018). The number
at the corner of each selected area is the
number of nodes included.

34
34
24
22

Table 1 lists the most frequently found Medical
Subject Heading (MeSH) terms in the five clusters.
Based on the MeSH terms, the five clusters are
identified as the Alzheimer’s diseases cluster, the
Cyclooxygenase cluster, the colon cancer cluster, the
adverse effects of selective inhibitors cluster, and the
adverse effects of non-selective inhibitors cluster. The
visualization provides an alternative way to locate
high-quality evidence. For example, amount the 19
nodes in the Alzheimer’s disease cluster, there is a
highly cited meta analysis [21], which was cited 43
times in the dataset.
Table 1. Top-5 MeSH terms assigned to the
five selected clusters shown in Figure 4.
19
14
10
8
8
6
56
28
26
12
12
8
8
8
8

CLUSTER: Alzheimer Disease
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*therapeutic use
Alzheimer Disease/*epidemiology
Alzheimer Disease/*prevention & control
Alzheimer Disease/*drug therapy
Alzheimer Disease/*pathology
CLUSTER: Cyclooxygenase
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*pharmacology
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors/*pharmacology
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide
Synthase/*genetics
Prostaglandin-Endoperoxide
Synthase/*metabolism
Aspirin/*pharmacology
Prostaglandins/*biosynthesis
Thiazines/*pharmacology
Thiazoles/*pharmacology

160
160
42
36
28
26
24

CLUSTER: Colonic Neoplasms
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*pharmacology
Colonic Neoplasms/*prevention & control
Apoptosis/*drug effects
Aspirin/*therapeutic use
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*therapeutic use
CLUSTER: Adverse Effects of Selective
Inhibitors
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*adverse effects
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors/*therapeutic use
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*therapeutic use
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors/*pharmacology
Isoenzymes/*antagonists & inhibitors
CLUSTER: Adverse Effects of
Traditional, Non-selective Inhibitors
Anti-Inflammatory Agents, NonSteroidal/*adverse effects
Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage/*chemically
induced
Aspirin/*adverse effects
Gastrointestinal Diseases/*chemically
induced
Peptic Ulcer/*chemically induced
Helicobacter pylori

Figure 5 shows a time-zone view of the evolution
of NSAID. The visualization contains two types of
entities: cited articles, and citing terms. The
distributions of various types of clinical evidence are
marked in terms of their study design types. For
example, the 1991 article by Gabriel near to the upper
left corner of the map is marked with a letter m on the
right shoulder of the node, which means that the article
is a meta-analysis. Similarly, we know that the 1998
article by Hawkey at the top of the 1998 time zone is a
randomized clinical trial because it is marked as rc.
The visualization reveals several important clues of
the evolution of NSAID. The earliest prominent term is
prostaglandin-synthesis in the 1991 time zone, which is
the foundation and the early focus of NSAID. The next
term peaked is h-2 receptor antagonists in 1994. In the
1999 time zone, terms such as proton pump inhibitors
and anti-inflammatory drug gastropathy are attached to
the main stream, highlighting the adverse effects of
non-selective inhibitors. The term selective-cox-2inhibitor is prominent in the 2000 time zone. The term
cost-effectiveness also appeared in the same time,
underlying the fact that selective inhibitors are more

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

expensive than traditional ones. The 2001 time zone
contains terms colon-cancer-cells and h-pyloriinfection. More terms related to cox-2-sepcificinhibitors and gastrointestinal-safety in 2002. In 2003,
Alzheimer’s disease emerged strongly (shown in the

map as s-disease near the top). In 2004, the most
prominent research front terms are proton pump
inhibitor and pump inhibitor. Note that this is the
second peak of proton pump inhibitor; its first peak
was in 1999.

Figure 5 The time-zone view of the evolution of the NSAID literature. The network contains 499
nodes and 2,018 lines. Clinical evidence is marked according to its publication type.

6. Discussions and Conclusions
From these prominent thematic terms we can form a
number of hypotheses of what happed in the literature as the
field of NSAID evolved over the past decade. As the first
step, we want to establish that there are evidently a few lines
of research running in parallel in NSAID. The next step is to
verify the role of specific clinical evidence in the process of
change.
The most interesting and potentially intriguing
hypothesis is that the revival of proton pump inhibitor in
2004 was connected to the increased heart-attack risk found
in selective inhibitors such as Vioxx. If there is indeed a
tendency to fall back to the earlier non-selective antiinflammatory agents, then the regained attention of proton
pump inhibitors will make sense because they were coprescribed in the past with non-selective inhibitor drugs.
We found that clinical evidence as a group tends to be
cited higher than other types of articles in the NSAID
example. The visualizations have enabled us to identify

RCTs and meta-analysis in unique positions within the
network of research front terms and intellectual base articles.
Meta-analysis in such positions would be the best candidate
for examining the consensus based on existing evidence.
RCTs in similar positions would be the strongest evidence
that must be taken into account when making clinical
decisions.
The purpose of the visualization is not to provide direct
answers to the questions raised. Instead, we intend to
provide the practitioners of EBM with an alternative tool
that allows them to identify high-quality clinical evidence in
the changing literature of medicine more effectively,
especially in light of the rigorous, recentness, and consensus
of available clinical evidence. In terms of training and
education, it is particularly encouraging that the
visualization appears to portrait a convincing timeline of the
evolution of NSAID. This approach can be valuable for
researchers who are preparing systematic reviews of clinical
evidence by simplifying the search and selection of critical
evidence to review. Furthermore, the contextual view of how

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

existing evidence is cited in the literature provides valuable
alternative viewpoints for systematic reviews.
The preliminary results are encouraging because the
automatic annotation technique provides a harmonic way to
combine two different sources of evidence, namely the
citation patterns and the study design types of clinical
evidence. There is a substantial amount of work to be done
before it can be used by healthcare educators and
practitioners. For example, it requires systematic validations
of detailed findings against existing gold standards. This
case study also has practical and theoretical implications to
knowledge domain visualization. Since events such as the
Merck’s withdraw of Vioxx might fall outside the range of a
traditional domain analysis, it remains to be done to
integrate various interrelated components into a fully
responsive system so that trends detected in the literature of
medicine and life sciences can be directly connected to
decision making and other healthcare activities in more
timely manner.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable
insights from Dr. Eric W. Vogel, College of Medicine at
Drexel University.

Note
CiteSpace is available at
http://cluster.cis.drexel.edu/~cchen/citespace

References
[1]
[2]

Vioxx-Attorneys. Arthritis Drug Vioxx Pulled. 2005, 2005.
P. Juni, L. Nartey, S. Reichenbach, R. Sterchi, P. A. Dieppe,
and M. Egger. Risk of cardiovascular events and rofecoxib:
cumulative meta-analysis. Lancet, 364(9450), 2021-2029,
2004.
[3] Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. Evidence-based
medicine: A new approach to teaching the practice of
medicine. JAMA, 268(17), 2420-2425, 1992.
[4] D. Sackett, S. Richardson, W. Rosenberg, and R. Haynes,
Evidence-Based Medicine: How to Practice and Teach EBM.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingston, 1998.
[5] A. J. Graham, G. Gelfand, S. D. McFadden, and S. C.
Grondin. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendations
in general thoracis surgery. Canadian Medical Association,
47(6), 461-465, 2004.
[6] National Cancer Institute. Levels of Evidence for Adult
Cancer Treatment Studies (PDQ®). 2005, 2004.
[7] J. LeLorier, G. Gregoire, A. Benhaddad, J. Lapierre, and F.
Derderian. Discrepancies between meta-analyses and
subsequent large randomized, controlled trials. N Engl J Med,
337(8), 536-42, 1997.
[8] J. C. Bailar. The promise and problems of meta-analysis. N
Engl J Med, 337(8), 559-61, 1997.
[9] I. Chalmers. The Cochrane Collaboration: preparing,
maintaining, and disseminating systematic reviews of the
effects of health care. Ann N Y Acad Sci, 703, 156-65, 1993.
[10] M. Starr and I. Chalmers. The evolution of The Cochrane
Library, 1988-2003. 2005. Oxford: Update Software, 2005.

[11] D. L. Hunt and K. A. McKibbon. Locating and appraising
systematic reviews. In Systematic Reviews, C. Mulrow and D.
Cook, Eds. Philadelphia: American College of Physicians,
1998, pp. 13-22.
[12] H. Small. Visualizing science by citation mapping. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science, 50(9), 799813, 1999.
[13] C. Chen, Mapping Scientific Frontiers: The Quest for
Knowledge Visualization. London: Springer, 2003.
[14] C. Chen. Searching for intellectual turning points:
Progressive Knowledge Domain Visualization. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 5303-5310, 2004.
[15] C. Chen. Detecting and mapping thematic changes in
transient networks. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Information Visualization
(IV’04), 1023-1032, London, 2004. IEEE Computer Society
Press.
[16] C. Chen. The centrality of pivotal points in the evolution of
scientific networks. In Proceedings of Proceedings of the
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI
2005), 98-105, San Diego, CA, 2005.
[17] C. Chen. CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing emerging
trends and transient patterns in scientific literature. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, In Press.
[18] R. Miedzybrodzki. Trends in nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug development and application. Postepy Hig Med Dosw
(Online), 58, 438-48, 2004.
[19] G. A. FitzGerald. The coxibs, selective inhibitors of
cyclooxygenase-2. N Engl J Med, 345(6), 433-42, 2001.
[20] W. H. Wang, J. Q. Huang, G. F. Zheng, S. K. Lam, J.
Karlberg, and B. C.-Y. Wong. Non-steroidal antiinflammatory drug use and the risk of gastric cancer: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute, 95(23), 1784-1791, 2004.
[21] P. L. McGeer, M. Schulzer, and E. G. McGeer. Arthritis and
anti-inflammatory agents as possible protective factors for
Alzheimer's disease: a review of 17 epidemiologic studies.
NEUROLOGY, 47(2), 425-32, 1996.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

