Meaning Metaphor for Visualizing Search Results
Nicolas Bonnel
France Telecom, Division R&D
4 rue du Clos-Courtel, BP 91226
35512 Cesson-S´evign´e Cedex, France
nicolas.bonnel@francetelecom.com

Alexandre Cotarmanac’h
France Telecom, Division R&D
38-40 rue du G´en´eral Leclerc
92794 Issy les Moulineaux Cedex 9, France
alexandre.cotarmanach@francetelecom.com

Annie Morin
Irisa, Campus Universitaire de Baulieu
Avenue du G´en´eral Leclerc, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France
amorin@irisa.fr

Abstract
While searching the Web, the user is often confronted by
a great number of results, generally sorted by their rank.
These results are then displayed as a succession of ordered
lists. Facing the limits of this approach, we propose a prototype to explore new organizations and presentations of
search results, as well as new types of interactions with the
results in order to make their exploration more intuitive and
efﬁcient. The main topic of this paper is the processing of
the results coming from an information retrieval system. Although the relevance depends on the result quality, the effectiveness of the result processing represents an alternative
way to improve the relevance for the user. Given the current
expectations, this processing is composed by an organization step and a visualization step. Then the proposed prototype organizes the results according to their meaning using
a Kohonen self-organizing map, and also visualizes them in
a 3D scene to increase the representation space. The 3D
metaphor proposed here is a city.
Keywords: Search result visualization, 3D metaphors,
Self-Organizing Maps, Adaptive interfaces.

1. Introduction
Available data on the World Wide Web is constantly increasing, so it becomes more and more difﬁcult to extract
the relevant information for a given search. The search engines, which are a way to represent the web to the users,
return a result number so great that it is necessary to search
for new methods to process these results. These methods
must be more adapted thanks to: a more relevant result or-

ganization, a richer visualization interface and an intuitive
navigation in the result space.
This paper deals with the processing of search results.
This processing, still neglected in some information retrieval systems, is becoming more and more important and
essential. It can be considered as a solution for enriching
the results. It is, in fact, complementary to the search process and also a mean to increase the result “relevance” for
the user. If the result quality remains a major concern, the
quality of the result restitution (classiﬁcation and visualization) must be taken into account too. Facing the increase
of search results, it seems obvious to want to organize and
to visualize them in an effective and adapted way. That
explains the goal of the prototype presented in this paper,
which is to provide the user with a search interface enabling
him to quickly ﬁnd the relevant information.
The context of our work is web search, so the documents
are the web pages returned by the query. We only use the
textual information of the documents. This information enables to have a vectorial representation (word vectors) of
the pages, which is frequently used in the Information Retrieval ﬁeld. The number of results to process must also be
speciﬁed because it is crucial for the organization and visualization choices. A recent study [5] shows that 81.7%
of users will try a new search if they are not satisﬁed with
the listings they ﬁnd within the ﬁrst 3 pages of results. But
it would be too restrictive to only consider the ﬁrst 30 results (10 results per page). Indeed this study has been done
on search engines with linear result visualization (ordered
lists) and users may want to see more results on 2D or 3D
visualizations. That is why the number of results considered
in this paper is more than 30 but less than a hundred (only
50 in the snapshots of this paper).
The two main points to reach our goal are a good data

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Techniques of search
results visualization

Visualization
of predefined
attributes

Visualization of

Visualization of

document attributes

interdocument links

Visualization
of user−defined
attributes

Visualization
of query terms
distribution

Links based on

Links based on

structure

similarity

Projection

Projection

without semantic proximity

with semantic proximity

Figure 1. Taxonomy of search result visualization systems
classiﬁcation and an effective visualization. Concerning
these two aspects, our directions are a clustering method
(the self-organizing maps) and a 3D visualization. The
choice of a 3D visualization enables to increase the visualization space. Indeed, contrary to 2D, 3D offers the possibility to display a great number of results, which is not
limited by the screen size but by the user’s perception. 3D
offers new interaction possibilities and allows to exploit the
cognitive abilities of the users. So it enables us to bring a
new point of view to the result visualization. However, considerable new problems appear, such as the navigation in
such an environment. Finally we must remember that data
visualization is strongly dependent on many criteria such
as the search goal or the result number and type. One single solution for data visualization probably does not exist.
That is why the prototype has many interfaces which adapt
themselves according to the context.
This paper deals with the unsupervised organization of
documents, the graphical representation of the results and
the user interaction. It is structured as follows. The next
section proposes a brief state of the art on search result visualization. Then the SmartWeb prototype is described in
Section 3 and Section 4 is devoted to the prototype use. The
last section allows us to conclude and gives an outlook on
future work.

2. State of the art
Many works have been done on search result visualization in the last few years. The aim of this section is only to
give a short overview of the main approaches in this ﬁeld.
As it exists many different techniques, many taxonomies of
these techniques have already been proposed. But it appears
that most of the classiﬁcations are inaccurate and depend on
the used techniques. So we propose a taxonomy (see Fig-

ure 1) based on the previous works of [15, 2]. It is important to notice that the proposed classiﬁcation only depends
on the visualization goal (and also on the type of visualized
objects or links). Techniques (like graphs, maps, 2D, 3D
and so on) are not considered because they are particular
implementations to reach the visualization goal.
The top level of the hierarchy differentiates the visualization of document attributes from the visualization of
inter-document links. Attribute visualization represents the
techniques used to only visualize some document attributes.
Good examples are tilebars [4], visualization of the query
terms distribution [15, 2], or systems based on many classical attribute visualizations [9]. But the problem with this
approach is the lack of information on document similarities. So we are more interested in the other approach called
link visualization between the documents. Indeed this approach gives the user information on the next document to
select thanks to the inter-document links. This approach
can be divided into two categories: the ﬁrst one uses the
links based on the document structure (hyperlinks) and the
second one uses the links based on the content similarity.
We focus on the second category: the visualization of interdocument similarities.
Visualization of inter-document similarities requires at
least two dimensions to be effective. Indeed this kind of
visualization must group similar documents together or explicitly show the inter-document links. So the techniques
used in this approach have already given up the linear display of ordered lists. There are many techniques for visualizing the links between documents but the two main
techniques used in our context are graphs and maps. In the
graph approach, nodes generally represent web pages and
arcs represent the links between web pages. Keywords are
sometimes represented in these graphs as valued nodes or
arcs. This approach is used in the meta search engine Kar-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

too 1 for which a drawback is the lack of a results overview.
But with the increase of results and link complexity, graphs
become more and more unreadable. In the map approach,
we can generally take advantage of the cognitive aspect.
Indeed the user is used to this kind of representation and
therefore has a priori knowledge. That is why we often
ﬁnd geographic metaphors [12]. Among these cartographic
techniques, some examples are the WEBSOM2 project [7]
which consists of computing self-organizing maps on textual data and Map.net3 developed by Antarctica. Map.net
gives a representation of ODP (Open Directory Project) using a 2D landscape metaphor. However we are still confronted by a readable problem when the results increase.
So one idea is to use 3D visualizations (which are less
frequent and familiar for users) to increase the available
space to represent information. The added dimension allows the display of complex graphs in a more readable way.
We can also take advantage of this third dimension for replacing maps by 3D worlds: landscapes like VxInsight [1]
or cities [11]. However the dimension increase makes navigation essential and especially more complex. We are facing another problem which is not obvious to solve. Finally
the AVE method and its Periscope system [14] are the closest works to those ones presented in this paper. We have the
use of X-VRML language and mixed interfaces (3D scene
and 2D interface) in common, or also the use of many visualization metaphors which answer different goals. However
our approach takes the problem of data organization in a
“semantic” point of view into account. Indeed it is not sufﬁcient in the context of web search to only order the pages
according to some low-level descriptors.

3. SmartWeb prototype
SmartWeb is a prototype which is very close to a classical search engine according to the query and the database.
The aim is to provide the user with the best organization
and visualization of his query results, without soliciting him
during the process. First we describe the global architecture
of the prototype and then we focus on the two main modules which are the organization and the visualization of the
documents.

3.1. Architecture
Figure 2 gives a simpliﬁed overview of the architecture
of the prototype. On one hand we have the server side with
the database and the different interface models. On the
other hand we have the client side with the Java applet (2D
part of the interface) and the VRML browser (3D scene of
1 www.kartoo.com
2 http://websom.hut.ﬁ/websom
3 http://maps.map.net

the interface). So the prototype access is easy because users
only need to have a Java interpretor and a VRML browser.
A conceptual representation of the prototype is also proposed on Figure 2. So we can see the query and result
progress between the various modules. The main steps are
the organization, visualization and interaction parts. Documents (web pages) are indexed in the database whose descriptors are those frequently used by the search engines:
URL, title, summary, snippet, word vector... User queries
(simple or boolean) are interpreted and then sent to the
database. The documents, corresponding to the query results coming from the database, successively go through
two main modules: organization and visualization. These
two modules are detailed in the following subsections. It
is interesting to notice a certain independence between data
organization and the selected metaphors for the visualization.

3.2. Document organization
In the context of this paper, it is essential to have an unsupervised method for organizing the documents. Among
techniques which address this problem, one of them is particularly interesting: the Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) [6].
This choice is motivated by some properties of this method:
it is a clustering method which organizes documents (or
word vectors) on a map with predeﬁned size, which guarantees a good use of space during the visualization. Moreover the obtained organization has a neighborhood concept.
Indeed two neighboring documents on the map have similar word vectors. With the self-organizing maps it is also
possible to have hierarchy levels or maps with dynamic size
[3]. These two points can be interesting in our context but
are not exploited at this time.
We detail some particularities of our implementation of
the self-organizing maps. The ﬁrst point concerns the word
weighting. The tf.idf weighting [13] is used. This word
weighting can be interpreted as a particular weighting of the
Euclidean distance, which allows to increase or decrease the
importance of some words. We use the LabelSOM method
[10] for labeling the neurons. As the goal is to classify
query results, an additional constraint is that the algorithm
must be deterministic. Indeed the same query on the same
corpus must always provide the same results. To do that,
we use the batch SOM algorithm, a map with predeﬁned
size (5 × 5) and we always use the ﬁrst data to initialize the
neurons.
This SOM-based method (used for organizing the documents) is only based on word distribution and has the advantage to respect the “semantic” proximity of the documents.
It also enables us to have a ﬁrst abstraction level if we move
on the neuron level. Then a hierarchical agglomerative clus-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2D INTERFACE

INTERFACE

USER
QUERY

MODELS
(X−VRML files)

X−VRML
2D INTERFACE

INTERACTION
MANAGER
INTERPRETOR

3D INTERFACE

USER
INTERPRETED
QUERY

DATABASE
3D INTERFACE

INTERACTION

SEARCH MODULE

DATABASE

VISUALIZATION MODULE

RESULTS
ORGANIZED RESULTS
APPLET
SERVER

ORGANIZATION MODULE

CLIENT

Figure 2. Simpliﬁed architecture (left) and conceptual schema (right) of the SmartWeb prototype.
tering algorithm is applied on the neurons and we only keep
the classiﬁcation in three clusters. So we have a second abstraction level which gives the user the three main topics
of his search. These topics are deﬁned by an arrangement
of the neuron labels. These abstraction levels are not based
on ontologies or document labeling. But we can consider
crossing neuron labels with an ontology or using semantic
data on documents during the algorithm. This approach is
also open and close to other more semantic approaches like
Topic Maps [8]. Indeed the self-organizing maps allow navigation in various abstraction levels like Topic Maps (topics
are represented here by neurons or groups of neurons).
However one method which provides the best organization in all of the cases probably does not exist. That is
why the aim of this module is to deﬁne many organizational methods and to select the most adapted to each case.
For instance, it does not seem relevant to compute a selforganizing map when the number of query results is very
weak.

3.3. Visualization module
The visualization module receives two input parameters:
the previously organized results and an interface model (selected either by the user or automatically). It must provide
output data for the applet (2D interface) and the VRML
browser (3D scene). The model which deﬁnes the visualization metaphor and the used interactions, is selected in a
list of interface models. However it is possible for the user
to easily create his own model and thus to personalize the
visualization interface and the interactions. The models are
expressed in X-VRML4 which is a meta-language (higher
level than VRML) enabling to add many functions such as
database interrogation or iterations. During the query processing, the model is interpreted in order to dynamically
produce the VRML ﬁle which contains the 3D interface provided to the user. The visualization module also has an in4 X-VRML is an XML based language developed by France Telecom
R&D and the Poznan University of Economics

teresting characteristic: its adaptability. The possibility to
choose the model makes the visualization adaptive. Indeed
this choice can be done according to some criteria such as
the result number, the search goal or the user category.

4. SmartWeb use
First we deﬁne the metaphor word which is often used in
this section: a metaphor is the realization of an association
between graphical parameters of the presentation and
information on the indexed documents. Then we present
the prototype for a given interface: the city metaphor.
The choice of the city metaphor is mainly justiﬁed by the
cognitive aspect of this metaphor. And it seems adapted to
a 3D environment contrary to the map metaphor where two
dimensions are enough. A ﬁrst version of this metaphor was
developed and a user test (on a panel of 50 users of various
ages and backgrounds) was carried out on this metaphor.
Upon the test results, the city metaphor has evolved. Figure 3 gives an overview of the new metaphor whose explanations can be classiﬁed in four classes: primitives, organization, visualization and navigation. This new version will
also be tested to know if the users’ expectations have been
answered and to identify new issues.

4.1. Primitives
Each building of the city represents a web page. These
buildings are grouped by districts which are placed on the
ground according to a grid. Each district represents a neuron of the self-organizing map. The page relevance is represented by the building height, which enables to quickly see
the best classiﬁed pages according to this criterion. As our
mapping choice for the relevance does not allow to visually
differentiate two successive ranks, an interval approach is
adopted. So the ﬁrst 5 ranks are associated to one building
height and so on.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3. SmartWeb prototype with the city visualization metaphor.

4.2. Organization
The districts are placed on the ground according to a 2D
grid. This grid (which is square in our example) enables to
carry out a classiﬁcation of the search results. This classiﬁcation is the result of the SOM algorithm previously computed by the organization module. Indeed the 2D grid on the
ground is the same one as the SOM grid. This organization
has two interesting properties: the unicity of the web pages
(or buildings) in the city and the “semantic” neighborhood
between the different pages and between the different districts. So the documents of the same district are close to
each other and two neighboring districts correspond to two
topics as close as possible.

4.3. Visualization
The choice of a 3D interface to visualize the search results pleased the users. Broadly the 3D visualization is not a
problem because it corresponds to our natural vision. Moreover this 3D metaphor enables us to give an overview of
a great number of results. The building texture represents
the document content, which enables us to quickly have an
overview of the results when hanging around in the 3D environment. Highlighting a building allows the user to see
information (URL, snippet, keywords) about the associated
document and about four neighboring documents which are
obviously close to the chosen document. Three colors were
chosen for representing the three clusters deﬁned by the hierarchical clustering on the neurons. Each district is associated to one of these three colors (which are displayed on
the ground). It enables us to show the three main topics of
the search. With this metaphor, we can also interact with
each document (represented by a building) in order to visualize all the images contained in the document. This image

visualization is carried out by another 3D metaphor called
gallery (see Figure 4). This gallery metaphor is very useful
for an image search and was appreciated by the users. However, following the user test, we notice that the user seeks
a compromise between the comfort and the effectiveness of
the visualization more and more.

4.4. Navigation
The user test shows that the main drawback is the navigation in the city, which does not seem to be commonplace.
We can add mouse sensibility problems or the loss of reference marks in the city. So certain displacements toward
strategic places of the 3D scene were simpliﬁed. To do that
the 2D map of the scene was made interactive in order to be
able to move to any district in only one click. This modiﬁcation makes navigation more comfortable but it must be
coupled with other approaches. So solutions must be found
in order to make navigation more familiar for the user (like
navigation in a 2D interface). On the other hand, the gallery
metaphor has the advantage of having a more constrained
navigation and thus less tiresome for the user. Indeed the
user can only move along one axis (the depth) and the side
rotation angles are limited too. These navigation constraints
avoid the user getting lost in the 3D environment and explain why the navigation in the gallery metaphor did not
obstruct the users.

5. Conclusion
The main contributions of this paper are to propose a
new taxonomy of search result visualization systems and to
present an effective method for organizing and visualizing
(in three dimensions) search results. The organization is

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 4. Gallery metaphor showing the images contained in a document.
based on a self-organizing map and the 3D visualization
proposed here is based on a city metaphor which is very
effective to represent organized documents. An essential
point of the prototype is the coupling between the 3D scene
and the 2D interface. The graphical interface is dynamically generated and interactive. With the proposed method,
we provide the user with a three-level approach: low-level
with document visualization, medium-level with neuron
visualization (similar documents are grouped together),
high-level with “topic” visualization (similar neurons are
grouped together). The idea is to show the various topics of
the query when going up in the hierarchy.
The search retrieval systems must be concerned with the
quality of the returned results (not discussed in this paper) but with their organization, visualization and interaction too. So our goal is always to enrich the organization
and visualization steps. For example, we must improve the
interaction between the various hierarchical levels and keep
on simplifying the navigation in the 3D scene. Other interesting outlooks are to make the classiﬁcation algorithm
interactive and to improve the interface adaptability. A last
point concerns the decrease of the execution time for the
algorithm and for generating the VRML code. Indeed this
time is currently higher than ten seconds.

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

References
[1] K. W. Boyack, B. N. Wylie, and G. S. Davidson. Domain visualization using VxInsight for science and technology management. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 53(9):764–774, 2002.
[2] M. Chevalier. Interface adapative pour l’aide a` la recherche
d’information sur le web. PhD Thesis, University Paul
Sabatier of Toulouse, France, 2002.
[3] M. Dittenbach, D. Merkl, and A. Rauber. Using Growing
Hierarchical Self-Organizing Map for Document Classiﬁca-

[13]

[14]

[15]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

tion. In Proceedings of European Symposium on Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks, pages 7–12, 2000.
M. A. Hearst. TileBars: Visualization of Term Distribution
Information in Full Text Information Access. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 59–66, 1995.
iProspect. iProspect’s Search Engine User Attitudes Survey
Results. White paper, 2004.
T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer, 1995.
T. Kohonen, S. Kaski, K. Lagus, J. Saloj¨arvi, J. Honkela,
V. Paatero, and A. Saarela. Self Organization of a Massive
Document Collection. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, Special Issue on Neural Networks for Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, 11(3):574–585, 2000.
B. Le Grand and M. Soto. Visualisation of the Semantic
Web: Topic Maps Visualisation. In Proceedings of the 6th
Int. Conf. on Information Visualization, pages 344–, 2002.
T. M. Mann. Visualization of WWW-search Results. In
DEXA ’99: Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop
on Database & Expert Systems Applications, pages 264–
268. IEEE Computer Society, 1999.
A. Rauber and D. Merkl. Automatic Labeling of SelfOrganizing Maps for Information Retrieval. Journal of Systems Research and Information Systems (JSRIS), 10(10):23–
45, 2001.
A. Rossi and M. Varga. Visualization of Massive Retrieved
Newsfeeds in Interactive 3D. In Proceedings of Int. Conf.
on Information Visualization, pages 12–17, 1999.
A. Skupin and S. Fabrikant. Spatialization Methods: A Cartographic Research Agenda for Non-Geographic Information Visualization. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 30(2):99–119, 2003.
K. Sparck Jones. A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and its application in retrieval. Journal of Documentation, 28(1):11–20, 1972.
W. Wiza, K. Walczak, and W. Cellary. Periscope - A System for Adaptive 3D Visualization of Search Results. In
Proceedings of the Int. Conf. on 3D Web technology, pages
29–40, 2004.
O. Zamir. Visualization of search results in document retrieval systems. General Examination Report, 1998.

