Design of a Pressure Sensitive Floor for Multimodal Sensing
Prashant Srinivasan, David Birchfield, Gang Qian, Assegid Kidané
Arts, Media and Engineering/Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State University
{ p.srinivasan, dbirchfield, gang.qian, assegid.kidane }@ asu.edu

Abstract
Visualization and knowledge of detailed pressure
information can play a vital role in multimodal sensing
of human movement. We have designed a highresolution pressure sensing floor prototype with a
sensor density of one sensor per square centimeter that
can provide real-time information about the location of
the performer on the floor as well as the amount of
pressure being exerted on the floor. Hardware and
software have been developed for detecting, collecting,
transmitting and rendering a graphical representation
of the pressure data gathered from the sensors. This
prototype can be easily reconfigured to cover large
floor areas, and will integrate closely with video, audio
and motion-based sensing technologies to facilitate
robust multimodal sensing. In our demonstrations, we
show that the system accurately captures and transmits
pressure information, and we illustrate how this will
form a basis for a variety of applications including use
in rehabilitation, virtual reality, entertainment, and
children activity centers.

1. Introduction
A primary aspiration for the development of our
system was to create a very high resolution pressure
sensing floor that would be scalable as well as easily
reconfigurable. Furthermore, we are working toward a
framework for multimodal sensing in which real time
pressure information can be integrated with marker and
vision based sensing systems to provide robust and
accurate sensing of movement. This has led to the
development of our portable floor prototype with a
sensor density of approximately one sensor per square
centimeter, which allows accurate visualization of the
pressure points from feet or other objects interacting
with it. The mats making up the floor are lightweight
and almost identical, and can be easily rearranged into
a variety of configurations. The mats are comprised of
a matrix of sensors, with sensors spaced 10 mm apart
and each sensor having an active area of 6 mm x 6 mm.

The floor transmits data to a host computer via highspeed Ethernet. A custom designed graphical user
interface (GUI) is used for data acquisition from the
board. This system is capable of operating as a
standalone system, but it has also been designed to
integrate with currently existing methods for
measuring the motion of certain objects, such as
marker-based motion capture systems and audiosensing systems. The major benefits of this system
include high density of sensors allowing for accurate
representation of interacting objects as well as ease of
reconfiguration to suit external environments. We are
working with domain experts from dance and
kinesiology to evaluate the performance of the current
prototype in order to test its sensing capabilities. The
floor will be an important interface for use in
applications such as interactive dance performances,
gaming, and physical rehabilitation.
In related prior work, various systems have been
designed to capture and view the sensory information
associated with people moving across a floor. The
surveyed systems only have sensor densities capable of
providing pressure distribution information for a small
area and cannot fit in the tight space available under a
typical dance floor. Furthermore, these lack the
capability to form a substantial part of an integrated
environment involving other sensing technologies
based on vision, sound and motion. Some popular
approaches like [1] and [10] make use of load cells set
underneath the tiles to measure weight and pressure
distributions across the floor. However these floors
cannot identify and produce detailed pressure data for
an object, losing the ability to report on the location,
orientation or resolution of the feet or other objects
interacting with the floor. Other approaches such as the
Magic Carpet from MIT [12], the LiteFoot [5] floor
from the University of Limerick in Ireland, and a
system developed at VTT Information Technology [7]
use sensors mounted on the floor surface to detect the
footsteps of a person. VTT Information Technology’s
floor system has only 196 sensors in all and this sensor
resolution would not be suitable for dance or
movement disability studies that we are targeting. In

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

case of the Magic Carpet, despite the good sensitivity
offered by the floor, it lacks spatial sensor resolution
due to the 100 mm distance between adjacent sensors
resulting in large zones that do not detect any pressure.
Thus, the technology is not suitable for covering a
large floor area. The LiteFoot prototype has over 1900
optical proximity sensors on the large 1.76 square
meter floor area and a single accelerometer to detect
the total impact force, but the spatial resolution of 40
mm does not meet the demands of our targeted
applications such as dance analysis. Moreover, force
measurements from the single accelerometers instead
of the individual pressure sensors, forms the basis for
the visual representation in this work. A floorspace
using Z-tiles [15] was developed to have the ability to
form a pressure sensitive area of varying size and
shape. This floor makes use of small interlocking tiles
that have the ability to network. However, there are
only 20 force sensitive resistors in each tile, which
does not allow collection of very detailed pressure data
in real-time. In-shoe sensors have been considered for
the force and pressure feedback of human movement
[13, 14]. But they offer limited feedback as data is only
collected from the foot. If the performer is executing
motion such as rolling or tumbling, or a patient is
walking with the help of a walker or cane, complete
data capture is not possible. Also, location and
orientation information of the foot with respect to the
floor is not captured. In our own previous work, we
developed the ISAfloor [6], a precursor project to the
work described in this paper, which was a smaller
prototype floor sensor with 256 force sensing resistors.
This floor was developed and tested at a scan rate of 10
Hz. During tests, it was noticed that the ergonomics of
the foot with cavities between the toes and in the
middle section created various “dead zones” with no
sensor information available during. This formed the
motivation to design an easily reconfigurable floor
with a denser array of sensors and higher scan rate for
applications requiring more detailed pressure
information in real time, such as walking pattern
analysis for rehabilitation.

2. The pressure sensing floor
The designed pressure sensing system consists of
numerous sensor mats capable of independently
gathering and transmitting pressure information,
microcontrollers, Rabbit Ethernet-enabled controllers
and a Windows based application program for pressure
visualization, data recording and playback. The
pressure sensing mats are grouped together to form a
cluster that sends real-time data to the host computer.
These mats can be synchronized to an external clock or

timer that is propagated through the Ethernet
connection of the mats to the host computer. Figure 1
shows the overall system diagram for a cluster or mats.

Figure 1. System Block Diagram for a cluster
of pressure sensing mats

2.1. Floor hardware and software
The system design in progress is one that can be
configured with as few as two mats having a total of
4,032 sensors covering an active area of about 4,160
square centimeters, or as many as 128 mats with a total
of over 258,000 sensors and an area of about 26.7
square meters. The sensor elements of the mat are
made using a pressure sensitive polymer between
conductive traces on sheets of Mylar. Calibration of the
system involves application of known and controlled
pressure for certain durations of time that can then be
used as references. As indicated previously, each
sensor has an approximate active area of 6 mm x 6
mm, and is sufficient for contemporary pressure
measurement systems for human movement as
suggested by Urry [16] and Davis, et al. [2]. The sensor
mat implemented in this design consists of a 42 x 48
grid of pressure sensors on a single model-5315 mat
from Tekscan [8]. The dimension of each Tekscan
sensor mat is approximately 62 cm x 53 cm, taking
into account the connection tab. The active area
dimension is 48.8 cm x 42.7 cm. The resistance of the
pressure sensitive paint is of the order of Mega ohms in
the absence of pressure and drops to a few kilo ohms
when pressure is applied. The sensor mat is rated at 30
pounds per square inch (PSI) or about 207 kilopascals.
Hence, while a 30 PSI sensor will continue to generate
data through pressure ranges higher than this rating
without the risk of damage to sensor elements, best
accuracy is achieved for a range of 2 PSI to about 30
PSI, or about 14 kilopascals to 207 kilopascals. The
following figure (Figure 2) shows the system overview
for a single mat.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

frame, m-1 type ‘b’ frames, n-1 type ‘c’ frames and (m1) x (n-1) type ‘d’ frames are used. The pressure
sensing mat protrudes over the frame in certain frame
types and vice versa in order to exactly fit over the
non-sensing border area of the adjoining mat and thus
allowing for the pressure floor to capture and measure
motion of pressure across the individual mats making
up the floor. Figure 4 shows one sensor mat and its
associated hardware circuitry. The controller circuitry,
consisting of a microcontroller, digital logic and a
Rabbit card, is actually affixed to the bottom of the
frame that holds the pressure pad.
Figure 2. System block diagram for single mat
In order to create a seamless sensing surface from
numerous individual mats, the pads are built in four
slightly varying ways, providing overlaps for the nonactive border areas. This is accomplished by designing
the wooden frame of the mat to be one of four different
specifications. This way, we can assemble the pressure
pads in clusters of varying dimensions. The frame
design is illustrated in Figure 3. The darkly shaded area
represents the Tekscan pressure mat, while the lightly
shaded area represents the wooden frame underneath.

Figure 4. Pressure Sensing Mat and
associated Controller Circuitry.

Figure 3. Overlapping sensor tile design - dark
shade represents the pressure sensing mat,
while the lighter shade shows support frame
A single type ‘a’ frame is used as the very first tile
of any chosen arrangement. Type ‘b’ frames form the
remainder of all tiles for the first row for any chosen
arrangement, and the type ‘c’ frames form the
remainder of tiles for the first column. All remaining
tiles in the arrangement consist of type ‘d’ frames. This
simplifies installation and configuration. Thus, for
arrangements of m x n pressure pads, one type ‘a’

This pressure sensing floor is designed for real time
sensing and feedback applications. Thus far, we have
achieved a sensor scan rate of 30 Hz and in the future
we will seek to boost this performance through
hardware and software revisions that allow for
dynamic compression and optimization of data.
Nonetheless, the current rate exceeds the performance
of other similar systems and our initial tests with
domain experts indicate that this rate is capable of
capturing valuable data from subjects. Also, our
marker-based motion capture systems run at 60 Hz,
and real time data from the floor at 30 Hz can be easily
synchronized. Each mat is connected to a processing
and control board that schedules data scanning and
facilitates collection of the scanned data to be
transmitted. Upon reception of the start-scan signal
from the host computer or controller, the local matbased controller scans the 2016 sensors. One highspeed analog to digital converter translates the sensed
pressure value to an 8-bit digital data. Timing and
control signals are generated by the microcontroller

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

and this regulates the scanning of the mats. Pressure
data is transferred to a C-programmable single-board
Rabbit computer with Ethernet through an input data
port after interrupt-enabled handshaking. A complete
frame of data consisting of pressure information from
all sensors is collected by the Rabbit board and
transmitted to the host computer via an Ethernet link
and a high-speed switch. This way, many individual
mats can be easily connected to the host computer.
Software on the host collects data from the Rabbit
board and displays it, and presents a graphic
visualization indicating the current pressure levels at
various points on the selected mat.

motor and sensory dysfunctions to provide tailored
multimodal biofeedback environments that are wellmatched to the needs of each rehabilitation subject. An
overview of the multimodal sensing environment is
shown in Figure 5.

2.2. Integration for multimodal sensing
The visualization of human movement is a
challenging task, yet with many potential applications.
The Interdisciplinary Research Environment for
Motion Analysis (IREMA) at Arizona State University
under the Arts, Media and Engineering (AME)
Program [17] aims to create a multimodal sensing and
feedback environment for human motion analysis and
movement-based interactive applications. Multimodal
systems have been demonstrated to be more effective
and robust than independent systems because humans
assimilate and absorb information better when
communication
occurs
through
multimodal
information channels [11]. Currently, IREMA houses a
marker-based 16-camera system from Motion Analysis
Corporation and a 16-channel wireless TeleMyo™
2400 EMG system from Noraxon. We have developed
context-aware auditory sensing mechanisms such as reconfigurable smart microphone arrays to detect and
acquire audio signals. These will be integrated to
develop robust and accurate vision-based movement
tracking and action recognition systems using low cost
video cameras. Data captured from multiple sensing
devices will be synchronized to enhance data fusion.
By putting marker-based motion capture system and
video cameras, the EMG system, the audio-based
system, and the pressure sensitive floor within a single
motion capture space, we will be able to perform a
holistic capture and analysis of human movement. We
would like to establish statistical models such as
Bayesian beliefs networks [3] to model the underlying
relationships among human movement, muscle tension
and floor pressure. We hope that these models can be
used to train video cameras to produce motion capture
performance comparable to that of the marker-based
system. Since the video-based systems will be cheaper
than marker-based systems, it will be very useful in
games and home therapy. Application to ongoing
projects such as our biofeedback for rehabilitation
project will enable study and treatment of a range of

Figure 5. The overview of a multimodal
movement sensing environment
Initial work in the direction of system integration of
the pressure sensing floor prototype has involved the
successful implementation of a signal mechanism to
synchronize the pressure floor system with an external
periodic signal that is propagated to all the pads via the
Ethernet connection to the host computer. This
architecture allows us to send a synchronizing clock
signal to all the pressure pads simultaneously, and this
is used by the controller circuitry to synchronize the
scanning of each mat to the external clock.

3. Preliminary results
We have evaluated the prototype system consisting
of two pressure sensing mats connected to the host
computer via a high-speed switch. Following various
tests with human subjects as well as objects, and
informed by feedback from domain experts in dance
and kinesiology, we note that the designed floor
prototype provides reliable pressure data, is robust and
easily reconfigurable. The pressure mats can be
calibrated by application of known forces to display
pressure readings in PSI, but as we are interested
currently in measuring relative pressure we only collect

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

the raw 8-bit digital data value proportional to the local
pressure being applied on the mat. We have succeeded
in dynamically reassigning configuration identification
keys, thus making the system “plug-and-play” as well
as capable of broadcasting the pressure information
over our network to remote workstations. Consistent
with our objectives, a scan rate higher than 30 Hz for
the sensors over the mats has been achieved without
using any hardware or software compression
techniques. As shown in Figure 6 below, we were able
to interact with the floor and use it to detect in real
time the pressure points on the foot during the walk
cycle. We observe that the current scan rate allows
capture of information sufficient to discern the shift in
foot pressure during various stages of the human gait
cycle from the heel to the ball of the foot and then to
the toes. When compared to previous work surveyed,
the existing scan rate of this system compares
favorably, as the large number of sensor elements
scanned gives the advantage of detailed data capture.
Below, the shifting of pressure from the heel of the
foot towards the ball of the foot, and then the toes is
clearly visible.

pressure captured with a subject standing on the
prototype.

Figure 7. 3-D view of a pressure map for a
human standing on the pressure sensing floor
We plan to use the system to better understand
dance movement as well as analyze various
characteristics of walking such as pressure shifts
during foot-ground interaction for normal and
abnormal gait conditions. Dance scientists have
previously utilized pressure and floor plates to measure
a variety of dance-related issues such as landing
parameters of various jumps, weight distribution and
changes in these aforementioned measurements with
alterations in shoe design [4, 9]. Many of these studies
use pressure based methods to investigate causes of
dance related injuries such as plantar fascitis, shin
splints, stress fractures and knee pain. A detailed
pressure-based high-resolution image of foot or body
interaction with the floor prototype will allow for
further research into dance movement along these
lines.

Figure 6. 2-D representation of the detected
pressure pattern for a foot during a walk cycle

4. Conclusions

The pressure patterns from a foot are well detected
by the system, and clearly reconstructed at the host
computer. The high density of sensors allows for this
clear pattern detection. The system successfully
demonstrated the ability to synchronize scanning and
transfer of data to an external clock signal, received
through the Ethernet connection. The 3-D pressure
map shown below illustrates the distribution of

We have successfully designed and implemented
the software and hardware architecture of a highresolution pressure sensing floor. Currently, we have
implemented a full cluster consisting of two mats and
we have been able to accurately detect pressure data
from the pads simultaneously connected to the host
computer via Ethernet. This system architecture is
robust and provides complete real-time data about
pressure and relative location as well as orientation and
movement on any activity that takes place on the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

prototype. This floor system can be easily extended by
interfacing several more mats identical to the ones
currently being used by the system, and network all of
them to the host computer. We are evaluating a number
of hardware and software-based algorithms for data
compression to reduce the amount of data being sent
over the network in order to dynamically increase or
decrease the scan rates for individual pressure sensor
pads as per the sensitivity needs of the applications that
will use the system. Furthermore, a framework for
carrying out the integration of this system with the
existing motion capture system is currently being
implemented and a protocol will be established which
allows the two systems to collect data simultaneously
and thereby enable improved study and analysis of
human movement.
It is anticipated that the complete system will
comprise of at least a dozen mats in several clusters,
and this can be easily increased to accommodate
different specifications by simply increasing the host
computer processing power and the network
bandwidth. Performing artists such as a musicians and
dancers will provide an ideal test bed for further
development and evaluation of body sensing
technologies because of their highly stylized
movements and expertly trained techniques. Also, the
pressure data collected along with motion-capture
information from the camera based system will provide
a means for performing a unique and novel analysis of
dance movement.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the support of the National
Science Foundation that has supported work described
in this paper under Grant #0403428. We also thank
Tekscan Inc. and Microchip Corporation for their
continuing support of our research.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

M. Addlesee, A. Jones, F. Livesey, and F. Samaria.
The
ORL
Active
Floor.
IEEE
Personal
Communications, 4(5), pp. 35-41. October 1997.
B. Davis, R. Cothren, P. Quesada, S. Hanson, and J.
Perry. Frequency content of normal and diabetic
plantar pressure profiles: implications for the selection
of transducer sizes. Journal of Biomechanics, Vol. 29,
No. 7, pp. 979-983. July 1996.
R.O. Duda,. P.E. Hart, and D.G. Stork. Pattern
Classification. Wiley Interscience, New York, Second
edition. 2001.
A. Gans. The relationship of heel contact in ascent and
descent from jumps to the incidence of shin splints in

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

ballet dancers. Physical Therapy, Vol. 65, No. 8, pp.
1192-1196. August 1985
N. Griffith and M. Fernström. LiteFoot: A floor space
for recording dance and controlling media. In
Proceedings of the 1998 International Computer
Music Conference 1998. International Computer Music
Association, San Francisco, U.S.A., pp. 475-481. 1998.
A. Kidané, A. Rodriguez, O. Cifdaloz, V.
Harikrishnan. ISAfloor: A high resolution floor sensor
with 3D visualization and multimedia interface
capability. AME Program, AME-TR-2003-11p. 2003.
url: http://ame2.asu. edu/faculty/hs/pubs/ame-tr-200311p.pdf
J. Leikas, J. Mattila, L. Cluitmans, and T. Urhemaa.
IMS Intuitive Movement Sensing Method. In
Proceedings of the Smart Objects Conference 2003,
Grenoble, France, pp. 200-203. May 2003.
C.F. Malacaria. A Thin, Flexible, Matrix-Based
Pressure Sensor. Sensors Magazine, Vol. 15, No. 9, pp.
102-104. September 1998.
C.D. Miller, L.E. Paulos, R.D. Parker, and M. Fishell.
The ballet technique shoe: a preliminary study of
eleven differently modified ballet technique shoes
using force and pressure plates. Foot Ankle, Vol. 11,
No. 2, pp. 97- 100. October 1990.
R. J. Orr, and G. D. Abowd. The Smart Floor: A
Mechanism for Natural User Identification and
Tracking. Extended Abstracts of the Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 2000. The
Hague, Netherlands, pp. 275-276. April 2000.
S. Oviatt. Ten myths of multimodal interaction.
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 42, No. 11, pp.7481, November 1999.
J. Paradiso, C. Abler, K. Hsiao, and M. Reynolds. The
Magic Carpet: Physical Sensing for Immersive
Environments. Extended Abstracts of the Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI 1997,
ACM Press, pp. 277-278, April 1997.
J. Paradiso, K. Hsiao, A. Benbasat, and Z. Teegarden.
Design and Implementation of Expressive Footwear.
IBM Systems Journal, Vol. 39, Nos. 3 & 4, pp. 511-52.
October 2000.
J. Paradiso, K. Hsiao, and E. Hu. Interactive Music for
Instrumented Dancing Shoes. In Proceedings of the
International Computer Music Conference 1999,
Beijing, China, ICMA, San Francisco, U.S.A., pp.
453-456. 1999.
B. Richardson, K. Leydon, M. Fernström, and J.
Paradiso. Z-Tiles: building blocks for modular,
pressure-sensing floorspaces. Extended Abstracts of
the Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems CHI 2004, Vienna, Austria, pp. 1529-1532.
April 2004.
S. Urry. Plantar pressure-measurement sensors.
Measurement Science and Technology. IOP Publishing
Ltd, Bristol, UK, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 16-32. 1999.
Interdisciplinary Research Environment for Motion
Analysis. Arizona State University, Arts, Media and
Engineering. url: http://ame.asu.edu/irema/index.html

