Controlling the Visualization: Evaluating Spatial Data Mining Patterns While
Exploring a Familiar Geographic Environment

Amy K. Lobben
Department of Geography, University of Oregon
{Lobben@uoregon.edu}
Abstract
This paper presents results from an empirical
research study designed to investigate the affect of data
format on user exploration patterns of spatial data
visualized through GIS tables and maps. An experiment
was designed in which geographic data were organized
into point, line, and area tables and maps. These data
were explored through a customized GIS interface and
user exploration patterns were recorded. The results
provide support for the application of the dominant
framework theories (that explain mental map formation
from direct exposure to a real-world geographic
environment) to learning spatial data visualized in GIS.

1. Introduction
If we ask a person to learn a familiar geographic
area by exploring data visualized through data tables and
corresponding maps, how will they choose to learn the
information? In addition, what if we structure the data
into separate formats, points, lines and areas? Will
exploration patterns be identifiable? These are the
questions that form the basis of the research reported in
this paper. An experiment was designed to assess
whether exploration patterns can be identified in the
exploration of spatial data visualized through GIS data
tables and corresponding maps.
More specifically, the research was designed to
determine the extent to which the dominant framework
theories of mental map formation can be applied to
explain learning point, line, and area data visualized
through data tables and map in a Geographic Information
System (GIS). In general, these theories focus on mental
map that are formed from the direct exploration
(walking, bicycle, bus, car…) of a large-scale
environment (such as a college campus, hometown,
office complex…). The theories suggest that the
formation of these mental maps are based on the
systematic input and storage of environmental point,
line, and area features (i.e. the mental maps are encoded
first with point features, such as home, work, store; then
line features, such as connecting routes; then area
features, such as neighborhood clusters) [1,2,3,4,5,6,7].

In most cases, the theories have been discussed in
association with direct exploration of environments.
However, some research has been conducted to
determine the application of these theories to learning
geographies through maps, but with mixed results [1, 2].
The experiment presented in this paper, provides support
for the application of the dominant framework theories
in learning spatial data visualized in point, line, and area
data tables and maps.

2. Background
Geography is the discipline that focuses on the study
of phenomena that exist in space (and often time). As a
result, geographers are devoted to measuring,
manipulating, analyzing, and visualizing all things
spatial. At first glance geography seems to be an eclectic
discipline including: urban, cultural, economic, political,
medical, geomorphology, hydrology, statistical and
regional geographers, as well as cartography, remote
sensing and GIS (Geographic Information Systems).
Again, while all of the above geographic sub-disciplines
may seem an eclectic assemblage, what they all have in
common almost always is the nature of their data, which
are spatial, meaning they have absolute (usually)
locational attributes.
Often an objective of geographic research is spatial
data visualization. While visualization can be defined as
“the creation of graphical images directly from data,
their transforms, and outcomes form algorithmic
manipulation of these data, [8 page 1]” spatial data
visualization often must be considered separately due to
the unique properties associated with spatial data.
Most spatial data exist along three axes: x, y, z. The
x and y axes provide location measures, while the z axis
indicates a quality or quantity of an attribute. Therefore,
every time a geographer gathers, measures, or analyzes
spatial elements, they must work with multi-criteria data.
Visualization of spatial data is then complicated by the
fact that a single entity is described by at least three
variables (location along the x-axis, location along the yaxis and location along the z-axis), creating a large and
complex data set. Further, much geographic research
also includes temporal data, adding a fourth axis. For

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

example, if a geographer were studying population
change patterns between 1990 and 1999, for every
location, four variables would need to be measured and
recorded: the longitude (the x-axis), the latitude (the yaxis), the number of people (z-axis), and the date (the
temporal data). While theoretically possible, identifying
four (or more) planes extending from a single origin is
difficult for most people to visualize.
But, while the multi-criteria nature of spatial data
may complicate the measuring, gathering, storage,
analyses and modeling of these data, it is the existence of
these multiple criteria, specifically the locational
attributes (the x-axis and the y-axis data) that provide a
visualization product that is both logical and relatively
simple for most people to understand; that product is a
map.

for the purpose of spatial analysis, but in the true sense
of geometric planar space, points, lines, and areas cannot
overlap. As a result, when spatial objects are overlaid
through the course of an analysis (for example
overlaying a school zone, an area object, and a voting
zone, also an area object) each zone would be considered
existing on their own geometric plane. Therefore, two
area objects on separate planes are overlaid, rather than
two area objects on a single plane.
Point

Line

Area
top

left
face

right
left

right
face

inside

bottom

3. Spatial Data Qualities (points, lines, areas)
Not Touching

Our perception of the world is formed most often
through events that occur and “whatever occurs, occurs
in space and time” [9 page 3]. While everyone will react
differently and form different opinions about events they
experience, most people mentally classify (consciously
or unconsciously) all environmental objects in the same
way, as points, lines, or areas [3,5]. Moreover, for the
purposes of measurement, manipulation, classification,
analyses, and visualization, these data are often classified
according to their form (point, line, or area).
When spatial data are gathered, the form of the data
is identified along with the location and variable (either
quantity or quality). Classifying spatial data by form
(point, line or area), not only provides an organizational
structure, which eases data storage and computation, but
also identifies spatial data in the forms that humans
perceive environmental phenomenon. For example,
points are discrete data and geographers identify features
such as buildings, cities (on a small-scale map), or
highway exits as discrete point data. People perceive
elements such as rivers and roads as lines and
geographers classify these features as continuous line
data. Finally, features such as political boundaries (state,
county, or country), forested areas, or lakes are classified
as area or polygon features.
The spatial extent and the topological relationships
between point, line, and area objects can be expressed
through a set of geometric elements [10]. A line is a
straight segment connecting exactly two points;
therefore, they have a distinct beginning and ending and
while lines can be connected, forming polylines, they
cannot be loops. Each line has two unique sides or faces,
the left and the right. A minimum of three lines may
connect for form a polygon or area, which maintains an
six topological spaces: inside, then left, right, above, and
below, all four of which are collectively considered the
outside, for spatial analyses purposes (Figure 1). For
each of separate points, lines, and areas, the objects may
touch, not touch, or be connected (Figure 1). While
using a GIS, the researcher may overlay spatial objects

Touching

Con nected

Figure 1. Topology and Connectivity
One of the most useful tools for field data gathering
is a GPS (Global Positioning System). This system may
be considered to be a collection of components
including:
the earth, earth-circling satellites
(approximately 24 solar-powered radio transmitters
orbiting about 20,000 kilometers above the earth’s
surface), ground-based stations, receivers (the unit that
receives satellite signals and often records the data), and
the users [11]. The receivers are what most people
typically consider to be the GPS units, which are capable
of calculating position along an x,y plane to an accuracy
of millimeters with higher end units. In addition, most
units also record elevation above sea level. Research
quality units are also capable of recording attribute data
at any location. The unit stores the data in the unit
computer, which can then download the data into a
spatial data analysis and visualization program housed
on a desktop computer. By default, the GPS collects
data in the form of points, lines, or areas. Most units can
be programmed to record specific attributes, such as fire
hydrant locations, a river, or a lake, but the form of the
attribute must be specified as a point (fire hydrant), line
(river) or area (lake). With a GPS unit, most of the data
topology and form classification are created before
manipulation or analyses oven begins in the GIS.

4. GIS and Spatial Data Visualization
Any spatial data that can be gathered can then be
entered (or down loaded) into a GIS (Geographic
Information Systems). A GIS provides an environment
that is suited for the unique requirements of spatial data.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Nearly all GIS software organizes data into tables, which
are separated into point, line, and area data tables.
However, the data tables may not be the most effective
representation method. While tables may be linked,
those that are differentiated by data form (point vs. line,
for example) are generally not combined. In fact, due to
the separation of attribute tables, basic exploration of
spatial data tables is restricted to individual tables. Even
though tables may be displayed simultaneously and
possibly linked, point, line, and area tables generally
remain separated. However, the geometric objects
themselves can be graphically overlaid in order to
visualize the data simultaneously.
Because spatial data represent an environment or an
idea about an environment, the data are ideally
visualized in the form of a map or statistical model,
rather than tabular data.
GIS software presents
researchers with a digital framework in which they may
organize, analyze, model, and visualize spatial data.
Any GIS allows attribute data to be georeferenced
according to the spatial location (latitude/longitude,
UTM…). While the data may be stored in the table
and/or represented in a map, the real advantage of a GIS
is that is provides an environment, which affords the
researcher the ability to conduct spatial analyses, the
results of which can be stored in a file and visualized in
the form of a map or a spatial statistical model.
Figure 2 illustrates the spatial data analyses and
visualization process and the relationships between the
users and the audience. GIS projects begin with data
collection, which is then converted into necessary GIS
data formats, including classification and separation into
point, line, and area forms. The creation of the spatial
data base and the point, line, and area tables usually
represent the most investment, in time and money, in any
spatial data analysis or visualization project [12]. Most
GIS activities are conducted by the GIS user/analyst as
represented in Figure 2. The audience participation
ranges from merely viewing a product, which may be
dynamic, static, map, model, interactive, or linear
presentation to limited data analyses and visualization.
Analyses are usually restricted to point, line, and area
data table exploration, theme viewing, or querying.
Visualization is often limited to an audience’s ability to
observe different themes and print maps. In both cases,
when a researcher wishes to provide limited analyses and
visualization to an audience, which often possesses
limited general GIS knowledge and even less program
manipulation knowledge, a custom programmed GIS is
often most appropriate and most effective.
In addition to visualizing spatial data through maps,
spatial models can be equally effective, depending on the
data, the purpose, and the audience. A model is a
representation of an idea, process, investigation, or
sometimes raw data (as in the case of a digital elevation
model, which is a digital representation of continuous
elevation data in a geographic area) while a “spatial
model is a model of an object of investigation in bispace
(space/attribute) [or]…a model of …trispace (space,
time, attribute)” [9 page 5]. Spatial models can be

classified into three general categories. Scale models
represent real-world features such as atmosphere,
transportation networks, or hydrology. Conceptual
models represent ideas, hypotheses, or spatial theories
such as landscape formation, population flows, or urban
development. Mathematical models represent statistical
spatial relationships such as geographically weighted
regression.
Ex tern al, Ind e pe nd en t
Va ria ble s

GIS U se r/ An alyst
Act ivit ies

Au die nce
Activitie s

Da ta
Con versio n
Data
A na lyses

Data
So ur ce s

V isual izatio n
Pro du ct

GIS

Data
V isua liza tio n

Figure 2 Model of GIS Activities
In the past, spatial statistics and spatial analyses
were conducted through separate software programs.
But now, much of the GIS software may be programmed
to create an environment customized for specific data
analysis or visualization (through maps or models). For
example, for spatial data that may maintain unique
characteristics, such as soil acidity or particle size, the
software can be programmed to provide customized
windows that allow for specific data entry, followed by
common statistical analyses, such as factor analysis,
spatial autocorrelation, or geographically weighted
regression. Or, the software can be programmed to
provide a specialized organizational structure for
marketing data in which the researcher may want to
assess the causal relationship of unique socioeconomic
data on spending habits. In that case, the software could
be designed to provide windows in which marketing data
may be entered and then manipulated through a
regression analysis. In addition, GIS software can be
programmed to provide specific analyses framework.
Algorithms or statistical formulas can be input and
mechanics created to provide for their use. Some GIS
software can be customized using software specific
scripting languages. For example, ArcView GIS is
equipped with the Avenue scripting language, unique to
that program, while ArcGIS may be customized using
Visual Basic. In both cases, the GIS can be custom
programmed to provide mechanisms for specific data
bases, analyses, or visualization.
Because “the real power of GIS resides in their
display facilities” [13 page 41], most GIS software is
used as a tool to create maps from spatial data or to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

conduct elementary analyses or database exploration,
rather than for complex statistical analyses, modeling, or
developing research hypotheses. As a result, the point,
line, and area attribute tables provide a means of creating
maps or querying spatial data.
However, the extent to which people rely of the
three forms (point, line, or area) of spatial data is not
known.
More specifically, researchers have not
identified the extent to which the dominant framework
theories of mental map formation apply to spatial
learning in a GIS environment. Therefore, a research
project was designed to determine the exploration
patterns. The extent to which subjects explored point,
line, and area tables, along with the corresponding map
layers was measured.

5. Programming the Customized GIS
In order to conduct the research, a customized GIS
program was designed to allow users (subjects) to
explore a spatial database while answering specific
questions provided by the research facilitator. The
objective was to determine whether users rely more on
line data and line attribute tables or on area data and area
attribute tables to answer the questions.
ArcView was used as the foundation program and
customized using the Avenue scripting language. The
custom program was designed to meet two primary
goals. First, the program interface should be simplified.
The basic ArcView interface includes many menus,
buttons, and tools, all of which allow for different types
of analyses (theme overlays, buffering space around
specific objects, querying data attribute tables…). The
new interface was designed to include only the menus
and tools that would be used in the experiment.
Second, pull-down menus and tools that specifically
relate to the experiment data needed to be created. A
pull-down menu that allows direct access to the point,
line and area attribute tables was created. The user can
select any of the listed attribute tables; tables can be
displayed simultaneously and moved around the screen.
A query tool was created that would allow the user to
click anywhere on the map to identify attributes of a
specific object. By selecting the query tool and clicking
on any object displayed in the map area, an attribute
table unique to that individual object will appear. Also,
the interface was designed so only one data format,
which includes the data table and corresponding map,
may be viewed at one time.
The customized software included five attribute
tables, a point table for cities, three line tables for
interstates, US highways, and state highways, and an
area table for counties. Avenue was used to create popup boxes into which the user can ask questions. These
pop-up boxes were linked to each of the specific attribute
tables. For example, one pop-up box allows the user to
inquire about interstates. They can ask the program to
identify the longest, the widest, or the busiest interstate.
They can also ask the program to then highlight that
specific interstate on the map. The same questions can

be asked about US highways and state highways in two
separate pop-up windows linked to the individual line
attribute tables. A county pop-up menu allows the user
to ask which is the largest and most populated county
(along with several other socioeconomic data related
questions) and then highlight that county on the map;
this pop-up can also locate a county of a specific name.
Pop-up menus were also created to provide interactive
inquiries about US and state highways as well as cities.
Through the city pop-up window, the user can inquire
about latitude/longitude and several socioeconomic
related questions. As with the other pop-ups, the user
can also request to highlight the city.
In all of the pop-up windows, the formation of the
user’s question is controlled by the software. The user is
unable to ask open ended questions; instead, they are
prompted by the program to develop controlled
questions. This customized GIS does not allow for data
manipulation.

6. The Experiment
Two pilot studies were conducted to assess the
usability of the customized ArcView. Following the
pilot studies, the experiment was conducted.

6.1. Pilot Studies
The first pilot study included eight subject
participants, 6 males and 2 females ranging in age from
29 to 28. All subjects were upper-level GIS students.
These subjects were chosen due to their experience with
ArcView and ArcGIS. The assumption was that they
would provide the most insightful comments and
suggestions for the customized GIS interface,
organization, and visualization of the spatial data layers.
However,
during
the
interviews,
subjects
overwhelmingly expressed frustration with the simplified
design and lack of options they had grown accustomed to
having at their disposal. As a result, as second pilot
study, in which novices were recruited was conducted.
Participants with no GIS experience were recruited
for the second pilot. Because the subjects in the second
group had not seen GIS software before and were
generally unfamiliar with the use of such software, the
interview sessions were conducted slightly differently
than in the first pilot study. Following a simple tutorial,
subjects were given a brief introduction to the software
interface and the data tables. They were then asked to
complete specific tasks, such as look for particular cities,
counties, or interstates. They were given 5 minutes to
work on their tasks and then the interview questions
were posed.
Understandably, most subjects expressed some
apprehension when they first began their tasks, as the
software was unlike any software that most had used.
All subjects said that the brief tutorial was helpful. In
general, the subjects indicated that they were
appreciative of the simple interface. They indicated that
the learning curve was low and as soon as they realized

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

the purpose was simply to explore the maps and data
tables, they felt very comfortable.
But, subjects
indicated that the separation of the line features (roads)
into three separate maps was confusing. Initially, one of
the research questions was designed to address whether
creating and visualizing a road hierarchy influenced
exploration patterns and learning. Because of the
confusion the hierarchy caused, a new road layer,
including only interstates and major US highways was
created. All of the roads were symbolized the same way;
this excluded a visual hierarchy.
The second pilot study was most successful.
Because the subjects recruited in the formal experiment
would not be GIS students and ideally not have any
experience with GIS software, the group recruited for the
second pilot study was appropriate. Based on the results
of the interviews from the second pilot study, the
interface and table/map design was deemed satisfactory.

6.2. The Formal Experiment
Eighteen subjects participated in this experiment.
They ranged in age from 18 to 44 years. Twelve
subjects were university students and six were not
affiliated (students nor employees) with any university.
All were high school graduates; four held university
BS/BA degrees. None of the subjects had ever used or
seen any GIS software. All subjects were paid $20 for
their participation.
Subjects were tested individually. Before beginning
testing, the experiment was briefly explained (excluding
specific research questions).
Consent forms were
explained and signed. Subjects were told that they would
complete a brief tutorial introducing them to the
software. Following the tutorial, they would be given 15
minutes to explore several Michigan spatial data tables
and maps.
After this introduction to the experiment, each
subject was given the 15 allotted minutes to explore the
customized ArcView software that included Michigan
cities, roads, and counties visualized through both data
tables and maps. Recall that exploration patterns were
controlled to a degree due to the program customization.

7. Results and Discussion
Subjects’ 15-minute data exploration sessions were
recorded using CyberCam, which created a movie of the
ArcView screen actions. The data mining patterns were
evaluated using two criteria. First, the type of table
accessed was identified as either point, line, or area.
Second, the amount of time (in whole seconds) was
recorded for each table exploration. Each time a subject
visited a table was considered a unique table access. In
other words, if a subject opened a line table for 45
seconds, then a point table for 150 seconds, and then the
line table again, three separate scores were recorded.
While each subject was allotted 15 minutes (900
seconds) to explore all tables, individual table access was

recorded in whole seconds. As a result, the total
recorded time for all subjects ranged from 896 to 905
seconds.
The maps and the data tables were used in
conjunction with each other, with the tables providing
attribute data (such as names) of a location on the maps.
Therefore, time spent studying the data theme and time
spent studying the corresponding data table were
summed. For example, the total time spend analyzing
the point theme and the point data table were considered
together as the point time.
Data Exploration Session. Data were gathered for
each subject in three areas: the initial order in which
subjects accessed the data tables and maps, how many
times they accessed each type of data table and map, and
how much time they spent studying each type of data
table and map. Regarding the access order, 17 subjects
accessed the point data first, while one subject accessed
the area data first. The results for the number of
exploration sessions and the total time spent exploring
the data is presented below, by format.

7.1. Point Data
Subjects accessed the point data 33 times, in total,
with a minimum of 1 access, a maximum of 4 times and
a mean of 1.833; the standard deviation was 0.857. The
total amount of time spent studying the point data was
ranged from 92 to 404 seconds, with a mean of 207.722,
a standard deviation of 94.682, and a total across all
subjects of 3739 seconds. A positive relationship was
observed between number of data access and amount of
time exploring data (Figure 6).

7.2. Line Data
Subjects accessed line data a total of 30 times, with a
mean of 1.66 and standard deviation of 0.76. Total time
spent studying the line data ranged from 167 to 410
seconds with a mean of 310.556, a standard deviation of
70.918, and a total across all subjects of 5590 seconds.
A slight negative relationship is observed between
number of tables accessed and total time spent studying
the tables (Figure 7). However, the trend is influenced
by a single outlier.

7.3. Area Data
Subjects accessed area data tables and maps 39 times,
with a mean of 2.16 times and a standard deviation of
0.78. Time spent studying the area data ranged from 236
to 565 seconds, with a mean of 382 seconds, a standard
deviation of 87.021, and a total of 6877 seconds across
all subjects. An impressive linear relationship was not
observed between the number of times the area data were
accessed and total time spent studying these data (Figure
8).
One of the more interesting results from this
experiment was the observed difference in time spent
studying each of the different data formats. To assess

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Total Time Spend Exploring Point Data

500

Total Time Spent Exploring Point Data

500

Total Time Spent Exploring Area Data

statistical significance of this difference, an ANOVA
was conducted on the total time subjects spent exploring
the point, line, and area data tables and maps. The
results indicate a statistically significant difference
(Figure 9).

600

400
300
200
100
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Point Exploration Sessions

400

7. Implications
What do these results indicate about spatial data
visualization and geographic learning? The results from
this experiment provide some initial support for the
broader application of the dominant framework theories
that have been offered to explain mental map formation.
Subjects were asked to explore data of a familiar
geographic environment (a state in which each subject
had lived for at least 12 years). As a result, should the
dominant framework theories apply, subjects should
have encoded point data first, then line, then area. So,
when asked to explore the data with the intent to learn
the geography, they should spend less time studying the
point data and the most time studying the area data. The
statistical analysis support such an assumption.
However, this study is one of very few designed for
the purposes of exploring the potential application of the
dominant framework theories of mental map formation
to learning from data visualized in the form of a map. In
addition, this experiment utilized GIS as a method for
the spatial data visualization, an even less common
approach. As a result, considerably more research is
warranted to determine the extent to which these theories
apply to such learning.

300

References
200

100
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Line Exploration Sessions

500

400

300

200
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of Area Exploration Sessions

Figure 6 Scatterplots of Data Access

Source
Variation
between
error
total

Sum
Squares
2.7E+05
3.6E+05
6.4E+05

d.f.
2
51
53

Mean
Squares
1.3E+05
7147

F

P

19.37

<.0001

Figure 7 ANOVA Results

[1]MacEachren, AM. 1992. “Application of Environmental
Learning Theory to Spatial Knowledge Acquisition from Maps.”
Annals of the Association of American Geographers. V 82,2
[2]Nelson, ES. 1996. “A Cognitive Map Experiment: Mental
Representation and the Encoding Process.” Cartography and
Geographic Information Systems. V 23,4.
[3]Golledge, RG and RJ Stimson. 1997. Spatial Behavior: A
Geographic Perspective. The Guilford Press.
[4]Montello, D R. 1998. “A New Framework for Understanding
the Acquisition of Spatial Knowledge in Large-Scale
Environments.” In M J Egenhofer and R Golledge (Eds.) Spatial
and Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Information Systems.
Oxford University Press.
[5]Mark, DM 1999. “Spatial Representation: A Cognitive View.”
In DJ Maguire, MF. Goodchild, DW Rhind and PA Longley (Eds)
Geographical Information Systems: Principles and Applications,
Second Edition Wiley.
[6]Golledge, R. 1999. Wayfinding Behavior. Johns Hopkins Press.
[7]Tversky, B. 2000. “Remembering Spaces.” In E Tulving and
FIM Craik (Eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Memory. The Oxford
Handbook of Memory. Oxford Press.
[8]Slocum, TA, RS Sluter, FC Kessler, SC Yoder. 2004. “A
Qualitative Evaluation of MapTime, A Program for Exploring
Spatiotemporal Point Data.” Cartographica, V 39,3. [9]Wegener,
M. 2000. Spatial Models and GIS. Spatial Models and GIS: New
Potential and New Models. Taylor and Francis.
[10]Carr, JR. 2002. Data Visualization in the Geosciences. Prentice
Hall.
[11]Molenaar, M. 1998. An Introduction to the Theory of Spatial
Object Modelling for GIS. Taylor and Francis.
[12]Kennedy, M. 1996. The Global Positioning System and GIS:
An Introduction. Ann Arbor Press, Inc.
[13] Montgomery, GE and HC Schuch. 1993. GIS Data
Conversion Handbook. GIS World Books.
[14] Fischer, MM. 2000. Spatial Interaction Models and the Role
of Geographic Information Systems. Spatial Models and GIS: New
Potential and New Models. Taylor and Francis.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

