A Methodology for the Evidential Analysis of
Computer-Generated Animation (CGA)
Dr D Schofield, Ms N Hussin, and Dr M Tarek Shalaby
The University of Nottingham
psxnh@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper demonstrates a sample analysis derived
from a full analysis of the legal items of evidence for
the purpose of generating forensic animation for court
litigation. The first section explains the vital elements
of the research. The second section elucidates the case
studies. The classification of evidence has been formed
into written, spatial, visual and eyewitness statements.
Section three of this paper, describe the conceptual
features from the analytical standpoint of knowledge.
This section also explains the interpretations made in
compliance with the literature from knowledge. The
methodology of the sample analysis has been structured
in section four. This part of the research includes the
scores that have been assigned in a quasi-experimental
stage. Subsequently, a number of scores have been
manipulated in a pragmatic stage to demonstrate the
significance of several factors. The final section
highlights a number of possible findings for the
evidential analysis of computer-generated forensic
animations.
Keywords: Visual, Computer-Generated Animation,
Forensic Animation, Knowledge, Evidence.

1. Vital Elements Involved in the
Research

A quasi-experiment is sometimes called ex post facto,
or after the fact experiments because the experiment is
conducted after classification has been made[2]. In
this research the subjects are the items of legal
evidence and the classification refers to the four classes
discussed in the later part of this paper.
The second part of the analysis embraces pragmatic
approach. It emphasises the practicality of the scores
assigned in the quasi-experimental stage.
The quasi-experimental stage encompasses the cases,
evidence, CGA and theory of knowledge. Whilst the
pragmatic stage refers to the result of the analysis,
statistical evaluation, discussion and conclusion.

2. Cases and Evidence Classification

There are four vital elements involve in the
research. The first element to be defined is the
computer-generated animation (CGA). CGA may
allow counsel to transform testimony and data1 into
dynamic visual demonstrations. In a basic definition,
an animation is a sequence of illustrations that, when
filmed, videotaped, or computer-generated, creates the
1

illusion that the illustrated objects are in motion. The
second elements to be defined are the three cases in
this research, which consists of two road traffic
accidents and a crime investigation. The third element
refers to the individual items of legal evidence. These
items have been derived from the three cases. The
fourth element is knowledge. Knowledge has been
applied in the analysis from the analytical
standpoint[1]. Based on these four elements, the
analysis of the items, involves both a quasi-experiment
and pragmatic stage.

See Declan O’Flaherty, Computer-Generated Displays in the
Courtroom: For Better or Worse?, Blackstone Press Ltd., available
at, http://webjcli.ncl.ac.uk/1996/issue4/oflah4.html (last visited
5/1/2005) (“More recently, major advances in technology have
meant that computer-generated displays have been unleashed in the
courtroom”).

1

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The three cases consist of two road traffic
accidents and a criminal investigation. The first
accident involves a collision between two motorbikes
and a car. Both motorcyclists died in the collision. The
second accident involves a fatal collision between two
motorcars. The third case involves an investigation of
the murder of two young girls. In all three cases, the
animator has been instructed by the police authority to
generate the CGA. The CGA applies as a method to
illustrate complex technical facts from the cases.
Figure 1, Figure 2, and Figure 3 demonstrate the three
stills from the CGA for Case 1, Case 2 and Case 3
accordingly.

For the written evidence the details of the individual
items of evidence are as follows: (a) E1, a Crash
Investigation Report and E2, a Police Statement from
Case 1; (b) E1, a Police Statement, E2, a Coroner’s
Inquest Report and E3, a Police Reports (prepared at
the scene) from Case 2; and (c) E1, a Report from
Expert Group and E2, a Police Statement from Case 3.
For the spatial evidence the details of the individual
items of evidence are as follows: (a) E3, a Road Layout
Plan from Case 1; and (b) E5 comprises of two Survey
Maps and E6 consists of two Overhead Plans of debris
from Case 2.

Figure 1: Still from a CGA showing the collision
between two motorbikes and a car in Case 1

For the visual image the details of the individual items
of evidence are as follows: (a) E5, photographs at the
scene from Case 1; (b) E7, a digital image reference
material from Case 2; and (c) E3, a survey plans from
Case 3. Finally, the eyewitnesses’ statements for all
three cases have been referenced as E4.

3. Conceptual Features
The types of knowledge and conditions for
knowledge,2 which then leads to the theory of
knowledge. The justified true belief and the theory of
justification have been perceived as having strong
correlation with the fundamentals of evidence. Both of
these concepts will be referenced as K1a, K1b, K1c,
K2a, K2b, and K2c in Table 2.

Figure 2: Still from a CGA showing the collision
between two motorcars in Case 2

K1 Types of Knowledge K2 Conditions for
Knowledge
K1a Competence
K2a Truth
K2b Acceptance
K1b Acquaintance
K1c Correctness
K2c Justification
Figure 3: Still from a CGA showing the environment
of the vicinity where the crime occurred in Case 3

Table 2: List of concepts from knowledge
theory

All the items of evidence have been classified into four
classes namely the written evidence, spatial evidence,
visual images and eyewitness statements.
The
following table (Table 1) illustrates the four classes of
evidence for the purpose of this research.
Classification
A Written Evidence

Table 3 describes an interpretation of all of the
concepts when analysing items of legal evidence under
the classification of written, spatial and visual. The
interpretation for all of these concepts has been made
in compliance with the underlying principles of types
and the conditions for knowledge.

Case 1 Case 2 Case 3

B Spatial Evidence

E1
E2
E3

C Visual Images
D Eyewitness

E5
E4

E1
E2
E3
E5
E6
E7
E4

For the purpose of analysing the eyewitness statements,
the concepts of K1 and K2 described above will be
applied in a different way (Table 4) from the items of
evidence in the Table 3.
The items of evidence
classified under written, spatial and visual are usually
produced by police officer or expert with appropriate
training and knowledge pertaining to the investigation.
On the other hand, eyewitness’ statements are

E1
E2
E3
E4

2

Table 1: Classification of Evidence

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2

see [2]

In the similar category, the police or expert has similar
training, qualifications and experience pertaining to this
specific investigation. Therefore, he or she has applied
a similar method in a previous investigation, which
pertains to the case in question. For example, the
police officer had training, qualifications and
experience in a collision case involving two motorcars.

description of an event (collision or crime) based on
human perception and usually an eyewitness is a
bystander who does not involve in the investigation
process.

Concepts
K1a competence

K1b acquaintance

K1c correct
K2a truth
K2b acceptance

K2c justification

Interpretations
knowledge of the police, expert or
person
in-charge
for
the
preparation of the item of legal
evidence
experience in relation to what the
person(s) in-charge was/were
involved in the collision or crime
the person(s) in-charge was/were
at the collision or crime scene
application
of
appropriate
scientific or specific rule
endorsement of what has been
applied
throughout
the
investigation
ability to validate the whole
process of the investigation
based on all the concepts

Finally, in the exactly category, the police or expert
has had exact training, qualification and experience
pertaining to the investigation. Therefore, he or she had
applied exactly the same method in a previous
investigation pertaining to the case in question. For
example, the police officer had training, qualification
and experience in collision case involving a motorcar
and a motorbike. Following these categories, a range of
scores has been formed ranging from 0.0-1.0. Each of
the categories will be assigned with a median score as
shown in Table 5.
Categories
General
Similar
Exactly

Table 3: Interpretations for items of legal
evidence
Concepts
K1a competence

K1b acquaintance

K1c correct
K2a truth
K2b acceptance

K2c justification

Table 5: Median scores for the categories

The same categories apply to the assessment on the
eyewitness statement. For instance, if the eyewitness
was at the crime scene and had witnessed the shooting,
he or she may be assessed under the exactly category.
If he or she did not witness the shooting but heard what
has been described as a firearm’s shot, he or she may
be assessed under similar category. Finally, if the
eyewitness did not see or hear the shooting but arrived
at the scene while the victim was still there, he or she
may be assessed under general category.

Interpretations
capabilities of the eyewitness in
that he or she was involved in the
collision or crime
experience in relation to what he
or she was involved in the
collision or crime
eyewitness was at the collision or
crime vicinity
description based on five human
senses
endorsement
from
the
eyewitness on his or her
description
based
on
the
intellectual capabilities
eyewitness’ affirmation on what
he or she has described earlier

4. Methodological Analysis for
Individual Items of Evidence
4.1. Quasi-experimental
The quasi-experimental analysis involves all the
evidence items stated in Table 1. In this paper, the
sample of the analysis will be done for Case 1
(collision between a motorcar and two motorbikes) on
all four items of evidence referenced as E1, E2, E3,
and E4. The inference begins by applying K1-K2 to
each item individually based on each case. Each of the
analysis will be referenced accordingly, as shown in
Table 6. It is essential to note that there is more than
one eyewitness in this accident. However, in the
sample analysis described in this paper, only the
statement made by the primary eyewitness will be
analysed. The eyewitness will be referred to as W1.
All the items listed in Table 6 have been furnished to
the animator. A copy of each item has been examined
for this research.

Table 4: Interpretations for eyewitness
statement

Consequential to Tables 3 and 4, three categories
namely general, similar and exactly have been formed
to correspond with interpretation.
In the general category, the police or expert has had
general training, qualification and experience pertaining
to the investigation. Therefore, he or she has applied
general methods in the investigation pertaining to the
case in question. For example, if a police officer had
training, qualifications and experience in dealing with
pedestrian fatalities.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Median scores
0.3
0.5
0.8

3

Item
E1

E2
E3

E5

E4

Analysis Ref.
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
b1
b2
b3
c1
c2
c3
d1
d2
d3

above. Based on the evaluation for E1 and E2 on the
same concepts (K1a and K1b), the police constable
will be assessed under the exactly category similar to
the analysis in a1 with a score of 0.8.

Concept
K1a, K1b
K1c
K2a, K2b, K2c
K1a, K1b, K1c
K2a, K2b, K2c
K1a, K1b
K1c
K2a, K2b, K2c
K1a, K1b
K1c
K2a, K2b, K2c
K1a, K1b
K1c
K2a, K2b, K2c

Analysis b2. The police constable states that he had
prepared the E3 by himself as shown in the report
associated with this item of evidence (K1c). A score of
0.8 has been assigned in a similar manner to analysis
a2.
Analysis b3. The police constable had applied the
scientific or specific method from the standard
literature for collision investigation (K2a-c). The
police constable will be assessed under the exactly
category similar to the analysis in a3 with a score of
0.8.

Table 6: Analysis reference for items of
evidence

4.1.3 Quasi-experiment for visual images
It is essential to note that due to the lack of
details available about the person capturing the visual
images, assumption has been made for analysis c1 and
c3.

4.1.1 Quasi-experiment for written evidence
Analysis a1. In Case 1, the police constable incharge of producing the Crash Investigation Report
(E1) is a Senior Crash Investigator. The facts from E1
demonstrate that the police constable has qualifications,
training and experience, particularly in crash
investigation. The concept of competency refers to the
training and qualification of the expert (K1a). On the
other hand, the concept of acquaintance refers to the
experience of the police constable (K1b). Based on this
fact, the police constable will be assessed under the
exactly category which stated that the expert had
qualifications, trainings and experience on very similar
collision investigation. The police constable will be
assigned a score of 0.8.

Analysis c1. For this purpose, an assumption must be
made that the expert had training, qualification and
experience (K1a and K1b) in a general type of collision
investigation (in capturing visual images). The expert
will be assessed under general category with a score of
0.3.
Analysis c2. The images seen in the photographs (E5)
are in compliance with the description from the Crash
Investigation Report (E1). The expert (photographer)
had visited the collision scene and will be assessed
under the exactly category with a score of 0.8 (K1c).

Analysis a2. The police constable had attended the
scene and was assigned a score of 0.8 (K1c).

Analysis c3. Similar to analysis c1, an assumption is
made that the expert had undertook the steps and rules
for capturing evidential images as described in the
guidelines from the Home Office[3]. The expert will be
assessed under general category with a score of 0.3.

Analysis a3. The police constable will be assessed
under the exactly category, which stated that he had
applied a scientific/specific rule based on experience,
training and qualification on very similar collision
investigation; that he has the ability to endorse and
validate what has been stated in E1 based on the
standard literature applied. The police constable will
hence be assigned a score of 0.8 (K2a-c).

4.1.4 Quasi-experiment
statement

eyewitness

It is essential to note that the sentenced formed in
italic style are information extracted form the
eyewitness statement made by W1.

Analysis a4. E2 in Case 1 for K1(a-c), has been
assessed in a similar manner to analysis a1 and a2.

Analysis d1. W1 stated that he has been driving since
1942 and that he is familiar with all the controls and
operations of the vehicle. Based on the statement made
by W1 and the concept of interpretation for eyewitness
(described in the earlier section), W1 will be assessed
under the similar category. These facts and this
category are evaluated as:

Analysis a5. E2 in Case 1 for K2(a-c), has been
assessed in a similar manner to analysis a3.

4.1.2 Quasi-experiment for spatial evidence
Analysis b1. This is a survey plan of the road
layout prepared by the police constable described

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

for

4

a.

capabilities of the eyewitness in what he was
involved during the collision (K1a); and
the experience in relation to what he was
involved during the collision (K1b).

b.

4.2. Pragmatic Evaluation on the Summary of
Scores
In the pragmatic stage all the concepts have
been elucidated as a series of factors referenced as R1R6 (Table 8a). Competence has been described as the
expert with training and qualification; acquaintance
refers to the experience of the expert; correct relates to
the presence at the scene; truth, acceptance and
justification are being construed as rule that has been
endorsed and validated.

The statement made by W1 will be assigned with a
score of 0.5 for K1 and K1b.
Analysis d2. The police officer states that W1 has been
called for the interview because he was involved in a
serious road accident on the B Road. This information
shows that W1 was at the vicinity of the accident or
collision (K1c). The statement made by W1 will be
assessed under the exactly category with a score of 0.8.

Quasi-experimental
K1a (competence)
K1b (acquaintance)
K1c (correct)
K2a (truth)
K2b (acceptance)
K2c (justification)

Analysis d3. W1 states that he pulled into the protected
area. His awareness on the basic road traffic rule has
been assessed as K2a. W1 estimates the distance with
the next vehicle before proceeding with the turning.
This action has been assessed as a form of endorsement.
W1 further affirms that he was aware of the clicking
noise of the indicator and the flashing light on the
dashboard. For K2, the statement made by W1 will be
assessed under the similar category with a score of 0.5.

Table 8a: Interpretation from concepts to
factors for written, spatial and visual evidence

Similar to Table 8a, Table 8b, illustrates the factors for
eyewitness statement. Competence has been described
as the eyewitness’ capabilities; acquaintance refers to
the experience; correct relates to the presence at the
vicinity; truth, acceptance and justification are being
construed as human senses followed by a form of
endorsing and affirmation of the description.

All the scores for each of the analysis have been
summarised in Table 7 and the bar chart (Figure 4).
Items
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5

K1a
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.3

K1b
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.3

Concepts
K1c K2a
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.8
0.3

K2b
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.3

K2c
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.3

Quasi-experimental
K1a (competence)
K1b (acquaintance)
K1c (correct)
K2a (truth)
K2b (acceptance)
K2c (justification)

Table 7: List of score from Case 1

Pragmatic
R1 (capability)
R2 (experience)
R3 (vicinity)
R4 (senses)
R5 (endorsement)
R6 (affirmation)

Table 8b: Interpretation from concepts to
factors for eyewitness statement

1
Scores

Pragmatic
R1 (expert)
R2 (experience)
R3 (scene)
R4 (rule)
R5 (endorsement)
R6 (validation)

E1

0.5

E2

As stated earlier the vital factor is R3 (previously K1c),
which requires the expert or eyewitness to be at the
scene or vicinity. In Table 9, the scores have been
manipulated to observe modification of the factors[4].
If the expert and the eyewitness statement were not
present at the scene, the items may possibly be
assessed as general or similar for R3. Presumably, the
police constable receives all the road markings,
photographs, and other details of the accident from an
assistant; in this instance the police constable was not
present at the scene. E1 would then be assessed under
the similar category with a score of 0.5.

E3

0

E4

1

2

3

4

5

6

E5

Concepts

Figure 4: Summary of scores

Based on Figure 4, on the x-axis, the numbers 1-6
represent K1a, K1b, K1c, K2a, K2b, and K2c. The
most reliable items are E1, E2, and E3. Although E5 is
lacking details pertaining to the person in-charge of
capturing the images, it may possible that the item be
corroborated with E1, E2 and E3. The eyewitness
statement has been evaluated under the similar
category except for K1c that W1 was at the collision
vicinity. K1c for each item shows that being present at
the scene or vicinity is vital.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

5

Items
E1
E2
E3
E5
E4

R1
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.5

R2
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.5

Factors
x
R3 R4 R5 R6
0.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.1
0.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.1
0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.0
0.8 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2
0.8 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.1
x: standard deviation value

This research aims to reach a level of certainty in
determining how reliable and accurate is the CGA for
each case based on the items of evidence. Although
there is no definite level of certainty, however, the
reliability and accuracy can be measured by analysing
individual items of evidence that has been used by the
animator to generate the forensic animation for the
litigation purposes.

Table 9: Scores manipulation

Fom Table 9, it can be seen that E3 is the most reliable
items with “0” deviation value. “0” deviation value
represent the fact that the individual item of evidence
has been assessed under exactly category.
The
evidential analysis shows that all six factors (R1-R6)
have significance in each item of evidence. The most
vital factor is for the expert and eyewitness in the items
of evidence to be at the scene and vicinity (R3).
Secondly, the training, qualification and experience of
the expert are crucial to ensure that the items of legal
evidence have precise and correct information for the
animation to be concluded as reliable and accurate (R1
and R2). The significance of factor R1 and R2 has a
strong correlation with R4, R5 and R6. The three
factors are all concerned with the method of
investigation. For eyewitness statements, the three
factors (R4, R5, and R6) involve human senses and the
capacity of a person giving such statement.

6. References
1

(ii) Hussin, N., Schofield, D. and Shalaby, M. T.,
Visualizing Information: Evidence Analysis for
Computer-Generated Animation (CGA), Proceedings of
8th
International
Conference
on
Information
Visualization IV04, London, 14-16th July, 2004.

5. Conclusion
This research hypothesizes the importance of
correct information from the evidence in a case as vital
in generating forensic animations. The main objective
is to highlight the legal evidence as a crucial element in
generating such an animation and that the items of
legal evidence have been prepared by authorized police
officer or expert. In an instance where eyewitness
statement has been analysed as items of legal evidence,
the eyewitness statement must also be present at the
collision or crime vicinity.
The human senses
involving statement made by the eyewitness are also
crucial in determining the reliability of information
given.
Consequential to the main objective, each items of
legal evidence can be used to substantiate the
information for the animator.
The process of
generating a CGA may not be possible if just one item
of legal evidence is the only source of information for
the animator. This fact is parallel with the literature
from knowledge (see Table 2). The relation between
these two literatures shows that (a) evidence is
knowledge to the animator; (b) the items of legal
evidence (knowledge) has been investigated by an
expert or a police officer with competency,
acquaintance and correct information; and (c) the
evidence fulfils the conditions for knowledge to
authenticate the credibility of (b).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

(i) Shalaby, T., Hussin, N. and Schofield, D., Forensic
Animation: Measuring the Reliability and Accuracy of
Computer Animations Used in the Courtroom,
Proceedings of IV03: The Seventh International
Conference on Information Visualization, London, 16th –
18th July 2003.

6

2

McBurney, Donald H. Research Methods. 5th Edition.
Wadsworth Thomson Learning. USA. 2001.

3

Home Office. Digital Image Procedure. Version 1.0
March 2002. Police Scientific Development Branch.
Available at, www.homeoffice.gov.uk/docs/digimpro.pdf
(Date Last Accessed: 28/01/2005)

4

Bryman, Alan. Social Research Methods.
University Press. New York. 2001.

Oxford

