Modeling 3D Scanned Data to Visualize the Built Environment
Yusuf Arayici, Andy Hamilton
The University of Salford, Greater Manchester
{a.hamilton@salford.ac.uk, y.arayici@salford.ac.uk}

Abstract

1. Introduction
Capturing and modeling 3D information of the
built environment is a big challenge. A number of
techniques and technologies are now in use. These
include EDM, GPS and photogrammetric
application and also remote sensing applications.
In this paper, we discussed 3D laser scanning
technology, which can acquire high density point
data in a accurate, fast way. Therefore, it can
provide benefits for refurbishment process in the
built environment.
The scanner can digitize all the 3D
information concerned with a building down to
millimetre detail. A series of scans externally and
internally allows an accurate 3D model of the
building to be produced. This model can be
"sliced" through different planes to produce
accurate 2D plans and elevations. This novel
technology improves the efficiency and quality of
construction projects, such as maintenance of
buildings or group of buildings that are going to be
renovated for new services.
Although data capture is more efficient using
laser scanner than most other techniques, data
modeling still presents significant research
problems. These are addressed in this paper.
The paper describes the research undertaken
in the EU funded (FP6 IP) INTELCITIES project
concerning 3D laser scanner technology for CAD
modeling and its integration with various systems
such as 3D printing and VR projection systems. It
also considers research to be undertaken in the EU
funded (INTERREG) Virtual Environmental
Planning Systems (VEPS) project in the next 2
years. Following this, an approach for data
modeling of scanned data is introduced, through
which the information belonging to existing
buildings can be stored in a database to use in
building, urban, and regional scale models.
Keywords- Laser scanner, data modeling,
visualization, built environment, integration,
objects recognition.

Terrestrial laser scanning is the use of a ground
based device that uses a laser to measure the three
dimensional coordinates of a given region of an
objects surface automatically, in a systematic order
at a high rate in near real time. It is also referred to
as close range laser scanning [1].
The scanner is targeted to the physical objects
to be scanned and the laser beam is directed over
the object in a closely spaced grid of points. By
measuring the time of laser flight, which is the time
of travel of the laser from the scanner to the
physical objects and back to the scanner, the
position in three-dimensional space of each
scanned point on the object is established. The
result is a “cloud of points” which consists in
thousands of points in 3-dimensional space that are
a dimensionally accurate representation of the
existing object [2]. This information can then be
converted in a 3D CAD model that can be
manipulated using CAD software, and to which the
design of new equipment can be added.
This innovation is significant because it has
potential to solve the problems that are always been
associated with design and construction of existing
buildings for reuse goals [10]. For example, it can
provide faster, better quality and more precise
analysis and feature detection for building survey.
The advantages and disadvantages of this
technology is shown in the below table [ ]. 3D
laser scanning technology advantages and
disadvantages are summarized in Table 1.
In the built environment, the use of the 3D
laser scanner enables digital documentation of
buildings, sites and physical objects for
reconstruction and restoration. It also enables the
creation of educational resources within the built
environment
including
cultural
heritage.
Furthermore, it can provide reverse engineering in
construction for the reuse of the existing buildings.
Producing building design and CAD models and
VR models from an existing building by means of
the laser scanner will facilitate the communication
between the stakeholders through 3D visualization
and facilitate the analysis of the latest conditions of
the buildings. Besides, it has also potential to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

accurately record inaccessible and potentially
hazardous areas. Consequently, it facilitates
“virtual refurbishment” of the buildings and allows
the existing structure and proposed new services to
be seen in an effective manner [9]. The potential of
3D scanners need to be matched against current
cost and other limitations noted in the table above.
3D Laser Scanning
Advantages
Disadvantages
Applicable to all 2D Some systems do not
and 3D surfaces
work in sun or rain
Rapid
3D
data 3D data sets needs postcollection-near
real processing for a useable
time
output
Very effective due to Difficulty in extracting
edges
from
data collected at a the
indistinct data clouds
predictable precision
needs
Ideal for 3D modeling Output
and
visualization manipulation for good
recording quality
purposes
common
data
Both 3D position and No
surface reflectance can exchange format in use
be viewed as an image for third parts
Rapidly
developing Difficult to stay up-tosurvey technology
date with developments
Table 1: Advantages and disadvantages of
3D laser scanning technology

2. The Intelcities Project
The INTELCITIES (Intelligent Cities) Project
is a research and development project that aims at
helping achieve the EU policy goal of the
knowledge society. INTECLITIES project brings
together the combined experience and expertise of
key players from across Europe, focusing on eGovernment, e-Planning and e-Inclusion, e-Land
Use Information Management, e-Regeneration,
Integration and Interoperability, Virtual Urban
Planning, etc, (www.intelcitiesproject.com).
The overall aim is to advance the possibilities
of eGovernance of cities to a new level through the
development of a prototype of the IOSCP
(Integrated Open System City Platform), as a clear
and easily accessible illustration of a shared civic
place in virtual space continuously available to all
– whether officials, decision-makers and other
professionals, such as planners, developers,
politicians, designers, engineers, transport and
utility service providers, as well as individual
citizens,
community
groups/networks
and
businesses, through a wide range of interfaces
This paper focuses on the e-Regeneration work
package in which there are two main tasks
identified for the use of laser scanner technology
[ ]. These are as follows:

The building data capture: Capture of digital
data of existing buildings using 3D laser
scanning equipment. Show how this data can
be used as an information base to enhance the
refurbishment process.
Building data integration: Build concept nD
modelling system and relate to other data
structures including relational databases to
illustrate how data can be integrated to support
intelligent city systems.
The rest of the paper elaborates the research on
building data capture and integration and data
modeling concept for the scanned data in the
Intelcities project.

3. Visualization of 3D Models
The main purpose of building data modeling is
to help in thinking about real world problems.
Advanced digital mapping technologies such as 3D
laser scanners and 3D printing can be enablers for
effective
e-planning,
consultation
and
communication of users’ views during the
planning, design, construction and lifecycle process
of built and human environments. The regeneration
and transformation of cities from the industrial age
(unsustainable) to the knowledge age (potentially
sustainable) is essentially a ‘whole life cycle’
process consisting of; planning, development,
operation, reuse and renewal. In order to enhance
the implementation of build and human
environment solutions during the regeneration and
transformation of cities, advanced digital
applications can have a significant impact.
Figure 1 illustrates the concept of the use of
the laser scanner technology in integration with
other tools for visualization.

Figure 1: Integration of spatial data with 3D
printed and the virtual environments
Within the built environment, the use of the 3D
laser scanner enables digital documentation of
buildings, sites and landscapes for reconstruction

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

and restoration. Besides, technologies such as 3D
printing allows for the creating of plastic models
from the digital record to. The use of the 3D
scanner in combination with the 3D printer
provides the transformation of digital data from the
captured CAD model back to a physical model at
an appropriate scale – reverse prototyping. The use
of these technologies is a key enabler in the
creation of an integrated system to capture, process,
and display 3D information.
The laser scanner can provide reverse
engineering in construction for the reuse of the
existing facilities. Producing CAD and VR models
from existing buildings, by means of the laser
scanner, will facilitate an analysis of the latest
conditions of the buildings. They even have the
potential to accurately record inaccessible and
potentially hazardous areas such as pitched
rooftops. Consequently, it facilitates “virtual
refurbishment” of the buildings and allows the
existing structure and proposed new services to be
seen in an effective manner. Figure 2, 3 and 4
shows the actin House example, which is the case
study building in East Manchester, for VR models
produced from the building data captured by the 3D
Laser scanner and CAD models extracted from the
VR models.

Figure 2: Jactin House exterior model

Figure 3: Jactin House CAD model

Figure 4: Printed model of Jactin house
This innovation is significant because it has
potential to solve the problems that are always been
associated with design and construction of existing
buildings for reuse. For example, it can provide
faster, better quality and more precise analysis and
feature detection for building surveys.
For instance, in regard to cultural heritage
sites, many historical buildings are slowly

deteriorating due to exposure to the elements.
Although remediation efforts can reduce the rate of
destruction, a digital model of the site will preserve
accurate 3D information about the site indefinitely.
Models of historical artefacts also allow scientists
to study the objects in new ways. For example,
archaeologists can measure artefacts in non contact
fashion, which is useful for fragile objects. Also
digital models allow objects to be studied remotely,
saving time and travel expenses and enabling more
archaeologists to study them.
In regard to civil engineering, modelling from
reality offers an efficient alternative to surveying.
For example, bridges need to be surveyed
periodically to determine whether significant
settling or other movement has occurred. A 3D
model of the site allows engineers to make the
same measurements with equivalent accuracy in a
fraction of the time.
With regard to reverse and rapid prototyping,
modelling from reality can be used to reverse
engineer manufactured parts for which a CAD
model is unavailable or never existed. Modelling
from reality “imports” the prototype into a
computer, creating a digital model that can be
edited with a CAD program.
Regarding architecture and construction,
architects frequently need to determine the “as
built” plans of building or other structures such as
industrial plants, bridges, and tunnels. A 3D model
of a site can be used to verify that it was
constructed according to specifications. When
preparing for a renovation or a plant upgrade, the
original architectural plans might be inaccurate, if
they exist at all. A 3D model allows architect to
plan a renovation and to test out various
construction options.
The Integrated visualisation environment
described in figure 1 is developed to use laser
scanner technology to provide data models in
different formats including the Virtual Reality
Modelling Language (VRML). Figure 5 below
shows demonstration of peel building in the VR
projection system as an example of a VR
environment, which has been implemented at the
University of Salford.
The research has practical applications in the
construction industry and related professions. It
will provide a better support for evaluation and
visualisation of building maintenance works so
that informed policies can be effectively targeted.
It will benefit construction companies, facility and
estate managers, and all those concerned with
building maintenance issues [10]
To make the information flow as the arrows
illustrate in figure 1 several problems need to be
overcome. One basic problem is the nature of
scanned 3D data. Whereas 2D data captured by a
camera confirms to accepted data standards ( PEG,

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

TIFF, etc.) current 3D data output varies in format
from scanner to scanner. This data conversion issue
is discussed in the next section.

Figure 5: Peel building data capture by
laser scanner is presented in VR Projection
System

4. The VEPS Project
The Virtual Environmental Planning System
(VEPS) project is an INTERREG IIIB funded
project undertaken by a European Consortium in
North-West Europe. The first phase of the project
started in December 2004. The goal of the project
is to share technical advantages in 3D visualization,
ICT
(Information
and
Communication
Technologies) applications to promote public
consultation; environmental modeling, data
collection and use for e-planning in territorial
development in North-West Europe. The current
planning systems for decision making is based on
2D data and information, which is inadequate for
the communication between stakeholders who are
coming from different background and disciplines.
This can result in interpretation and misjudgment
during the decision making of environmental
planning. Instead, forming a intuitive virtual
environmental planning system, which can
manipulate 3D data and information, will improve
the efficiency and productivity in decision making
process of environmental planning. Besides,
providing intuitive visualization system can help
the public participation in the decision making
process of environmental planning.
Therefore, in the VEPS project, it is aimed at
developing
a
common
architecture
and
methodology to enable public people to view and
respond to planned changes via standard PCs. The
key activity in the VEPS project is analysis of large
data sets, including high resolution 3 dimensional
height data from LIDAR, for use within Virtual
Reality (VR) visualization software and the
subsequent delivery of the VR environment via the
Internet and World Wide Web. The virtual

environments used in VEPS can look extremely
realistic as the Lidar images demonstrate.
Through the VEPS project, the research on
laser scanner technology moves on the urban and
regional scale while the research has been carried
out at the building and urban scale in the Intelcities
project. In other words, the issues of building data
capture and building data integration, which are
addressed in section 2, will be considered at a
larger
scale
through
investigating
data
standardization, modeling and integration with
other VR systems.
The following section introduces a research
angle of object recognition for the modeling of
laser scanned data for standardization and for
visualization at building scale and at urban scale.
As a result, the issues in the Intelcities project and
in the VEPS project will be covered.

5. Object Recognition Approach for
Data Modeling
To make progress in the area of modeling,
conversion issues of 3D scanned data need to be
solved. The general problems of 3D data
integration in the built environment are considered
elsewhere [10]. In this section we specifically
address the problem of object recognition. This is
important in realizing the visualization of 3D
models of the built environment because
visualization will be undertaken with the real
characteristics and features of the real world
objects as opposed to raw 3D models of laser
scanned data, which is difficult to handle by many
visualization software applications due to big file
sizes. As a result data modeling and analysis of
laser scanned data can also be done more
effectively and precisely. It also facilities the use
of CAD and GIS software which will not normally
support raw scanned 3D models..
There are certain barriers; for example; there
are no standard formats for the distribution of
scanned data. This leads to issues relating to
compatibility, exchange of information and data
archiving. These barriers can be overcome through
data conversion from scanned data to a standard
data formats such as IFC (www.iai.org.uk) or IFG
(Industry Foundation Classes for GIS). IFC is an
international data standard model for information
sharing and interoperability in the construction
industry. On the other hand, IFG also makes it
possible to communicate relevant intelligent
information from various GIS standards to CAD
systems using IFC [10].
In the Intelcities research programme, we have
an approach for object recognition through
simultaneous recognition of multiple objects in
scenes of polygonal mesh models produced from
the laser scanner point cloud data, which contains

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

clutter and occlusion. Recognition is based on
matching surfaces by matching points using spin
image representation. Spin image is a data level
descriptor that is used to match surfaces
represented as a surface mesh [3]. The diagram
below that describes the process of object
recognition from the laser scan data is developed
based on spin image definition from [3], [4], [5].

Figure 6: the process of object recognition
from a building VR model developed from
the laser scanner system
Through surface matching, an object can be
identified in a scene of laser scanned data by
comparing a targeted surface to an object surface
stored in a database. When the object surface is
matched, an interrelation can be established
between something known (the object) and
something unknown (the scene of laser scanned
data). As a result, information about the world is
acquired.
Surface matching is based on matching
individual surface points in order to match
complete surfaces [3]. By matching points, the
problem of surface matching is broken down into
many smaller localized problems of point
matching. As a result, matching points provides a
method for handling clutter and occlusion in
surface matching without first segmenting the

scene; clutter points on one surface will not have
matching points on the other, and occluded points
on one surface will not be sought on the other [11].
To differentiate among points, 2D images
associated with each point are constructed.
Oriented points, which are 3D points with
associated directions, are used to create spin
images. An oriented point is defined at a surface
mesh vertex using the 3D position of the vertex and
surface normal at the vertex. The surface normal at
a vertex is computed by fitting a plane to the points
connected to the vertex by edges in the surface
mesh (see [4] and [5] for spin image creation in
detail).
According to the diagram in figure ,
polygonal model mesh is invoked by the API
(Application Programming Interface) to be
developed in order to create scene spin image based
on a selected scene oriented point. At the same
time, the system will access the object database to
create spin images for each object model in the
database and these spin images are stored in a spin
image stack. Point correspondences are then
established between the selected point and the
points with best matching spin images on the other
surface. This procedure is repeated for many points
until sizeable set point correspondences. Point
correspondences are then grouped and outliers are
eliminated using geometric consistency.
This surface matching can be extended to
object recognition as follows. Each object in the
object database is represented as a polygonal mesh.
Before recognition, the spin images for all vertices
on all models are created and stored. At recognition
time, a scene point is selected and its spin image is
generated. Next, its spin image is correlated with
all of the spin images from all of the objects. The
best matching model spin image will indicate both
the best matching model and model vertex. After
matching many scene spin images to model spin
images. The result is simultaneous recognition and
localization of the objects that exist in the scene
[12].
The following step is to assign and populate
objects to the corresponding elements in the scene
of the laser scanner VR mesh model. In the end,
new VR model is an object-populated mesh model.
The following step is to write these objects in the
scene into the IFC schema at building scale or IFG
schema at city scale [8]. IFC enabled CAD
software assists the professionals when planning a
building or an area with buildings by supplying
attribute information type of window, cost &
performance) directly connected to the 3D model.
For larger scale integrated data it is also necessary
to extract parts of the site and building information
(in IFC form) and make it available in GIS
standards.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The information characterised by either IFC
schema or IFG schema will be stored in the nD
modelling [7] database. nD modelling database is a
multi dimensional data storey to keep information
for various systems at building scale and urban
scale.
This is ongoing progress and the focus of the
future work will be the algorithm definition for
object recognition for data conversion from
scanned data to nD modelled data

7. References

5. Conclusions
The paper explained the research on the use of
laser scanner technology for built environment. The
focus was the e-regeneration to facilitate the
building refurbishment process. Therefore, building
data capture by laser scanner and building data
integration with various systems are addressed.
In the paper, the research projects such as the
intelcities and VEPS projects were introduced and
their scope for the use of the laser scanner
technology for the built environment at building
scale and urban scale was described. The research
undertaken in these projects about 3D laser scanner
technology mainly focus on the data capture and
modeling. Case studies of actin House and Peel
building were given as examples for CAD and VR
modeling and integration with other technologies
such 3D printer and VR projection system.
Furthermore, potential benefits of using 3D laser
scanner were addressed. Lastly, an approach of
object recognition for object-oriented data
modeling from the 3D scanned data was discussed.
The benefits of this approach were noted. For
example, providing information in a standard
formats such as IFC and IFG about the built
environment using the laser scanner through object
recognition approach will enable to communicate
with other city and building systems including
CAD and GIS systems.
Although present use is quite labor and time
intensive, it is envisaged that when the data
conversion problems are solved, use of laser
scanner VR models can be developed quickly,
which will make it feasible for
intelligent
visualizations to be produced for a wide range of
applications. Some of these applications will be
explored in the VEPS project.

6. Acknowledgements
The project work presented in this paper is cofinanced through the INTERREG IIIB North West
Europe programme.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[1] Bryan, P., (2003), An Addendum to the Metric
Survey Specifications for English Heritage,
The Metric Survey Team, YORK.
[2] Schofield, W., (2001) “Engineering Surveying
5th Edition: Theory and Examination Problems
for Students”.
[3] ohnson, A.E., Hebert, M., “Using Spin Images
for Efficient Object Recognition in Cluttered
3D Scenes”, IEEE Transaction on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Vol 21,
NO 5, May 1999.
[4] ohnson A.E., and Hebert, M., “Surface
Matching for Object Recognition in Complex
Three-Dimensional Scenes,” Image and Vision
Computing, vol. 1 , pp. 35- 51, 1998.
[5] ohnson, A.E., Spin-Images: A Representation
for 3-D Surface Matching, doctoral
dissertation, The Robotics Institute, Carnegie
Mellon Univ., 1997.
[ ] Arayici, Y., Hamilton, A., Gamito, P.,
Albergaria, G., (2004) The Scope in the
INTELCITIES Project for the Use of the 3D
Laser Scanner, in the Proceeding of ECT2004:
The Fourth International Conference on
Engineering Computational Technology, 7-9
September 2004, Lisbon, Portugal. ISBN
09487499 2
[7] Lee, A. Marshall-Ponting, A. . Aouad, G. Wu,
S. Koh, W. W. I. Fu, C. Cooper, R. Betts, M.
Kagioglou, M. and Fisher, M (2003).
Developing
a
vision
of nD-enabled
construction, Construct IT, University of
Salford, UK
[8] Wang, H., Hamilton, A. (2005). Data
integration issues within nD Information
Modelling
for
Urban
Planning.
5th
International
Postgraduate
Research
Conference, Salford, UK, Blackwell Publishing
P194-203
[9] Ahmed V., Arayici, Y., Hamilton, A., Aouad,
G., (2004), Virtual Building Maintenance:
Enhancing Building Maintanance Using 3DGIS and 3D Laser Scanner (VR) Technology,
the Proceeding of European Conference o
Product and Process Modelling in the Building
and Construction Industry (ECPPM), 8-10
September 2004, Istanbul, Turkey ISBN 04
1535 938 4 pp 29-34
[10] Arayici, Y., Hamilton, A., (2005), “Built
Environment
Reverse
and
Forward
Prototyping”, International SCRI Symposium,
University of Salford, Greater Manchester, 12th
-13th April 2005.
[11] Ullman, S., Vidal-Naguet, M., and Sali, E.,
”Visual features of intermediate complexity
and their use in classification”, Nature
Neuroscience, 5(7): 82- 87, uly 2002.
[12] Stein, A., Hebert, M., “Incorporating
Background invariance into Feature-Based
Object Recognition, 7th IEEE Workshop on
Application of Computer Vision, anuary 2005

