3D Visualisation of Spatial Information and Environmental Process Model
Outputs for Collaborative Data Exploration
A. O’Connor1, Prof. I Bishop2, Dr. C. Stock3
1&3
Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information, 2Department of Geomatics, University of
Melbourne
{a.o'connor3@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au, i.bishop@unimelb.edu.au, c.stock@unimelb.edu.au}
Abstract
Increased access to consolidated digital spatial data
via Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI) is advancing the
potential for spatial analysis applications such as
environmental process modelling. While a number of
expert visualisation packages exist for environmental
models, there is a lack of widely available interactive
visualisation tools. To provide for greater community
engagement, virtual environments that are online,
collaborative and can run on low-cost PCs are required.
This paper discusses the development of a tool which
aims to provide both expert and non-experts with access
to environmental process model outputs. Conversion
from standard format GIS data, into a game engine has
been achieved. A methodology for mapping the effects
from environmental model outputs into the virtual
environment has also been shaped. Development of a 3D
object library, for vegetation and other matter,
implementation of the tool on a network and
specification of criteria for display and communication
options in a multi-skilled environment are the current
focus. Envisaged system use scenarios have been devised
in collaboration with national and state agencies, who
are the clients for this research.
Keywords--- 3D Visualisation, Geographic
Information
Systems
(GIS),
Spatial
Data
Infrastructures (SDI), Environmental Process
Modelling, Community Engagement, Game engines

1. Introduction
Visualising
information
can
improve
its
understanding. In terms of scientific data analysis,
including environmental process modelling, visualisation
may be used to interact with and maneuver through
scientific data [1]. This can provide an environment in
which people can examine and classify data, as a part of
an iterative process, the results of which can feedback
into the model [1]. The advantage of linking models to
visualisations is that the data is made more accessible

and easily understood. This means increased exposure of
important information and greater input, from a wider
range of people, into the modelling and planning process.
Environmental process models are not generally
realised in collaborative virtual environments.
Traditionally, model outcomes are communicated via
tables, graphs and 2D maps which may not be fully
understood by affected non-experts. Realistic and
abstract 3D visualisation of spatial data in a multi-user
system can aid communication of processes and
outcomes and enhance community engagement and
decision-making. Current Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) do not provide the sophisticated user
interaction and graphics that can be achieved with realtime 3D virtual environment software. As such GIS are
currently limited in their ability to provide a desired
knowledge sharing environment.
This paper will discuss the development of SIEVE
(Spatial Information Exploration and Visualisation
Environment), which integrates a GIS, 3D CAD models,
a Geodatabase and a game engine. The software creates
virtual environments of user selected areas, such as a
catchment, group of properties or a city. The size of the
area selected will be flexible but less detail will be
available for larger areas. Users may choose to simply
view a location as a virtual 3D environment or to view
the effects of an environmental process on that area
(Figure 1). Using the outputs from spatial models, the
software selects 3D objects and terrain textures that are
either ‘normal’ or effected by a modelled event. The
game engine software provides multi-player network
functionality so users can then explore the environment
collaboratively. Communication options, such as a chat
window, and abstract and realistic visualisation options,
including sub-surface display, will provide an
environment where people with varying levels of
technical competency can collaboratively explore the
data, learn and make decisions.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2. Users interact with
existing environment
1. Online Users Select Geographic area
and Scenario
TGE Visualisation Data

Des
Layperson who resides in
the area
Daphne
Expert who models
selected process

Users agree to view the effects of a
modelled change in the area
Des
Later on Des adds some
trees and alters the terrain.

•Des identifies some landmarks
and orients himself
•Daphne examines terrain and
vegetation dispersion

3. Users interact with
modelled environment
New Mission and Terrain Files

•Des sees how this change will
effect his land and judges the change
•Daphne explains that the factors which
are causing the modelled change are
tree locations and the lie of the terrain

Daphne
Daphne runs the model
again and organises to meet
online in the new environment
and discuss the modified
scenario. She sends
the required data to a third
party and invites them to
give input on the situation.

4. Users interact with NEW modelled
environment

TGE Visualisation Data
Paul
Paul, an expert at another
agency, examines the
environment. He disagrees
with the model and suggests
some changes

Figure 1. Collaborative Usage of SIEVE

1.2. Communicating Spatial Data and
Community Engagement
3D representations of data have been shown to aid
understanding of concepts and learning of tasks in a wide
range of expert areas. In medical fields, visualisation and
haptics are used for training purposes such as practicing
operations in a virtual world. Geologists can gain
previously
unattainable
insight
into
complex
underground systems using 3D software to understand
interactions between subsurface layers. While 3D
visualisation within specialist fields has proven
advantages, implementing visualisation of data and
processes for an audience of affected non-experts is more
complicated.
Environmental process models can have widespread effects and impacts on planning at many levels.
There is a need for environmental process models to be
shared with a variety of users. Communities of people
affiliated by geographical location, special interest, or
similar situations need to address issues affecting their
well being. Stakeholders need to be better informed to
help identify issues that may not have been considered
and to encourage improvement of existing conditions
[2][3]. “Due to the diverse nature of people involved in

•Des, Daphne and Paul run the new
model and explore the changes
•Healthy discussion ensues

the planning process, specialist software and platforms
certainly do not meet the various requirements from
different people” [4]. There is currently a gap between
environmental process model outputs and widespread
access. There is a clear need for tools to facilitate
information transfer.
Communication of spatial information via a tool
that enables users to interact in a virtual 3D environment,
in their own time, using a PC can enhance understanding.
Such tools have the disadvantage of excluding those who
are not computer literate. On the other hand, there is an
increase in computer literacy, following from the
popularity of the internet and other software. With
careful design, game engines can provide intuitive user
interfaces. A 3D environment also has the advantage of
offering ways to assess a variety of options and their
consequences via a structured approach. This is useful
when engaging in complex environmental issues where
there are many criteria to consider and can be used
simultaneously by industry, government and community
members [3].
A number of studies using visualisation in
collaborative, multi-skilled user environments have been
undertaken [5][6][7]. These use available technologies in
a number of ways. One study involved users at different
physical locations, ‘immersed’ in the same virtual
environment using 3D projection screens, head tracking

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

devices and the internet [6]. Users explored and
discussed climate data and topography. In another study,
groups of people at the one location interacted with a
virtual environment, on a large screen, using personal
digital assistants (PDA) [7]. In this case users could
‘vote’ on different land use scenarios affecting their
community. Research questions arising from these
studies, such as “how to share different conceptual
perspectives on the problem context (e.g., that of a
climatologist and a land use planner)” [6] will be
explored in this research

relationships. “Due to the rapid development of
computer graphics, visualization and animation
techniques, general-purpose GIS can no longer satisfy
the multitude of visualization demands. Therefore, GIS
have to utilize independent visualization toolkits” [8].
While the need for advanced visualisations of GIS data,
and their potential benefits are well understood, the
precise requirements for community engagement need to
be determined.
There are a range of tools in existence that provide
3D visualisation of spatial data. Virtual Reality
Modelling
Language
(VRML)
viewers,
The

User Interface (Web Mapping Service)

Spatial Data Storage

User selects area and spatial layers online

Texture & Object Library (CRC)
Database of objects (such as trees),
object textures and textures for
terrain.

SIEVE Data
Selection
Data
Roads
Vegetation
Land Use
Models
Salinity
1 year
5 years

WMS Data
Extents of spatial
area, list of required
files and model
selected

Spatial Data (GA, DPI)
DEM, Imagery, vegetation
Infrastructure from local, regional
or national SDI (online or local)
Environmental Process Model
Outputs
Salinity, Wind, Landslides etc

Flood
100 year flood
Groundwater
Contamination

Data Conversion
VB code to clip data and convert to TGE
format

Spatial Information Exploration
and Visualisation Environment (SIEVE)
3D Interactive, multi-user environment showing existing or
modelled environment. Users can ‘walk’ or ‘fly’ around and edit
the environment alone or with others via network connection.

Torque Games Engine (TGE) files

Self Extracting
ZIP file
TGE executable and
required
objects/textures

Objects & point locations list for
games engine (Torque) .mis file
X,Y,Z coordinates and Object ID
Terrain values & textures .ter file
Elevations and thematic raster data
converted to HEX

SERVER

CLIENT

Figure 2. SIEVE Components and Data Flow

1.3. Existing Technology, GIS and Visualisation
Tools
“General-purpose GIS were originally designed for
the classical 2D application areas, and hence do often not
reflect the state of the art visualization. Moreover, if a
GIS implements its own visualization subsystem, it will
be difficult or even impossible to integrate cutting-edge
visualization technology” [8]. GIS has traditionally used
2D maps for analysis and display. 2.5 and 3D analysis
and visualisation of data has become increasingly
popular, initially driven by mining and other industries
that are involved with complex multi-dimensional

Visualization Toolkit (VTK), and GeoViz International
are a few examples. VRML viewers have the advantage
of being freely available over the internet. VTK can deal
with a wide range of scales i.e. real-world terrain down
to nanoscale DNA. GeoViz can provide impressive fly
through visualisations for a range of applications, such as
mine sites and associated infrastructure. GeoViz products
are custom designed for clients with little public access.
TGE was selected for this research for a number of
reasons. Apart from providing sophisticated rendering
engine and multi-user capabilities, the source code was
obtained so required customisations can be made.
Integration with other software in the future is also
possible. There are a limited number of people involved
in the development of SIEVE. Using software that

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

provides network functionality, chat windows,
customisable user interface, in game editing and
animation functionality allows the research to focus on
selecting and providing the options deemed necessary for
3D visualisation of environmental process model outputs
for collaborative data exploration.

2. Spatial Information Exploration and
Visualisation Environment (SIEVE)
The Torque Game Engine (TGE) was selected for
the development of the SIEVE tool. The engine is multiplatform, has multi-player network code, a sophisticated
rendering engine, animation functionality, GUI creation
toolset, in-game editors, a Torque specific scripting
language, C++ source code and a range of other features
(see www.garagegames.com). The C++ source code is
available to licensees of TGE. TGE permits users to
explore the same environment, from different physical
locations using the internet and also to communicate via
a chat window. This, and other user interface features,
will be customised and expanded to allow for discussion
and exchange of information in a collaborative planning
environment
The basic functionality of SIEVE is explained in the
following. Users will be able to select the spatial
information they wish to see and an area on a map using
a GIS thin client (Figure 2), SIEVE will then (on the GIS
server) convert the required data from rasters and
shapefiles, into TGE specific formats. SIEVE will then
specify the textures that should be rendered onto the
terrain and which 3D objects should be drawn where,
i.e.: ‘a mature pine trees’ or ‘gums showing the effects
salinity’, defined by the model outputs.

2.1. System Architecture & Data
Transformation
The components of SIEVE can be seen in Figure 2.
The ‘Spatial Data’ component will initially be populated
with national, state and local satellite imagery and
topology. The ‘Texture and Object Library’ will be a
database of vegetation textures, 3D models (such as trees
or underground geological volumes) and terrain textures.
‘Environmental Process Model Outputs’ will be 2D
layers. If a user wishes to run different scenarios, for an
area they have already viewed, they will only need to
download a subset of additional data.
TGE runs with two files, the terrain file and a
mission file. The terrain file is in hexadecimal format
and the mission file is a text file. The terrain file
specifies a grid of elevation, e.g. from a digital elevation
model (DEM) and which textures to use on the terrain.
The mission file specifies the objects that should be
drawn on the terrain, and a wide range of other elements
such as sun, sky, fog and water effects.
TGE terrain currently contains 256 by 256 pixels. It
is intended that this be expanded to provide more detail.
For each pixel there is a specified height and an
associated texture. The file also defines how the terrain

should be scaled in xyz. These variables can all be
written out from the GIS using a module that has been
programmed for this purpose. The height values are
simply converted from a specified DEM. Theme values
are obtained from a 2D layer with, for example, land use
classes or salinity levels. Each theme references a
texture, this reference is also written to the terrain file.

2.2. Automation of Vegetation Visualisation
One component of the system will be the texture and
object libraries. Australia has detailed national vegetation
classifications. These classifications detail tree species
and related factors across the country at a range of scales.
This information is available as GIS layers, the attributes
of which specify information about the proportion of tree
species in an area, under story and height distributions.
Detailed photographs have also been taken to document
this variation. These photographs can be used to create
3D trees in SIEVE. Using the vegetation class attributes
to define what types of trees occur where, and their
density, SIEVE can be used to show representative
vegetation for a selected area. As the documentation and
photographs are updated over time, SIEVE could
generate both current and historical vegetation.

2.3. Visualisation of Environmental Process
Model Outputs
Environmental processes can be defined as the
actions, operations, and cycles that occur naturally in the
environment [9]. Groundwater flow, hydrology, salinity,
erosion and estuarine cycles are a few examples.
Environmental process models are used to simulate,
explore and describe the dynamic information involved
in these processes. There are vast numbers of models
developed in both the public and private sectors. Models
frequently involve isolated efforts with purpose built
datasets. The models developed often have little
portability to other similar scenarios and cannot be
adapted to utilise different datasets. “Environmental
models must "open up" in order to achieve a full
integration with GIS and between models themselves”
[10].
The lack of standards in environmental models make
creating visualisation tools for multiple models a difficult
task. Some modelling may be conducted within GIS
packages, and have 2D layers as their outputs. Some
models may use other software. This research will
assume that data from models can be converted to 2D
layers, the values of which can be transferred to visual
effects on objects and terrain by SIEVE (Figure 3). This
architecture will hopefully mean SIEVE is open to input
from a wide range of models.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Environmental Process Model

Spatial Effects of Model

Pre-Run

Geodatabase

GIS
Model run within GIS

Raster Elevation Data
2D POLYGON OR RASTER
MODEL OUTPUT

Other
Model run with external program

Live-Run
GIS
Model run within GIS

Other
Model run with external program

Raster Texture Data
Satellite Imagery or thematic
textures for 2D models
Object locations
With or without attribute
from 2D model data

Torque
Terrain & Mission File

Figure 3. Environmental Process Model Outputs

2.4. Communicating Models and Exploratory
Visualisation
SIEVE will use the 2D outputs from environmental
process models to create a virtual environment where the
objects and terrain show realistic or abstract effects of
the model. Subsurface objects, such as the water table, or
geological features may also be created under the terrain
surface. The virtual environment may be a flooded
valley, a farm affected by salinity or an eroded dune
area, as a few examples. As SIEVE is a community
engagement tool, it aims to allow exploration of spatial
models by experts and non-experts simultaneously.
Experts and non-experts have different visualisation
preferences, as such a range of options will be provided.
For example, an expert may wish to view a simplified
environment, where trees are represented by symbols.
This way they can quickly make a quantitative analysis.
Non-experts may be more interested in seeing what the
real world looks like. A number of keystroke options will
be available to users to perform tasks such as
• choosing realistic or abstract visualisation,
• turning the terrain on and off to view the subsurface or
• viewing satellite imagery or thematic textures.
These features aim to enhance individuals’
understanding of the modelled processes as users can
explore the data, in a form they are most comfortable
with and in their own time.

2.5. System Use
Figure 3 gives one example of a potential use
scenario for SIEVE. In this example, an expert and a
non-expert create a virtual environment of an area in
which the non-expert resides. They then both view the
effects of a modelled change on that area. The nonexpert edits the environment in his own time and
requests that the expert runs the model again. This nature
of input from non-experts may prove to be valuable in a
number of applications which have traditionally

developed in isolation. Some models used by SIEVE
may be pre run, and only the model outcome will be
accessible. In this case SIEVE will be acting as a
visualisation tool. In other cases, such as the example in
Figure 3, it may be possible for the model to be run again
once the users make changes, this would make SIEVE a
part of the iterative modelling process.
There are many conceived possibilities of use for
SIEVE, with varying numbers of users and level of
expertise. A number of categories of use, such as
‘stakeholder
meeting’,
‘community
workshop’,
‘presentation’, and ‘exploring’ are envisaged. Each of
these categories may have different communication
options. Presentation mode, for example, may allow
comments to be controlled by the ‘presenter’. In a
‘stakeholder meeting’ there may be sensitive issues
involved, and communication between specified users
only may be desirable. ‘Community workshop’ mode
could allow all users to make comments viewed by the
whole group. Usage could be customised for a range of
other options as needed.

2.6. Demonstration Data
Demonstrations of the SIEVE tool are currently
being developed using two datasets. The first dataset
involves a number of models relating to “ecosystem
services” in rural Victoria. SIEVE will be used to show
how different land use scenarios affect the model
outputs, including changes in stream and vegetation
condition. Subsurface data, such as depth to water table
and ground water flow will be visualised also. The
second demonstration aims to use modelled tsunami data
for an urban coastal area. SIEVE will be used to visualise
the areas affected by the tsunami at different time steps
during the disaster. The effects of the tsunami on the
built environment, such as buildings that are completely
submerged and ones which are partially flooded, will be
communicated.
Detailed data has been obtained from state and
national agencies for these demonstrations. It is
envisaged in initial stages that a number of people in
these agencies may use SIEVE over a local access
network (LAN) to discuss the data. Local
implementation of SIEVE, using the datasets obtained,
will allow the methodology for showing modelled effects
in a virtual environment to be tested. Foreseeable
problems for extending SIEVE to other datasets and
implementation online include the lack of standardised
environmental process models and potentially long data
download times on PCs with limited bandwidth. There is
a move towards standardising environmental models
which should make implementation of this, and other
tools, easier in the future. Increased data transfer rates
should also help to minimise download times.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3. Progress and Outlook
SIEVE is currently running on a single PC. By
carrying out a number of steps, a user can select an area
in a GIS, then view the virtual environment created by
TGE for that location. Automation of this process is
required as the next stage. Implementation of the tool on
a network and provision of display choices (realistic or
abstract) and communication options are also the current
focus of research. Once this functionally has been added
and tested, SIEVE should provide a needed 3D
visualisation tool for spatial data and environmental
process model outputs intended for community
engagement and collaborative data exploration.

Acknowledgements
The Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial
Information, Fractal Technologies, Geoscience Australia,
Department of Primary Industries, Victoria and The
Department of Geomatics, University of Melbourne,

References
[1]

[2]

Jankun-Kelly, T., K-L. Ma & M. Gertz (2002) A Model
for the Visualization Exploration Process, Proceedings of
the conference on Visualization '02, October 2002,
Boston, Mass. USA
Charter for Community Engagement (2001), Community
Engagement Unit, Queensland Government, Department
of Emergency Services, Brisbane

[3]

Effective Community Engagement Workbook and Tools
(2004), Community Engagement Unit, Resources and
Regional Services Division/Catchment and Agricultural
Service, Department of Primary Industries, Department
of Sustainability and Environment, Victoria
[4] Hofschreuder, J. (2004). Visual Criteria in Detail:
Correlation between the required level of detail of 3Dlandscape visualisations and visual criteria. Land Use
Planning, Wageningen University, The Netherlands.
[5] Gouveia, L. F. G. (2001). A Visualisation Proposal to
Assist Knowledge Sharing. International Conference on
New Technologies in Science Education - CINTEC,
Aveiro University.
[6] MacEachren, A. M., R. Edsall, D. Haug, R. Baxter, G.
Otto, R. Masters, S. Fuhrmann & L. Qian (1999). Virtual
Environments for Geographic Visualization: Potential
and Challenges. ACM Workshop on New Paradigms for
Innovation Visualization and Manipulation, Kansas City.
[7] Stock, C. and I. D. Bishop (2005): Helping rural
communities envision their future. In Visualization for
Landscape and Environmental Planning: technology and
applications, eds. I. D. Bishop and E. Lange. Taylor and
Francis, Oxford: 145-51.
[8] Dollner, J. K. H. (2000). "An Object-Oriented Approach
for Integrating 3D Visualisation Systems and GIS."
Computers and Geosciences (26): 67-76.
[9] Sustainable Development Indicator Group (1996),
Working Draft Framework, Version 2, June 4, 1996
Online: http://www.hq.nasa.gov/iwgsdi/Processes.html
(Accessed, 25/02/2005)
[10] Bain, L. (1997). Opening Environmental Models.
International
Conference
and
Workshop
on
Interoperating Geographic Information Systems, 1997,
Santa Barbara, California.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

