The Naturalness of Reproduced High Dynamic Range Images
ˇ ık, Pavel Slav´ık
Martin Cad´
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
Karlovo n´am. 13, 121 35 Prague, Czech Republic
cadikm@sgi.felk.cvut.cz, slavik@fel.cvut.cz
Abstract
The problem of visualizing high dynamic range images
on the devices with restricted dynamic range has recently
gained a lot of interest in the computer graphics community. Various so-called tone mapping operators have been
proposed to face this issue. The ﬁeld of tone mapping assumes thorough knowledge of both the objective and subjective attributes of an image. However, there no published
analysis of such attributes exists so far. In this paper, we
present an overview of image attributes which are used extensively in different tone mapping methods. Furthermore,
we propose a scheme of relationships between these attributes, leading to the deﬁnition of an overall quality measure which we call naturalness. We present results of the
subjective psychophysical testing that we have performed to
prove the proposed relationship scheme. Our effort sets the
stage for well-founded quality comparisons between tone
mapping operators. By providing good deﬁnitions of the different attributes, comparisons, be they user-driven or fully
automatic, are made possible at all.

is the domain of tone mapping methods. A number of different tone mapping methods (or operators) have been proposed in history. Since the advantages and disadvantages of
these methods are not immanently clear, a thorough comparison is very desirable. In order to conduct a comparison
of tone mapping methods, it is necessary to settle upon a
set of image attributes by which the images produced by
the methods should be judged. Furthermore, the relationships and dependencies between those attributes will inﬂuence any comparison signiﬁcantly and should therefore be
analyzed.
In this paper, we attempt to give a list of all important attributes involved in the evaluation of a tone mapping operator, and we show which relationships exist between them.
The evaluation of the attributes and their relationships leads
to the deﬁnition of an overall image quality metric which
we call naturalness. In short, the naturalness gives an idea
how well the tone mapping operator is able to produce realistic images. We encourage our proposition by means of
subjective perceptual study. Virtually all well-known tone
mapping operators are considered in the study. The results
of the study show strong correlations with our proposal.

1. Introduction

2. Background

The dynamic range available of visual stimuli in the real
world is vast. Accordingly, the human visual system (HVS)
is able to adapt over a huge range of luminous intensities
through a process known as visual adaptation. However,
even though several different computer technologies can
produce a high dynamic range luminance1 maps (images) of
synthetic graphics or real scenes, the media used to present
these images can only display a few orders of magnitude in
luminous intensity. This problem, i.e., the reproduction of
high dynamic range images on conventional output devices,

The input for a tone mapping method is a high dynamic
range (HDR) image, which is a map of pixels with arbitrary
luminance values. The output of a tone mapping method is
low dynamic range (LDR) image, which is a map of pixels with values displayable by a particular output device.
We distinguish global tone mapping methods and local tone
mapping operators. Global tone mapping methods apply the
same transformation to every pixel, while local methods
are spatially varying and apply a different scale to different parts of an image. See a review by Devlin [4] for more
information on a particular method.
The dynamic range of light encountered in the real world
or in predictive global illumination simulations is enormous. The human visual system can face this range by

1

Luminance is the amount of visible light leaving a differential point
on a surface in a given differential direction. The standard unit of luminance is candela per square meter (cd · m−2 ≡ Nit).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Real Luminance

High dynamic
range scene

Real scene
observer

Real scene
perception

Real Luminance

MATCH!
Tone
Mapping

Display device
+ display
conditions

Display device
observer

Displayed scene
perception

Figure 1. The goal of the tone mapping process - matching the perception of original
scene and reproduced image [19].

means of adaptation mechanisms. Generally speaking, tone
mapping methods try to mimic this retentive behaviour of
the human vision. Several formulae were proposed in history to determine the performance of human vision, but we
need to be careful in interpreting these formulae. In principle, we can distinguish threshold data, where a stimulus is just barely visible, and suprathreshold data, valid
above a threshold. In the luminance domain, the threshold-versus-intensity (TVI) functions show the relationship
between just noticeable differences (JND) in intensity and
the background illumination level. Over a wide range of
illumination levels, the visual system obeys Weber’s law,
which states that the size of the JND is a constant proportion of the background level. On the other hand, Stevens
and Stevens [11] proposed a linear scale for brightness that
is valid for suprathreshold luminance levels. Following
Stevens, brightness is expressed in brils, where one bril is
equivalent to the brightness induced by a 1 second exposure
1
−2
(i.e., 1 microlamto a 5◦ white target of π×10
2 cd · m
bert). They demonstrated that subjective brightness grows
as a power function of luminance (power law). See the survey by Ferwerda [9] for more information on human aspects
of spatial vision.

3. Naturalness
In this section, we motivate and describe a measure
which is useful to determine the performance of a particular tone mapping operator.
Viewing a tone-mapped image should produce a subjective experience that corresponds well with viewing the real
scene, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This means that the reproduced image should look as natural as possible, i.e., the naturalness is the goal of tone mapping methods. However, naturalness has not been deﬁned so far. If we want to assess the
performance of a particular tone mapping operator, we must
deﬁne the naturalness of an image in some sense. Unfortunately, naturalness is a very subjective quantity.
In order to be able to asses the naturalness of an output
image, we propose to deﬁne the naturalness as a result of
a network of other image attributes, namely the brightness,

contrast, colour reproduction, reproduction of details, simulation of glare, visual acuity and artifacts, see Fig. 3. This
implies that the naturalness need not be judged directly, but
can be seen as a composition of these attributes. If we are
able to measure these attributes somehow, and quantify the
relationships between them, we are also able to assess the
naturalness as a function of these attributes.
Our goal is therefore to ﬁnd out how different image attributes inﬂuence the naturalness. Since some of the proposed attributes are not independent (as we explain later),
we also show a scheme of relationships between them
(Fig. 3), and verify this scheme by means of perceptual subjective study.

4. Image attributes
As opposed to radiometric or photometric units, the image attributes used in tone mapping are not well deﬁned and
consistent. In this section we describe particular image attributes for tone mapping, and we list typical tone mapping
methods that attempt to reproduce them correctly.
Brightness is deﬁned by the CIE as the attribute of a visual sensation according to which an area appears to emit
more or less light. In fact, brightness is a quantity that measures the subjective sensation produced by a particular luminance, i.e., the brightness is the perceived luminance.
Tone mapping methods aim to preserve the overall impression of brightness. Stevens and Stevens proposed an
expression for the apparent brightness, see Section 2. Although the expression is convenient for simple targets, the
overall brightness of an image is more complex. Thanks to
the light adaptation of the human visual system, people are
quite insensitive to absolute levels of illumination. The perceived dimension of brightness is due largely to the contrast of one region with a surrounding region [11]. When
two small adjacent patchs of the retina are stimulated by
light, each patch not only responds to the light, but also inhibits the response of its neighbor. By providing a dark surrounding to any patch, we reduce the inhibition it receives,
and its response to the same amount of light is increased.
This phenomena is called simultaneous contrast and depends strongly on the semantics of the scene, see Fig. 2.
Tumblin and Rushmeier [19] proposed an operator that
attempts to preserve the overall impression of brightness
using a mapping function that is based on the model by
Stevens and Stevens. This mapping function matches the
brightness of a real world luminance to the brightness of
a display luminance. Bright scenes therefore appear bright,
while dark ones appear dark.
Contrast: image contrast is deﬁned in different ways, but it
is usually related to variations in image luminance. Michelmax −Lmin
son’s deﬁnition [14] is as follows: C = L
Lmax +Lmin , where

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 2. The simultaneous contrast effect:
the two small rectangles are the same shade
of gray, but the left one appears lighter than
the right one.

Lmax and Lmin are the maximum and minimum luminance
values, respectively. Michelson’s deﬁnition is sometimes
used when assessing the global contrast of the image. However, using it for global contrast is rather deceptive, because
it is strongly affected by possibly random, irrelevant pixels with extreme values.
Weber’s deﬁnition is used to measure the local contrast
of a single target against a uniform background. The deﬁnition is as follows: C = ∆L
L , where ∆L is the difference of
the target luminance from the background luminance. Weber’s deﬁnition is sometimes used to measure local contrast
in the image, but if there are many targets present, the initial assumptions do not hold and interpreting the result is
rather tricky. Peli [14] proposed another deﬁnition of local contrast that is suitable for complex images. Peli’s local band-limited contrast assigns a contrast value to every
point in the image as a function of the spatial frequency
band. For each frequency band, the contrast is deﬁned as
the ratio of the bandpass-ﬁltered image at that frequency to
the low-pass image ﬁltered to an octave below the same frequency. This produces a multiscale representation of the effective image contrast.
Ward’s [21] initial tone mapping operator focuses on the
preservation of perceived contrast. This method transforms
input luminance to output luminance using a constant scaling factor. Since Ward’s operator scales image intensities
by a constant, it does not change scene contrasts for display. Almost the same principle of contrast preservation is
exploited also in the other operators [10, 22]. Advanced local tone mapping methods (e.g., the method by Reinhard et
al. [16] or by Ashikhmin [1]) are based on a multi-resolution
decomposition of the image and deﬁne contrast in a way
similar to Peli.
Reproduction of colours: the sensation of colour is an important aspect of the human visual system, and correct reproduction of colours can help to increase the realistic appearance of the output image. One important feature of the
human visual system is the capacity to see the level of
colours in a bright environment. This ability, measured as
colour sensitivity, is reduced in dark environments, as the
light sensitive rods take over for the colour-sensitive cone

system. As the luminance level is raised, the cone system
becomes active and colours begin to be seen beginning with
the long wavelength reds and progressing toward the middle wavelength greens. Only at relatively high luminances,
short wavelength blue targets begin to appear coloured.
The tone mapping operator by Ferwerda et al. [10] captures changes in threshold colour appearance by using
separate TVI functions for rods and cones and interpolation for the mesopic luminance range. Ward et
al. [22] used a very similar approach in their work. Pattanaik et al. [13] proposed a comprehensive multi-scale
model that accounts for both changes in threshold colour
discriminability and suprathreshold colourfulness. Using opponent colour processing, the model is able to
handle changes in chromatic and luminance-level adaptation as well. In their recent work, Reinhard and Devlin [15]
adapted a computational model of photoreceptor behavior that incorporates a chromatic transform that allows the
white point to be shifted.
Reproduction of details: conventional output devices
have a limited dynamic range and thus a limited span of reproducible subtle contrasts, which translates directly in
the amount of reproducible detail. The reproduction of details is critical mainly in very dark and bright areas, because
truncation of values occurs most frequently in these areas. The simplest methods to adjust scene intensities
for display will usually reduce or destroy important details and textures. On the other side, the effort to reproduce
details well is a potential cause of artifacts.
Several tone mapping operators focus especially on the
reproduction of details. Tumblin and Turk’s LCIS operator [20] builds a hierarchy using multiple instances of a low
curvature image simpliﬁer. A high detail, low contrast image is constructed from this hierarchy by compressing only
the large features and adding back all small details. The idea
of compressing just the large features and then adding back
subtle non-compressed details is also used in the operators
based on the bilateral [6] and trilateral ﬁlter [3].
A rather different approach was presented by Ward [22].
Ward’s operator based on histogram adjustment aims to preserve visibility, where visibility is said to be preserved if we
can see an object on the display if and only if we can see it
in the real scene. Ward’s operator does not strive to reproduce all the details available, but exploits the limitations of
human vision to reproduce just the visible details.
Visual acuity simulation: visual acuity is the ability of
the human visual system to resolve spatial detail. The visual acuity diminishes in dark environments, since cones
are not responding to such low light levels. We can simulate this phenomenon to enhance the naturalness of the
image. Shaler [9] measured the relationship between background luminance and foveal acuity. The original data by

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Shaler can be approximated with the following functional
ﬁt: R = 17.25 · arctan(1.4 log10 (La ) + 0.35) + 25.72,
where R is the visual acuity in cycles/degree and La is the
local adaptation luminance in cd · m−2 . This function can
be used to predict the visibility of scene details at different levels of illumination.
Ferwerda et al. [10] proposed a global blurring function
based on a single adaptation level to simulate changes in
spatial acuity. Ward et al. [22] applied a similar blurring
function locally, according to the foveal adaptation. Using
such a method, it is possible to extend virtually any operator to take visual acuity into account.
Glare simulation: owing to the scattering of light in the
human eye, and due to diffraction in the lens, effects called
bloom (the “glow” around bright objects) and ﬂare lines (radial streaks emanating from the center of the light source)
are seen around very bright objects. Another effect called
lenticular halo (a set of coloured, concentric rings, surrounding the light source and distal to the ciliary corona) is
due to the diffraction of the circular optical grating formed
by the radial ﬁbers at the periphery of the crystalline lens.
All these real-world phenomena are commonly referred to
as glare effects [18].
Since the dynamic range of traditional output devices is
not sufﬁcient to evoke such phenomena, we must simulate
the human response artiﬁcially to improve the naturalness
of the image. Several works on the simulation of glare effects [18] have been published, and some tone mapping operators [2, 22] have included glare simulation as well. Using subjective testing results, Spencer et al. [18] veriﬁed that
the simulation of glare can substantially increase the apparent brightness of light sources in digital images.
Artifacts: as a consequence of tone mapping, artifacts may
appear in the output image. The artifacts are degrading the
quality and therefore the naturalness of the output image.
Simple local tone mapping operators [2, 17] typically exhibit halo artifacts. These halo artifacts are caused by contrast reversals, which often happens for small bright features or sharp high-contrast edges, where a bright feature
causes strong attenuation of the neighbouring pixels, surrounding the feature or high-contrast edge with a noticeable
dark band or halo.

5. Attribute relationships
In order to clarify the relationships between the attributes, we propose the scheme shown in Fig. 3. As we
can see from this scheme, the naturalness, our measure of
overall image quality, is determined by all the attributes. It
depends strongly on the overall perceived brightness, i.e.,
dark scenes should appear dark, bright scenes should appear bright. Apparent contrast should also be reproduced

Colour reproduction

Brightness

Increase

Glare
simulation

Naturalness
Increase

Contrast
e

reas

Dec

Details
reproduction

Decrease
Increase

Visual
acuity

Decrease

Artifacts

Figure 3. The relationships between image attributes.

well to make the result natural. The reproduction of details
or rather the reproduction of visibility of objects is certainly
essential to make the output image appear natural. Furthermore, since we are typically facing a limited display gamut,
the reproduction of colour is an important factor for naturalness as well. The simulation of visual acuity loss can signiﬁcantly improve the naturalness of dim or night scenes,
while the simulation of glare can enhance the naturalness
of the dark scenes with strong light sources. There is no
doubt that the presence of ugly artifacts degrades naturalness.
Brightness: the perception of brightness is affected
greatly by the contrast arrangement (i.e., by the semantics of an image, see Fig. 2). Fairchild [7] studied the effect
of image contrast on the perceived brightness and concluded that the brightness sometimes increases with contrast. The perception of brightness is modiﬁed by the
colour representation as well. The simulation of colour appearance at scotopic levels of illumination can substantially
change the perceived brightness. Finally, the simulation of glare plays an important role for the brightness
perception. The glare simulation increases the apparent brightness of light sources.
The reproduction of details is strongly affected by the
simulation of the visual acuity. Since there are available
data that represent the visual acuity (e.g., Shaler’s curve),
these data place limits on the reproduction of ﬁne details,
and may also be utilized to verify the naturalness of detail reproduction. Furthermore, the visibility preservation
diminishes the reproduced details using a threshold function (e.g., the threshold versus intensity curve, TVI). The
simulated glare can obscure otherwise reproducible details

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 4. Iso contour plot of the test scene.
Maximum luminance is 100195 cd/m2 , minimum luminance is 0.0988018 cd/m2 .

near strong light sources.
In the scheme of relationships (Fig. 3), we can identify attributes that represent limitations of the human visual
system (depicted in dashed boxes): the simulations of glare
and visual acuity and (in part) the reproduction of colour
(in the sense of simulation of the scotopic vision). These attributes enhance the naturalness of the output image, but are
not desirable when the goal is different, for example when
we aim to reproduce as many details as possible.

6. Subjective perceptual study
We have conducted a subjective perceptual study to encourage the proposed idea of the image naturalness measure
and to uncover the correlations to the image attributes.

6.1. Subjective testing setup
In the experiment, we wanted to simultaneously present
an original HDR image and the tone mapped image to a human observer and ask him to rate the naturalness and the
other image attributes. Since HDR output display devices
are still unattainable or unsatisfactory, we have arranged a
typical real indoor HDR scene, see Fig. 4. We acquired the
series of 15 images of the scene using a digital camera with
varying exposition from a locked-down tripod. The HDR
radiance map was recovered from the recorded series using the method by Debevec and Malik. The HDR map was
then transformed using 14 essential tone mapping operators to the 14 output LDR images 2 . We involved following tone mapping operators into our experiment – the meth2

All the images are available on the web pages of the project:
http://www.cgg.cvut.cz/˜cadikm/tmo

ods proposed by: Ashikhmin [1], Drago et al. [5], Durand
and Dorsey [6], Fattal et al. [8], Chiu et al. [2], Choudhury and Tumblin [3], Tumblin and Turk [20], Pattanaik
and Yee [12], Reinhard et al. [16], Schlick [17], Tumblin
and Rushmeier’s revised operator [19], Ward [21], Ward et
al. [22], and a linear mapping.
The sequence of the 14 LDR tone mapped images presented the input visual stimuli for an observer. In the perceptual test arrangement the subject was able to observe both
the real scene and a LDR image of the scene displayed on
the calibrated CRT monitor. The total number of 9 subjects
were asked to express the naturalness, the overall brightness, the overall contrast, the reproduction of details, the
visibility, and the reproduction of colours for a particular
LDR image by ratings (on the scale 0–10, where 0 represents the worst result, while 10 is the best). Subjects had
normal or corrected-to normal vision and were non-experts
in the ﬁeld of computer graphics.

6.2. Test results
Absolute average values of subjective opinion scores
judge the following methods to produce the most natural
LDR images for our input HDR stimuli (average scores in
parentheses, 10 being the best): Choudhury and Tumblin [3]
(6.83), Ward et al. [22] (7.66), Tumblin and Turk [20]
(7.83), and the best rated was: Reinhard et al. [16] (7.98).
Next, we used the standard (Pearson) correlations for
the numerical evaluation of the subjective data. We computed the correlation coefﬁcients between the naturalness
and the other image attributes for each of the 14 LDR images (corresponding to a particular tone mapping operator).
The correlation coefﬁcients were then averaged and the results summarized in Table 1. The values of correlation coefﬁcients signify quite a strong relations between the naturalness and the image attributes, particularly the overall brightness and the overall contrast. This result supports the proposed scheme depicted in Fig. 3.
We are acquainted with a perceptual experiment by
Yoshida et al. [23]. The authors evaluated 7 tone mapping operators using a direct comparison between the appearance of two real architectural scenes and images
of these two scenes displayed on a monitor. The results of the Yoshida’s experiment exhibit rather weaker
correlations of brightness and detail reproductions to naturalness. Since both ours and Yoshida’s experiment has
a limited span of input scenes, more thorough and extensive testing is needed to conﬁrm the outlined results.
The discrepancy in results is probably caused by the number and nature of input LDR images as well, since we
use much more tone mapping operators in our experiment.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Naturalness

Contrast
0.7402

Brightness
0.8136

Repr. of details
0.6245

Visibility
0.6246

Repr. of colours
0.6156

Table 1. Average correlation coefﬁcients between image naturalness and other image attributes.

7. Conclusions
The ﬁeld of tone mapping assumes thorough knowledge
of various image attributes and approaches from diverse scientiﬁc areas. In this paper, we have presented an overview
of image attributes for tone mapping. Since the attributes
are intimately related, we have proposed a scheme of relationships between them. Moreover, we have proposed a
measure called naturalness, which can be expressed as a
weighted sum of these attributes. We have veriﬁed the proposed ideas by means of the subjective psychophysical experiments.
The presented overview of image attributes is helpful for
getting into the tone mapping ﬁeld, or when implementing
or developing a new tone mapping operator. On the other
hand, the identiﬁcation of the relationships between the attributes is very useful for the subjective comparison of tone
mapping methods. It also simpliﬁes the comparison process
by reducing the actual number of attributes that can be used
to evaluate a tone mapping operator. Finally, it represents
the initial effort to the design a truthful, objective comparison metric for high dynamic range images.

Acknowledgements
Special thanks to M. Wimmer, A. Artusi, and J. Bittner for their
help in preparing this paper. This project has been partly supported
by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic under research program No. Y04/98: 212300014 (Research
in the area of information technologies and communications).

References
[1] M. Ashikhmin. A tone mapping algorithm for high contrast
images. In 13th Eurographics Workshop on Rendering. Eurographics, 2002.
[2] K. Chiu, M. Herf, P. Shirley, S. Swamy, C. Wang, and
K. Zimmerman. Spatially nonuniform scaling functions for
high contrast images. In Proc. of GI, pages 245– 253, 1993.
[3] P. Choudhury and J. Tumblin. The trilateral ﬁlter for high
contrast images and meshes. In EGRW ’03: Proc. of 14th Eurographics workshop on Rendering, pages 186–196, 2003.
[4] K. Devlin, A. Chalmers, A. Wilkie, and W. Purgathofer. Star:
Tone reproduction and physically based spectral rendering.
In D. Fellner and R. Scopignio, editors, State of the Art Reports, Eurographics 2002, pages 101–123, 2002.
[5] F. Drago, K. Myszkowski, T. Annen, and N.Chiba. Adaptive logarithmic mapping for displaying high contrast scenes.
Computer Graphics Forum, 22(3), 2003.

[6] F. Durand and J. Dorsey. Fast bilateral ﬁltering for the display of high-dynamic-range images. In Proc. of 29th conf. on
C. G. and inter. techn., pages 257–266. ACM Press, 2002.
[7] M. D. Fairchild. Color Appearance Models. Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 2nd edition, 2005.
[8] R. Fattal, D. Lischinski, and M. Werman. Gradient domain
high dynamic range compression. In Proc. of 29th conf. on
C. G. and inter. techn., pages 249–256. ACM Press, 2002.
[9] J. A. Ferwerda. Fundamentals of spatial vision. In V. Interrante, editor, Applications of visual perception in computer
graphics, pages 1– 27. Course 32, SIGGRAPH ’98, 1998.
[10] J. A. Ferwerda, S. N. Pattanaik, P. Shirley, and D. P. Greenberg. A model of visual adaptation for realistic image synthesis. Computer Graphics, 30:249–258, 1996.
[11] S. E. Palmer. Vision science – photons to phenomenology.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, 3rd edition, 2002.
[12] S. Pattanaik and H. Yee. Adaptive gain control for high dynamic range image display. In SCCG ’02: Proc. of 18th
spring conference on C. G., pages 83–87. ACM Press, 2002.
[13] S. N. Pattanaik, J. A. Ferwerda, M. D. Fairchild, and D. P.
Greenberg. A multiscale model of adaptation and spatial vision for realistic image display. In Proc. of 25th conf. on C.
G. and inter. techn., pages 287–298. ACM Press, 1998.
[14] E. Peli. Contrast in complex images. Journal of the Optical
Society of America A, 7(10):2032–2040, October 1990.
[15] E. Reinhard and K. Devlin. Dynamic range reduction inspired by photoreceptor physiology. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2005.
[16] E. Reinhard, M. Stark, P. Shirley, and J. Ferwerda. Photographic tone reproduction for digital images. In Proc. of 29th
conf. on C. G. and inter. techn., pages 267–276, 2002.
[17] C. Schlick. An adaptive sampling technique for multidimensional ray tracing. In Photorealistic Rendering in Computer
Graphics, Springer Verlag, pages pp. 21–29, 1994.
[18] G. Spencer, P. Shirley, K. Zimmerman, and D. P. Greenberg.
Physically-based glare effects for digital images. In Proc. of
22nd conf. on C. G. and inter. techn., pages 325–334, 1995.
[19] J. Tumblin and H. Rushmeier. Tone reproduction for realistic images. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 13(6):42–48, 1993.
[20] J. Tumblin and G. Turk. Low curvature image simpliﬁers
(LCIS). In SIGGRAPH 99 Conference Proceedings, Annual
Conference Series, pages 83–90. Addison Wesley, 1997.
[21] G. Ward. A contrast-based scalefactor for luminance display.
Graphics Gems IV, pages 415– 421, 1994.
[22] G. Ward Larson, H. Rushmeier, and C. Piatko. A visibility
matching tone reproduction operator for high dynamic range
scenes. IEEE Trans. on Vis. and C. G., 3(4):291–306, 1997.
[23] A. Yoshida, V. Blanz, K. Myszkowski, and H.-P. Seidel. Perceptual evaluation of tone mapping operators with real-world
scenes. Human Vision & Electronic Imaging X, SPIE, 2005.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

