Challenging Conventions for Geovisualization
Interface Design: Implications for Exploratory Data
Analysis
Robert M. Edsall
Department of Geography, Arizona State University
robedsall@asu.edu

Abstract
The use of interface metaphors and cartographic
guidelines for facilitating communication between
cartographer and user may serve to limit the power of
the system or the representation for a diverse set of
users or a diverse set of uses. For example, the data
exploration tasks typical of geovisualization systems
may be hindered by strict adherence to conventional
and/or
traditional
interface
metaphors
or
cartographic symbolization. Successful design of
geovisualization systems, therefore, should take into
account factors that are socially and culturally
determined and adjust design accordingly dependent
on the targeted users or, more importantly, the
targeted task (i.e. exploratory data analysis). This
paper explores this possibility and presents the results
of a pair of human-subjects experiments where some
subgroups among the participants were shown nontraditional representations. Results indicate that, for
data exploration tasks, designers and users should
embrace unconventional designs in order to
encourage creative problem solving and hypothesis
generation.

1. Introduction
Tools and methods for geographic visualization (and
visualization in general) are purported to be able to
assist a user in solving problems, communicating
information, uncovering previously unseen features, or
generating hypotheses [1][2]. Common to all these
applications is the important influence of the user’s
experience, knowledge, and background on the
effectiveness of the tools. Because geovisualization is
inherently a human activity, and not (just) a set of
methodologies of presenting spatial information on a
computer screen, the consideration of the factors
influencing user interpretation and understanding of

visualization displays is a critical component in
successful design.
Visualization as a cognitive process is most
successful, particularly in data exploration tasks, when
a user is provided means to think creatively about a
data set or a phenomenon. Where the 20th century task
of the cartographer was to communicate spatial
information – and conclusions about that information
– to a wide audience, cartographers of the 21st century
are additionally asked to provide ways to privately
explore and understand large quantities of geographic
data for which few hypotheses or conclusions have
been made.
As such, cartographers and other
designers of methods for representing spatial data
must work toward facilitating data exploration,
encouraging creative and often unconventional
thinking about a problem.
The research reported here serves to support a
hypothesis that a strict adherence to conventions and
metaphors in geovisualization interface design may
actually serve to diminish the ability of a user to
achieve the goal of creative and insightful data
exploration. Based on a pair of simple tests of map
reading
and
understanding,
conventions
of
cartography used in both map and interface design
may serve to hinder both the acceptance of
geovisualization by culturally diverse users and the
usefulness of geovisualization tools for a diverse set of
uses including exploratory spatial data analysis.

2. Background
Through the interactive features of a visualization
system, the user assumes the traditional role of the
cartographer – all of the choices left to a mapmaker
can now be placed in the hands of the user [3][4]. As
such, design of geovisualization systems is now,
perhaps more than ever in cartography, reliant on the
understanding of how users behave, think, and

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

assimilate information. The apparent “freedom” of
highly interactive systems must not be over-hyped: the
design and selection of tools provided for interaction
can be guided by conventions that may or may not
match the (pre)conceptions of the users.

2.1. Interface Metaphor
Many
human-computer
interaction
(HCI)
researchers and practitioners have discussed the merits
of metaphors in the design of interfaces as a way of
facilitating the understanding of a complex and
abstract system [6][7][8]. As users interact with a
system through the interface, their knowledge of the
system is supported by prior knowledge of both the
system and the metaphor (e.g. a “desktop” or
“typewriter”) to refine their mental models of the
system. Thus, metaphors allow the development of
improved mental models through the association of
familiar real-world concepts to unfamiliar abstract
concepts.
Such familiar real-world concepts as the desktop,
the typewriter, and the book all seem reasonable to
utilize as metaphors for computer systems (the Xerox
STAR – and the subsequent Macintosh and Windows
interface, the word processor, and web “pages,” in the
examples above) for most humans worldwide.
However, some metaphors are surely socially and
culturally constructed, and designers of visualization
applications should be cognizant of the implications of
designing for an increasingly diverse set of users and
applications. Among the challenges that Stephanidis
[9] notes for software designers in coming years is the
differential needs of a worldwide group of users (e.g.
societies other than those in Europe and North
America).
Interface metaphors, along with other aspects of a
visualization system, including the map and other data
displays, facilitate the activation of cognitive
schemata, the abstract structures in memory that, when
combined, contain the um of our knowledge of the
world [10][11]. Schemata can be more effectively
activated if the learning material (a map interface, a
visualization, etc.) is somehow similar in structure to
that of the existing schema [11]. In the context of
geographic representation, Peuquet [12] refers
specifically to anticipatory schemata, which are
patterns in thought that enable a perceiver to expect a
certain conclusion. More experienced individuals (for
example, good sight-readers of music, or chess
masters, or professional tennis players) anticipate a
great deal about what is to come, allowing them to
assimilate the multi-modal (visual, aural, etc.) stimuli
and react appropriately. Metaphors in interfaces can

be designed to activate anticipatory schemata and
guide a user to an appropriate conclusion.
Creating interfaces designed to prompt appropriate
schemata is not straightforward. Consideration of
social and cultural influences on the users of the
system in necessary – in many cases, certain taken-forgranted interface and cartographic conventions lead
users of diverse backgrounds to hypotheses or
conclusions that are incorrect, or worse, unduly
influenced by the design of the tools and interface.

2.2. Sociocultural factors in interface design
Sociocultural factors have recently gained attention
in human-computer interaction studies as users of the
Internet and corresponding applications become more
and more diverse and international [13][14][15][16].
Cultural differences relevant to human-computer
interaction manifest themselves in a variety of
different ways. On a broad level, interface design
could be affected by factors identified by Hofstede
[17], including the orientation of the society to
individual or group (collective) achievements, the
acceptance of social power hierarchies, and the
culture’s tolerance for uncertainty. Marcus [8] is one
of several HCI practitioners who advocate the
awareness of “cross-cultural” design of software and
interfaces specifically to enhance usability across
diverse users.
In more specific contexts, researchers have
examined culturally specific conventions in interface
design. For example, certain colors may be used in
ways that are conventional to Western users, but
unconventional to others: in China, for example, white
is indicative of death and red is the color of happiness,
both contrary to Western conventions [8][16]. The use
of pictographic icons such as floppy disks (which will
soon be outdated for young users) in interface design
is also subject to cultural influences [17].

2.3. Cartographic conventions and
geovisualization
Similar conventions are well documented in
cartography, map design, and statistical graphics. For
example, the vast majority of maps, particularly those
created in Western societies, are oriented with north at
the top of the map. Other conventions include that
“higher” corresponds to “more” (as on 3D density
maps or 2D bar graphs), that darker colors also
correspond to greater quantities (as on choropleth
maps), and that temporal progress in an animation is
indicated by a rightward movement of a temporal
indicator [5].

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Consider a classic reference map of the physical
features of the United States, common to many
thousands of school classrooms. The “elevation”
color scheme (one of the default schemes of GIS
packages), with green at sea level, through olive,
yellow, beige, brown, and white with increasing
elevation, might lead a user to believe that arid and hot
Yuma, Arizona, close to sea level, is lush with
vegetation, while the relatively moist and verdant (and
high) Appalachian Mountains are barren, dry, and
lifeless.
This misconception reflects a semiotic
mismatch between referent and interpretant; school
children or naïve map users may not understand that
color on the map symbolizes something other than
what is directly visible in the environment [19].
This obvious mismatch should lead a cartographer
to consider how other less conspicuous conventions
could lead users – even experts – to mistaken
conclusions. In the context of data exploration and
knowledge discovery applications, often cited as a
benefit of geographic visualization, conventions could
shield a user from making creative “out-of-the-box” –
literally unconventional – decisions and hypotheses
about the data set. Visualization systems hold an
advantage over static maps in this respect in that users
are able to alter the characteristics of the display to
examine data in potentially unconventional ways, and
this may lead them to generate hypotheses that are
(relatively) uninfluenced by the decisions of other
cartographers.

3. Facilitating creative thinking
Data exploration tasks typical of the use of
geographic and information visualization systems
require a different type of cognitive associations than
the data communication tasks typical of more
traditional cartography and information-oriented
graphical design. There is a greater requirement for
unconventional and creative thinking in applications
of visualization, and designing information systems in
order to encourage such approaches should be a
priority. The mental model development through the
use of metaphors as discussed above may run counter
to this priority, as metaphors by definition rely on
familiar and existing conventions, and may serve to, in
fact, “blinker” a user to a proscribed way of thinking
about a problem.
This notion of blinkering was mentioned as a
criticism of the overuse of interface metaphors by
Nelson [20]. An interface designer who is overly
focused on the direct mapping of interface
functionality to familiar everyday items (clocks,
desktops, etc.) may not only constrain his/her own

interface design, (s)he may also be constraining the
mental
models
developed
(and
knowledge
constructed) by the user of the system. For example,
Preece, Rogers, and Sharp [21] cite a case that a online
documentation system, designed to closely mimic a
book, had “blinkered” the users and the designers,
preventing them from organizing the material in a
more useful way.
Removing these blinkers may be accomplished by
either (a) presenting a challenging but ultimately
understandable interface that makes the tools actually
less “transparent” and, at least at first, useable, or (b)
giving the users the option of adapting the interface
design in order to match their individual mental
models of the ways things “naturally” work.
In a pair of experiments, our research group found,
at the time, a surprising result that supports this notion
that interface conventions may actually serve to
suppress creative thinking and careful inductive
approaches to visual analysis. The experiments,
discussed below, were designed to determine the
influence on alternative map design choices, some
partially constructed from social or cultural
conventions, on the use of those maps and georepresentations to generate insight and construct
knowledge.

4. Experiments
We conducted two experiments. The first was not
originally designed to test the hypothesis that
unconventional interface choices actually improved
learning in a geovisualization context, however, one
result of the first experiment does, in fact, support that
claim. The second, smaller scale experiment was
designed as a follow-up to the first to more formally
investigate what was anecdotal evidence from
Experiment 1: that by challenging cartographic
interface and representation conventions, insight like
that which is considered the “holy grail” of geographic
visualization (uncovering unknown things, generating
hypotheses, etc.) is encouraged or even made easier.

4.1 Experiment 1: temporal legends on
animated maps
In the first experiment, we wished to determine if
students perform differently on animated map-reading
tasks depending on the orientation and direction of
motion of the temporal indicator in the graphical user
interface of the map. Until now, the choice of the
direction that the temporal indicator progressed along
an animated linear legend has gone unexamined.
Though left-to-right seems to have become a “default”
direction for this motion, as is evidenced on weather

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

maps, computer movie interfaces, and VCR/DVD
controls, we wished to investigate whether this was, in
fact, a guideline that could be codified through
empirical tests. For example, in certain situations, it
may be necessary for a designer of a dynamic map to
orient the temporal legend differently (say, from topto-bottom). Does such a choice have a significant
influence on the ability of users to understand the
phenomenon?
A total of 527 students at Arizona State University,
each offered extra credit in class for their participation,
were subjects in the experiment. The targeted students
came from introductory courses known for a
significant cultural diversity, with a relatively high
percentage of non-American students. We grouped
students according to their native language
directionality (native English speakers were classified
as “left-to-right” readers, while native Arabic and
Hebrew speakers were classified “right-to-left”).
Each student was randomly presented an animated
map with a temporal indicator / progress bar that
moved either left-to-right (as in a conventional
Windows Media Player or QuickTime interface), topto-bottom, or right-to-left. The subjects were asked a
series of questions about the animations.
The
questions were designed to be proxies for, among
other uses of the animations, data exploration tasks.
The animations (Figure 1) were created in
Macromedia Flash from reordered frames of a classic
animation of urban growth of the BaltimoreWashington area [22].
Further details of this experiment are described
elsewhere [5], but the data revealed a counter-intuitive
result. Subjects who saw the right-to-left temporal
indicator (considered by all subjects to be the least
familiar interface design) answered questions about
the animations more accurately than those subjects
that saw the left-to-right indicator. In fact, the most
conventional (left-to-right) interface style led to the

worst performances of the three possible interfaces.
It seems likely that this result occurred because
those subjects who were exposed to the non-traditional
interface design necessarily attended to the display
more than their counterparts. Inversely, those who
saw a traditional interface style might have taken the
information on the maps for granted, assuming more
about the map than they should. In this first
experiment, we did not record the time it took for each
subject to respond to the questions, but it seems
evident that the non-traditional interface design forced
individuals to study the maps more carefully and for a
longer time, which led to more accurate conclusions
about the phenomenon represented on the animations.
Recent theory and research in HCI have advocated
customizable interfaces that are based on multiple
metaphors [23]. Our results lend support to a user
interface guideline that allows the user to customize
the direction of motion of the temporal indicator. As
has been reported here, the most natural legend may
not always be the most favorable. Giving the user the
option to customize their temporal indicator design
may be a viable answer for diverse users with diverse
uses for maps.

4.2. Experiment 2: challenging the north-up
convention
We conducted a second experiment that might be
considered a follow-up to the temporal legend
experiment above. To look further into the use of
unconventional elements in geographic representation,
and its influence on user understanding, the second
experiment consisted of a single question requiring
map users to make pattern recognition and feature
comparison assessments that was a proxy for data
exploration. We wished to determine whether there
was an influence on the orientation of a global map –
north-up vs. south-up – on successful estimation of

Figure 1: Three cases for temporal legend experiment: left-to-right (left); right-to-left (center); top-tobottom (right) temporal indicator motion.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

area on the maps. Does a non-traditional orientation
(south-up) lead users to a different approach in reading
and understanding the map, allowing them to use
unconventional and more careful thinking?
A total of 57 subjects, split between volunteers in
front of a student union at an American university and
volunteers walking past a public library, were each
shown one of two simple maps. Both were cylindrical
equal-area projections of the earth in two colors, with
land filled with dark gray and water filled with light
gray (Figure 2). The maps differed in that one was a
traditional north-up map, with the northern hemisphere
in the top half of the map, close to the visual center of
the page. The other was a south-up map, with the
South Pole at the top. We hypothesized that, all else
equal, subjects will spend more time answering a
question about the map, and will do so more
accurately.
We collected three pieces of data for each subject.
The first was the subject’s estimate of the amount of
the area of the earth that is covered by water.
Specifically, the subjects were asked, “looking at this
map, what is your estimate, between 0 and one
hundred percent, of how much of the earth is covered
by water?” The second variable collected was the
time in seconds that the subject took to respond to the
question. Finally, we asked whether or not the subject
had an idea about the answer to the water-coverage
question before the experiment.
Two dependent variables were thus collected for
analysis – the estimate of water coverage and the
response time of the subjects – with one independent
grouping variable – the orientation of the map. The
responses of those subjects who claimed to have
known the answer previously were removed, and the
remaining responses (47 of the 57 subjects) were
subjected to Student’s t-tests for difference of means.1
Table 1. Difference-of-means test for water cover estimates.
n
north up
south up

21
26

Sample
mean (%)
66.3
57.1

s
10.1
11.5

t

sig.

2.93

0.0053
(45 df)

The results indicated that individuals who saw the
south-up representation came much closer to the actual
water coverage value (about 70%), and that the
estimates of water coverage were significantly higher
for the south-up respondents (Table 1). This result
could be due to one of two factors: first, most of the
earth’s water is in the southern hemisphere, and a
south-up map places the large masses of water in the
visual center of the map. This would lead users to

Figure 2. Two cases for north-up experiment:
south-up (top); north-up (bottom).

tend to overestimate water coverage, at least relative to
maps where the large landmasses would be in the
visual center (the north-up case).
Another
explanation, more relevant to the discussion here, is
that the south-up representation, being less
conventional, would lead map readers to study the
map more carefully, looking at it with fewer
presuppositions.
To test this possibility, we also recorded response
times. The average response times for individuals
who saw the south-up map took significantly longer
(Table 2). This result is not surprising, but indicates
that the unconventional representation required longer
attention, which may mean that users considered the
answer to the water coverage estimation question more
carefully.

1

We also ran similar analysis with the 10 subjects retained; results
were similar to those described above.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Table 2. Difference-of-means test for response times.
n

north up
south up

21
26

sample
mean
(sec)
5.85
8.57

S

t

sig.

2.2
4.2

2.88

0.0061
(45 df)

5. Conclusion
Visualization is a human activity, dependent on
cognitive processes that can be specific to the user (in
terms of socio-cultural factors) and the use (in terms of
task-specific factors). The interface metaphors that
are developed and implemented by software designers
are generally useful, helping users understand,
remember, and enjoy the entities and relationships of
systems designed for communication [8]. Yet data
exploration tasks typical of geovisualization are
facilitated by interfaces that encourage creative and
unconventional thinking, and the use of interface
metaphors and cartographic conventions that directly
map the system or phenomenon to common everyday
objects or experiences may run counter to the these
exploration goals. The use of interface metaphors and
conventions may serve to constrain the interpretation
of mapped phenomena, and “blinker” the subsequent
mental models, which may lead to incorrect
conclusions or missed discoveries.
The two
experiments reported lend credence to this assertion.
It is difficult to conduct human-subjects experiments
that replicate tasks and simulate the use of
geovisualization tools in an exploratory setting. The
experiments here use proxies of animation
understanding and map pattern recognition and feature
comparison as relatively complex and high-level tasks
typical of visualization applications. Future work will
include experiments that better simulate the data
exploration tasks of geovisualization. Cartographers
should be prepared for the possibility that longstanding cartographic conventions and established
interface metaphors may serve to inhibit rather than
encourage out-of-the-box approaches to data
visualization.
If our goal is to facilitate data
exploration in novel ways, designers of visualization
systems
should
be
open
to
embracing
unconventionality in order to achieve those goals.

References
[1] A.M. MacEachren, “Visualization in Cartography:
Setting The Agenda.” in Visualization In Modern
Cartography, MacEachren, A.M. & Taylor, D.R.F. (eds.),
Pergamon, Oxford, 1994, pp. 1-12.
[2] M.J. Kraak & A.M. MacEachren, “Visualization for
Exploration of Spatial Data,” International Journal of
GIScience 13, 1999, pp. 285-87.
[3] R. Edsall, “The Parallel Coordinate Plot in Action,”
Computational Statistics And Data Analysis, 43, 2003, pp.
603-19.
[4] J. Crampton, “Interaction Types in Geographic
Visualization,” Cartography and Geographic Information
Science 29(2), 2002, pp. 85-98.
[5] R. Edsall & L. Sidney, “Challenging The Conventions
Of Interface Design For Education-Oriented Animated

Maps,” Research In Geographic Higher Education, 2005 (in
press).
[6] J. Alty, R. Knott, B. Anderson, & M. Smyth, “A
Framework for Engineering Metaphor at the User Interface,”
Interacting With Computers 13, 2000, pp. 301-22.
[7] D. Benyon & M. Imaz, “Metaphors And Models:
Conceptual Foundations of Representations in Interactive
System Development,” Human-Computer Interaction 14,
1999, pp. 159-89.
[8] A. Marcus, “Do We Dare Define User Interface
Design?” Interactions 9(5), 2002, pp. 19-24.
[9] C. Stephanidis, “User Interfaces for All: New
Perspecitves,” in User Interfaces for All: Concepts,
Methods, And Tools, Stephanidis, C. (ed.), Lawrence
Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 2001, pp. 3-20.
[10] A. Paivio, “Language and Knowledge of the World,”
Educational Researcher 3(9), 1974, pp. 5-12.
[11] W. Winn & D. Snyder, “Cognitive Perspectives in
Psychology,” in Handbook of Research for Educational
Communications and Technology, Jonassen, D. H. (ed.),
MacMillan, New York, 1996, pp. 112-42.
[12] D. Peuquet, Representations Of Space And Time.
Guilford, New York, 2002.
[13] D.L. Day, “Shared Values and Shared Interfaces: The
Role of Culture in The Globalisation of Human-Computer
Systems,” Interacting with Computers 9, 1998, pp. 269-74.
[14] T. Fernandes, Global Interface Design. Academic
Press, London, 1995.
[15] L. Leventhal, B. Teasley, B. Blumenthal , K. Instone,
D. Stone, & M.V. Donskoy, “Assessing User Interfaces for
Diverse User Groups: Evaluation Strategies And Defining
Characteristics,” Behaviour & Information Technology
15(3), 1996, pp. 127-37.
[16] A. Marcus, “International and Intercultural User
Interfaces,” in User Interfaces For All: Concepts, Methods,
And Tools, Stephanidis, C. (ed.), Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence
Erlbaum, 2001, pp. 47-63.
[17] G. Hofstede, Cultures and Organizations: Software of
the Mind, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
[18] S.M. Huang, S. Kong-King, & C.F. Chi, “Factors
Affecting the Design of Computer Icons,” International
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 29, 2002, pp. 211-18.
[19] A.M. MacEachren, How Maps Work, Guilford, New
York, 1995.
[20] T.H. Nelson, “The Right Way to Think about Software
Design,” in The Art of Human-Computer Interface Design,
Laurel, B. (Ed.), Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990, pp.
235-45.
[21] J. Preece, Y. Rogers, & H. Sharp, Interaction Design:
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 2002.
[22] Masuoka, P. & W. Acevedo, Time-series animation
techniques for visualizing urban growth. Computers and
Geosciences, 23(4), 1997, pp. 423-35.
[23] D. Akoumianakis, & C. Stephanidis, ‘Multiple
Metaphor Environments: Designing For Diversity,”
Ergonomics 46(1), 2003, pp. 88-113.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

