Visual Exploration of the Spatial Distribution of Temporal Behaviors
Gennady Andrienko and Natalia Andrienko
Fraunhofer Institute for Autonomous Intelligent Systems
Schloss Birlinghoven, D-53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
http://www.ais.fraunhofer.de/and
{gennady,natalia}.andrienko@ais.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
The paper elaborates on the previous research on
the analysis of temporal and spatio-temporal data done
in statistical graphics and geo-visualization. We focus on
the exploration of spatially distributed time-series data,
i.e. values of numeric attributes referring to different
moments in time and locations in space. After
considering appropriate interactive visualization
techniques, we propose several methods of exploration
based on user-controlled data transformation and
aggregation, easy-to-understand calculations, and
dynamic linking of data displays. The proposed methods
are potentially scalable, i.e. they can be applied to large
data sets without overcrowding the displays and loosing
interactivity.
Keywords: visual data mining, spatial time-series
analysis, data visualization, dynamic and coordinated
data displays

1. Introduction
Analysis of time series data is one of the most
important topics in several research areas. Thus, a
number of computational methods have been recently
developed in data mining [1]. Researchers in statistical
graphics, information visualization, and human-computer
interaction propose various interactive visualization
techniques for time-series. The papers [2,3] introduce
basic graphical and interaction facilities for enhancing
analytical capabilities of time series plots, or time
graphs:
1. Interactive access to values via graphics by
pointing on a segment of a line.
2. Tools for overlaying lines to enable their
comparison, which allow the user to distort the lines for a
better correspondence.
3. The possibility to select lines with particular
characteristics, such as specific values at a given time
moment or interval, specific profiles, etc.
4. Dynamic linking between a plot and other
information displays (scatter-plots, histograms, maps
etc.) by identical marking of visual items corresponding
to user-selected objects.

Most of these tools are applicable to a relatively
small number of time series but unsuitable for studying
large collections of time series data. In most cases, such
tools are implemented as stand-alone prototypes with a
limited number of available complementary displays.
The authors do not propose any approaches to dealing
with the spatial aspect of the data except for linking time
graphs with simple maps, which show only the locations
of the time series and provide quite restricted
visualization and interaction opportunities.
Cartographic
and
geo-visualization
research
communities pay much attention to visualization and
analysis of spatial time series data [4-11]. Since [12],
different types of spatio-temporal data are distinguished
according to the type of changes that occur over time:
1. Existential changes: appearing, disappearing,
reviving of objects or/and relationships;
2. Changes of spatial properties of objects
(location, size, shape);
3. Changes of thematic properties, i.e. values of
attributes.
Sometimes only one type of change takes place or is
of interest for an analyst, but in many cases one needs to
deal with several types simultaneously.
In our previous publications, we suggested several
new methods supporting the exploration of various types
of spatio-temporal data and various aspects of them.
Thus, we designed and implemented techniques for the
exploration of trajectories of moving objects [13] and
spatio-temporal distribution of point events [14],
detection of changes and analysis of variance in spatial
time series data [15,16], characterization and comparison
of spatial development scenarios [17]. We have recently
undertaken a survey [18] of existing methods and
software tools for the exploratory spatio-temporal
visualization in order to build an inventory of approaches
and to identify the necessary directions for further work.
In paper [19] we have studied the impact of data and task
characteristics on design of spatio-temporal data
visualization tools.
In this paper, we focus on the exploration of changes
of thematic properties of spatial objects. Our objective is
to find suitable approaches and suggest tools for
analyzing multiple spatially distributed time series.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2. Local behaviors and their visualization
We shall use the term behavior, or local behavior, to
denote the temporal variation of attribute values in a
particular place. One of the possible views of a dataset
consisting of attribute values referring to a set of spatial
locations and a sequence of time moments is to view it as
a collection of local behaviors, with each behavior
referring to one of the locations. Other views are also
possible, for example, treating the data as a sequence of
spatial distributions of the attribute values, where each
distribution refers to one of the time moments. In this
paper, we take the former view. We limit our focus to
behaviors formed by changeable values of a single
numeric attribute.
In the course of the exploration of a collection of
spatially distributed behaviors, an analyst may be
interested to find answers to various questions:
x What is the general dynamics of values over the
entire territory?
x What are the general features of the local
behaviors in this area and how do they compare
to the behaviors on the remaining territory?
x Find locations with the behaviors having specific
features and check whether these locations are
neighbors, or, in other words, form a spatial
cluster. Here are some examples of the features
that may be looked for:
o persistently low (or high) values;
o high value fluctuations;
o continuous increase (or decrease) of
values during a given time period.
x Identify spatial clusters of similar behaviors.
Let us look what tools and techniques may be helpful
to the data analyst in finding the answers. For our
investigation, we shall use the dataset concerning the
statistics of crimes in the USA published by the U.S.
Department of Justice. The data are available at the URL
http://bjsdata.ojp.usdoj.gov/dataonline/. This dataset
contains values of 21 numeric attributes referring to 51
states of the USA and to 41 time moments, specifically,
the years from 1960 to 2000. The attributes include the
population number and the absolute numbers and rates of
the crimes of different types, for example, burglaries,
motor vehicle thefts, murders, etc.
For studying a single temporal behavior, the
visualization of the data on a time graph is typically
used. The behavior of a numeric attribute often appears
on such a graph as a line, which results from connecting
the positions corresponding to the values at consecutive
time moments. When multiple behaviors are explored
irrespectively of the geographic space, they can be
represented in a single display as lines drawn in a
common coordinate framework. Figure 1 shows a time
graph with 51 lines corresponding to the behaviors of the
attribute “Burglary rate” in all the states. This

representation can be used for getting the first rough idea
about the dynamics of the burglary rates over the entire
country: overall increase until 1980 followed by a period
of gradual decrease. However, the cluttering and
overlapping of the lines make the display hardly legible.

Figure 1. Behaviors of the burglary rates in the
states of the USA are represented on a time
graph display as multiple overlaid lines.
The time graph can be dynamically linked to a map
display: positioning the mouse cursor on a line or
clicking on it can result in this line being specially
marked (highlighted) as well as the corresponding state
on the map. The link can also work in the opposite
direction, i.e. selection of a state on the map highlights
the corresponding line on the graph. By selecting several
states, one can find answers to questions concerning the
general features of the local behaviors in this or that area.
However, since the user can only see the behaviors
corresponding to selected locations, it is very difficult to
understand how the character and distinctive features of
the local behaviors vary over the whole territory.

Figure 2. A cartographic representation of the
spatial distribution of the behaviors of burglary
rates over the USA
A suitable graphical representation for the latter task
is shown in Figure 2: the local behaviors are represented
by symbols superimposed on a map according to their
spatial references, i.e. at the locations of the respective
states. The form of the symbols is a modification of the
time graph technique: the coordinate frame is omitted
and the lines are complemented to closed shapes with

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

internal filling for a better visibility against the
cartographical background.
With such a map, we can see how different behaviors
are distributed over the territory of USA. Thus, we can
observe that the states in the north-central part of the
country had smaller burglary rates than in the other states
during the whole time period from 1960 to 2000.
Another observation is that the states on the west and
southwest have higher peaks in the middle of the time
interval than the states on the east (with a few
exceptions). It is possible to see some spatial clusters of
states with similar temporal behaviors of the burglary
rate: (1) west-southwest-south, (2) middle north, (3) the
area around the Great Lakes, (4) center and southeast,
except for Florida. The clusters are roughly outlined in
Figure 3.
2

3

3. Combining tools for behavior exploration
One possibility to overcome the dimensionality
problem is to use methods of computational statistics and
data mining. For example, an explorer can use cluster
analysis for replacing numerous spatial locations by
groups made of locations with close characteristics.
Spatially aware clustering methods can create
geographically continuous aggregates. However, there
are several problems with this solution. First, such
methods usually require significant efforts for data
preparation. Second, the outcomes are very sensitive to
method parameters. An explorer needs to do multiple
trials with assigning different values to the parameters
and then choose the most appropriate result. Third,
execution time may be rather long. Finally, the results
are often difficult to interpret.
The approaches we are going to suggest are based on
simple, easily understandable calculations enhanced by
interactive dynamically linked data displays. We shall
demonstrate that, despite of the simplicity, these
techniques can be quite effectively applied to large
datasets.

4
1

1:

3.1
2:

3:

4:

Figure 3. Spatial clusters of states with similar
temporal behaviors of the burglary rate. Below
the map, the typical behavioral patterns for each
cluster are schematically shown.
By visual inspection of the map, an explorer can find
locations with the corresponding behaviors having
specific features and, naturally, immediately see whether
these locations form a spatial cluster. It is also possible to
detect the essential common features of behaviors in a
certain area.
In the examples we have considered in this section, a
purely visual exploration has been quite effective due to
the small dimensionality of the data in the spatial,
temporal, and thematic aspects. Thus, we have dealt with
a single attribute, quite short time series, and a small
number of spatial locations. Therefore, we have been
able to review and compare all the local behaviors
represented on the map. However, for the exploration of
more complex data, it is necessary to use more
sophisticated methods or combinations of techniques.
Consideration of multiple attributes is out of the scope of
this paper. For the remaining complexities, i.e. the length
of the time series and the number of different locations,
we propose some new methods that shall be discussed in
the next section. Although we stick to the same example
data, the methods are also applicable to substantially
larger data volumes.

Getting the general picture of the
behavior on the entire territory

In Figure 1, we have demonstrated a time graph
display with multiple overlaid lines. Already with fifty
local behaviors, this display suffers from cluttering and
overlapping. It becomes completely unusable when this
number increases to hundreds or thousands.
In Figure 4, bottom, we propose an aggregationbased alternative to the time graph display representing
multiple behaviors.

Figure 4. The value range of the attribute has
been divided into intervals. The segmented bars
show for each year the proportions of values
over the whole country fitting in these intervals.
For producing this visualization, the value range of
the attribute “Burglary rate” has been divided into 5
intervals by introducing breaks 500, 1000, 1500, and

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2000. For each year, the display contains a segmented
bar with the differently colored segments showing how
many values in this year over the whole country fit in the
corresponding intervals. The white segments correspond
to the values below 500, the light gray – to values
between 500 and 1000, and so on (the higher the values,
the darker the color). The background coloring of the
time graph display above the segmented bar display
visually illustrates the principle of the aggregation and
the current division of the attribute value range.
The aggregated display at the bottom allows us to do
important observations concerning the general behavior
of the burglary rates on the whole territory over the time.
Thus, we can see that in early sixties the burglary rates in
most states were below 500 and in a part of states (from
one-fourth to one-third) between 500 and 1000. Starting
from mid-sixties, the burglary rates over the whole
country increased and reached their extremes in 1980
and 1981, when the proportions of the states with the
rates below 500 and between 500 and 1000 were the
smallest and the proportions of the states with the values
between 1500 and 2000 and more than 2000 were the
largest. After 1981, the situation slightly improved and
remained more or less stable until the beginning of
nineties, when it started to gradually improve and
preserved this trend until the end of the time period
under study. However, the low criminality level of early
sixties was not reached again.
The thick black line on the time graph above the
aggregated display connects the yearly countrywide
median values and thereby provides an additional
generalized view of the dynamics of the burglary rates
over the country.
The aggregation technique can be combined with
various transformations of the original attribute values,
such as computing the changes from year to year, as is
shown in Figure 5. Here, the burglary rates in each year
have been transformed into their ratios to the values in
the same states in the previous year. The resulting values
higher than 1.0 correspond to annual increase and values
below 1.0 – to decrease. The time graph at the top
represents the transformed values instead of the original
ones.
Like in the previous case, we have applied the
division of the whole range of the transformed values
into intervals. This time, chose two breaks, 0.95
corresponding to 5% decrease and 1.05 corresponding to
5% increase, and thereby obtained 3 intervals.
The resulting aggregated display is instrumental for
finding years and periods of significant countrywide
increase or decrease of values. The light gray color
corresponds to the decrease by more than 5%, white – to
the changes between 5% decrease and 5% increase, and
dark – to the increase of the values by more than 5%. It
may be seen that 1974 and 1980 were the years of almost
overall rapid increase and 1999 was the year of general

rapid decrease. Starting from 1992, the crime rates
mostly decreased or changed by less than 5% in
comparison to the previous year.

Figure 5. The time graph has been transformed
to show the annual changes in the individual
states. The lower image aggregates the
changes for each year.
Hence, this simple aggregation technique proves
quite useful in application to both the original data and
the transformed ones. The technique is scalable in
respect to the number of objects and to the length of time
series: the computational complexity is linear with regard
to both dimensions. The limitation for the visualization is
the screen size and resolution. The time graphs
accompanying the aggregated displays in Figures 4 and 5
are not necessary for the sort of exploratory tasks
considered and may be omitted.

3.2

Finding spatial patterns of similar
local behaviors

Another way of aggregating the same data is
demonstrated in Figure 6.

Figure 6. The aggregate time graph represents
the changes of the value range and the quartiles
over time.
The display contains a so-called “envelope”, that is, a
polygon enclosing all the lines representing the local
behaviors. Actually, the lines themselves are not needed
for building the envelope but only the minimum and
maximum values over the country in each year. The

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

envelope thus shows how the range of the burglary rates
changes over time. In addition to the value range in each
year, the median and quartiles are shown. The positions
of the corresponding positional measures in consecutive
years are connected so that the original envelope is
divided into four polygons. The polygons are painted
using alternating light and dark shades of gray, which
makes them clearly visible and distinguishable.
In principle, there is a danger that a viewer may
consider these polygons as containers of certain subsets
of lines whereas they are just indicators of the positions
of each year’s median and quartiles, and individual lines
may cross the boundaries of the polygons, as may be
seen from Figure 7. Perhaps, it would be less misleading
to mark somehow these positions without connecting
them, but such a display would be much more complex
to perceive.

values can be replaced by the numbers of the respective
quarters. Thus, the line of Mississippi in Figure 7 was in
the lower quarter of the value distribution from the
beginning of the time period until 1980, i.e. for 21 years.
Accordingly, the original values of the burglary rates in
this state for the years from 1960 until 1980 are encoded
into the value 1. Then, from 1981 up to 1986, the
burglary rate values were in the second quarter and,
hence, are encoded into 2. Analogously, the values for
the years 1987-1991 are encoded into 3, and starting
from 1992 – into 4. In the same way, the values for all
other states are transformed.
For each so transformed time series, the occurrences
of each quarter number are then counted. For example,
the counts for Mississippi are 21, 6, 5, and 9,
respectively. The counts are presented in Figure 8 by bar
charts positioned on a map. Each symbol consists of four
bars corresponding to the quarters with the sizes being
proportional to the respective counts. Additionally, the
coloring of each state corresponds to the dominating
quarter, i.e. having the maximum number of occurrences
among the four quarters. Thus, the dominating quarter
for Mississippi is 1.

Figure 7. The line representing the local
behavior in Mississippi is superimposed on the
aggregate time graph.
Providing that the meaning of the polygons is
understood correctly, one can effectively use them for
data analysis. The display gives us a summarized picture
of the countrywide situation with the burglary rates in
each particular year and allows us to compare the
situations in different years. We can also get an idea of
the overall trend of the burglary rates over the country
during the whole period from 1960 to 2000 or any of its
sub-intervals. Thus, an increase of median and quartile
values indicates the overall increasing trend of the
burglary rates, and the same for decrease. For example, a
clear decreasing trend can be observed on the interval
from 1991 to 2000. Moreover, using the properties of the
positional measures, we can particularize this
observation by giving some numeric estimations: in
1991, more than a half of the states had burglary rates
over 1000, whereas in 2000, the burglary rates in more
than 75% of the states were below 1000. We can easily
see the period of the highest burglary rates from 1977 to
1982, when the rates in at least 75% of states were over
1000. The synchronous peaks of the values of the median
and the quartiles in 1975 and 1980-1981 may be also
worth attention as well as the rather steep decrease from
1981 to 1984.
The computed yearly medians and quartiles can be
further used for data simplification. The original numeric

Figure 8. Computationally supported detection
of clusters of similar local behaviors
It may be noted that, in the result of this automated
procedure, we have got spatial clusters (groups of
neighboring identically colored states) very similar to the
clusters in Figure 3 revealed “manually”.
The transformed data can be also analyzed in another
way. For each local behavior, the average (mean) quarter
and the variance can be computed. In Figure 9, bottom
left, these values are represented on a scatterplot. Using
the dynamic link between the scatterplot and the time
graph, one may find and explore behaviors with
particular characteristics in terms of the average and
variance. Thus, in Figure 9, the scatterplot has been used
to find the behaviors with low variance and the values
being mostly either in the lowest or in the highest
quarter. The corresponding lines are highlighted on the
time graph.
Similarly, in Figure 10, the states with high
variability of values have been selected through the
scatterplot. The map fragment shows only the eastern
part of the country where all the selected states are
located.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The analytical instrument we have described allows
the user to choose arbitrary percentiles for the value
range division and subsequent replacement of the
original values by the interval numbers. It is possible to
apply the computations to the complete time period or to
any sub-interval. The user can dynamically change the
selected time interval. In response, the computations are
automatically re-applied and the visualization of the
results updated. It is also possible to apply another data
simplification procedure that counts increases and
decreases of the interval numbers inside the time series.
The proposed method can be applied to rather large
data sets. It has a linear complexity in respect to time and
n*log(n) complexity in respect to the number of
locations. The visual representation is based on
aggregated characteristics, and only selected individual
data with specific characteristics are shown in detail.
Figure 9. Selection of the states with
consistently low (painted in light color) and
consistently high (shown in dark) burglary rates

3.3

Detecting spatio-temporal patterns
of similar changes

The geometrical representation of temporal behaviors
provides interesting possibilities for data exploration
through dynamic querying. The idea, which is
demonstrated in Figure 11, is to show only line segments
having a certain inclination.

Figure 10. Selection of the states with high
variability of values
It may be noted that the time graph displays in
Figures 7, 9, and 10 combine an aggregated
representation of the entire set of local behaviors and a
detailed representation of selected behaviors. This
technique compensates for the deficiencies of both
representations being used separately. Despite of the
aggregation, individual data can be viewed in sufficient
detail and compared with the general characteristics of
the entire dataset. Since the detailed representation is
only applied to selected items, cluttering and overlapping
of display elements is considerably reduced.

Figure 11. The time graph shows only the line
fragments corresponding to value increase by
1% or more.
The inclination may be specified through setting the
lower or/and upper limits for the degree of absolute or
relative change (i.e. difference or ratio) in comparison to
the previous moment. Thus, in Figure 11 (lower image),

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

the user has specified the lower limit for the relative
change to be 1.01, which corresponds to 1% or more
increase in a current year in comparison to the previous
year. In response, the tool shows only the line fragments
complying with this specification; all other line
fragments have been hidden. Prior to the filtering, the
lines had been smoothed using the 5-year centered
moving averages and appeared as is shown in the upper
image in Figure 11.
Now, it is possible to apply direct manipulation
querying in order to find out which states had no less
than 1% increase of the burglary rate in particular years.
This can be done by clicking on the line segments, but
there is also another opportunity: the user can click on
the years, that is, on the positions corresponding to
different years below the horizontal axis of the graph. In
the result, the lines with no less than 1% increase in these
years become marked, and so do the corresponding
graphical elements on other displays, in particular, the
outlines of the states on a map display. Selection of two
or more years marks the lines having the specified
inclination in all these years.

these years. On the right of each time graph, there is a
map with the corresponding states being marked by thick
black boundaries.
First, we selected the year 1986 and observed on the
map what states had the specified increase of the
burglary rates in this year. After that, we clicked on the
next year. In the result, marking of two states
disappeared, and only the states with increase in both
1986 and 1987 remained marked. Then, we clicked on
the year 1988, and so on. With each subsequent
selection, the number of marked states decreased. At the
end, when six years from 1986 to 1991 were selected,
only one state remained marked. It may be seen from the
graph at the bottom that the corresponding line fragment
(shown in black) ends in the year 1991, and, hence, the
selection of the year 1992 would remove the last
marking.
This technique is useful for answering analytical
questions like: “Find spatial clusters of states with
continuous increase of values during a given time
period”. In this method, a direct manipulation user
interface supports interactive testing of the sensitivity to
variation of the time period and the threshold for
increase. The technique can also be applied to much
larger data sets: due to the filtering, the overlapping is
significantly reduced.

4. Discussion and conclusions

Figure 12. Looking for states with 1% or more
increase of the burglary rates in consecutive
years starting from 1986.
Figure 12 demonstrates the effect of a series of
successive selections. The vertical lines on the time
graph indicate the selected years. Marked by black colors
are the lines with the specified degree of increase in

In this paper, we proposed several interactive
methods for visual exploration of spatially distributed
time-series data. The first method described in § 3.1 is
based on data aggregation and supports the overall view
of the value dynamics on the entire territory. The second
method (§ 3.2) supports finding spatial patterns of
similar temporal behaviors. This method is based on data
simplification: the values within intervals determined by
user-selected positional statistical measures are treated as
equivalent. Easily interpretable calculations such as
counting of value occurrences and finding the most
frequently occurring value in a time series are then
applied to the transformed data. The results are presented
on dynamically linked displays that allow easy selection
of objects with specific characteristics for a detailed
visualization. The third method (§ 3.3) is instrumental
for detection of spatial patterns of similar temporal
changes and for studying sensitivity of the procedure.
This method is based on data filtering and interactive
manipulation of multiple coordinated visual displays.
The essence of our approach is in combining easily
understandable methods of data transformation and
aggregation with interactive manipulation of linked data
displays representing the results of these methods. In the
displays, the representation of aggregated characteristics
of the entire dataset can be combined with viewing
detailed information for selected individual instances.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

An important feature of the proposed methods is their
potential scalability. Although we use a small dataset in
the examples presented here, almost all of the proposed
methods can be applied to large data sets as well (see a
related discussion in [20]). We have an experience of
applying these methods to datasets of different sizes. In
all cases, the results were useful and stimulating.
There are several directions for further research. New
interactive methods are needed for analyzing multiple
attributes simultaneously, for dealing with very long time
series, and for detecting structures in temporal behaviors
(e.g. cyclical phenomena etc.) Besides developing new
methods, there is a need in helping users to select proper
tools and effectively operate them for solving specific
problems and making informed well-grounded decisions.
For this purpose, we are going to develop a knowledgebased system for assisting users in data analysis that will
incorporate the generic knowledge on data analysis,
visual communication, and decision making.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

5. Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported in projects SPIN!,
GIMMI, EuroFigures, EFIS, NEFIS, SILVICS. We are
grateful to our partners and colleagues for friendly
support and fruitful discussions. We would especially
like to thank Peter Gatalsky for many years of
cooperation in spatio-temporal research.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

E.Keogh and S.Kasetty, On the need for time series data
mining benchmarks: a survey and empirical
demonstration, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,
2003, 7 (4), 349-371.
Unwin, A. R., and Wills, G., Eyeballing Time Series.
Proceedings of the 1988 ASA Statistical Computing
Section, 1988, pp.263-268
H.Hochheiser and B.Shneiderman, Dynamic query tools
for time series data sets: Timebox widgets for interactive
exploration, Information Visualization, 2004, 3 (1), pp.118.
J. Bertin, “Semiology of Graphics Diagrams Networks
Maps”, The Univ. of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1983.
A. Koussoulakou, M.J. Kraak, “Spatio-temporal maps
and cartographic communication”, The Cartographic
Journal, 29 (1992) 101–108.
I.R. Vasiliev, Mapping time, Cartographica 34 (2) (1997)
1–51.
D.J. Peuquet, “It’s about time: a conceptual framework
for the representation of temporal dynamics in
geographic information systems”, Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, 84 (3) (1994),
pp.441–461
Tobler, W., (1970) “A computer movie simulating urban
growth in the Detroit region”, Economic Geography,
46(2), 234-240.

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

T. Slocum, S. Yoder, F. Kessler, R. Sluter, MapTime:
software for exploring spatiotemporal data associated
with point locations, Cartographica 37 (1) (2000) 15–31.
M. Harrower, A.L. Griffin, A.M. MacEachren, Temporal
focusing and temporal brushing: assessing their impact in
geographic visualization, in: Proceedings of 19th
International Cartographic Conference, Ottawa, Canada,
Vol. 1, 1999, pp. 729–738.
A. Fredrikson, C. North, C. Plaisant, B. Shneiderman,
Temporal, geographic and categorical aggregations
viewed through coordinated displays: a case study with
highway incident data, in: Proceedings of Workshop on
New Paradigms in Information Visualization and
Manipulation (NPIVM ’99), ACM Press, New York,
1999, pp. 26–34.
C. Blok, “Monitoring Change: Characteristics of
Dynamic
Geo-spatial
Phenomena
for
Visual
Exploration”, in Ch.Freksa et al. (eds) Spatial Cognition
II, LNAI 1849, Berlin, Springer-Verlag pp.16-30
Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., and Gatalsky, P.
Supporting Visual Exploration of Object Movement. In
V. Di Gesù, S. Levialdi, L. Tarantino (eds.) Proceedings
of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces AVI 2000, Palermo, Italy, May 23-26, 2000,
ACM Press, 2000, pp.217-220, 315
P. Gatalsky, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko, Interactive
Analysis of Event Data using Space-Time Cube, In
Banissi, E. et al (Eds.) IV 2004. 8th International
Conference on Information Visualization, Proceedings,
14-16 July, 2004, London, UK, IEEE Computer Society,
Los Alamitos, California, 2004, pp. 145-152
Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., and Gatalsky, P.,
Exploring Changes in Census Time Series with
Interactive Dynamic Maps and Graphics, Computational
Statistics, 2001, v.16 (3), pp.417-433
Andrienko, N., and Andrienko, G., Interactive visual
tools to explore spatio-temporal variation, In
M.F.Coastabile (Ed.) Proceedings of the Working
Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces AVI 2004,
Gallipoli, Italy, May 25-28, 2004, ACM Press, 2004,
pp.417-420
N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and P. Gatalsky, Tools for
Visual Comparison of Spatial Development Scenarios, In
Banissi, E. et al (Eds.) IV 2003. Seventh International
Conference on Information Visualization, Proceedings,
16-18 July, 2003, London, UK, IEEE Computer Society,
Los Alamitos, California, 2003, pp. 237-244
Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., and Gatalsky, P.,
“Exploratory
Spatio-Temporal
Visualization:
an
Analytical Review”, Journal of Visual Languages and
Computing, 2003, v.14 (6), pp. 503-541
Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., and Gatalsky, P., Impact
of data and task characteristics on design of spatiotemporal data visualization tools, In J. Dykes, A.
MacEachren and M.-J. Kraak (Eds.) Exploring
Geovisualization, Oxford: Elsevier, 2004 (in press)
G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko, “Blending Aggregation
and Selection: Adapting Parallel Coordinates for the
Visualisation of Large Datasets”, The Cartographic
Journal, 2005 (accepted)

