Visualizations of symbols in a horizontal multiple viewer 3D display
environment
Lars Winkler Pettersson
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University
lwp@it.uu.se
Ulrik Spak
Swedish National Defence College
ulrik.spak@fhs.mil.se

Stefan Seipel
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of G¨avle
ssl@hig.se

Abstract
In this paper we present a visualization environment for
collaborative and co-located displays of geospatially related data for command and control. We ﬁrst describe
the working principle of a novel horizontal display that is
aimed at providing high resolution stereoscopic 3D visualizations simultaneously to a group of up to four observers.
This display environment opens up new ways to present
view-dependent visual content within a shared workspace.
For this environment we propose frontoparallel presentations of conventional symbols that are 3D presentations of
2D symbols which appear virtually oriented towards the
line of sight of the observer. In an experiment we compare
frontoparallel symbols with ﬂat symbols i.e. symbols that
are presented in the horizontal plane of the display. The results of our study indicate that frontoparallel symbols in a
stereoscopic view are perceived and identiﬁed faster than
symbols presented ﬂat in relation to the plane of the display.
Keywords—
Stereoscopic visualization, Collaboration, Perception,
Command and Control

1

Mats Lind
Department of Information Science
Uppsala University
mats.lind@dis.uu.se

Introduction

Tactical and operational information about military and
civil disaster relief situations are traditionally presented
using maps with related symbols in a two dimensional
setting. The maps and the symbols are used to quickly
mediate information about the currently known situation
and future planed-for situations. The tools currently used
to present geo-spatial information by the Swedish armed
forces can be as simple as paper maps with plastic overlays or more advanced computer supported command and

control systems. Maps are either presented in a vertical position to make them readable by larger groups of people or
in a horizontal position to facilitate interactive face to face
discussions. An assumption made is that displays in a horizontal position where the participants are gathered around
the display will better support collaboration. One problem
when working with maps in a horizontal position is that the
displayed information can only be read optimally from one
direction. A single view display with geo-spatial information will contain labels of geographic information as well
as tactical and operational information that in most cases
will be hard to interpret for all but the participants facing
the map from its south to north direction. Only the participants viewing the map from south to north will be able to
efﬁciently read the labels and symbols of the map. We can
assume that symbols and text can be read more efﬁciently if
they are oriented in the correct way. Though even from the
optimal view from the south to north, we can suspect that
symbols will be harder to identify if they are presented ﬂat
in the plane of the display instead of facing the viewer. A
table top environment to support face to face collaboration
with geo-spatial information requires a way of presenting
information such that it can be interpreted correctly and
efﬁciently independent of perspectives.
Information about exact positions and status of individual military objects such as troops, tanks, airplanes, etc.
will only give an advantage if the information can be presented in an efﬁcient and useful way in an environment
suitable for collaboration. This paper presents one aspect
of symbol visualization for stereoscopic multiple viewer
display environments. We have focused on how to make
geo-spatial meta-information such as symbols and textual
tags efﬁciently readable.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2

Previous Work

Recent work has found that the ability to identify realistic 3D icons is much harder than identifying 2D symbols
[10] and proposed a solution where the two types are combined to form Symbicons. Symbicons take the most useful
attributes of 3D icons and combine them with traditional
symbols. Smallman et al. also state: that it is extremely
difﬁcult to create a 3D view populated with symbols that
do not look artiﬁcial because symbols are ﬂat, 2D objects
and thus cannot be naturally rendered and integrated into a
3D view [11].
We suggest that rendering of 2D symbology in a 3D
view can be achieved only if the characteristics of the display system will support it. For a single user display environment to support 2D symbology the most important
characteristic is precise head tracking with low latency updates. For 3D multiple viewer display environments, efﬁcient presentation of 2D symbology requires each user’s
perspective of the display to be view-dependent with the
visualized model co-located in the same presentation volume. The ﬁrst characteristic, view-dependent perception
is important for enhancing the visualization by presenting
each user in the display environment with textual tags and
symbols oriented towards their gaze. The second characteristic, the visualization of a co-located model, ensures
that all the users in the environment perceive the model as
one and can interact with it. To describe the visualization
technique based on these characteristics we use the term
view-dependent co-located visualization [9].
Head Mounted Displays (HMD) used for displaying
stereoscopic visualizations can either represent the surrounding environment through a virtual setup, a video seethrough setup or an optical see-through setup [3]. However, since command and control work is highly dependent
on face to face collaboration. HMDs representing the surrounding environment by a video captured stream will hinder the detection of subtle facial expressions used in face
to face collaboration. Optical see-through HMDs could be
an efﬁcient alternative for collaborative work, but the technique is sensitive to incorrect head tracking with the requirement of registering six degrees of freedom (6DOF) at
below 10 ms latency [3].
Compared to HMDs, stereoscopic screen visualization
with shutter glasses or passive polarizing glasses can be
achieved efﬁciently by means of three degrees of freedom
tracking of the viewpoint. It is therefore less affected by
angular tracking errors and net latency in the registration
equipment. Stereoscopic presentation techniques based on
active shutters generate frame rate dependent ﬂickering
when more than only one user share a presentation area
in a temporal multiplexing scheme [1]. In order to avoid
this problem when shutter glasses are used for more than

one independent observer, the display can be spatially divided into separate viewing zones for each user [6]. This
approach works at the cost of signiﬁcantly reduced effective resolution and spatial viewing area of the display.

3

The Multiple Viewer Display Environment

In our research we use a novel display environment developed by the Swedish company Varg¨ogat AB. On top of
the display environment we have developed a set of software components. At the very bottom we ﬁnd a display
which presents simultaneously the content of eight independent image sources. These images are presented within
the same physical area on-screen and can therefore be perceived in the same locus by different viewers. The eight
co-located images can be used to either provide four independent viewers with individual stereoscopic imagery or to
serve eight independent observers with monocular views.
The physical display system is essentially an integrated
retro-projection display system, in which the projection
screen is oriented horizontally. This approach provides a
viewing metaphor that is perceived as a bird’s eye view.
Similar viewing conﬁgurations have been presented earlier
for instance in medical applications [7].
What is novel with the display environment presented
here is the fact that eight independent digital image projectors are used to rear-project images from eight independent image sources upon the same physical screen area.
Each two projectors are projecting from one of the four
main directions upon the screen. The square screen has
a size of 0.8 by 0.8 meters. Projection images are horizontally adjusted such that the other image centers align
with the centre of the square screen. The visible pixel resolution of each projection image on-screen is 768 by 768
pixels. All eight projection-images are superimposed upon
the same physical screen area, but pairs of two are rotated
90 degrees or 180 degrees, respectively in relation to one
another. The separation of stereo image pairs is accomplished by using polarizing ﬁlters in front of the image
projectors rather than using an active shutter system with
temporal multiplexing. One component of the display that
is not further described in this place is a special optical design for the retro-projection screen, which allows the projection images to penetrate the screen primarily along the
direction of the optical axis without loosing polarization.
In consequence, a viewer being located at one side of the
screen perceives only two of the eight projection images
and, when using passive stereo glasses, perceives only one
of the two images on either eye.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 1: Two users discuss a situation in the same geographic area with military domain symbols frontoparallel to each
user’s perspective

4

Figure 2: The picture shows the viewpoint corrected
monocular view as well as (subdued) the pictures aimed
for the remaining other viewers
Figure 2 shows the viewpoint adapted projection image
for an observer looking from one side of the horizontal display. In this picture, also the view of the remaining three
observers upon the same object can be seen, since the picture is taken without polarizing ﬁlters. Only monocular
views have been rendered. This display system is driven
by a small cluster of four commercial off-the-shelf computers that are interconnected with a Giga-Ethernet local
area network. Each of the four computers is equipped with
an NVidia QuadroFX graphics cards and renders two pipes.
Hence, for a four-person conﬁguration, each computer renders the stereo image pair for one observer. For the purpose of head position tracking, a magnetic tracking system
is used (Ascension Flock of Birds) that is connected to a
separate computer.
A more detailed description of the display system and
the software architecture can be found in [9]

Application for view-dependent co-located
visualization

We argue that collaboration in the multiple viewer display environment can be well supported due to its ability of
rendering view-dependent perspectives. To present symbols and geospatial text references in an optimally readable way we suggest that they should be presented correctly rotated and orthogonal to the user’s direction of gaze.
The term frontoparallel is used for such a surface that
is correctly oriented towards the user’s direction of gaze.
The projected 3D environment will display simulated frontoparallel symbols and geospatial text references, but in the
rest of the text we will in short refer to them as frontoparallel. Frontoparallel presentation should as well be effective for presenting text labels and other geographically tied
symbols.
Visualizations in command and control systems present
geo-spatial data as well as content visualization where
symbols describing military functions and objects have a
prominent role. The described multiple viewer display environment is capable of presenting military entities using
3D icons but research suggests that classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of military entities using 3D icons in most cases
are more difﬁcult and takes longer time to perceive than
using traditional symbols [10].
In ﬁgure 1, two users are shown collaborating in the
multiple viewer display environment. They are provided
with two perspectives of the same geographic area. For
each view the symbols are frontoparallel towards the head
tracked position of the user. The two views are the view
from south, ﬁgure to the left and the view from the west,
ﬁgure to the right. In this scenario the users are discussing
one particular symbol, and as can be seen in the ﬁgure, the
symbol they point to is frontoparallel to both users views

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

while remaining in the same position in the geographic
area. The observable difference between frontoparallel and
ﬂat horizontal presentation is here used to represent inactive objects, which are rendered ﬂat in the horizontal plane
but still oriented towards the spectator.

5

Experiment

When presenting traditional 2D symbols in a frontoparallel condition as shown in ﬁgure 1, some new visual cues
are introduced into the visualization. Firstly, due to the
asymmetric off-axis projection in the viewpoint dependent
visualization of the symbol, the perceived shape of the 2D
symbol preserves uniform distances and angles within the
symbols area. Previous research has also shown that 2D
shape is more correctly perceived in a frontoparallel position than in a slanted position [8]. Secondly, as a consequence of the asymmetric projections under low viewing
angles, the footprint of the displayed shape of the frontoparallel symbol on the screen contains more pixels than
an equally large symbol that is presented ﬂat in the screen
plane (compare also ﬁgure 5). Thirdly we know from previous research of mental rotation of objects that symbols
are harder to perceive if they are oriented differently in respect to how they were learned to be perceived [5, p258].

of the display, see ﬁgure 3. Since we suspected that the size
of the area a symbol covers might affect the efﬁciency to
perceive symbols, we also introduced a reference condition
as a third form of visualization, see ﬁgure 3. The reference
condition is presented horizontally and ﬂat in relation to
the plane of the display but covers a display area the same
size as the projection of a frontoparallel symbol would in
the same location. We assume that frontoparallel symbols
results in better readability and thereby enhances the speed
of perceiving the individual symbols.
In our experimental setting we used a single stereoscopic view of the display environment described in section 3.

5.2

Subjects

Twelve subjects participated in the experiment, all with
no prior experience of the display environment. All the
subjects were male. The subjects received two movie tickets for participating in the study.

5.3

Stimuli

5.1 Method and technical apparatus

View ing angle

1.
D isplay s urf ac e

3.

2.
Frontoparallel

1.

Flat

2.

Reference condition
Cov ers the sam e display area
as frontoparallel

3.

Figure 3: Three forms of visualization were used in the
experiment
We compared the efﬁciency in identifying symbols presented using three different forms of visualization. The
ﬁrst form of visualization presented frontoparallel symbols, see ﬁgure 3. The second form of visualization presented symbols horizontally and ﬂat in relation to the plane

Stimulus 2

Stimulus 1

In the experiment we compared the time to perceive and
categorize a set of symbols using the three different forms
of visualization described in the setup. The display environment projected a static stereoscopic image. No motion
parallax was used to enhance the stereoscopic perception.
Each subject was presented with the same perspective of
the screen by using a cheek rest. Polarizing eyewear was
worn by the subject to create the stereoscopic illusion. Two
alternative answers could be given with a response gear.

Rect.

Circ.

Sum

Rect.

Circ.

Sum

4

2

6

3

3

6

R

3

3

6

R

F

2

4

6

F

G

4

2

6

G

2

4

6

Sum

9

9

18

Sum

9

9

18

Figure 4: The number of symbols in the two types of
stimuli
Two types of stimuli were used, see ﬁgure 4. The task
for the subjects was to determine which of the two types
of stimuli that were presented. Each set of the stimuli was
created from a set of symbols combined using the three letters R, F and G together with the geometric forms of either
a rectangle or a circle. The two stimuli consisted of seven
targets and eleven distractors. The stimuli were designed
to balance the effect from different symbols in each stimulus such that they were equally challenging to perceive.
As the table states each of the two stimuli consisted of the
same amount of letters, circles and squares.
The cheek rest was positioned such that the eyes of the
subject were located approximately 70cm away from the
center of the display and 60cm above it. This gives a viewing angle of 40 degrees and a distance of 90cm to the center of the screen. The perceived visual width of the ﬂat and
frontoparallel symbols were 7cm.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

was posed. A pretrial of 5 stimuli presented with the ﬂat
form was held before the actual experiment started.

5.6

Figure 5: Example of stimuli from the three different
forms of visualization
In each stimulus 18 symbols were presented on a low intensity dark gray background, see ﬁgure 5. The individual
symbols were evenly distributed around the center of the
screen without overlapping. The ﬁgure to the left, is the
frontoparallel form of visualization, the ﬁgure in the middle, is the ﬂat form of visualization and to the right is the
control condition. All of the stimuli in the example ﬁgures
are of type one.

The test data consisting of the presentation times and
the errors made for the three sets of 50 presentation times is
stored for each subject. The average of the last ten presentation times, from stimulus 41 to 50, was used as a measure
of performance.

6

Results

We had two speciﬁc questions derived from theory and
previous results. They form the following two hypotheses:
1. Frontoparallel presentation leads to a faster reading
performance than 2D normal presentation in this situation

5.4 Design

5.5 Experiment procedure
A short introduction was held to the entire group of subjects before they took part in the experiment. The experimenter went through the experiment instruction with each
subject before they took part in the experiment. To verify
that the subject had understood the procedure of the experiment a question and a pre-trial was held. The subject was
shown an example of the stimuli type two on paper and the
question “How many R in a Rectangle can you identify”

2. Frontoparallel presentation leads to a faster performance than in the 2D control condition in this situation. This means that we hypothesize that a found
difference between frontoparallel presentation and
2D normal presentation will not only be due to the
larger visual angle present in the frontoparallel condition.

3400
3200
3000
2800
2600

Time in milliseconds

The task for the subject was to identify if stimulus type
one or stimulus type two were presented. The three forms
of visualization each constitute a condition in the experiment and each condition was covered by 50 trials. Each
trial presented a stimulus of either type one or two, were
the presentation time depended on the result of the previous trials. The presentation time for the ﬁrst trial in each
condition started at 4500ms and was decreased with 200
ms when a correct answer was given and increased with
400ms when an incorrect answer was given.
The order between the three different conditions were
varied between the subjects to avoid learning effects. The
conditions were combined into the possible six different
sequence orders (123, 231, 231, etc). The six different sequence orders were repeated twice over the twelve subjects
in such a way that the ﬁrst subject was presented with 50
trials of the ﬁrst condition, then 50 trials of the second and
then 50 of the third (123). The second subject saw the sequence order 231, etc.
For each of the conditions there was a random but equal
amount of stimulus one and two presented. The positions
and the content of the symbols in each stimulus were randomized between trials such that no symbol would be presented in the same position as in the previous trial.

Data analysis

2400
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
Frontoparallel

Flat

Ref. Condition

Figure 6: The results of presentation times for the three
forms of visualization.
These two hypotheses were each tested with a one-tailed
t-test for dependent samples using a decision criterion of
5%. The tests show that we cannot reject either of these
two hypotheses based on our data. Frontoparallel versus
2D normal (t= -2.31, N=11, p < 0.022). Frontoparallel
versus 2D control condition (t= -2.93, N=11, p < 0.007).
As a consistency check the hypothesis that there is a
difference between the 2D normal condition and the 2D
control condition was tested by means of a two-tailed t-test
for dependent samples. The hypothesis was rejected (t =
-0.766, N=11, p < 0.46).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

7

Discussion

The results in the experiment show that symbols presented virtually frontoparallel in a stereoscopic horizontal display can be identiﬁed faster than equally large ﬂat
symbols presented in the plane of the display. The virtually frontoparallel symbols cover a larger pixel area in
screen coordinates due to the asymmetric projections under the chosen viewing conditions. This increased number
of pixels available for symbols presentation in frontoparallel form could be an explanation for improved symbol
recognition by the subjects. However, this assumption is
nulliﬁed, since the t-test between the frontoparallel condition and the control condition with footprint adjusted ﬂat
symbols shows signiﬁcant interaction. From these observations we reason that effects of improved readability of
frontoparallel symbols are due to spatial geometric cues
rather than relative size of the symbols’ footprints.
We assume that the results can be generalized to other
domains of situational map presentation in stereoscopic
multiple viewer display environments. The symbols in
the experiment are visualized in a stereoscopic display environment. There are several indications that the results
should as well be valid also for monoscopic head tracked
display environments [2, 4].

8

Future Work

To further verify our results we plan to investigate the
interaction between symbols and map background. We
also plan to evaluate the performance of frontoparallel
symbols in collaborative settings. We know from other
work [11] that identifying the heading of military entities
was easier with 3D icons than with conventional symbols,
we have still chosen to focus on presentation techniques
using conventional symbols. Future work will focus more
on the issue of visualizing the dynamics of a battle ﬁeld.

9

Acknowledgements

The work presented in this paper is result of a subproject funded by Swedish National Defense College
(SNDC) in the framework of project AQUA. Technical details on the display hardware used are proprietary of S.
Anders Christenson at SNDC and Peter Segerhammar at
Varg¨ogat AB and are published elsewhere by their authors.
We acknowledge their admission to reproduce schematically the working principle of the multiple projector display device as required for the comprehension of the presented multiple viewer 3D visualization system.

References
[1] Maneesh Agrawala, Andrew C. Beers, Ian McDowall, Bernd Fr¨ohlich, Mark Bolas, and Pat Hanrahan. The two-user responsive workbench: support

for collaboration through individual views of a shared
space. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniquesarrraraa, pages 327–332. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., 1997.
[2] Kevin W. Arthur, Kellogg S. Booth, and Colin Ware.
Evaluating 3d task performance for ﬁsh tank virtual
worlds. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., 11(3):239–265, 1993.
[3] R.T. Azuma.
A survey of augmented reality.
Presence, Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
6(4):355–385, 1997.
[4] E. M. Berends, B. Liu, and C. M Schor. Stereo-slant
adaptation is high level and does not involve disparity
coding. Journal of Vision, 5(1):71–80, 2005.
[5] Michael W. Eysenck and Mark T. Keane. Cognitive Psychology: A Student’s Handbook. Psychology
Press, fourth edition, 2000.
[6] Yoshifumi Kitamura, Takashige Konishi, Sumihiko
Yamamoto, and Fumio Kishino. Interactive stereoscopic display for three or more users. In Proceedings
of the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 231–240. ACM
Press, 2001.
[7] Wolfgang Krger, Christian-A. Bohn, Bernd Frhlich,
Heinrich Schth, Wolfgang Strauss, and Gerold
Wesche. The responsive workbench: A virtual work
environment. Computer, 28(7):42–48, 1995.
[8] Mats Lind, Geoffrey P. Bingham, and Camilla
Forsell. Metric 3d structure in visualizations. Information Visualization, 2(1):51–57, 2003.
[9] Lars Winkler Pettersson, Ulrik Spak, and Stefan
Seipel. Collaborative 3d visualizations of geo-spatial
information for command and control. In Proceedings of SIGRAD 2004, pages 41–47, 2004.
[10] Harvey S. Smallman, Mark St. John, Heather M.
Oonk, and Michael B. Cowen. When beauty is only
skin deep: 3-d realistic icons are harder to identify
than conventional 2-d military symbols. In PROCEEDINGS of the HUMAN FACTORS AND ERGONOMICS SOCIETY, 2000.
[11] Harvey S. Smallman, Mark St. John, Heather M.
Oonk, and Michael B. Cowen. ’symbicons’: A hybrid
symbology that combines the best elements of symbols and icons. In PROCEEDINGS of the HUMAN
FACTORS AND ERGONOMICS SOCIETY, 2001.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

