3D Information Visualization for Time Dependent Data on Maps
Christian Tominski, Petra Schulze-Wollgast, Heidrun Schumann
Institute for Computer Science, University of Rostock, Germany
{ct,psw,schumann}@informatik.uni-rostock.de

Abstract
The visual analysis of time dependent data is an
essential task in many application fields. However,
visualizing large time dependent data collected within
a spatial context is still a challenging task.
In this paper, we therefore describe an approach
for visualizing spatio-temporal data on maps. The
approach is based on two commonly used concepts:
3D information visualization and information hiding.
These concepts are realized by means of novel
embeddings of 3D icons into a map display for
representing spatio-temporal data, and an integration
of event-based methods for reducing the amount of
information to be represented. Our approach is
capable of visualizing multiple time dependent
attributes on maps, and of emphasizing the
characteristics constituted by either linear or cyclic
temporal dependencies.

1. Introduction
Modern databases are capable of storing large
amounts of multivariate time dependent data. Since
such data could help understanding natural phenomena
or business processes, temporal data analysis is an
essential task in many application fields. Besides
statistical methods, visualization has proven to be an
effective means for analyzing temporal data. A variety
of expressive techniques have been developed in recent
years (cp. [1], [2]).
In many cases temporal data is collected in a
geographic context. This leads to another data
dependency – a spatial dependency. Maps have been
used for ages to visually represent spatial contexts.
Modern Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
provide rich facilities to use maps on computers. They
also provide interactive techniques for visualizing data
on maps. In GIS temporal data is commonly visualized
by means of animations, which represent changes in
the data. By using animations the evolution of
temporal data can be conveyed efficiently.

However, a detailed data analysis is hardly possible
when using animations. Moreover, visualizing
multivariate data with both temporal and spatial
dependencies on maps is still a challenging task.
Especially, if very large multivariate datasets have to
be visualized on maps current methods reach their
limits.
In order to meet this challenge we have developed
an approach that integrates two well known concepts,
which have proven to be effective in other applications
as well:
x
x

3D information visualization, and
Information hiding.

The main advantage of using a 3D representation
space is the possibility of integrating additional visual
information into the representation. In this paper we
describe how special 3D icons can be utilized for
mapping temporal dependencies, and how such icons
can be combined with maps in order to represent
spatial dependencies. The proposed 3D icons have
been designed not only to be able to represent multiple
data attributes, but also to address different types of
time (i.e. linear time and cyclic time).
Another challenge when visualizing data with
temporal dependencies is coping with large datasets.
Disregarding this aspect would result in overcrowded
and cluttered displays if the amount of data represented
exceeds certain limits. A first approach for alleviating
this problem is to integrate concepts such as
overview+detail or focus+context. A second possibility
to deal with large datasets is to use information hiding
concepts. Here the intention is to visualize information
relevant to users, and to hide information irrelevant to
them. Although we will regard both possibilities, the
focus we set in this paper is on information hiding. We
utilize an event-based approach allowing users to
specify their interests by means of events. In order to
hide irrelevant information we visualize detected
events rather than the whole dataset. By doing so,
overcrowded displays are avoided and only relevant
information is displayed.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

This paper gives an overview on related work in
Section 2. The proposed 3D icons and their
combination with a map are described in Section 3.1.
Sections 3.2 and 3.3 are dedicated to coping with large
datasets by means of event visualization. The paper
concludes in Section 4 with a summary of the
presented methods and an outlook to future work.

Especially if the amount of data to be visualized is
very large, more sophisticated techniques are required
to create expressive visualizations. In recent years this
issue has been addressed by several researchers. Their
efforts have resulted in the development of the
following concepts:
x
x
x

2. Related work
The visualization of time dependent data has been
addressed by many researchers. A variety of
techniques (cp. [1], [2]) have been developed for
different application backgrounds.
When visualizing temporal data it is important to be
aware of the type of time constituting the time
dependency. In this paper we focus on two common
types of time: linear as well as cyclic time with time
points as temporal primitives [3]. Linear time can be
defined by points on a linear time axis (e.g. 1, 2, 3,
seconds). Cyclic time is defined by temporal
primitives, which recur cyclically (e.g. seasons or
months of a year). If cyclic time is extended by an
indication of the number of cyclic passes (e.g. seasons
+ year), cyclic time can be unrolled to linear time. This
is useful since it enables visualization techniques to
emphasize either linear or cyclic characteristics of a
dataset.
Commonly, time is visually represented by a time
axis. The shape of the time axis differs among the
techniques known in literature. Mostly, a straight line
is used to represent time. This is suitable for conveying
linear temporal dependencies (e.g. in many kinds of
diagrams). Moreover, utilizing spirals (cp. [4], [5], and
[6]) have resulted in expressive time visualizations
especially useful for visualizing cyclic time. The
temporal dependency is usually represented by
aligning data items with the time axis (e.g. plots or
simple icons). Since common techniques require large
amounts of drawing space, simply embedding them
into map displays leads to lot occlusion of map data.
Therefore, spatio-temporal data is often visualized
by means of animated maps [7]. These are created by
rendering a map for each time step in the data to a
frame of an animation. Usually, color coding is used to
represent the data in each frame. As such, animations
are useful for comprehending the evolution of time
dependent data within a spatial context. Due to the
limitations of the human brain, however, an exact
analysis of certain time steps of a large dataset can be
hardly realized by means of animations. Even to
achieve simple comparison of different time steps users
would be compelled to browse through the animation
over and over again.

Overview+detail,
Focus+context, and
Information hiding.

Overview+detail and focus+context are widely used
concepts for interactively (i.e. user interaction is
required) dealing with heavily loaded graphics.
Overview+detail techniques provide a coarse
representation of the data in an overview and allow
zooming in upon user request for a detailed data
analysis [8]. Since detailed views are represented
separately from the overview, additional perceptual
efforts are required for comprehending the data.
Therefore, focus+context techniques try to combine
overview and detailed view within a common display
[9]. Lens techniques for instance realize this by
applying distortions to an underlying visualization
technique. As such, lens techniques can be understood
as second order visualizations [10].
Besides applying overview+detail or focus+context
concepts, an automatic limitation of the amount of
information rendered to the display could alleviate the
problem of overloaded and cluttered displays.
Therefore, the goal of information hiding is to only
visualize information relevant to certain users and omit
irrelevant or less important information. The
visualization of events of interest is one possibility for
achieving this goal.
Recently, several publications followed an eventoriented approach. Matkoviü et al. describe in [11] how
events (i.e. exceeding of thresholds) can be utilized to
provide virtual monitoring instruments at different
levels of detail. In [12] it is described how events can
be visualized in time and space by using a space-time
cube. While in [11] only quite simple threshold
exceedances are detected as events, the events
visualized in [12] are even given only a priori. This
lack of generality infers a requirement of methods for
describing and detecting arbitrary events of interest to
be accounted by the visualization.
Therefore, we have introduced in [13] an eventbased approach which addresses these issues. The
basic idea is to let users specify their interests by
means of events, detect these events on the data, and
consider occurred events when creating a visual
representation of the data. The event specification is
formally based on predicate logic formulas. In order to
address differently experienced users, events can be

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

specified either by directly writing a formula, by
parameterizing formula templates, or by simply
choosing from a collection of domain specific
predefined formulas. In the event detection step the
defined formulas are evaluated regarding the dataset to
be visualized. This can be realized by utilizing the
capabilities of modern database management systems.
Once events are detected, there are two basic
possibilities to represent the occurred events. On the
one hand a given visualization technique can be
parameterized to visually emphasize the event
occurrences (i.e. implicit event representation). On the
other hand events can be represented separately rather
than visualizing the whole dataset (i.e. explicit event
representation).
While in [13] we have focused on implicit event
representation, in this paper we will utilize explicit
event representation in order to realize information
hiding.

3. A concept for visualizing time dependent
data on maps
In this section we will describe a concept for
visualizing data depending on linear or cyclic time in
their spatial context. The basic idea is to utilize a 3D
space for representing the data, and to integrate an
event-based approach for focusing on relevant
information. The following subsections will detail on
both aspects.

3.1. Using 3D icons for visualizing spatiotemporal data
In order to address the challenge of visualizing
spatio-temporal data on maps, we introduce in this
section novel embeddings of 3D icons representing
either linear or cyclic time into a sophisticated map
display.
As basis for our approach we are given a
hierarchically structured 2D map, which is subdivided
based on administrative subdivisions of geographical
regions (i.e. federal state, country, zip code regions).
Hence, different levels of spatial detail can be provided
upon user request. This allows users to get an overview
of the map and zoom in details on demand.
Additionally, the focus+context approach is
supported by means of a cartographic fisheye lens that
has been realized as a vertex shader for the graphics
hardware, and therefore, allows zooming in small areas
of the map in real time. By interactively moving the
lens, users can analyze details of the represented data
without loosing the overview of the map.

After having introduced the map display we will
now detail on the:
1.
2.

Construction of expressive 3D icons, and the
Efficient embedding of the icons into a 3D map
display.

For the construction of 3D icons it is first necessary
to consider what type of time constitutes the temporal
dependency, and hence, should be conveyed by the
visualization. The second aspect that must be taken
into account is how to make the icons capable for
visualizing multiple data attributes. Addressing both
aspects, we utilize two kinds of 3D icons: pencil icons
for representing linear time and helix icons for
representing cyclic time.
Pencil icons: Since everybody is familiar with the
shape of a pencil, it is a very useful visual metaphor.
This is corroborated by the fact that visualizations
based on pencils have been successfully used in other
applications (e.g. [14]). The natural shape of a pencil
provides multiple faces, which evolve from a common
tip. This shape excellently serves as a 3D icon for
visualizing multiple data attributes with dependencies
on linear time. For mapping data onto a pencil icon,
linear time is encoded along the pencil’s faces starting
from the common tip. Each face of a pencil can then be
used to color code an attribute of a dataset (cp. Figure
1(a)). The number of faces of a pencil can be adjusted
according to the number of attributes to be visualized.
Helix icons: If temporal dependencies have cyclic
characteristics this should be conveyed by the visual
representation as well. A spiral helix provides a
geometric shape that allows an emphasis of the cyclic
character of a dataset (cp. [4], [5], and [6]). In order to
construct a helix icon, a ribbon is created. For each
time step the ribbon extends in angle and height
depending on the number of temporal primitives per
cycle and the number of cyclic passes. Again color
coding is used to encode data values along the ribbon
(cp. Figure 1(b)). In order to be able to represent
multiple data attributes the ribbon can be subdivided
into narrower sub-ribbons.
The fact that the icons will be embedded into a 3D
map display implies that perspective distortions will
occur in the final visual representations. Mapping data
values onto any geometric parameter (e.g. width,
height, angle, etc.) could therefore lead to
misinterpretations and false conclusions. As a solution
to this problem, both kinds of icons make use of color
coding to visualize data values. To fully exploit the
capabilities of the human visual system we integrated
an enhanced color coding scheme [15]. By doing so,
we not only enhance the visual exploration, but we also
support comparison tasks essential in visualization.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Visualizing monthly health data by means of 3D icons on a map: (a) Pencil icons
representing cases of 6 diseases, some diseases show a certain pattern over time; (b) Helix icons
clearly reveal the cyclic characteristic of 2 selected diseases. Additional “tunnel views” mitigate
the problem of hidden information for a selected icon.
The described pencil and helix icons can now be
combined with a 3D map display. First, either pencil
icons or helix icons are created for a user determined
selection of geographic areas. These icons are then
embedded into the map display. This can be realized
by positioning each 3D icon at the centroid of its
respective area and aligning it with the z-axis of the 3D
presentation space. By doing so, the representation of
the temporal dependencies is shifted from the map to a
dedicated dimension in the 3D representation space.
However, the embedding in 3D involves new problems
compared to a 2D representation:
x
x

Undesired changes of the icon view upon user
interaction, and
Loss of information due to icon occlusion and
hidden surfaces.

Applying all interactions allowed in the 3D
presentation space (i.e. rotation, translation, scaling) to
both the map and the icons is disadvantageous. Though
such behavior is common in 3D applications, it implies
visual inconsistencies during the visual analysis. If for
instance users rotate the map while analyzing attributes
represented on a pencil icon, the faces of the pencil are
undesirably rotated as well, i.e. the view of data
attributes changes. An alternative is to unlink map
interactions and icon interactions upon user request.
This can be achieved by aligning the icons not simply
with the z-axis, but by aligning them with respect to
the user’s current view point into the 3D scene. By
doing so, it is ensured that while navigating the map,
the icon view remains the same. In order to allow users
to change the icon view whenever required, it is
necessary to provide a possibility for rotating the icons.
In the common case all icons can be simultaneously

rotated. However, for detailed data analysis it is also
possible to rotate each icon separately.
The second problem that must be addressed when
using 3D visualizations is loss of information. Such
loss can occur if 3D icons occlude each other, and on
hidden surfaces of the 3D icons.
A first step to alleviate this problem is to improve
the crude procedure of positioning icons at the areas’
centroids. An aspired method must consider the users
viewpoint in addition to the area centroids. Since the
viewpoint can be changed interactively, the icon
positioning algorithm must be able to calculate new
icon positions multiple times per second. This implies
that a complete resolution of all icon occlusions by a
global algorithm cannot be achieved. Conversely, an
iterative approach that calculates occlusion conflicts,
and alters the positions of the icons locally can help to
reduce occlusion. Our algorithm is started on each
change to the viewpoint and runs until no conflicts
occur, no further improvements are possible, or the
maximum number of alterations has been exceeded. By
doing so, on the one hand significantly enhanced icon
positions can be achieved, and on the other hand
interactive frame rates are ensured.
A second extension regards the problems imposed
by information loss on hidden surfaces. Although using
3D allows a high degree of interaction with, and
navigation through the data, a certain amount of
possibly important information is always hidden. To
mitigate this disadvantage, we provide the possibility
to switch to special viewpoints designated for each
icon. The special viewpoints are located directly
underneath each icon and the view directions are
aligned with the icons’ axes. Switching to one of these
viewpoints results in a “tunnel view” that reveals all

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

data values represented by the respective 3D icon. As
such this “tunnel view” can be understood as a
realization of the overview+detail concept. Figure 1
shows how a “tunnel view” supports visual analysis in
a 3D presentation space.
These enhanced viewing and interaction techniques
in combination with the mentioned geographic lens and
the common 3D interactions provide a rich basis for a
visual exploration of multiple, time and space
dependent attributes. Furthermore, it is possible to
emphasize linear or cyclic characteristics of data by
using dedicated 3D pencil or helix icons, respectively.

3.2. Events of interest
When visualizing very large datasets it is necessary
to automatically limit the amount of represented
information. Focusing on user-chosen events of
interests is a possibility to achieve this aim.
When analyzing temporal data, events regarding the
evolution of the attributes are certainly of interest. The
simplest event would be for instance the exceeding of a
certain threshold (attrt > thres). Another example could
be the exceeding of a certain increase į of attribute
values from one time step to another (į = attrt - attrt-1 >
thres).
Time
local
global
Simple threshold
events

Temporal pattern
events

global

Spatial pattern
events

Complex spatiotemporal pattern
events

Space

local

are possible. Such events can be specified and detected
quite easily.
If either time or space are considered globally (i.e.
event formulas are evaluated regarding the whole
respective domain), more complex events are possible.
If for instance time is considered globally, temporal
predicates like before, starts, during, etc. (cp. [3])
could be used to detect temporal pattern like “value
increases over a certain period of time”. Conversely,
considering space globally allows an integration of
spatial relationships (i.e. predicates). This allows
events that describe spatial pattern like “all neighbors
of an area show lower data values than the area itself”.
Apparently, a combination of temporal and spatial
predicates allows a detection of complex spatialtemporal patterns. However, these require lot more
efforts by the user (or a domain expert) in specifying
them, and by algorithms in detecting them in the data.
In the next section we will describe how such
complex spatio-temporal pattern events can be
visualized on a 3D map display.

3.3. Space-time paths for representing events
In the following we will demonstrate how eventbased visualization can be used to analyze spatiotemporal data. In our case the goal has been to analyze
human health data with respect to the spread of certain
diseases. A reasonable approach to achieve this goal is
to examine where in time and space maximum data
values (i.e. number of cases of a certain disease) occur.
In our event-based manner, this means that we detect
for each time step the area with the highest data value.

Figure 2. Categorization of possible events.
However, considering temporal data with a spatial
context raises the question about what events to detect.
An issue to pay attention to is whether events should
be detected globally or locally. With respect to the
temporal aspect this means whether we should detect
events for a single time step only, or in the whole
temporal domain. Conversely, for the spatial context
this means whether we should detect events regarding
only a single area, or throughout all areas of the map.
Combining both considerations result in a
categorization of possible events to be detected. The
categories are shown in Figure 2 along with a color
coding of the efforts required for specifying and
detecting events of a respective category. If events are
detected locally regarding both time and space (i.e.
event formulas are evaluated regarding a single time
step and a single area), only simple threshold events

Figure 3. Space-time path (Source: [16]).
For representing the detected maxima values we
take on the idea of space-time paths described in [16].
Originally developed for representing human activities
(cp. Figure 3), today space-time paths can be found in
a variety of cartography related visualizations (e.g.
[17]). A space-time path connects points in a 3D
presentation space, which consists of one temporal and
two spatial dimensions. Hence, it can be used for
visualizing maximum events detected on health data.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

For creating a representation of the detected
maximum events, we first create special 3D icons for
each area on the map. Depending on whether linear or
cyclic time shall be conveyed the icons provide a
respectively shaped time axis. During the event
detection the icons are built up by adding a small
sphere to each icon for each time step in the data. This
sphere is colored red if the maximum event occurred
for the respective area, and is colored blue if the
maximum event did not occur. By doing so, event
occurrences can be clearly detected from the visual
representation. Finally, successive event occurrences
are connected by a space-time path. In order to guide
the user to relevant information only, icons of areas,
for which no event occurred (i.e. no red sphere has
been added to the icon), are faded out.
For now, we have considered all areas of the map in
connection with one certain temporal granularity.
However, it also makes sense to consider sub sets of
areas of interest. Then it is possible to calculate spacetime paths that visualize which areas contribute to the
maxima detected for the areas of interest. The visual
representation can be further enriched with additional
information on how the space-time path looks like for a
temporal granularity (e.g. days) finer than the temporal
granularity currently displayed (e.g. week). This allows
insight into a finer temporal resolution without
completely recalculating the whole visualization.
Figure 4 shows an example of space-time path
visualization. It can be seen how the visualization
focuses users to relevant events within the data.
Furthermore, it becomes clear that the space-time path
helps to understand how maximum values evolve over
time and space.
Though we have focused on maximum value events
in our description, it must be mentioned that this
implies some questions as well. If for instance data
values differ only slightly from one time step to
another, it is possible that the space-time path oscillates
between two regions. In such cases it would be better
to consider an epsilon environment around the
maximum before switching it from one area to another.
A second question regards the expressivity of
maximum events for visualizing spreads of diseases.
For the scenario of human health data it is also possible
to consider maximum value increases or decreases
from one time step to another as indicators for the
evolution of a disease. Since such events are similar to
ordinary maximum value events they can be visualized
using our methods as well. The decision what events
are most expressive, however, must be left to the
expertise of physicians. The same applies to other
application domains, where surely different events will
be required for expressively analyzing spatio-temporal
data from that domain.

4. Conclusion and future work
In this paper we have described an approach for
visualizing temporal data on maps. Our approach is
based on the two commonly used concepts: 3D
information visualization and information hiding.
We have described intuitive 3D pencil and helix
icons capable of both visualizing multiple time
dependent data attributes and emphasizing the type of
the underlying temporal dependency (i.e. linear or
cyclic time). Moreover, we have considered
implications of embedding these icons into a 3D map
display. These considerations have resulted in
enhanced viewing and interactions facilities for the 3D
representations space.
In order to address the problem of visualizing large
spatio-temporal datasets we followed the information
hiding concept. For doing so, we advanced an eventbased approach that allows the focusing on events of
interest detected in a dataset. This enables to visually
guide the users’ attention to relevant information (i.e.
the events of interest) and to hide irrelevant
information. In order to backup our event-based
concept, we have demonstrated how maximum events
detected in human health data can be visualized by
means of space-time paths.
Since we think event-based visualization bears
much potential, we will focus on generalizing the
concept of explicit event visualization in the future.
This will go along with advancing the formalism of
event-based visualization and the development of
further techniques for visualizing events explicitly. For
doing so, it is planned to cooperate with domain
experts to determine the efficiency of our methods.

References
[1] S. Silva and T. Catarci, “Visualization of Linear TimeOriented Data: a Survey”, Proceedings of 1st International
Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering, Vol.
1, Hong Kong, June 2000, pp. 310-319.
[2] W. Müller and H. Schumann, “Visualization Methods
for Time-Dependent Data – An Overview”, Proceedings of
the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference, New Orleans,
December 2003, pp. 737-745.
[3] A. U. Frank, “Different Types of “Times” in GIS”, In:
M. J. Egenhofer and R. G. Golledge (eds.): Spatial and
Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Information Systems,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1998, pp. 40-62.
[4] J. V. Carlis and J. A. Konstan, “Interactive Visualization
of Serial Periodic Data”, Proceedings of ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (UIST’98), San
Francisco, November, 1-4, 1998, pp. 29-38.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[5] K. P. Hewagamage, M. Hirakawa and T. Ichikawa,
“Interactive Visualization of Spatiotemporal Patterns Using
Spirals on a Geographical Map”, Proceedings of Symposium
on Visual Languages (VL’99), Tokyo, September, 13-16,
1999, pp. 296-303.

[12] P. Gatalsky, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko,
“Interactive Analysis of Event Data Using Space-Time
Cube” Proceedings of International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV’04), London, July, 14-16,
2004, pp. 145-152.

[6] M. Weber, M. Alexa, and W. Müller, “Visualizing
Time-Series on Spirals”, Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (InfoVis'01), San Diego, October,
22-23, 2001, pp. 7-13.

[13] C. Tominski and H. Schumann, “An Event-Based
Approach to Visualization”, Proceedings of International
Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04), London,
July, 14-16, 2004, pp.101-107.

[7] A. M. MacEachren, How Maps Work: Representation,
Visualization, and Design, 3rd edition, The Guilford Press,
New York, 2004.

[14] B. Francis and J. Pritchard, Visualisation of Historical
Events Using Lexis Pencils, technical report, Centre for
Applied Statistics, Fylde College, Lancaster University,
1997.

[8] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman (eds.),
Readings in Information Visualization – Using Vision to
Think, Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco, 1999.
[9] T. A. Keahey, The Generalized Detail-In-Context
Problem, Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis'98), Durham, October, 19-20, 1998,
pp. 44-51.
[10] S. Björk, L. E. Holmquist, and J. Redström, “A
Framework for Focus+Context Visualization” Proceedings of
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis'99),
San Francisco, October, 24-29, 1999, pp. 53-56.
[11] K. Matkoviü, H. Hauser, R. Sainitzer, and M.E. Gröller,
“Process Visualization with Levels of Detail”, Proceedings
of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis’02), Boston, October, 28-29, 2002, pp. 67-70.

[15] P. Schulze-Wollgast, C. Tominski, and H. Schumann,
“Enhancing Visual Exploration by Appropriate Color
Coding” Proceedings of International Conference in Central
Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and Computer
Vision (WSCG’05), Plzen, January, 31 – February, 4, 2005,
pp. 203-210.
[16] T. Carlstein, D. Parkes, and N. Thrift (eds.), Human
Activity and Time Geography, Edward Arnold Publishers,
London, 1978.
[17] T. Kapler and W. Wright, “GeoTime Information
Visualization”, Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (InfoVis’04), Austin, October, 1012, 2004, pp. 25-32.

3D Icon

Irrelevant
Information
Faded Out

Space-Time Path

Occurrence of
Maximum Event

Figure 4. Representing maximum events by means of 3D icons and a space-time path.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

