Visualization for Communication: The Importance of Aesthetic Sizzle
Richard Brath, Mike Peters, Robin Senior
Oculus Info Inc.
{rbrath, mpeters, rsenior}@oculusinfo.com
Abstract
When creating a visualization for communication,
the inclusion of aesthetically appealing elements can
greatly increase a design’s appeal, intuitiveness and
memorability. Used without care, this “sizzle” can
reduce the effectiveness of the visualization by obscuring
the intended message. Maintaining a focus on key design
principles and an understanding of the target audience
can result in an effective visualization for
communication. This paper describes these principles
and shows their use in creating effective designs.
Keywords--- visualization,
Gestalt, animation.

3D,

color,

trails,

1. Introduction
In the field of analytical and referential information
visualization, aesthetically novel techniques are often
criticized for detracting from the message presented by
the original data. However, when a visualization’s
primary goals include communication, aesthetic details
(or sizzle) can greatly enhance its potential to
communicate. This is because sizzle can add a visceral
appeal. Sizzle enhances a visualization’s potential to
communicate by focusing the desired message and
increasing its memorability. When properly applied,
sizzle can enhance the communication potential of the
graphic; whereas poorly applied gratuitous sizzle can
result in a graphic that either misses the message or is
even misleading. Evaluating which techniques are
appropriate for clarity and accuracy is of the utmost
importance when designing a visualization for
communication.
What is sizzle? Highlights, 3D, animation,
simplification, use of color and other visual effects are
often derided by critics with good reason [1] [5] yet
continue to appeal to everyday consumers of information
graphics (for example, the popular daily snapshot in
USA Today).

Figure 1 - 3D Surface
The highlights and shading across the surface create
a slick image, but do these gratuitous 3D effects add any
value to understanding the data? Consider the same data
represented with bars:

Figure 2 - 3D Bar Chart
The bars represent the same data, but plateaus and
ripples are not as easily discerned as they are in the
surface representation. The glossy surface can provide
more insight visually than simple bars.

Consider the following 3D surface:
Is the evaluation of effective sizzle simply a
mutually exclusive decision, such as whether or not to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

use a surface? Consider this example of a heat grid
(reduced to grayscale):

Figure 3 - 2D Heat Grid
Large differences in values are immediately
apparent, but subtle differences are harder to distinguish.
Now consider the same data depicted in three
dimensions:

Figure 4 - 3D Heat Grid
3D makes subtle differences more visible, such as
the difference between the bar heights in March and
April in the first row. But the heights of the bars and the
perspective viewpoint obscure many small bars. Is 3D
just a gratuitous effect obscuring data? Consider the
same 3D chart from a different angle:

Figure 5 - 3D Heat Grid, Alternate Viewpoint
From this 3D viewpoint, almost all bars are visible,
and relative heights can be visually compared. 3D has
added value to this visualization, but the issue is not as
simple as “3D or not 3D” – rather more subtle
parameters such as viewpoint and scaling are key to
making the 3D work.
So how does one evaluate “good sizzle”? One way
is to evaluate information design similar to how we
evaluate good art, good architecture or other design –
examples are de-constructed to understand what appears
to work; and is used as a basis for a set of guidelines.

2. Background
Poorly thought-out designs can result in detracting
elements such as “chart junk” [5] , moiré patterns [4] and
visual clutter that reduce or even negate the benefits of
an analytic visualization. The principles put forth by
Tufte, Bertin and others can be used to reduce these
problems and allow the viewer to focus on the data, not
the visualization.
When the goals of the visualization include
communication, the designer must extend on these
principles and incorporate novel, domain-specific
elements to facilitate the presentation of the desired
message. When dealing with high-dimensional data the
visualization must also incorporate 3D interaction
design, since it may be impossible to display the
information on a two-dimensional surface. In these cases
the designer must utilize spatial reasoning to help the
observer interact with and comprehend the data.
Effectively communicating the intended message of
a complex dataset requires the designer to couple the
techniques of information visualization (such as scale,
contrast and proportion) with those of interaction design
(such as affordances [7] , representation and structure).

3. Key Principles
There are several key design principles that can be
used create visualizations that are accurate and concise
while remaining aesthetically interesting. The concept of
“less is more”, as introduced by Mies van der Rohe, is a
mantra followed by many in the information
visualization world. It is most often practiced in
visualizations showing trends in the data, as opposed to
analyzing specific details. When the goal of the
visualization is to show relative movements (see Figure
10), then obscuring the graphic with a multitude of labels
is irrelevant. Only the maximum and minimum of the
current range need to be shown, providing a context for
the observer. Had the goal of the visualization been to
provide an analytic view, then absolute label markers
along each axis would have been required.
The incorporation of spatial and color dimensions
are primary signifies of data values. Values may be
reinforced by correlating spatial position and color, or
these two dimensions can be used to represent separate
variables, as the color dimension is just as significant as
the spatial dimension in imparting information [8] .
When
choosing
between
reinforcement
and
dimensionality, the design must be tailored to the
specific domain in which the data exists and to the
audience to whom it is being presented. Gestalt grouping
principles (used to signify related elements) apply to
both location and color, and must be employed in the
design of secondary elements so as not to accidentally
give implied meaning [6]. Common aspects such as
glyph and label sizes, colors and placement may cause
the observer to assume an unintended relationship.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Percent
Aware
70

Advertising Awareness

60
50

McDonald's

40

Burger King
Arby's

30
20

Figure 6 - USA Today Online Weather Map

KFC

10
49

41

33

25

17

9

0
1

Connotative associations are essential when
visualizing data that conjures a mental image to the
observer. The classic USA Today weather map (Figure
6) displays temperature for geographic regions by using
a hypsographic map. The color ramp used for correlating
color with temperature follows the guideline that
observers will associate hot things with colors such as
red and orange, and cold things with blue and purple.
Had the color ramp been selected at random, the
observer would have had to continually reference the
legend. The visualization targets the goals and abilities of
the intended audience by reducing the data to a quickly
understandable representation.
When incorporating 3D visualizations a linear
perspective projection can both add and detract from the
design. When viewing a visualization that has been
applied to a 3D surface, and rotated by some degree,
users must be able to discern whether the volatility of
fluctuations in the data decreases because of the actual
data, or if in fact it is because the visual element is
receding into the distance. Visual reinforcements must be
used, such as grid lines or a directly correlated color
mapping. Because observers function in a 3D
environment, their cognitive functions are sensitive to
abnormalities that violate standard depth cues [9] .
Fixed-size labels that do not obey linear perspective
scaling cause confusion when gauging depth. The use of
transparency is also essential for reducing the effects of
obscured data points in complex visualizations [3] .
Linear perspective problems in 3D bar charts or
collections of small multiples can be avoided by using an
isometric viewpoint, but doing so also removes potential
benefits that can be gained from using linear perspective,
such as intuitive navigation from depth cues and the
ability to view a greater proportion of the dataset.

Wendy's

Figure 7 - 2D Line Chart
As a result, the client has all the information, easily
visible without any bias to any of the many stories in the
data: such as the recent dip and recovery for
McDonald’s, the slow decline of Burger King, the
Arby’s low position slowly gaining against Burger King,
similar profiles for both Burger King and Arby’s, etc.
What’s missing is guidance to the key findings of
the market researcher. At a simple level, the market
researcher could simply summarize all the key findings
into a table of results (Figure 8).
Chain
McDonald’s
Wendy’s
KFC
Burger King
Arby’s

Awareness
59.7
49.4
35.8
34.2
22.1

3 Month Change
5.9%
-.6%
-3.5%
-2.4%
-4.6%

Figure 8 - Table of Findings
While a table presents key information, it lacks the
immediate insight visible in the chart. Once again,
perhaps a 3D representation would help? Consider the
chart in Figure 9.

4. Case Studies
We will now discuss the key design principles in the
context of their application to actual visualization cases.

4.1 Recent Time Series Performance
A market research organization conducts weekly
surveys of hundreds of participants tracking responses to
many questions. Those results are tabulated, analyzed
and then collected into reports typically containing up to
a hundred charts. The results are presented in a flat,
neutral format (Figure 7).

Figure 9 - Poor Use of 3D in a Line Chart
The default configuration of this ribbon chart with
free-floating ribbons in 3D space makes it difficult to
judge the size of the gaps and crosses between the
ribbons. Increasing the gap size, adding drop lines, etc
can help but introduce other issues.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

in the upper right corner, where the most recent
performance data lies, reinforcing the goal of the
communication. Highlights on the ribbons increase
the illusion of the 3D perspective, potentially
improving the perception of perspective. Because
the image was generated using a 3D library, the
lighting source for the highlights are consistent.
Hand-created pseudo-3D scenes may result in
inconsistent highlights, ruining the 3D effect by
providing false depth cues.

Now consider instead this designed representation
with even more aesthetic techniques than the previous
chart:

Simultaneous Views
The composition of three visual elements provides
context and supporting detail for the key
perspective. The left 2D chart provides a broader
time context, the central 3D perspective provides the
focus and the rightmost text boxes provide the key
findings. The left to right orientation follows the
familiar left-to-right reading process of the intended
audience. The initial 2D contextual view may not be
necessary if the only message is recent performance,
but since this image is intended to be viewed
repeatedly on a weekly basis a longer time context
provides continuity to the past and provides a mental
cue to past views of the data.

Figure 10 - Effective Use of 3D in a Line Chart
Obvious techniques include:
• Perspective viewpoint
• Ribbon lines (lines with depth)
• Highlights on ribbons and backplane
• Multiple simultaneous views
• A lot of color

Color
The original image is very colorful; recessive blues
are used for backgrounds and brighter colors for
lines. Call-outs have backgrounds color-coded based
on performance that are not recessive at the
extremes of performance (saturated green and red)
while fading out for neutral performance, thereby
attracting attention to recent performance with larger
changes. The line coloring in this example was
arbitrary, but could be specifically tuned to associate
connotations in the viewer’s mind (using brand
colors, for example).

Now consider these techniques in the context of the
goal: guiding the viewer to the recent changes.
Perspective Viewpoint
The eye is automatically drawn to the most dynamic
element in the composition: the dramatic 3D closeup view. The perspective view emphasizes the
foreground over the background, increasing
emphasis to the most recent performance. While
perspective is highly debatable, this particular visual
has carefully controlled the perspective parameters:
• Vertical alignment: vertical lines are not skewed
potentially providing easier interpretation
• Natural Field-of-View: the camera is not overly
wide-angle and therefore does not overly distort
the perspective
• Borders and Gridlines: provide subtle
perspective cues.

In addition to the sizzle factors, other design
considerations further enhance the communication
aspects of this visual:

Ribbons
Ribbons are not free floating – rather they are all
attached to the backplane, making direct visual
comparison feasible. By using ribbons rather than
just lines, the depth of the ribbon orthogonal to the
back plane helps to reinforce the perceptual
interpretation of the perspective.

Fonts
Clean sans-serif fonts are used for labeling. Large
fonts are reserved exclusively for the title and call
out, thereby providing a truncated form of the key
story: "Advertising Awareness (for) McDonalds (is)
+ 6% (over the recent time period)". Other fonts and
labels are reduced to the point where they still
provide context such that the other graphics can be
properly interpreted.

Highlights
The highlights used in this example are not
gratuitous; highlights on the backplane are brightest

Labels
Minimal labeling is used to reduce clutter, thereby
reducing distraction away from the focus story of
recent performance.

In this example, multiple sizzle techniques were
used to make a compelling graphic. This particular

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

design involved a separate context chart, but other
alternatives could also be used to represent the context
and the period of interest as they relate to the intended
audience.

4.2 Intrusion Incident Explanation
Network security experts have deep expertise about
the minutiae of network events. Security tools generate
hundreds of thousands of records. Visual techniques for
analyzing security logs can provide insight to security
engineers for data analysis and also to management who
need for making policy decisions at a higher level of
abstraction. The goal is to have a simple depiction of
intrusion events to illuminate, at a granular level, who
did what to whom and when, and to see broader patterns,
such as a similar patterns indicating a visual signature for
certain types of attacks.

Figure 11 - Siege Metaphor for Intrusion
Detection
Although this visual might be dismissed as eyecandy at first glance, it provides useful information in a
form that is easy to understand:

For each intrusion event, there are many data
attributes associated with the intrusion data:
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Source computer (IP address) and associated
port.
Target computer (IP address) and associated
port.
Time of the event.
Type of event.
Protocol
Etc.

There are also a variety of summary characteristics,
such as number of attacks and number of types of attacks
per each computer.
This data can be represented with a node and link
representation, such as a graph. There are many different
ways to represent a graph; which layout would be
appropriate? A typical graph drawing approach would be
to generate the graph attempting to reduce the number of
crossings or attempting to reduce the distances between
most frequent connections. Unfortunately, the data set is
a very densely interconnected graph making most of
these attempts result in graphics that appear to be a bowl
of spaghetti. Instead, some aesthetic techniques were
used, including animation and Gestalt principles to create
a metaphor of a siege.
The company’s computers are located in the center
and are surrounded by attacking computers (Figure 11),
similar to a medieval city encircled by attacking forces.
Each attack is represented as a line from an attacker to a
target. With animation, the user can scan through tens of
thousands of attacks in a single minute. Visual patterns
appear in the data, such as a “sweep” depicted above.

•
•

The “siege layout” uses gestalt grouping
principles to separate attackers from targets.
Encoding nodes using color or symbols are not
necessary. The Gestalt phenomena of proximity
and continuation are applied to the IP addresses
to produce a logical grouping. Each IP address
is represented by a box of the same size, but
aligned and separated so that they take
advantage of the observer’s natural cognitive
grouping skills.
Color, bar height, line thickness, etc, is then
used to represent other characteristics, such as
number of attacks and attack type.
Animation provides a means to navigate
through a large data set and connotatively
depicts sequence of events. Users can animate
at high speed, adjust the amount of information
within a frame, and step through frames.

The visual is only one part of a larger analysis and
explanation visualization. There are various other
interfaces as well, some of which are shown by the
labeled cubes on the right side. One of the challenges
when utilizing a metaphor is extending the metaphor to
meet the needs of the goal: for example, how does the
visualization extend to simultaneously show all attacks
from one source, or how can suspected associations
between attackers be represented? Sizzle must not
inadvertently limit the design of the visualization such
that it does not meet the requirements. Design
alternatives and tradeoffs need to be managed throughout
the design, development and enhancement phases of the
project.

4.3 Same Effect, Different Results
Sizzle effects do not always result in more effective
visualizations. The same effect used in different contexts
can have very different results. The animation effect of a
“trail” has a lot of visual appeal. A trail is simply a line

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

following the path along which a moving object has been
recently. Trails can be effective in adding a temporal
aspect to plotted data.
In one test case, a visualization was created with a
scatter plot, depicting two key axes and a point which
showed the status of the system at any given point in
time. Over time, the point moved and left a trail
indicating where it had previously been (Figure 12).

This visual clearly depicts where an object has been
with the trail depicted as a line, and also with the explicit
depiction of time in the third dimension. This
visualization is intended for an analyst user familiar with
maps and familiar with timelines; the fused
representation of time and geography builds on concepts
familiar to the user audience.
Clearly the context of the goal and the capabilities
of the users are important considerations in the success
of a visual technique. If the user’s mental model cannot
comprehend the target visualization, no amount of sizzle
factor can succeed.

7. Conclusion

Figure 12 - 2D Trail Scatter Plot
The users were baffled by the representation and
could not understand the display at all. What the users
wanted and understood right away were familiar 2D line
charts (Figure 13).

When creating a visualization for communication,
the inclusion of aesthetically appealing elements can
greatly increase a design’s appeal, intuitiveness and
memorability. Used without care, this “sizzle” can
reduce the effectiveness of the visualization by obscuring
the intended message. Maintaining a focus on key design
principles and an understanding of the target audience
can result in an effective visualization for
communication. This paper has described these
principles and shown their use in the creation of several
effective designs.

References
[1]

Figure 13 - 2D Trail Line Chart
However, the trail technique is successfully used in
the depiction of movement over geography and through
time, such as in the GeoTime visualization shown in
Figure 14 [10] .

Figure 14 - 3D GeoTime Visualization

E.R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press. 1990.
[2] J. Roberts, N. Boukhelifa, P. Rodgers. Multiform Glyph
Based Search Result Visualization. In Proceeding
Information Visualization 2002. IVS, IEEE, 549-554.
2002.
[3] S. Zhai, W. Buxton, P. Milgram. The partial-occlusion
effect: Utilizing semitransparency in 3D humancomputer interaction. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction, 3(3), 254-284. 1996.
[4] J. Bertin. Semiologie Graphique. Paris. 1973.
[5] E.R. Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Cheshire, CT. Graphics Press. 1983.
[6] K. Mullet, D. Sano. Designing Visual Interfaces:
Communication Oriented Techniques. Mountain View,
CA. SunSoft Press. 1995.
[7] D. Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. New York,
NY. Basic Books (Perseus). 2002.
[8] C. Ware and J.C. Beatty. Using Color Dimensions to
Display Data Dimensions. Human Factors. 30(2), 127142. 1988.
[9] R. L. Sollenberger, P. Milgram. A Comparative Study of
Rotational and Stereoscopic Computer Graphic Depth
Cues. Proc. 35th Annual Meeting Human Factors Soc.,
San Francisco. 1991.
[10] T. Kapler and W.Wright. GeoTime Information
Visualization. In Proceedings of IEEE InfoVis 2004.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

