Painting the Digital River
James Faure Walker
Senior Research Fellow, Fine Art, Kingston University
James@faurewalker.demon.co.uk
Abstract
This paper recounts the rationale and process of
writing a book on digital painting, the coming together
of computer graphics and contemporary art. As both a
digital and a ‘physical’ painter, I felt there were
fascinating possibilities the practitioner comes across,
but these implications were being overlooked. There is
a view that ‘new media’ will simply replace
‘traditional media’, like painting. I intended to show
that a painter can ‘go digital’ and yet remain quite
obviously a painter. There had to be a balance between
the detailed discussion of computer graphics and the
detail of painting: the techniques, the histories, the
continuing debates, in a way that would bring it alive
to a wider readership. The title, ‘Painting the Digital
River’, is a metaphor for what divides the territory, for
the co-existence of change and continuity, and for the
journey of discovery.

Painting with the Computer
This paper is an account of how I recently came to
write a book on the subject of painting with the
computer. Computer graphics has provided the painter
with new tools, and painters need to adjust their
working habits, their ways of thinking, their ways of
seeing. The painter has this new ‘window’ to see
through, but much of the discussion of ‘digital
painting’ is clouded with misconceptions. Paint
software is well developed, but in its manuals the
understanding of painting as an art form is less
developed. In some surveys of digital art painting is
mentioned only as a ‘traditional’ medium, or a set of
skills, that has been superseded by ‘new’ media. My
experience as a practitioner has been typical in being
more complicated, alternately sceptical and
enthusiastic. It has been hard to develop a sense of
proportion, to get the most out of demanding software
without succumbing to the illusion that here is the

miracle cure for all art’s problems. In no sense is
digital art ‘better’ than what went before just because it
is digital. I continue to work both in physical and
electronic formats, and like many others I see the
possibility of an exclusively digitally based art
becoming less and less probable. Put simply, art has
not ‘gone digital’. The questions we shall have to deal
with, especially in ‘digital painting’, are about
integrating old and new, bringing together the insights
of the visual analyses of computer graphics with the
encyclopaedic range of painting culture.
So this is not a technical paper, a report of
visualisation experiments, nor a speculative essay on
the future, nor a presentation of ingenious computeraided art works. Instead I wanted to pause and stand
back, and suggest some adjustments in the way we
think about computers and art, specifically the use of
digital processing in painting. A generation of wouldbe artists are currently passing through art schools that
in some cases take no account of the new levels of
expertise required. Two weeks of a PhotoShop
‘induction’ course is not the right approach. It could be
that the subject of drawing needs to be conceived
afresh so as to take account of digitally-assisted
drawing and the creative uses of photography. Some of
the terms in use, such as ‘new media’, are becoming
meaningless. New media are now old media, and the
assumption that painting would be replaced as a
‘traditional’ medium, is proving to be a premature
assumption. Much of the more influential and
innovatory work in contemporary art has been
emerging in painting, and in video installation, with
both being driven more by concepts, narratives than by
technologies. The technologies of virtual reality,
interactive multimedia, or internet art have made less
of an impact than was expected ten years ago, and have
been absorbed into the paraphernalia of science parks,
shopping malls and the PlayStation. Those of us caught
up in the day-today work of using digital tools to
fabricate would-be works of art, have to be aware of
the changing patterns of a society’s use of technology.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The ‘being there’ illusions of virtual reality, the
immaculate software we use, these are taken for
granted. Mobility, being able to keep in touch, matters
more, thus the success of the Ipod, the camera phones,
the wireless laptop. If there is a lesson in this for the
digital artist it is that any prediction about the future
use of a breakthrough technology must be treated with
some caution. Social needs, such as communicating
and sharing, really count for more. Perhaps this is
where art fits in.

Digital River
In writing my book the first difficulty was defining
the subject and the viewpoint I was going to take.
Obviously, I had to persuade a publisher that such a
book was feasible, and viable for more than a
specialist, and perhaps academic readership. One
constant problem has been that the terminology can
mean quite different things to different groups.
‘Conceptual art’, for example, is a shorthand term in
contemporary art, but within the world of commercial
art a ‘concept artist’ is the painter who sets out the
‘treatment’ for a sci fi movie. So ‘digital painting’ can
mean anything from commercial illustration, amateur
painting with the family desktop, the sophisticated
work in the Siggraph Art Gallery, to a video piece at
the Venice Biennale. I did not want to undertake a
survey of ‘digital art’, partly because as an artist
myself I was too involved and biased to be a decent
critic, and partly because I wanted to present the topic
as an individual painter confronts it, through adapting
to the demands of paint software, and this software is
itself evolving. There are several such surveys of
digital art, and net art, and they tend to present ‘digital’
art as a break from ‘traditional’ art. Painting with the
computer, the integration – some would say the
confusion – of the new with the old, is not part of their
story. I felt the story of how painting and the digital
can be integrated needed to be told.
The second problem was to find a balance between
my ‘art world’ knowledge and my ‘computer graphics’
knowledge. Not many readers would be completely
expert on fifteenth century Flemish painting, and also
on the origins of the paint program. I doubt whether
many computer science graduates follow the intricacies
of post-modernist criticism. Equally, the fundamental
distinction between bitmap and vector would mean
little to most painters. The book I had in mind had to
be like a bridge between the two. I had also to be sure
of my ground. The knowledge I do have has been
acquired largely through first-hand experience, both as

a painter, and as a self-taught user of paint software. I
also have had many conversations, chance encounters
at conferences over the years. But this knowledge, this
awareness of the field, has never been set down in a
formal way. As far as I know there are no university
courses that cover both painting and computer
graphics, though part of my thesis is that such courses
may soon be in demand.
The third task was that I had to bring this all
together in a coherent book, piecing together the ideas
into something that someone else might want to read. It
meant finding the right tone of voice, not necessarily
academic, but certainly critical. It would mean being
both participant and observer. It meant working out
what would be central, what would be peripheral. I
have had this project in mind for at least ten years. I
had a foretaste of what might be required when I wrote
a regular column in CGI magazine in the nineties. It is
possible to address both audiences at the same time,
and now the body of ‘digital artists’ has reached the
critical mass where much can be taken for granted –
such as the viability of high quality prints. At the same
time there are many in the ‘mainstream’ art world,
critics as well as artists, whose understanding is limited
by misconceptions. For example, phrases like
‘computer-generated’ or ‘digital imagery’ are used
freely as if we were still looking at crude geometry and
lumpy swarms of pixels.
Some commentators might say that an artist has
enough to do in making their work and should not
undertake the extra burden of making pronouncements
on their subject. It is indeed difficult to divide a
working day into periods of painting and periods of
writing. However, the point here is that critics have not
covered this subject in any depth because they feel out
of their depth. In some cases their background was art
history, and that does not help with understanding
computer graphics concepts. Also, as a practitioner
there are sometimes major decisions to make, even
about which equipment to use, and putting my thoughts
into some order might be of some help. It is only by
testing the different methods, pushing some ideas as far
as they can go, that you begin to understand how the
current programs do and don’t facilitate the tasks.
The final form of the book, ‘Painting the Digital
River’, uses the metaphor of the river, both as a
journey of discovery, and to suggest how territories are
separated from each other. It begins with listing the
dilemmas the digital painter encounters, whether to ‘go
digital’ wholeheartedly, or whether to observe the
opulence of computer graphics with detachment, so to
speak, from the banks of the river. Different positions

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

are taken up, some historical and some contemporary,
some proclaiming the end of painting, some rejecting
the new technology altogether. The workings of the art
world’s opinion forming culture have to be considered
with respect to the reception, and frequent rejection, of
computer art. Painting has been caught up in its own
polemics over the last thirty years, the period in which
paint software came into its own, and sometimes these
trends moved in opposite directions. As paint software
aimed to be ‘natural’ and followed the quest for
ultimate realism, the leading painters celebrated the
artificial, the inexpressive, the inert, the abstract.
Programs have evolved in the way they have for good
reasons, but it is possible that in the future a more
artist-friendly paint software could emerge.
Part of this book is like an imaginary roundtable
discussion where the claims and counter claims of
digital art are worked through, but not necessarily
resolved, because the debate is itself competitive, and a

symptom of the lively attention directed on these
questions. The issues range from the merits of the
interactive, the virtual, the algorithmic, the physical, to
the nature of painting, the status of the hand-made.
There could well be an exhibition on the theme of the
effect on painting of digital tools, and whilst listing
some of the challenges of such an exhibition, one
chapter does provide a glimpse of what leading
practitioners have been up to. Finally, the discussion
returns to the river theme, to the ‘silver thread’,
defining what painting with the computer really
involves, and what the next generation will need to
know to move the subject further on.
James FaureWalker ‘Painting the Digital River’
Addison Wesley, will be published in Fall 2005.
www.dam.org/faure-walker

James Faure Walker Baroque Thoughts on a Rainy Day 2005 61 x 81 cms Archival inkjet print

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

