Visualization of Biological Patterns in Event Detection and Tracking
Based on SRP algorithm
T.Mala, Dr.T.V.Geetha
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
College Of Engineering, Guindy, Anna University, Chennai, India
{mala@cs.annauniv.edu, tvgeedir@cs.annauniv.edu}
Abstract
The goal of this paper is to provide a temporal
visual structure, which helps in easy identification of the
amount of information the story adds to the event in an
event detection and tracking task. The strength of the
event is calculated each time the story arrives and is
plotted in a visual structure. The relationship of the story
with an event is found applying a biological species
interaction approach towards the incoming news stories
and events. The biological model proposed in this paper
helps in classifying the story type by considering the
interaction among the species as relationship with the
events. The fitness score of the story to the event is
calculated using SRP algorithm. This score together with
the relation type helps in calculating the strength of the
event, which is used to plot on a temporal visual
structure. There is a combined display of archive events
with the present stories which gives a clear view of the
importance of news in the stories.

1. Introduction
With the volume of online news available today, it is
difficult to manually sort through the hundreds of daily
news articles to find articles related to specific topics.
Therefore there is a need to have an automated system,
which would sift through the mounds of news and
display the articles that match an individual’s interests.
Such a system would need to identify topics within the
articles, group them into clusters, and present the articles
based on the user’s interest. This task of text
categorization is known as event detection and tracking.
Event detection and tracking is a variant of classification
in which classes are not known or fixed in advance.
Considering the patterns of the incoming news stories
that are to be classified into correct events, the stories get
classified under various events. If it is a first story about

the event it forms a new event. This particular task is a
challenging work in the broad area of machine learning.
This challenge includes identifying and learning new
classes from few documents, identifying and effectively
utilizing the temporal relationship in the new data and
the interaction between the story and the event. This
paper deals with methods that help a person monitor
changes in news coverage over time. The assumption
here is that a user has access to a stream of news stories
that are about the same event but that the stream grows
rapidly enough that one does not have the time to look at
every story. In this situation, a person would prefer to be
kept up-to-date on the stories within the event, and to
dive into the details only when the reported stories
trigger enough interest. If there was a visual model,
which can give enough idea about the stories and their
importance in the event then it is easier for a person to
refer to news stories of interest. The task of visualizing
event tracking and detection comes under information
visualization since events and stories are eventually
textual documents. The envisioned visual model requires
that the technology provide a visualized structure of the
incoming stories and the growth of the event temporally.
The growth of the event depends on the relationship
between the incoming story to the event under
consideration. Biological patterns in Event story
relationships were identified and were used to identify
the type of relationship that exist among them. This
relationship together with the fitness score calculated
from the SRP algorithm helps in calculating the event
strength. This is then plotted in a sectorial visual
structure which together with other events form a
temporal circular view.

2. Information visualization
The use of computer-supported, interactive, visual
representation of abstract data to amplify the acquisition
of knowledge or use of knowledge is called information
visualization [5]. People have tremendous perceptual

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

abilities for visual information. Visualizations rely on the
fact that users can assimilate distinguish positions,
colors, textures, and relationships. Relationships can be
shown in such displays by proximity, by containment, by
connected lines, by color-coding, etc. Fields containing
hundreds or thousands of points can be scanned rapidly
and efficiently for clusters, outliers, trends, and gaps.
Attention can be drawn to salient items using a variety of
techniques including highlighting, blinking, motion, and
size. Direct manipulation of visualizations can be
accomplished with a variety of methods, such as pointing
to select, dragging, and zooming. Feedback is immediate
and intuitive in such environments. "The eye, the hand
and the mind seem to work smoothly and rapidly as users
perform actions on visual displays" [13]. Shneiderman
defines the visual information seeking mantra as the
central principle of the visual design guidelines that state
overview first, zoom and filter then details on
demand[14]. In his Data Type by Task Taxonomy (TTT)
he adds three more actions : relate by visualizing
relationships between items ,to keep a history of actions
and allow extraction of sub collections and of the query
parameters. In this paper relationship between stories are
visualized and the past stories are also kept in an archive
sector.
Document visualization is a kind of information
visualization where the data to be visualized is in its
abstract form. Document collections can be visualized
and browsed through space and time attributes associated
with the documents [10]. By making use of these natural
attributes, users are freed from having to deal with
filenames and directories. This paper describes a
document visualization tool for Event tracking which
makes it easy for analysis and for comparison of the
temporal behavior of tracked stories. Visualization tools
available for Documents include Linear Text: eg: Tile
Bars [6], Two-dimensional Text: eg:Pad++ [1], Threedimensional Text: eg:WebBook , Multidimensional Text:
eg:SPIRE , Temporal Text: eg:SeeSoft , Tree Text:
eg:Hyperbolic Tree [9], Networks: eg:Navigational View
Builder and Distributed Documents/Workspaces eg:
CASCADE [15].
Temporal text visualizations follow
time
sequence animations, which allow a high level appraisal
of the overall change in topics over a period of time [16].
Other visualizations depict time in a variety of ways.
SAGE [11] has been used to code timelines of
information extracted from historical documents.
EditWear/ReadWear [7] creates a bar adjacent to the
normal scroll bar when a document is being viewed. In
the bar a two-dimensional plot of user activity can be
plotted showing the length of time that the document has
been either read or edited. Therefore, it is clear that
temporal depiction covers a lot of territory. Time may be
viewed as:
•
•

a point, e.g., when did this happen first?
Linearly, e.g., how long has this been going on?

•

Planarly, e.g., how much of this has been
happening during some time interval?

Temporal data is frequently overlaid with other
types of information [2]. One might think of temporal
information as merely another dimension in a
multidimensional space, but to do this is to risk losing
the importance that people tie to this important kind of
data. Time, as a dimension, is the same as linear or lowdimensional data when one considers the content of a
document, e.g., the timeline in a novel or news story. It is
different when considered as metadata, e.g., creation date
or date of last reading. Liddy (1995) has explored
extracting temporal information from text in a system
called CHESS. CHESS automatically creates a
knowledge base, which aggregates information about any
named entity (people, places, events, organizations,
companies or ideas) and organizes that knowledge into a
timeline, which covers the entire period of the
knowledge base. The visualization approach presented
in this paper considers temporal data and links it to the
growth of the Events. Temporal data is mapped as points
on radial lines, which depict time.

3. Visualizing event detection and tracking
The goal of the pilot research in Topic Detection and
Tracking (TDT) was detection and tracking events within
streams of broadcast news stories [8]. Its successor, TDT
[17] added online news events detecting and tracking
functionality as one of its main objectives. In tracking
the stories that talk about the same event are clustered
into one single group. Clustering the stories can be
implemented by applying various clustering techniques
such as K means algorithm, KNN algorithm, Neural
network based algorithms and Probabilistic algorithms.
They use approaches related with computing the
similarity of the incoming story to the event under
consideration. One such approach is the SRP algorithm
which uses a set, rank and priority based approach. This
approach, which was our earlier work, helps in assigning
score to the incoming stories based on their similarity
with the event under consideration. This score will vary
depending on the type of story that is given for detection.
SRP algorithm helps in efficiently categorizing multi
topic documents using the calculated score value.
In this paper a biological species interaction
approach is applied over the incoming news stories.
Biological interactions in species explain the relationship
that exists between the different species. This
relationship depends on the type of interacting specie.
Similarly the event strength depends on the incoming
news story. According to the biological interaction
classification it is possible to calculate the growth in the
strength of the event as and when the stories arrive. The
event strength is calculated on the basis of the similarity
score from SRP algorithm. The event strength will
specify what type of story has arrived and it will also
specify the relationship of the story to the event under

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

consideration. After calculation, the Event story
relationship relating to the strength is visualized. This
involves temporal archive visualization of the stories
with respect to the event under consideration.
There are various forms of TDT visualizations.
Many visualization techniques for analyzing complex
events typically use one of time, geography or network
connectivity. Each of these types of visualizations is
common and well understood. For example, timefocused scheduling charts such as Lifelines [Plaisant et
al, 1996] or Microsoft (MS) Project, display attributes of
events over the single dimension of time. Some of the
TDT visualization schemes show the story misses and
the false alarm rates visually [4]. Effective statistical
techniques for finding interesting topics from document
collections use timelines as effective form of
presentation [12]. Visualization of time-dependent data
by means of feature tracking and event detection is also a
hot research topic. But in all the above cases we visualize
only the event or the incoming story and we do not
consider the relationship of the story to the event. Also
past history of events are not considered. In our approach
we consider the event story relationship with respect to
the increase or decrease in strength of the event and also
have an archival visualization of the past history of
events. This work proposes a sector-based visualization
and all sectorial events form a circle. Archival
visualization forms another circle. Two circular views of
various events with their stories gives a clear idea about
their temporal and biological relationship showing the
effect of stories on events under consideration. In
addition it gives an overview of the amount of relevant
information content in the incoming story.

retrospective or in on line tracking. Most of the text
categorization algorithms classify the incoming stories to
the event by attaching only a Boolean value concluding
whether the story is fit to the event or not [3]. The SRP
algorithm uses a new scoring function for categorization,
which was described in our earlier paper. In this novel
approach, multi level ranking is given to the bag of
words. Within each level, priority is assigned to further
improve the categorization. Extraction of bag of words
from the training data is performed based on the rank,
priority and index. The Set, Rank and Priority based
algorithm gives a fitness score, which gives the degree of
relationship that exits between two documents. Using
this score for biological patterns in event tracking and
detection it is possible to calculate the strength or
weakness of the event on being associated with a story.
Visualization of the growth in the event as the stories
arrive is an innovative approach. This provides a clear
view of the relationship that exists between the story and
the event temporally.
Events are said to be dormant when there is no
growth in the event after some time. Dead events are
events that are replaced by new incoming events. The
dormant events with the dead events are visualized as
sectors in archival circle. This is a kind of temporal
archival visualization, which displays both the dead,
dormant and the incoming stories as they arrive. The
category fitness score arrived for each story helps in
calculating the percentage of increase in strength of the
event. This increase in percentage of the event is used
for mapping the stories onto their event sectors.

5. Biological pattern matching: A species
interaction based approach

4. Visualization based on category fitness
Most of the topic tracking and detection visualizations
deal with whether the incoming story belongs to the
event or not. They concentrate more towards the
correctness of fit to the event. In this paper event
detection and tracking visualization is aimed at the
increase or decrease in strength of the event as and when
the stories arrive. The amount of information contributed
from the story to increase the event strength is also
visualized. The strength of the event depends on the
pattern of relationship that exists between the event and
the story. Classifying the relation pattern with respect to
biological patterns will take care of all the types of
stories that arrive. This biological pattern matching helps
in easy identification of the relationship of the story to
the event and gives the increase or decrease in strength
of the event as the stories arrive. It also tells about the
amount of information delivered by the story towards the
event strength. This relativity depends on the degree of
fitness between the event and the story. To calculate the
degree of fitness Set, rank and priority based text
categorization approach is used here. One such approach
is the SRP algorithm.
Event detection and tracking approaches use
text categorization algorithms to trace the events either in

It is essentially required to characterize the association of
stories to events and the resulting increase in strength of
the information conveyed by the event. This paper
proposes to characterize this concept using a biological
ecosystem model. When different species in an
ecosystem have activities or resource needs in common,
they may interact with one another. Members of these
species may be harmed by, benefit from or unaffected by
the interaction. Ecologists identify five basic types of
interactions between species: Interspecific competition,
Predation, Parasitism, Mutualism and Commonsalism
[5]. Competition between members of two or more
different species for food, space or any other limited
resource is called interspecific competition. This can be
pattern matched to a story, which arrives, and the
competition among the events to capture the story.
Depending on the highest degree of fitness it is classified
to the respective event. Here the competition is among
the events to capture the incoming story. But only one
can win .The winner is the event, which associates
highest score to the story.
The other interactions deal with relationship
between two different species. In Predation, members of
one species (predator) feed directly on all or part of a
living organism of an other species (prey). In this

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

interaction the predator benefits and the prey is destroyed
totally. If the incoming story is a kind of story which can
destroy the entire event then it acts as a predator on its
prey. In certain cases an incoming story can act as
predator and destroy or replace an existing event (Prey).
For example if there exists an event about earthquake in
a particular place with ritcher scale value 5.7 A news
story arriving about the same event but with higher value
in the ritcher scale say 6.7 then this predator will kill the
prey that is the event. Here the story is benefited and
evolves as a new event and the event under consideration
becomes extinct. The entire information from the story is
utilized as this is going to be a first story for that event.
Parasitism occurs when one species (the
parasite) feeds on part of another organism (the host) by
living on or in the host. In this relationship the parasite is
benefited but the host is harmed but not completely
damaged or destroyed. Consider a Multi topic story that
discusses two events. Depending on the maximum score
the story is assigned to one event. The strength of the
event grows due to the incoming story but the
information contained in the story is harmed because the
other topic is not considered. The story is not totally
destroyed because some part of the story adds to the
event information. For example a story on tsunami,
which talks about the relief fund given to survivors by
actors will be a multitopic story which will belong to two
domains i.e. cinema and accidents. If it is classified
under accidents depending on fitness score it adds
information to the event but the other information
relating to cinema is not considered and therefore the
story is matched to the host that is harmed.
In Mutualism two species involved in a
relationship interact in ways that benefit both. This
pattern can be matched to an incoming story which
strongly talks about the event under consideration and by
this way both the event as well as the story is benefited.
This is because all information from the story contributes
to the enhancement of the event under consideration. For
example a story talking about an accident giving
information about the accident how it occurred and what
is the cause of it will add a lot of strength to the event
and in this case the event and the story will be benefited.
Commensalism is an interaction that benefits
one species but neither harms or helps the other species
in a significant way. This can be mapped to a story,
which has some novel information about an event, which
is of not much importance. When this story is associated
with that event then the event is benefited but the story is
neither benefited nor harmed since the novel information
alone adds content to the event. Consider a story talking
about accident and giving extra details about the accident
then it gives a novel information to the event and the
event strength grows but the story is neither benefited
nor harmed. The measuring of this contribution can help
in relatively calculating the results of story – event
interaction and help in visualization. SRP algorithm uses
the given formula to calculate the score value.

Score = ( (Priority) * Term Frequency) + ((Term
Frequency/(Index)) * TFIDF)*Rank
Score - Term weight calculated for each term present in
the dictionary.
Priority - Priority of the term within the set.
Term Frequency - Number of occurrences of the term.
TF IDF - Term frequency / Total words.
Total Words - Length of the document.
Index - Position of the word in the dictionary.
Rank - Set weight, which gives the significance of a set.
Fitness score

Increase in
strength

69.13
24.07
10.33
10.28
18.42
57.28
113.98
27.335
2042.40
228.60
80.58
306.60
151.80
261.02
139.52
250.08
364.56
82.17
91.68
81.60
87.38

197.1
46.9
1.1
0.93333
28.0667
157.6
346.6
57.7833
6774.4667
728.6667
235.2667
988.6667
472.6667
836.73333
431.7333
800.2667
1181.867
240.5667
272.2667
238.6667
257.9333

The algorithm takes a story and scores it to the
event according to the fitness criteria. The percentage
increase in event strength is given by
Y= 1/N * ((V – T)/T) * 100
Where T is a threshold which is essentially a
lower limit on the contribution of a story to an event, V
is the SRP score value and N is a constant such that N *
T is the minimum index above which there is 100%
increase.
Using the Y value the strength of the event is
calculated. Sample data of say 20 stories from Tamil
news papers are considered for testing. The fitness score
is calculated using SRP algorithm and using the fitness
score the strength of the various events as the stories
arrive are calculated based on the given formulae. The
calculated increase in strength of events and fitness score

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

of sample accident stories are shown in the form of a
table below.
The values shown above are then normalized
such that 0 to 100 represents 25% increase, 100 to 200
represents 50% increase and >200 means 100% increase
in the strength of the event. These are then plotted in a
circle.

6. Visualization based on species interaction in
event detection and tracking
By modeling the information contribution by incoming
stories to events under consideration the strength of the
contribution is depicted by species interaction.
Visualizing the interaction among events and stories is
performed with the help of sectors. Events are
represented in the form of sectors. All the sectors
together form a circle. As new events arrive they are
accommodated in the same circle by dynamically
adjusting the sectors. Various stories as they arrive are
represented as radial lines in the sectors. They represent
the timelines and give a temporal visualization of the
events. The strength of the event is plotted as points in
the radial lines. As the strength of the event increases the
point moves inside the sector depending on its increase
in strength. This occurs in the case of Mutualism,
Parasitism and Commensalism. But in all the above cases
the increase in strength varies depending on the type of
relationship. If there is no increase in strength of the
event as the story arrives then the point is plotted on the
next radial line in the same location as the previous
value. This kind of visualization will help in temporal
visualization of the events as they arrive. When any story
with predator prey kind of relationship enters then the
new event replaces the old event. The old event dies in
this case. The dead events are placed in another circle,
which acts as an archive of dead and dormant events.
Dormant events are the events, which are not
active for a specific period of time. The amount of
information the story adds to the event is also visualized
by varying the color intensity of the arriving stories. This
kind of visualization helps in visualizing the increase in
strength of the event as the various stories arrive. It also
helps in knowing the relationship that exists between the
event with the story. Temporal relationships between
various events are also seen clearly. It also includes an
archival view, which will be helpful in viewing past
events and the type of stories attached to those events
with their relationships.
Using the data collected from events Fire
accidents, Tsunami the stories are visualized as shown in
figure 1. The importance of this kind of visualization lies
in the fact that explicit event story interaction viewing
with strength of event in event detection and tracking
applications. It also helps a person to understand whether
the story is worth reading or not from a huge collection
of news stories. It gives a clear picture of the number of
days an event has been active and the importance of the
stories or event in news collections.

Figure 1 –Temporal sectorial event story
visualization with the archive event

7. Conclusion
This paper work has contributed to the visualization and
tracking of stories in event detection and tracking. This is
an effective way of visualizing event clusters with their
relationships. The efficiency of this approach can be
appreciated since by way of temporal visualization this
gives an idea about the importance of an event,
importance of a story within an event and the time span
the event has been active. These can be visually
understood by looking at the story point in the radial line
moving towards the inner circle for each event and the
number of circles it hops for each story. It also gives an
idea about the worthiness of the story. Future
enhancements in this work can be performed as follows.
(i)
Calculating the Strength factor by
considering the slot filling capacity of the
stories in the parent template of the event
by assigning priorities to the slots while
extracting the data.
(ii)
Sectorial visual can be made more
interactive

References
[1] Bederson, B.B. and J.D. Hollan. 1994 ” Pad++: a zooming
graphical interface for exploring alternate interface physics”,
Proceedings of ACM User Interface Software and Technology
Conference (UIST'94), 17-26
[2] Emile Morse White paper on “Document Visualization”
[3] Eui-Hong (Sam) Han George Karypis, Vipin Kumar, “Text
Categorization Using Weight Adjusted k-Nearest Neighbor
Classification “Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Computer Processing of Oriental Languages,
Shenyang, China,( 2003).
[4] Gareth J. F. Jones -A Visualisation Tool for Topic Tracking
Analysis and Development SIGIR’02, August 1115, 2002,
Tampere, Finland. ACM 1581135610/ 02/0008.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[5] G.Tyler Miller Jr ”Environmental science,Working with the
earth” tenth edition, Thomson Brooks/Cole, first reprint 2004
[6] Hearst.M.TileBars: visualization of term distribution
information in full text information access, Proceedings of the
ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI), 59-66.
[7] Hill, W.C. and J.D. Hollan. 1992. Edit wear and read wear.
In Proceedings ACM CHI'92 Conference Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Monterey, CA, 3-7 May 1992), 3-9.
[8] James Allan, Jaime Carbonelly, George Doddingtonz,
Jonathan Yamronx, and Yiming Yang, UMass Amherst, CMU,
DARPA, Dragon Systems, and CMU “Topic Detection and
Tracking Pilot Study Final Report”
[9] Lamping, J., R. Rao, P. Pirolli. 1995. “A focus+context
technique based on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing large
hierarchies.” CHI '95, 401-408
[10]. Patrick Chiu, Khai N. Truong ”Interactive Space-Time
Maps for Document Visualization” IEEE InfoVis 2002,
Interactive Poster & Demo
[11] Roth, S.F., J. Kolojejchick, J. Mattis, and J. Goldstein.
1994. Interactive graphic design using automatic presentation
knowledge. CHI '94 112-117.
[12] Russell Swan and James Allan ,”Automatic generation of
overview timelines”,ACM SIGIR 2000.
[13] Shneiderman, B. 1996. The eyes have it: a task by data
type taxonomy for information visualizations. Proceedings of
IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, Boulder, CO,
September 3-6, 336-343.
[14] Shneiderman, B. Designing the User Interface: 3rd
Ed.,Addison-Wesley Publ. Co., Reading, MA, 1998, pp. 509549.
[15] Spring, M.B., E. Morse, and M. Heo. 1996.” Multi-level
navigation
of
a
document
space.”
http://www.sis.pitt.edu/~spring/mlnds/
[16] Wise, J.A., J.J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M.
Pottier, A. Schur, and V. Crow. 1995. “Visualizing the nonvisual: spatial analysis and interaction with information from
text documents.” Proceedings of Information Visualization,
October 20-21, 1995. IEEE computer Society Press, Los
Alamitos, CA. 51-58.
[17] Yiming Yang, Jaime G. Carbonell, et al.: “Learning
Approaches for Detecting and Tracking News Events” In:
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 1999, pp. 32.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

