Reviewing the Role of Visualization in
Communicating and Understanding Forest Complexity
Michael J. Meitner, Ryan Gandy, Stephen R.J. Sheppard
Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning
Department of Forest Resources Management
Forest Sciences Centre
2045-2424 Main Mall
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC., Canada V6T 1Z4
mike.meitner@ubc.ca, gandy@interchange.ubc.ca, shep@interchange.ubc.ca
Abstract
In recent years, we have seen a great deal of
expansion in our knowledge of forest ecosystems and the
underlying management dimensions that support
decision-making in this context. Forestry, much like
other natural resource management disciplines, is faced
with the challenge of integrating information from many
different perspectives often with limited understanding of
the basic principles of the multitude of specialized fields
from which they are generated. This problem is only
exacerbated when reviewing management options with
diverse stakeholders such as statutory decision makers
and the general public. This paper suggests that 3D
visualizations can aid in mitigating these difficulties of
communication and understanding forest complexity.
Methods of visualizing forestry data hold promise in
clarifying complex spatial and temporal relationships,
for experts and lay people alike. This paper reviews
issues of complexity raised by today’s demand for
sustainable forest management, and the potential of 3D
visualization to address these issues, drawing on past
and current research on visualization effectiveness and
validity. Ultimately, the goal of this work is to develop
effective visualization methodologies to expand our
ability to explore, critique, and understand forestry data.
Our hope is that this will support knowledge discovery
and diffusion to effected communities in the face of
underlying data complexity and often, a limited
familiarity with the concepts and principles of forest
management.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a major expansion in
our knowledge of forest ecosystems and their
relationship to forestry interventions. This information is
intended to support decision-making under the new

paradigm of sustainable forest management. However,
forestry, much like other natural resource management
disciplines, is faced with the challenge of integrating
highly complex information from many different
disciplines, and making it intelligible to forest managers,
decision makers, indigenous peoples and the general
public.
This paper addresses how we might derive visual
representations of forest data that are capable of
increasing our understanding of forest management
issues. It is well known that visual media can help
advance understanding of many phenomena, as
witnessed by the rise of scientific visualization
approaches. Can visualizations make complex forest
management issues understandable in a way that allows a
broad spectrum of people to use this information in the
formulation of societal goals? Here, we explore how 3D
visualizations in particular can be applied to the specific
context and requirements of forestry, drawing on past
and current research on visualization effectiveness and
validity.
Within the paper we highlight selected results from
recent research by members of the Collaborative for
Advanced Landscape Planning (CALP) at UBC, who
have been involved in several studies to explore the use
and potential of environmental visualization technology
in interdisciplinary forest management planning and
decision support.
These studies have included
development of technological advances aimed at
increasing the speed, automation and accuracy of
environmental visualizations, to assist both experts and
the lay public alike in addressing important but complex
issues involved in sustainable forest management. In
addition, we have begun to evaluate the efficacy and
applicability of these visualizations in a variety of natural
resource settings, investigating the validity and ethical
constraints around their use. Ultimately, the goal of this
work is to expand the ability to explore, critique, and

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

understand forest management information in a context
of high complexity and user unfamiliarity with the
scientific concepts involved.
Section 2 characterizes some of the complexity
issues associated with sustainable forest management.
Section 3 discusses possible solutions to improving
understanding of this complexity using 3D
visualizations.
Section 4 discusses various
considerations and concepts which need to be borne in
mind in applying 3D visualization effectively to forestry
applications. Section 5 draws overall conclusions and
discusses future research needs.

2. Problems of complexity in forest
management
If we wish to engage people meaningfully in forest
land use planning and forest practice decision processes,
we must find better methods for them to access scientific
information. In a democracy, it is essential that these
processes be open to all stakeholders. However,
democracy serves society best when all contributing to
decision processes are well informed. The problem is
that forest ecosystems, and therefore forestry itself, are
complex. In fact, in the complex systems literature, the
most common example given to explain the concept of
complexity is an ecosystem. Forest managers must
consider large areas of land, over the long term, affecting
thousands of species and multiple forest uses by humans.
Typically, forest management systems attempt to keep
track of numerous criteria and indicators for measuring
aspects of ecological, economic, and social
sustainability. Good forest management requires the
integration of highly complex spatio-temporal
information on multiple criteria; making all this
intelligible to practitioners, often with limited
understanding of the basic principles of those specialized
disciplines, is a major challenge. This problem is further
exacerbated due to the mandate of sustainable forest
management to involve stakeholders that have diverse
backgrounds, such as statutory decision makers (often
from non-resource management backgrounds) and the
general public.
In forest management the biophysical complexity of
the ecosystem is compounded by social complexity,
which generally frames public discussions of forest
management. Our goals, how we conceptualize and
represent our values, our training, and our visions of
desired future forest conditions all affect the weighting
we place on aspects of the biophysical domain. As with
the biophysical, social complexity too has a temporal
scale, and continuing changes in cultural norms and
societal values can represent as difficult an issue as the
variability and uncertainty in the biophysical domain.

2.1. Issues of system complexity in forestry
Together, these social and physical complexity sets
give rise to significant challenges when we attempt to
communicate and discuss forest management issues.

Complex systems are necessarily conceptualized in many
different ways. Our lens of experience colors our
internalizations of complex external perceptions. For
example, when gathering disciplinary experts to address
ecosystem management problems, each brings
predefined sets of terminology and mental models of
phenomena that are unlikely to be universally held. Often
this results in debates of semantics and limits the
usefulness of highly domain-specific knowledge, as each
expert may be unable to deliver the kernels of wisdom in
a form that can be easily digested by the other experts.
Complex systems are also characterized by high degrees
of interconnectivity & low decomposability [1]. To
understand and manipulate complex ecosystems,
complex models are needed (e.g., [31]), and the creation
of these models depends on our ability to integrate the
multiplicity of relevant disciplines. The fact that all of
these subsystems are interacting gives rise to another
component of complex systems, that small perturbations
of input conditions may result in large changes in
outputs. The high variability in results makes it
imperative that the validity of outputs (both in terms of
the modeling itself and the presentation of the results) be
evaluated.
There are two additional aspects of complex systems
that influence our ability to communicate forest
management issues. Firstly, such complex systems are
quite large when compared to their atomistic
components. Secondly, our conceptualization of a given
complex system is scale dependant (i.e. complexity
varies with depth of examination). In other words, if our
level of analysis is a tree, we view forests quite
differently when compared to representing forests as
stands, which in turn is very different from looking at
molecular activity within a single tree. Forest modeling
systems tend to occur at scales of the single tree, stand
level, and landscape level (addressing several adjacent
watersheds). Forest modeling thus conforms to the tenet
that complex systems are nested hierarchies of complex
systems. These characteristics of complex systems give
rise to issues of reference. How do we shift from one
level of analysis to another and in turn how do we make
these multi-scale models relevant to the human
condition?

2.2. Human psychological limitations
In addition to system complexity, there are several
important factors, relevant to sustainable forest
management and intrinsic to human mental capacity,
which constrain our ability to assimilate quantitative
information accurately and wholly.
As humans we can accurately evaluate one quantity
relative to another similar quantity but are much less able
to gauge the absolute value or size of an unreferenced
quantity. We are able to estimate relative proportions far
better than absolute quantities and can understand
averages and norms, but are poor at computing such
values by means of on-the-fly calculation in our heads
[3], [9]. We struggle to measure duration accurately and

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

in many cases we respond to situations with a “here and
now” attitude, evaluating temporally extended
experiences as an average between highpoint and
endpoint [4]. For example, Daniel Kahneman has
demonstrated that people will invariably choose greater
amounts (duration) of pain (in various forms) if the last
subjective evaluation of pain is lower, so long as peak
pain is held constant, in spite of the fact that the
experience clearly lasts longer [4]. We are capable of
detecting subtle changes in a visual array when one
situation is evaluated immediately after another but are
generally unable to detect this change when a time lapse
or mask is applied between the two situations [30]. This
effect is often referred to as “change blindness” and
causes us to be very weak at detecting variations in
acceleration and deceleration of trends.
According to Pylyshyn’s research on visual
indexing, sometimes referred to as fingers of
instantiation (FINSTS) [29], humans are capable of
manipulating no more than six variables at a time [17].
When doing this, we have a tendency to manipulate a
single variable whilst holding all others constant. For this
reason, we are incapable of rationally optimizing a series
of predictors such as a computer might do in a simple
linear regression model, or forest management scenarios
which seek to balance many different sustainability
criteria. Research in both education admissions and
commerce has shown that a simple linear regression will
outperform a group of professional evaluators almost
every time in predicting likely outcomes; in fact, even
when evaluators are provided with the regression scores
ahead of time, the computer model is still able to
outperform their predictive capacity in almost all cases
[28].

3. The potential role of visualization
One possible solution to problems of system
complexity and human limitations in understanding
quantitative forestry data is visualization. It is relatively
common for 2D visualizations to be used in forestry in
the form of maps, as in GIS inventory layers or spatial
modeling outputs. However, these do not necessarily
overcome some of the problems identified above in
terms of meaningful scale or locational references; they
also tend to be rather abstract, and have been shown to
be of limited use in some public participation contexts on
forestry issues [18].
The focus here is on 3D
visualization, showing perspective views of forest land
represented by 3D data as seen in Figure 1.
The uniqueness of this medium lies in
communicating in a language that more closely matches
the human perceptual system and relates to people’s
daily lives in terms of what they are used to seeing.
Visualizations can be thought of as a type of universal
language; they exploit our natural abilities to intuitively
grasp visual information. A majority of the information
processed by human beings is visual in nature and we
have evolved a visual perceptual system that can quickly
process immense amounts of data with very little

cognitive effort on the part of the perceiver. 3D
visualization is thus a potentially powerful
communications tool.

Figure 1: Example forestry visualizations

3.1. A brief history of forest visualization
Over the last 30 years, dramatic advances have been
achieved in the technology of environmental
visualization; with movement from manual graphic
methods to computer-based image generation, and
increasing capacity to generate visualizations from data
rather than artistic skill [35]. Early visualization systems
for forest management applications (e.g., [36]) were
useful for the professional forester, but the computergenerated graphics were typically quite abstract. This
basic approach of using computer symbology was
enhanced in later systems (e.g., [11], [16]), but the
resulting visualizations were still rather abstract, clearly
being the result of computer rendering. Today, however,
the degree of photographic realism available from purely
data-driven renderings using software such as Visual
Nature Studio and Envision, is remarkable, as either
detailed 3D models or 2.5D models derived from
photographs of real objects. This range of realism
requires the distinction between conceptual 3D
simulations which are intentionally somewhat abstract in
order to promote cognition, and the more realistic
landscape visualizations which attempt to mimic more
experiential qualities of actual landscapes [35].
Recently, the technological barriers of responsiveness
(interactivity) and visual immersion through panoramic
or head-mounted displays (which can be collectively
referred to as virtual reality) have been largely crossed.
These developments further enhance the perceived

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

realism obtainable with forest landscape visualizations
[27].
As a tool for furthering our understanding of
complex scientific information, 3D visualization has
already proven useful in a number of settings (e.g., [1],
[15]), including forest landscapes [18], [34]. The
effectiveness of landscape visualizations appears to be
related to the ease of spatial orientation, linkage to
recognizable &/or familiar features, and ability of the
medium to retain the viewer’s attention [35].
It has been argued that realistic landscape
visualizations are particularly important, if not essential,
in addressing certain social implications of site-specific
forest management actions [35].
Greater realism
increases the potential of soliciting emotional responses
of the type that may be generated by the real world. It is
generally believed that the degree of realism currently
available from data-driven renderings has increased the
representational validity of today’s environmental
visualizations in matching responses obtained from the
corresponding actual environments [12]. These advances
in realism, in conjunction with recent progress in realtime rendering [8], offer the promise of near-photorealism that is both interactive and user friendly. Ease of
use results in a reduced risk of a technological “smoke
and mirrors” effect, freeing the user to focus more on the
information content than the medium. In addition,
increased interactivity should facilitate a greater degree
of spatial understanding of the underlying data [19].

3.2. Current use of visualization in forestry
Much has been written about the potential and use of
visualizations
in
environmental
planning
and
management (e.g., [2], [21], [24], [32]), including some
attention to its applications to forestry and resource
management (e.g., [6], [37]). There have also been
applications of visualization designed specifically for
particular forestry problems, such as forest health
planning and pest management (e.g., [5], [13], [20],
[26]). However, there has been relatively little practical
application of visualization in forestry outside of the
academic context. The primary use of visualization in
practice has been for the fairly narrow purpose of visual
impact assessment for proposed harvesting operations
[35].
The broader use of visualization to convey the
complexities of forest management to multiple audiences
is not yet widespread. However, the enabling models
and meta-models to derive such visualizations are in use
or emerging (e.g., [27], [31], [34]). Modern 3D data
visualization systems focused on forest and land
management issues can translate quantitative data
projections of future (or desired) forest conditions into
concrete visual representations.
Such visualization
emphasizes systematic, traceable links between forest
biophysical data and the features presented in the
visualization [10], [25].

3.3. Benefits if visualization in communicating
forest complexity
The visualization medium holds promise in
addressing a number of the problems described in
Section 2 above and promoting a fuller understanding of
complex forest systems. First and foremost is the ability
of scientific visualization to make explicit our mental
models, as a knowledge representation tool. Through the
very process of creating a visual representation, the
creator is forced to specify unambiguously many detailed
assumptions reflecting our understanding of the
underlying data used to drive the simulation, and its
linkage to the real landscape. This resolves the problem
of multiple conceptualizations of a system and
capitalizes on the fact that visual media are unaffected by
linguistic ambiguity. New knowledge can be developed
through integrated representation in a landscape, and our
own models scrutinized and tested in a new light, with a
widened scope of peer review.
Visualization also extends our perceptual system by
allowing data that might be non-visible in nature to be
presented, e.g. soil types or forest health conditions not
apparent to the untrained eye. Visualizations which
permit interaction or overlay of multiple criteria or
factors in an augmented reality format (e.g. multiple
draped overlays which can be turned on or off) [37],
offer advantages here, especially if retaining both the
realistic and abstract imagery at the same time [8].
While somewhat limited in its ability to represent high
levels of realism, this concept has nearly been achieved
in standard 3D GIS applications now widely available.
Visualizations can represent changes in data that are
not commonly apparent to us, in ways that make them
relevant to the human condition. For example, imagine
viewing a time-lapse movie of a flower blooming. By
compressing the temporal scale we are able to witness
aspects of the world around us in ways not possible
without the aid of technology, and subsequently benefit
from new insights. This temporal compression is very
relevant in the forestry context. Forest management
decisions made today will impact future generations; by
bringing the future to life through visualization, we can
allow an individual more easily to put themselves in the
shoes of their children’s children. This provides a far
richer environment in which to make judgments on risk,
uncertainty, and issues of intergenerational justice.
Another aspect of visualization as a knowledge
communication tool is its role in translation of
information: conversion from one form to another which
is more appropriate for users. Visualizations can
potentially simplify complex scientific information for
consumption by non-experts, by aggregating it and
presenting it in recognizable patterns. However, it
should not be assumed that information transfer is a oneway street, as these technologies are equally capable of
representing the mental models of non-academic
stakeholders, allowing information to flow in the other
direction. Lewis has identified how realistic landscape
visualization can more efficiently articulate a

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

community’s vision than other more commonly used
media [18].
Given knowledge of where human judgment or
assimilation capacities are weak, we can surmise ways to
use visualization to help to alleviate some of the human
psychological limitations also discussed in Section 2.
For example, landscape visualizations contain many
spatial and size cues which we subconsciously use as
comparators when evaluating the dimensions of
unknown quantities being presented, e.g. tree heights,
roads, forest communities, familiar landforms, etc.
Conversion of tables or lists of variables into spatially
demarcated visualizations allow us to maximize our
ability to use relative proportion estimation to understand
quantities. At the same time, the subconscious cues just
mentioned, or additional graphic devices (e.g. vector
graphics overlaid on the visualization), can help to
anchor these relative proportions, allowing us more
easily to make the necessary conversions over to
absolute values as demonstrated in Figure 2. For
example, visualizing a harvest area relative to a football
field inserted to scale in the same image is far easier to
comprehend than reporting the size of the cut to be an
abstract value such as 0.76 hectares. Similarly,
visualizing a distribution of patch sizes and shapes on a
landscape is easier to grasp than reporting the mean and
standard deviation of the areas together with the
distribution parameters for the ratio of edge to interior.

of “change blindness” [30], and are better able to
comprehend complex interactions. As an example, the
simple relationship between deforestation and erosion as
it relates to steepness of slope is difficult to understand
when presented as a series of graphs and distributions. In
a visualization of this interaction, steepness of slope is
subconsciously assimilated as is the difference between
forested and harvested areas, leaving the viewer free to
evaluate the single remaining variable, relative size of
erosion effect. This too is simplified in that the absolute
values shown on the graphs and plots have been replaced
by scaled depictions of these effects which can be
evaluated relative to each other prior to conversion of
these relative sizes into actual finite quantities.
Visualizations can also help us to detect more
accurately fundamental errors of omission in prediction
models [22]. By converting model into a data driven 3D
visualization, as demonstrated in Figure 3, we can
instantly pick out places where previously unrecognized
data holes exist [31].

Figure 3: Missing data visualization

Figure 2: Environmental visualization with
quantitative data overlay
Perceptually, temporal variations are perhaps our
weakest point, especially over long time-frames, such as
the 100 year rotation length of a forest after harvesting or
natural disturbance. Visualization can overcome this
weakness by condensing time in such a way that we are
better able to comprehend subtle shifts. In simple
univariate cases, graphing temporal variation as a series
of points in X and Y is highly effective, but because of
the limitations we have in co-processing multivariate
scenarios, assimilating temporal interactions of variables
is very difficult and usually inconclusive. By condensing
time and depicting these variables using visual objects
referenced in a perspective view, we minimize the effects

As mentioned earlier, humans are very weak when it
comes to the mental equivalent of linear regression. We
are capable of rationally arguing and dissecting how any
two variables might interact, but struggle to assemble the
whole picture with many variables. Visualization not
only allows us to view individual variables or data sets
spatially, but allows us to view the aggregated output of
several combined variables. Let us again look at the
simple erosion example discussed earlier. Our model
predicts that erosion is positively correlated to both level
of harvest and steepness of slope. However, using 3D
visualization, we can immediately tell from visual
inspection if our model fails to address some key
influences: for example, erosion patterns may appear far
too uniform across the entire site when the landscape’s
true variability is revealed, forcing us to consider
possible differences in hydraulic action between
topography where sheet flow occurs versus obviously
confined channel flow situations. This might lead to a
second iteration incorporating other key variables and
refinement of the model. Had we not visualized this,
electing rather to retain our data as graphed averages,
this omission might never have come to light. In this
way visualization is central to the conversion of
information to knowledge through the nearly effortless
insights that this medium can facilitate.
The list of forestry-related variables that can be
visualized so as to improve comprehensibility is as
extensive as the number of GIS coverages and thematic

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

variables already in existence. A general rule of thumb
might be “if you can map it, visualizing it can only help
to improve comprehension”. A short list of examples
include analysis of existing site conditions such as
topography, hydrology, pedology, nutrient levels, floral
species distribution, faunal species distribution for
feeding, breeding, nesting, etc., and current and historical
human uses. Representing temporal sequencing or
bivariate or multivariate interactions of any of the above
factors is where visualization can perhaps make the
largest contribution to understanding.

4. Making visualization effective in forestry
In order to deliver the promise of visualization in
improving understanding of forestry, despite the
incomplete evidence from research and practice to date,
we can begin to suggest ways to structure and direct the
visualization process.

representative would. Different users may vary in their
familiarity with media and data types, experiencing
different associated levels of comfort with various
visualization types and levels of complexity. This
suggests limits on the universality of the visual language,
or at least a role for learned visual literacy in interpreting
visualizations.
Some of this variability in audience types is
presented in Table 1. This simple working model is a
means to explore the differing roles that visualization
might play in different contexts with different users.
Scientists/Academics

Generalists
Practitioners
Stakeholders

General Public

4.2. The context and audience for visualization
In considering the role of visualization as an aid to
communication and understanding of forest complexity,
it is important to recognize that the ways in which we
utilize this technology and the benefits that we might
derive are limited by the context and purpose of their
application. Roles will vary depending on the type of
information needed, and the type of audience. An expert
in watershed hydrology may not need the same visual
information that a forest manager or ENGO

Decision makers
Interested/motivated public

4.1. Principles for forestry visualization
General principles for landscape visualization in
forestry and allied fields have been proposed [33], [35],
which emphasize the following: representativeness of
important, typical, or meaningful views; accuracy; visual
clarity; interest level; legitimacy, and accessibility to
users. In order for environmental visualizations to
support the decision-making process effectively in a
long-term scenario modeling context, both accuracy and
legitimacy should be strengthened through:
1) Providing high quality biophysical base-data in
a timely manner,
2) Closely tying the environmental visualization
system to scientific models in order to produce
traceable forecasts and defensible output
In seeking to clarify and if necessary simplify
environmental information and relationships, these
systems must find methods to express and/or constrain
the underlying uncertainty of the predictive models and
data used, though there is much debate on how
uncertainty in predictive modeling should be represented
(e.g., [6], [27],). Several authors have suggested
combining multiple media to avoid the risk of bias in any
one method (e.g., [2], [37]). Increasing the transparency
of the visualization process itself is also recommended,
to avoid legitimacy and accuracy issues [33]. This calls
for improved interface design and usability.

Disciplinary experts

Disinterested public
Children and young adults

Table 2: A generalization of intended audiences
for a particular visualization
We will not discuss in detail all of the cases made
explicit in Table 1, but will give examples that shed light
on the interplay of the purpose of a given visualization
and its intended audience. We have already noted the
example of the disciplinary expert, where visual
depictions allow the scientist creating the underlying
model to evaluate the ‘face validity’ of its outcomes and
to iteratively refine the model itself.
For a more generally oriented scientist, the purpose
of visualization might be to aid in the integration of
information from multiple disciplines to answer
complex, multi-facetted technical questions. This could
be used in the context of investigating interactions
among subcomponents of a meta-model, or alternatively
could be used to investigate those same interactions as
representations of social values that are to be traded off
[34]. The generalist might also be quite interested in
how to use these images to communicate to nonscientists.
In the case of the practitioner, for example a
professional forester, it is likely that they would also be
interested in the aforementioned uses, but they might
also ultimately desire greater relevance to operational
management issues in the form of decision support tools.
For example, the ability to use visual representations of
management alternative to explore possible outcomes in
the context of social expectations (e.g. visual impacts,
perceived fire risk) would likely be of considerable
interest. Additionally, visualizing operational plans both
to explain these plans to logging crews as well as to elicit
feedback regarding operating conditions that impact
worker safety, might also be desirable. This class of user
would also likely use this technology to increase the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

effectiveness of their interactions with scientists and
stakeholders.
At the other end of the spectrum are children. In this
case visualization holds a great deal of promise as an
educational device, contributing to a new generation of
well informed citizens able to participate in shaping our
environment [15]. First, visualization can capitalize on
pre-existing technological affinities and interests so
common in the younger generation, e.g. computer games.
By creating compelling visual representations of science
in an animated form with which they are somewhat
familiar, we might very well spark some interest in an
individual to pursue a related career path, e.g. forestry or
conservation. Second, we might hope to foster a sense of
curiosity about their relationship to the natural world.
Lastly it might also be possible to increase the meaning
and relevance of environmental management issues to
the young viewers.
In each of these examples the details of what would
constitute an effective representation of the same
underlying data might differ greatly.
Imagine a
representation where trees and shrubs are drawn as color
coded geometric cylinders to represent fire hazard
categories. This might be a very effective representation
for an expert in this area to assess overall patterns of
their model output, but would certainly be less useful for
explaining to the lay public living in a fire-prone area the
causal mechanisms that drive this classification, e.g. the
role of ladder-fuels and underbrush in raising fire risk.
In the latter case, a series of visualizations depicting
typical cases of fuel loading with different forest
structures might be far more effective. For children as
part of their environmental curriculum, a simplification
of ecosystem relationships combined with a fast-paced
animated presentation with high interactivity might be
most effective. This example illustrates the point that, in
order to use visualization most effectively, we should
consider alternate representations and evaluate our
choice(s) of depiction based on their suitability for
facilitating communication and understanding in a given
context with a certain user type(s). Based on this
discussion, it becomes imperative that we clearly
articulate the intended goals of a given visualization and
clearly define the target audience in order to be most
effective.

Conclusions
The application of 3D visualizations to sustainable
forest management appears promising in communicating
complex scientific relationships, and their potential is
increasingly being recognized, as evidenced by the
emerging tools for creating data-driven visualizations of
environmental states. However, when examined closely,
using visualization in this context raises several
significant questions. How do we present visual and
non-visual information on an equal basis? What are the
strengths and weakness of different approaches to visual
representations for achieving a deeper understanding of
the information represented? What is the effectiveness

of different visualization systems at engaging different
audiences? What are the ethical implications of using
these powerful communication tools in a decision
making context?
While such significant concerns need to be
addressed seriously, we would also argue that the
pressure of environmental concerns prevents us from
awaiting complete answers to these questions. It is
important that these technologies be applied as a
component of the land management decision-making
process, and thus contribute to a deeper understanding
and questioning of the underlying concepts. Therefore
we should proceed with caution, guided by interim
principles or code of ethics [33], while continuing to
evolve our ability to deliver unbiased land management
information through visual means.
Ultimately the goal of research such as that
underway at CALP is to evaluate the performance of
these technologies in disseminating information to the
public and increasing interactive engagement in forest
management decisions. Feedback obtained through this
interaction can then be used in an iterating loop between
the public and management professionals, to refine the
preferred set of forest management scenarios and meet
the needs and desires of both groups. While efforts will
no doubt continue to improve our technical ability to
translate complex forest data into images that
communicate future forest scenarios to the general
public, it is equally important to ask what role these
visualizations should play in the larger societal context.
Our hope is that these advances in translating numeric
representations of future forest conditions into more
salient visual representations will help to engage the
public in a richer, clearer discourse with scientists around
natural resources, ultimately leading to more inclusive
and informed participation in the decision-making
process.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to express appreciation to
Canadian Forest Products Ltd., the Canadian Forest
Service, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC), and the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC)
for their support of this research. In addition, we would
like to thank our colleagues at Collaborative for
Advanced Landscape Planning as the work discussed in
this paper really is a group effort.

References
[1] Appleton, K. and Lovett, A., 2003.
GIS-based
visualisation of rural landscapes: defining 'sufficient'
realism for environmental decision-making. Landscape
Urban Plan. 65(3), 117-131.
[2] Appleyard, D., 1977. Understanding professional media:
issues, theory, and a research agenda. In: Altman, I.,
Wohlwill, J.F. (Eds.), Human Behavior and Environment.
Plenum Press, New York, Vol. 1, pp. 43-88.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[3] Ariely, D. 2001. Seeing sets: Representation by statistical
properties. Psychol Sci, 12, 157–162.
[4] Ariely, D., Kahneman, D., & Lowenstein, G. 2000. Joint
comment on "When does duration matter in judgment and
decision making?" J Exp Psychol Gen, 129(4), 524-529.
[5] Baker, F.A., Rabin, D. 1988. Using computer graphics to
assess the visual impact of limb rust in ponderosa pine.
Utah Sci. 49, 98-102.
[6] Bishop, I. D., Karadaglis, C. 1997. Linking modelling and
visualization for natural resources management. Environ.
Plann. B. 24, 345-358.
[7] Casti, J.L. 1994. Complexification: explaining a
paradoxical world through the science of surprise,
HarperCollins, NY. 320 pp.
[8] Cavens, D., 2002. A semi-immersive visualization system
for model-based participatory forest design and decision
support. University of British Columbia, May 2002, M.Sc.
Thesis.
[9] Chong, S. C., & Treisman, A. 2003. Representation of
statistical properties. Vision Res, 43(4), 393-404.
[10] Daniel, T. C., 1992. Data visualization for decision
support in environmental management. Landscape Urban
Plan. 21, 261-263.
[11] Daniel, T.C., Long, G., Heasley, J., Lynch, A. Orland, B.,
Wunneburger, D. 1988. Visual impact analysis for forest
harvests. In: Proceedings of Resource Technology 88,
American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing, Falls Church, VA.
[12] Daniel, T., Meitner, M., 2001. Representational validity of
landscape visualizations: the effects of graphical realism
on perceived scenic beauty of forest vistas. J. Environ.
Psychol. 21(1), 61-72.
[13] Daniel, T.C., Orland, B. Hetherington, J., LaFontaine, J.
1990. Model-driven visual simulations. In: Gramman,
J.H. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Third Symposium on Social
Science and Natural Resource Management, College
Station, TX.
[14] Fisher, B., & Dill, J. 2000. Application of theories of
indexical cognition to a Web-based workspace. Smart
Graphics, pp. 1-7.
[15] Furness III, T. A., Winn, W., Yu, R., 1998. The impact of
three dimensional immersive virtual environments on
modern pedagogy: Global change, VR and learning. In:
Proceedings of Workshops in Seattle, Washington, and
Loughborough, England in May and June 1997. Seattle,
WA.
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/r-9732/. Accessed June 1, 2004.
[16] Heasley, J., 1990. Simulating the visual effects of timber
harvest practices. In: Resource technology 90.
Washington, DC: American Society for Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing.
[17] Kahneman, D. 2000. Evaluation by moments: Past and
future. In D. Kahneman and A. Tversky (Eds.), Choices,
values, and frames New York: Cambridge University
Press. pp. 693–708.
[18] Lewis, J.L., 2000. Ancient values, new technology:
Emerging methods for integrating cultural values in forest
management. Unpublished Masters Thesis (MSc), Faculty
of Forestry, Forest Resources Management Department,
University of British Columbia.
[19] Lum, E., Stompel, A., Ma, K. L. 2002.
Kinetic
visualization: a technique for illustrating 3D shape and
structure. In Proceedings of IEEE 2002 Visualization
Conference. pp. 435-442.
[20] Lynch, A.M., Twery, J.M. 1992. Forest visual resources
and pest management: potential applications of

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

visualization technology. Landscape Urban Plan. 21, 319321.
Malm, W., Kelly, K. Molenar, J., Daniel. T.C. 1981.
Human perception of visual air quality: uniform haze.
Atmos. Environ. 15(10/11), 1874-1890.
Meitner, M., Sheppard, S., Cavens, D., Gandy, R., Picard,
P., Harshaw, H., & Harrison, D. (in press). The multiple
roles of environmental data visualization in evaluating
alternative forest management strategies. Compu Electr
Agr.
Myklestad, E., Wagar, J. A. 1977. PREVIEW: computer
assistance for visual management of forested landscapes.
Landscape Plan. 4, 313-331.
Orland, B., 1992. Data visualization techniques in
environmental management: a consolidated research
agenda. Landscape Urban Plan. 21, 237-244.
Orland, B., 1993. Synthetic landscapes: a review of
video-imaging applications in environmental perception
research, planning, and design. In Stokols, D., Marans, R.
(Eds.), Environmental Simulation: Research and Policy
Issues. Plenum Press, New York, pp. 213-252.
Orland, B., Onstad, D. Obermark, J., LaFontaine, J., 1992.
Visualization of plant growth and pest models. In:
proceedings from ASPRS/ASCM/RT 92, Vol. 5, pp.
246-251.
Orland, B., Uusitalo, J., 2001. Immersion in a virtual
forest: some implications. In: Sheppard, S.R.J., Harshaw,
H.W. (Eds.), Forests and Landscapes: Linking Ecology,
Sustainability, and Aesthetics. IUFRO Research Series,
No. 6., CABI Publishing, Wallingford, UK., pp. 205-224.
O'Shaughnessy, J. P. 1996. What works on Wall Street: A
guide to the best-performing investment strategies of all
time (1 edition ed.): McGraw-Hill.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. 1989. The role of location indexes in
spatial perception: A sketch of the FINST spatial-index
model. Cognition, 32, 65-97.
Rensink, R. A. 2000. Seeing, sensing and scrutinizing.
Vision Res. 40, 1469-1487.
Seely, B., Nelson, J., Wells, R., Peter, B., Meitner, M.,
Anderson, A., Harshaw, H., Sheppard, S.R.J., Bunnell,
F., Kimmins, H., Harrison, D. 2004. The application of a
hierarchical, decision-support system to evaluate multiobjective forest management strategies: A case study in
northeastern British Columbia, Canada. Forest Ecol
Manag. 199: 283–305.
Sheppard, S.R.J., 1989. Visual simulation - A user’s guide
for architects, engineers & planners. Van Nostrand
Reinhold, New York.
Sheppard, S.R.J. 2001. Guidance for crystal ball gazers:
Developing a code of ethics for landscape visualization.
Landscape Urban Plan. 54: 183-199.
Sheppard, S.R.J., Meitner, M. 2004. Using multi-criteria
analysis and visualisation for sustainable forest
management planning with stakeholder groups. Forest
Ecol Manag. 207(1-2): 171-187.
Sheppard, S.R.J., Salter, J. 2004. The role of visualization
in forest planning. In: Encyclopaedia of Forest Sciences.
Academic Press/Elsevier, Oxford, UK. pp. 486-498.
Travis, M.R., Elsner, G.H. Iverson, W.D., Johnson, C.G.,
1975. VIEWIT: computation of scene areas, slope, and
aspect for land-use planning. USDA Forest Service Gen.
Tech. Rep. PSW-11 /1975. Pacific Southwest Forest and
Range Exp. Stn., Berkeley, CA.
Wilson, J.S, and McGaughey, R.J. 2000. Landscape –
scale forest information. J Forest, December 2000, pp. 2127.

