Quantitative comparison between the use of 3D vs 2D visualization tools to present
building design proposals to non-spatial skilled end users
Alejandro Carvajal (a.carvajal@reading.ac.uk)
School of Construction Management and Engineering, The University of Reading, Reading, Whiteknights, Reading,
Berkshire, RG6 6AW, UK.

Abstract

environment stimulation, i.e. people become experienced

Information technology in construction (ITC) has been

in their daily activities. This research suggests that within

gaining wide acceptance and is being implemented in the

the building design context, BEU are an important source

construction research domains as a tool to assist decision

of unexplored experience and expertise. Further, it

makers.

visualization

suggests that if BEU are approached using appropriate

technologies (VT) has been on the wide range of 3D and

tools they could deliver useful suggestions/information

simulation applications suitable for construction processes.

regarding a particular design layout, which eventually

Despite

would help design specialists to identify the best possible

Most

its

of

the

development

research

with

into

interoperability

and

standardization of products, VT usage has remained very

alternatives and thus make better decisions.

low when it comes to communicating and addressing the
needs of building end-users (BEU).

Communication between participants in the briefing
process is of paramount importance [1,2,3]. However, it is
widely accepted that design specialists develop spatial

This paper argues that building end users are a source of

abilities over time as a result of their own professional

experience and expertise that can be brought into the

practice [4,5], just as would occur with a few other

briefing stage for the evaluation of design proposals. It

disciplines that encourage particular cognitive processes

also suggests that the end user is a source of new ideas

(engineering, medicine, biology, etc.). BEU are not always

promoting innovation.

included in this group, and may not necessarily develop
the spatial abilities required to understand [3] the most

In this research a positivistic methodology that includes

primitive tool used by design specialists: two-dimensional

the comparison of 3D models and the traditional 2D

drawings.

methods is proposed. It will help to identify “how much”,
if anything, a non-spatial specialist can gain in terms of

Communication and negotiation of BEU needs to the

“understanding” of a particular design proposal presented,

design specialists need to change dramatically to make

using both methods.

best use of BEU expertise. This paper highlights the
importance of the use of 3D models that would

Keywords: Visualization technologies, building end-user,

compensate for the lack of spatial ability skills of

briefing, methodology

non-spatial specialists. It is therefore suggested that, as a
1

visualization

1 Introduction

aid,

BEU

feedback

regarding

design

proposals should be addressed. In particular, it is in the
Empirical psychology studies suggest that human beings

interest of this research the analysis and measurement on

develop degrees of automatic response to different

BEU outputs after tested on two visual environments (2D
& 3D).







Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Visualization is an essential ingredient for understanding.

stimuli used in design proposals (2D and 3D) presented by

According to research conducted into learning processes,

design experts and the understanding regarding such

Treichler [6] concluded that people learn up to 83% of new

design proposals by the non-spatial specialist (NSS) and

information through sight. 3D systems can present design

the spatial specialist (SS). The comparison between

information to the BEU in a natural way that can be

two-dimensional building drawings and three-dimensional

appreciated by non-specialists. 3D systems can create a

computer models of a given design proposal were analyzed

design environment, which improves the level of

both, qualitatively and quantitatively. The latter helped to

understanding of building designers regarding BEU needs,

identify "how much" a non-spatial specialist can gain in

which should lead to better and more considered designs.

terms of "understanding" of a particular design proposal

Within VT, considerable emphasis is usually placed upon

presented, using both methods. The former identified user

the visual aspect or interface with the building's design

satisfaction and innovative issues arising from BEU after

through 3D visualization tools. However, the experience of

they have analyzed the design proposal.

BEU in the design/briefing process has not been addressed
further. For instance, if VT is widely accepted as a tool that

3.1 Experimental approach

permits clear understanding of what is being presented,

In order

could this improve the quality of suggestions delivered by

understanding and visual stimuli tool utilized a positivistic

BEU?

approach was developed, it had three different defined

to

identify a

correlation between NSS

design proposals that were tested using two visual methods.
It is widely accepted [2,3,7] that the current practice for

The first method was labeled traditional (control), to refer

communicating building design proposals to clients are in

to the two-dimensional drawings and any extra tools used

the form of 2D technical drawings, artistic impressions,

currently by design specialists to present their design

scale models, photomontages, etc. Three-dimensional tools

proposal. The second was called the proposed method

have been used for simulation and modelling of specific

(experiment) and referred to the use of a 3D tool as a

issues of the building performance or as a marketing tool

means of presenting the design proposals.

only. However, their use in dealing with BEU needs has

3.2 The 2D drawings

remained limited. The BEU lack of spatial visualization
could be replaced by the use of VT. Spatial visualization

The 2D drawings were obtained from the Facilities office

skills in design practitioners are an important component

at the University of Reading. Such drawings correspond to

of their career because of their direct relationship to the

three different student accommodation halls. The particular

graphical communication associated with design. Such

areas of interest in the drawings (kitchen, toilet and

communication has been identified as a language that is

bedroom) were shown in plan view (2D layout) to NSS

not totally understood [8]. Lawson, referred to the

and SS.

importance for design specialists to change from one
language to another when addressing BEU or anyone not

3.3 The 3D models

related to the design discipline.
The 3D models for the experimental approach were

2 Aims and objectives

developed

using

commercial

available

software

(Architectural Desktop 3.3 and Studio Max v5.0) from the

The aim of this work was to evaluate the effectiveness, of

2D drawings above. The textures and internal detailed

3D models in comparison to an equivalent 2D drawings set,

representation were taken from the original finished

when addressing BEU regarding a particular area of

accommodation hall buildings. The walkthrough of the 3D

building design.

models was shown, again to NSS and SS, with a
pre-defined path for each of the buildings (Fig. 1) using an

3 Methodology

Acer Laptop (using windows media player), a data
The study focuses on the correlation between visual




Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

visual stimulation on each environment, participants were

projector (Hitachi CP-X325) and screen (1.5 x 1.5 mts.).

interviewed with the questionnaire, which addressed two

3.4 Design proposal review and data collection

particular

A suitable area was selected in order to carry out the

correctness and the number of innovative features

experimental process. The two visual stimuli were tested

identified.

measurements

relevant

to

this

research

using experienced BEU represented by students at the
University but who were unfamiliar with the particular

Correctness was defined for the purpose of this research as,

accommodation halls in the study. Also involved were

the closest value given by participants tested in any visual

samples of groups representing BEU unfamiliar with

environment, to real dimensions of the selected building

living in accommodation halls and construction specialists.

area. It refers to the comparison between the data obtained

Both control and experiment groups were briefed firstly

from the experimental phase with the known values for

with a standard description of the research project, and

each building area analyzed. Correctness was made up of

secondly with a description of the particular building

two sections: scale, which measured the ability of

design area that they were considering. This description

participants to judge scale; and cognition, which determine

started with the same sequence as that developed in the 3D

the information embedded on the participant after the

models; first, a description of the corridor, then the

visual stimuli. An example of the questions asked in the

bedrooms and common areas\kitchen and finally the toilets.

spatial and cognition sections included:

Participants were encouraged to ask any questions during
the 7-minutes visual stimuli presentation. The research

Estimated size of the kitchen

mts/feet

design was developed in such a way that the order of

Estimated size of the bedroom

mts/feet

presentation for both visual environments (2D and 3D) and

How wide is the corridor?

mts/feet

the three different design layouts (H1, H2, H3) were

How far is the bedroom from the toilet?

mts/feet

predetermined. So a given participant would have to be

Table 1 Example of Scale section

tested using a combination of the two visual environments
About the toilets:

with two different design layouts.

None

One Two

Three Don't know

How many showers were
available?
How many hand basin
were available?
How

many

WC

were

available?

Table 2 Example of Cognition section

The number of innovative features (NIF) refers to all those
features not described in the design proposal but identified
by BEU as a need. Features that client and design
specialists have not identified previously, thus they have
not been addressed.

Fig. 1 Example of 3D model

3.5 Evaluation

4 Results

A standard questionnaire was developed for both methods.

Spatial-experienced versus inexperienced participants were

It was piloted to synchronize the terminology utilized on

tested on both visual environments and results were as

previous research when addressing BEU [9]. After the

expected. There was no significant advantage identified for





Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

experienced participants in any method. However,

experiment testing different building types is suggested.

non-spatial skilled participants obtained a significant

Also different methods of 3D display technologies would

advantage after being tested on the three-dimensional

be useful to compare results.

models of the design proposal presented.

7 Acknowledgements
Correctness
Scale %

The authors would like to acknowledge Martin K.
Cognition % NIF units

Westacott, Head of Estates Services and Patrick Hackett,

Resident

32

16

4

Head of Facilities Management at the University of

Non-resident

27

12

2

Reading for facilitating the 2D drawings. Many thanks to

Expert

7

5

2

Carlos Barahona from the Statistics department at Reading
University who supervised closely the statistics involved

Table 3 Percentage on the increase of right answers

in this project; Kate Harvey from Psychology department

when using 3D over 2D

and Kay Dickinson, Head of accommodation office. The

The results suggest that participants tested using 3D

developments of the 3D models were possible thanks to

visualization technologies identified an increase in

the invaluable help of Paula Cardellino and Juan Altieri

awareness

and the proof reading was kindly done by Carol Jewell.

of

particular

issues.

Participants

using

traditional 2D drawings could not detect these issues. For

References

instance participants using 3D models were able to identify
20% more features than those using 2D drawings. These

[1]

features were embedded already in the design. The

Salisbury,

F(1990) briefing your

architect.

London

University Press.

correctness as defined previously increased to 32% using

[2[

3D models in comparison with the participants using the

Worthington, A. J. (2001). Managing the brief for better

design. London, Spon Press.

2D drawings.

[3]

Barret, P. (19996) Managing the brief. RIBA Seminar on

briefing, 16 October 1999, London.

5 Conclusions

[4]

Miller, L. and Bertoline, G. (1991). "Spatial visualization

The results above suggest that an increase in understanding

research and Theories: Their importance in the development of

has been achieved by BEU when exposed to 3D models

an Engineering and Technical Design Graphics Curriculum

rather than traditional 2D drawings. This increase in

Model." Engineering Design Graphics Journal 55(3): 5-14.

understanding suggests that the lack of spatial skills of

[5]

BEU can be minimized by the use of 3D technologies. It is

Sorby, S. A. and B. J. Baartmans (1996). "A course for the

development of 3D Spatial visualization skills." Engineering

logical to assume that if BEU increased their awareness

Design Graphics Journal 60(1): 13-20.

and understanding on what is being presented, they would

[6]

be able to produce relevant comments regarding the design

Treichler, D. (1992). Projected instructional media: The

good the bad and the ugly. Annual ASEE confer, Toledo, OH.

proposal presented. Design experts to justify their design

[7]

decisions or even produce any necessary modifications to

Patel, N. K., S. P. Campion, Terrance, F. (2002).

Evaluating the use of Virtual Reality as a tool for briefing clients

the design proposal may use these comments.

in

architecture. Information visualization,

London, IEEE

computer society.

6 Further work

[8]

To further validate the results presented, a more

Lawson, S. M. L. B. (1997). "Computers, words and

pictures." Design studies 18: 171-183.

comprehensive evaluation including larger participant
[9]

groups relevant to each particular area studied would need
to be undertaken. A variety of building types would

and current uptake of VR." Construction Innovation 2: 3-13

suggest a variety of BEU experience and expertise, thus an



Whyte, J. and D. Bouchlaghem (2002). "Implementation of

VR systems: a comparison between the early adoption of CAD



Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

