Icon-based Visualization using Mosaic Metaphors

1

Thomas Nocke1 , Stefan Schlechtweg2 , Heidrun Schumann1
University of Rostock, {nocke, schumann}@informatik.uni-rostock.de
2
University of Magdeburg, stefans@isg.cs.uni-magdeburg.de
Germany
Abstract

This paper introduces a new approach to extend iconbased visualization methods by using a mosaic-based
paradigm. We discuss, how image metaphors closely related to the application domain can be applied for
icon-based representations. Therefore, we enhance visualizations by well-known Image Mosaic techniques,
such as image layouts, image selection and color adaption. Furthermore, we present the results of our approach
by discussing an example of a clustered real-world climate data set.
Keywords Icon-based Visualization, Mosaic-based Rendering, Climate Impact Research, Visualization Metaphors

1. Introduction
The visualization of large multi-variate data sets is still
a challenging task, especially when we consider the exploration of a variety of attributes in one representation. Many
techniques have been developed to visualize such multivariate data sets (cf. [5] for an overview):
• pixel-oriented techniques represent each data value as
a single pixel on the screen,
• geometric projection techniques map the ndimensional information space to “interesting”
subspaces,
• icon-based techniques display small icons representing the attribute values of the data records, and
• hierarchical and graph-based techniques display the information space as a hierarchy or a graph.
In this paper we will focus on presenting multi-variate data
on maps. In this context icons are a frequently used approach. One advantage of such icons is that they combine all
data values of a given data set in one primitive and, thus, enable users to recognize multi-variate correlations. However,
the perceptibility of such icons quickly decreases with the
number of variables being displayed. To increase the intuitive recognition of such icons, easy perceptible metaphors
such as Chernoff faces [2] and Infobugs [3] can be applied.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Techniques visualizing information using intuitive metaphors have been developed for different ﬁelds. The InfoCanvas system [11] enables users to interactively select and
place metaphors on an image. In [10] the simple and expressive image metaphor of “money trees” for stock data
has been introduced, to give just two examples.
Especially in the domain of cartography metaphors or
symbols are widely used to support the effective recognition of general information. The question we want to answer is whether metaphors can be used to communicate numerical, multi-variate data as well. In other words: Can we
replace abstract icons by metaphor-based icons?
When placing such metaphor-based icons on maps, several problems similar to the generation of Image Mosaics
have to be solved. In this paper we discuss how algorithms
that create such Image Mosaics can be applied to enhance
icon-based visualizations on maps.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the background. Afterwards, we discuss our approach
to mosaic-based visualization (Sec. 3). Furthermore, we describe and discuss the results of our approach on a data set
from the climate impact research background (Sec. 4). Finally, we conclude with a short discussion and outline future work (Sec. 5).

2. Background
In this section, we ﬁrst outline basics of icon-based visualization techniques, afterwards discuss the background of
Image Mosaics and, ﬁnally, describe the background of the
data set to which we have applied our approach.

2.1. Icon-based visualization techniques
Icon-based visualization techniques have been proven to
be effective for the visualization of multi-variate data. They
map data variables onto geometric (e.g., shape, size, orientation) and non-geometric (e.g., color and texture) visual attributes (cf. [14]). There are two general modi operandi:
1. techniques generating individually recognizable icons,
and

2. icon-based techniques generating textures.
Well-known examples for the ﬁrst class are StarGlyphs [13] and Autoglyphs [1]. Both enable users to
identify and compare certain data values. With a rising number of concurrently displayed icons, texture-based
techniques from the second class are more expressive (e.g.,
Stick-Figure-Icons [9] and Color-Icons [6]). They support the identiﬁcation of general trends and clusters in the
data.
The design of suitable icons is a sensitive process. Special editors have been developed to interactively construct
such icons. However, metaphor-based icons to visualize
multi-variate data are – with the exception of Chernoff
faces [2] – rather uncommon.

We want to discuss this strategy considering as example a
concrete application scenario.

2.3. Application: a maize harvest data set
A challenge for climate researchers is to develop methods that support the evaluation of climate model results
and to reproduce extreme conditions. Important instruments
in this context are cluster analysis and visualization techniques (see [8]). Here especially, the visual exploration of
the multi-variate features of spatially-scattered clusters can
beneﬁt from Image Mosaic algorithms.

2.2. Image Mosaics
Image Mosaics have become very popular in the last few
years as a form of art, which is used for advertisements,
posters, etc. An Image Mosaic is created from other smaller
images which together portray a larger subject. An input
image is to be replaced by an output image which is constructed from several “tiles” of a size larger than a pixel and
which match the tonal values of the input image (cf. [4, 7]).
The creation of an Image Mosaic requires the following four
major steps:
1. choose images which are to be used as mosaic tiles,
2. choose a tiling grid,
3. ﬁnd an arrangement for the mosaic tiles in the grid,
4. possibly perform a color correction on the tiles to
match the target image
The most interesting feature of Image Mosaics that will be
used in the context of this paper is that they include two different levels of detail in one image. First, you get a global
view on the portrayed subject by looking at the mosaic as
a whole. Second, the individual tiles show small details depending on the selection of the tile. Typically, the tiles are
selected in such a way that they portray something that is
connected to the subject which is shown in the mosaic.
If we compare this to icon-based visualization techniques, the icons representing the data can be regarded as
the image tiles and the display of the whole data set as the
mosaic itself. The challenges are now similar to the four
steps described above:
1. ﬁnd iconic representations of the individual data items,
2. ﬁnd a layout for the icons depending on the underlaying data set or chose a layout,
3. place the icons according to the chosen layout,
4. possibly perform a color correction to fulﬁll the goals
regarding a global overview of the data.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 1. Visualization of clusters representing the risk of a drought for maize cultivation during the year 1983 in the semi-arid
Northeast of Brazil based on regional climate
model results.
The data set that we will be using as example throughout
the paper represents a severe drought that occurred during
the year 1983 in the semi-arid northeast of Brazil. To generate the data set, idealized criteria, identiﬁed by climate researchers, were assumed based on certain total precipitation
thresholds. Doing so, it is possible to characterize the risk of
potential total yield loss for maize as one of the major agricultural crops of this region. These criteria have been used
to derive six parameters expressing the positive differences
between the individual precipitation thresholds and the actual rainfall. For these, a cluster analysis on the 865 measurement stations has been performed (see Fig. 1).
In this ﬁgure, similar observation stations – referring to
the mentioned parameters – are aggregated into the same
cluster, whereas dissimilar stations belong to different clusters. Unfortunately, such an image of circles representing
the cluster ID of each observation station does not allow to
get an overall overview about cluster features as well as to

explore all the parameters constituting the cluster in one image. To achieve a better expressiveness and effectiveness of
the image, the following tasks have to be supported:
1. the cognition of general cluster information, e.g., the
identiﬁcation of extreme cultivation conditions,
2. the exploration of individual parameters and of parameter dependencies, and
3. the identiﬁcation and localization of measurement stations.
This can be achieved using metaphor-based icons.

is to draw six of these maize cobs (one for each parameter).
Unfortunately, due to the requirement that the small images
should remain identiﬁable to retain their metaphoric meaning, the resulting rectangular icon gets quite large, producing overlapping problems in regions with high point density.
Thus, we subdivide the maize cob image into six regions,
and construct the resulting image for a parameter combination based on six image parts of Fig. 2. For instance, high
values of parameter p1 lead to a thick, yellow head on the
left cob side. Fig. 3 illustrates this procedure. Doing so, we
avoid to enlarge the image and the user gets all information at a glance.

3. An approach for mosaic image visualization
In the following we want to discuss, how the tasks from
Section 2.3 can be supported using the Image Mosaic approach outlined in Section 2.2. The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd an
adequate iconic metaphor for the individual measurement
stations.

3.1. Designing the mosaic pattern
The data set consists of six parameters and a cluster ID
at each 2D position, altogether seven values. Since the cluster ID is of more general character and of higher importance
for a general overview, we need to encode it separately.
Considering the meaning of the parameters in an agricultural context, a metaphor based on a simpliﬁed maize cob
is very straightforward and intuitive (see Fig. 2). Low risks
for the maize harvest are represented by a thick, yellow cob
(Fig. 2 left), whereas high risks are represented by a thin,
brown cob. Other image metaphors, for instance, displaying clouds, plants and the sun are imaginable. We have decided against it, since the maize cob is well-perceptible even
in an image with a high number of measurement stations.

Figure 3. Construction of a metaphor-based
icon, representing six parameters

Furthermore, using a certain background color, these
icons simply allow to encode the cluster membership as
well (see Fig. 4). Doing so, the resulting mosaic image gets
a well-perceptible “coat of paint”, that encodes this important information.

Figure 2. The three base icons displaying
maize conditions: good (left), middle (center)
and bad (right) conditions
The metaphoric images from Fig. 2 can be arranged and
chosen analogous to mosaic images, yellow cobs in “good”
regions and brown cobs for “bad” regions. However, keeping in mind that we want to analyze six parameters, we need
to extend this simple metaphor. A straightforward approach

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 4. Metaphor-based icon representing
six parameters with the background color
identifying the cluster

3.2. The layout problem
After the mosaic tiles have been designed we have to ﬁnd
a layout for the tiles and place them according to the chosen layout (steps 2 and 3 from Section 2.2). Three basic grid
layout types have been introduced [12]:
• scattered layouts,
• regular layouts and
• multi-resolution layouts.
Fig. 5 illustrates these layout types. Each of them has certain advantages and disadvantages for the visualization of
our data set.
The scattered layout for Image Mosaics is a random process, in general used as an artistic feature. This procedure
is – in general – not suitable for a visualization of numerical data, since the tile images (or icons) in visual representations – in contrast to mosaic images – can not be placed
to arbitrary positions. In the visualization context we need
to keep the important relation between the visual representation of the measured data and the position of the measurement stations. Based on these considerations, there are two
possible scattered layout mechanisms:
• using a straightforward layout placing icons of constant size at the position of the measurement stations,
and
• placing icons into given or calculated (e.g., by a
Voronoi tesselation) regions, adjusting their position and size according to the region’s extent.
We use the ﬁrst mechanism, placing images at the measurement station positions only (see Fig. 5 left). One advantage
of this layout is that it directly represents the underlying distribution of 2D locations and avoids possibly misleading interpretations. A disadvantage, however, is the possible overlapping of icons in regions with high station density.
To overcome this drawback, regular and multi-resolution
layouts can be applied. Regular layouts (Fig. 5 center) show
in each grid cell an aggregated information over all measurement stations (see Sec. 3.3). Three kinds of regular mosaic layouts are commonly used:
• rectangular grid (standard regular grid),
• hexagonal grid, and
• brick wall layout.
For visualization purposes rectangular as well as hexagonal
grids are suitable for different icon shapes. However, a brick
wall layout is a more artistic instrument and seems to bring
no new beneﬁt for the visualization. We use the rectangular
grid, which is especially suited for the rectangular icon we
have designed. Moreover, we have applied a region merging of neighboring grid cells with the same (mean) cluster

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

to larger blocks (2 × 2, 3 × 3, . . . ), and display these regions with a larger icon. This allows to identify large homogeneous regions quickly.
A regular grid layout enables users to get a quick
overview of the data set and to explore the overall distribution of values and clusters. A drawback of such layouts
is that the original parameter and cluster values are aggregated and, hence, no longer explicitly visible. As a solution to this problem, the grid resolution can be changed
in a detail-on-demand manner. A low grid resolution supports a fast overview of distributions in the data with large
mosaic icons, and a high grid resolution allows to get details of certain regions if required with smaller icons. Furthermore, to keep an overview of the point distribution
in a certain region, small dots representing the measurement stations can be faded in (see Fig. 6).
As a third layout technique, a multi-resolution layout
(see Fig. 5 right) can be applied. Here, icons are placed in
a region, if there is exactly one cluster in this region. If not,
the region is subdivided. Then, parameter values of similar
stations only from the same cluster are aggregated and, thus,
we avoid to merge regions with inhomogeneous properties.
We used a quadtree-based multi-resolution algorithm.
This layout allows to gain a deeper insight into local
cluster distributions, keeping all clusters visible. Now the
question is how to visualize the metaphor-based icons in
grid cells with varying sizes. On the one hand, the icons can
be visualized in constant size independently of the grid cell
size. On the other hand, the icon size can be scaled to the
available space of the grid cell. The decision between these
possibilities is background dependent. For instance, if large
homogeneous regions should be perceived quickly, the second technique is appropriate (see Fig. 5 right).
A quadtree bases on a successive subdivision of rectangles and, by doing so, approximates the underlying regions.
Actually, region boundaries have irregular shape. Thus, the
quadtree subdivision can cause the extension of icons into
“undeﬁned” regions. To avoid drawing mosaic tiles into
these regions (in this case to the Atlantic ocean (Fig. 5
right)), clipping has to be integrated into the quadtree traversal algorithm. Altogether, a quadtree-based multi-resolution
layout strongly adulterates the region boundaries (Fig. 5
right), whereas a scattered layout only minimally changes
the region shape representation (Fig. 5 left).

3.3. Icon placement
After the layout step has been performed we have to decide which icons to place on the map (step 3 from Section 2.2). This decision is strongly layout-dependent, especially owing to different region merging strategies (see
Sec. 3.2).
In the case of a scattered layout, we simply construct the
icons based on the individual station parameter values. If,

Figure 5. Three layout types of Image Mosaics: scattered(left), regular (center) and quadtree-based
multi-resolution (right) layout

3.4. Color correction

Figure 6. Mosaic image in regular layout with
stations faded in (red dots)
on the other hand, the icon should represent a region possibly consisting of more than one station, the user can decide
which icon to display:
• a “typical” station in the region,

Finally, we have to parameterize the metaphoric icons,
ﬁrst of all applying a color correction (step 4 from Section 2.2).
First of all, a general consideration: when designing the
icons (see Sec. 3.1) we have chosen colors for the parameter categories for each of the six icon parts. This process can
be seen as a kind of color correction with only three colors.
To generalize this process, any number of categories and referring image parts can be produced using a color interpolation of the “key images” (in the sense of color correction).
Since we – in addition to the colors – use different shapes,
we have to interpolate the shapes as well. Further research
needs to be done to evaluate if – in dependency of the applied metaphors – interpolation of colors and shapes is a
suitable procedure.
A further kind of color correction for the metaphoric
icon is the adaption of the background color representing
the cluster membership. For the maize icon, two modi support different exploration tasks. To explore spatial cluster
distributions, the background of the icon can be completely
ﬁlled out. On the other hand, the cluster membership can
be mapped to the surrounding rectangle border colors only,
keeping the rest of the background transparent. This allows
to correlate the parameter values with other features on the
map, e.g. a height ﬁeld or other geographic information.

• an icon based on the mean values for all the stations in
the region,

4. Implementation and results

• a cluster representative of the
– most common cluster (for a regular layout), or
– only cluster (for a multi-resolution layout)
in the region.

The presented techniques have been implemented in a
prototypical system with a variety of interaction possibilities. The modular system can be easily adapted to other 2D
clustered multi-variate data sets and other image metaphors.
Fig. 7 shows the GUI of the system.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 7. The mosaic framework: Image Mosaic map (left) and parameter control and legends (right);
a certain measurement station and all the stations of the same cluster have been selected
The user interface consists of a visualization window
(Fig. 7 left), and a GUI area showing legends and parameters (Fig. 7 right). To obtain detailed information about clusters and their properties, a zoomed icon displays the currently selected cluster and its mean values in the top left
part of the GUI area. To gain details about measurement
stations, the zoomed icon for the currently selected measurement station is drawn below. Alongside to these two
icons, the legend for the cluster colors is presented. On the
left hand side of this legend the user can change the cluster “model” and, thus, can compare various clusterings calculated for the data set. This allows a statistical evaluation
of the deployed proximity measures and cluster algorithms.
Below the icon for the currently selected station, the numerical values of the selected cluster’s mean parameters and
the selected station parameters are represented. Additionally – to enable users to evaluate the homogeneity of a certain cluster – the differences are displayed using white-blue
color coding.
The image icon was designed on the base of thresholds
distinguishing between good and bad maize harvest conditions. These thresholds can be interactively adapted and,
thus, trigger the mosaic tiles on the map. The base image
icons for good and bad conditions (Fig. 2) are depicted
on the right hand side of the numerical values of the cur-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

rently selected measurement stations and the currently selected cluster and their differences, below the cluster color
legend.
Moreover, a wide variety of other parameters can be set.
This includes grid size, icon size, background color, layout style, icon calculation and others. Furthermore, to reproduce successful parameterizations, a certain parameter
combination can be stored and reloaded.
Altogether, we developed a system for metaphor-based
Image Mosaics that supports a variety of exploration tasks
(see tasks from 2.3). First, general cluster information can
be easily perceived. Especially the multi-resolution layout
gives a fast overview of local cluster distributions, not merging clusters together (see Fig. 5 right). Extreme conditions
and the referring clusters can be easily recognized. Second,
individual parameters, their spatial distributions and their
dependencies can be easily explored. In this context, the
regular layout (see Fig. 5 center and Fig. 6) is suited to get a
fast overview of the spatial distribution of the parameter values. In the costal regions and in the south eastern parts, very
good conditions for the maize harvest are predicted. On the
other hand, in a large area from the north-west to the southeast, the risk for a potential total yield loss is high. Third,
to identify and explore individual measurement stations together with their clusters, the scattered layout is especially

suited (see Fig. 5 left and Fig. 7). The user can interactively
focus on a certain measurement station, study its parameter values and compare it with the cluster mean values and
with other measurement stations of this cluster.
In ﬁrst tests, climate researchers received new insights
into the data set that could not be achieved by earlier techniques (see Fig. 1). For instance, the mentioned spatial distribution of regions with high risk of a drought for maize
cultivation can be separated very well from areas with a low
risk, and the single risk causes (represented by the parameters) can be identiﬁed and compared directly. Thus, climate
researchers feel that our approach has high potential for the
estimation of extreme climate conditions in general. A further achievement is that the approach supports to acquire
information at all levels of detail, from an overview of the
whole data set (using a regular layout), via regional distributions (e.g., using multi-resolution layouts) to detailed information about station parameters and cluster properties.
“Typical” stations, regions and clusters as well as outliers
can be examined.

5. Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we have investigated the applicability of
mosaic-based methods to enhance icon-based visualizations. Based on the example of a practical agricultural data
set, we introduced a new image metaphor and discussed
how methods well-known from Image Mosaics, such as image layouts and color adaption, can be used for visualization
purposes. Based on these considerations, we described our
modular mosaic-based visualization system and presented
ﬁrst results for the application background.
Finally, further research has to be done to explore the
application, interpretation and reusability of our approach.
First tests with users gave promising insights, however, we
have to further test the system with other data sets and suitable metaphors. Especially, this includes to compare the usability of metaphors with non-metaphoric icon techniques.
Moreover, we want to extend spatial cluster exploration.
This includes to enable users to compare two clusterings in
one image and to visualize cluster variances in addition to
the currently displayed mean values. Furthermore, we plan
to apply focus+context techniques in our framework and to
evaluate their use to metaphoric icons on maps.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Mario Baalcke for implementing the
Mosaic Visualization System. Furthermore, we thank our
partners Uwe B¨ohm and Michael Flechsig from the Potsdam Institute of Climate Impact Research for providing the
data set and for helpful discussions regarding its mosaicbased visualization.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

References
[1] J. Beddow. Shape Coding of Multidimensional Data on a Microcomputer Display. In Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization conference, pages 238–246, 1990.
[2] H. Chernoff. The Use of Faces to Represent Points in kDimensional Space Graphically. Journal of American Statistical Association, 68:361–368, 1973.
[3] M. C. Chuah and S. G. Eick. Information Rich Glyphs for
Software Management Data. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 18(4):24–29, July/August 1998.
[4] Adam Finkelstein and Marisa Range. Image mosaics. Technical Report TR-574-98, Princeton University, Computer
Science Department, March 1998.
[5] D. A. Keim and H.-P. Kriegel. Visualization Techniques for
Mining Large Databases: A Comparison. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 8(6):923–938,
December 1996.
[6] H. Levkowitz. Color Icons: Merging Color and Texture Perception for Integrated Visualization of Multiple Parameters.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization conference, pages
164–170. IEEE Press, 1991.
[7] T. McKenna and G. R. Arce. New image mosaic structures.
Technical report, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Delaware, 2000.
[8] T. Nocke, H. Schumann, and U. Boehm. Methods for the Visualization of Clustered Climate Data. Computational Statistics, 19(1):75–94, 2004.
[9] R.M. Pickett and G. G. Grinstein. Iconographics Displays for
Visualizing Multidimensional Data. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, pages
514–519, 1988.
[10] X. Shen and P. Eades. Using MoneyTree to Represent Financial Data. In Proceedings of IEEE Information Visualization,
IV’04, London, pages 285–289, 2004.
[11] J. Stasko, T. Miller, C. Plaue, Z. Pousman, and O. Ullah. Personalized Peripheral Information Awareness through Information Art. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Ubiquitous Computing, pages 18–35, September 2004.
[12] T. Strothotte and S. Schlechtweg. Non-Photorealistic Computer Graphics: Modeling, Rendering, and Animation. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002.
[13] M.O. Ward. XmdvTool: Integrating Multiple Methods for
Visualizing Multivariate Data. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization conference, pages 326–333, 1994.
[14] M.O. Ward. A taxonomy of glyph placement strategies for
multidimensional data visualization. Palgrave Information
Visualization, 1:194–210, 2002.

