NS-Narrative and Film Rhetoric Composition System
KANAI Akihito, MOROHOSHI Chie
HOSEI University, Asagaya College of Art & Design
kanai@mt.tama.hosei.ac.jp, ns narrative@yahoo.co.jp
Abstract

system.

Using a cognitive and computational model, we classify
the rhetoric of the moving image. We especially focus on
intensive Non-Story type rhetoric and call the rhetoric NSNarrative. Then, we use the classiﬁcation to compose NSNarrative by a computer system. We propose ﬁlm rhetoric
composition system (FRCS) for NS-Narrative and present
moving images composed by the system.
Keywords— Non-Story, Narrative,
Rhetoric Composition System

1

Cognition,

Film

Introduction

Narrative has both story and non-story aspects. We deﬁne a story as all implicit or explicit events in a narrative. A ﬁlm usually has a rhetoric that tells a story to conform to the viewer’s internal constraint to the story comprehending. The process of the viewer coming to understand the story, which is purpose of story type rhetoric, has
certain cognitive effects. For example, the experiences of
the ﬁlm’s characters may lead to some affective response.
However, the other cognitive effects may arise in the case
of “Non-Story (NS) type rhetoric” by resetting of viewers’ viewpoints. A narrative based on NS-type rhetoric can
make situations “unfamiliar” to the viewer. The unfamiliar
situations cause new cognitive effects relate to unknown
memories and affects which does not arise through comprehending the story. We focus on the situations. Based
on the non-centric computer program and pinhole camera,
images and sounds of old ﬁlms’ memories, and new images and sounds can be clashed. Those clashes can make
intensive cognitive effects.
We especially focus on intensive NS-type rhetoric and
call the rhetoric NS-Narrative. In this work, using a cognitive and computational model, we classify the rhetoric
of the moving image. The rhetoric of the moving image
means combination of techniques based on a sender’s purpose of cognitive effects. Then, we use the classiﬁcation
to compose NS-Narrative by a computer system. Kanai
and Ogata (2004) had proposed ﬁlm rhetoric composition
system (FRCS) [5]. In this paper, we propose FRCS for
NS-Narrative and present moving images composed by the

2

NS-type Rhetoric and Cognition

One purpose of NS-type rhetoric is to create a pure audiovisual situation. Another purpose is to make the story
contents appear unclear and to emphasize the subtle element, such as individual shots. Then, editing and photography themselves become important. This case is not studied in cognitive science and AI, sufﬁciently. Intensity and
quality of viewer’s cognitive effects differs from the types
of rhetoric. So, differentiate S- and NS-type rhetoric is important in the research of ﬁlm cognition and composition.
To cause an intensive cognitive effects using NS-type
rhetoric, such as moving images used for advertisement,
video art, art ﬁlm, music video, and so on, discontinuity
of events must be emphasized in the rhetoric. In this case,
a viewer sometimes can not understand consistent story.
So, attention to the rhetoric itself is enhanced. Experimental results based on the cognitive and computational model
show that to relate to NS-type rhetoric, a viewer must relax his/her internal constraint of needing to understand a
story and set his/her viewpoint regarding the rhetoric independent of the story [2], [3]. The constraint of requiring
a story is in effect when a ﬁlm is viewed and people often
relate to a ﬁlm only within the terms of this constraint. Yet
the ﬁlm has many possibilities other than telling the story
such as making the association of the objects and the atmosphere, ﬁnding new nature of the rhetoric itself and so
on.
Relaxing the constraint of requiring the story must be
considered, because it allows moving image’s nature other
than telling the story to be focused upon and causes intensive cognitive effects. The interaction between story
understanding and constraint relaxation is one of the most
important aspects on moving image. FRCS can approach
the interaction. FRCS can generate different types of the
rhetoric from the same story or database of shots according to a strategy for intensity of cognitive effects.
In NS-type rhetoric, the editing, recording, and photography are not always subordinate to the overall story. The
focus of NS-type rhetoric is on the ﬁlm’s associations of
the objects and mood rather than on the events of a story.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Such associations cause cognitive effects that do not arise
in the process of comprehending a story. In this paper,
we call the rhetoric based on the strong associations NSNarrative.

3

How To Make NS-Type Rhetoric

Generally, moving image creation is done by the sender
choosing the type of rhetoric that ﬁts his/her strategy, either
S- or NS-type. FRCS can generate either rhetoric from
the source video. In making the system, we focused on
the continuity and discontinuity, rational and irrational relationships in the rhetoric of the moving image. FRCS can
make moving images by using one or more NS- and Stype rhetoric approaches through which the user can see
all the possibilities of rhetoric creation. Continuity is used
in many S-type rhetoric. For example, spatial continuity
ensures that a viewer can understand the characters’ relative locations even when they are not in the same frame [1].
Continuity can be created by putting identical elements in
continuous shots. FRCS uses approaches for making stories based on continuity and rational relationships by which
the system can make S-type rhetoric. In contrast, discontinuity or irrational relationship must be emphasized to make
NS-type rhetoric [4]. Here, the viewer sometimes cannot
comprehend a consistent story from the images. Consequently, attention to the rhetoric itself is enhanced.
NS-type rhetoric can be created based on the three relationships below, in the rhetoric of the moving image [6].
Approach 1) Relationship between rhetorical elements
of two shots
Approach 2) Relationship between one event and image
Approach 3) Relationship between sound and image
NS-type rhetoric may also have different kinds of continuity, such as actor, object, sound, or tone of photography.
The interplay between continuity and discontinuity is important. In NS-type rhetoric, one or more of the above discontinuity or irrational approaches may be used to cause
cognitive effects through the audiovisual situation itself.
FRCS for NS-Narrative uses the approaches.

4

For example, from database of pinhole camera’s shots,
we made NS-Narrative work 1 by the system. In NSNarrative work 1, background tone by pinhole camera is
not changed, but foreground object is changed. In the outputted ﬁlm, the discontinuity is created based on relationship between rhetorical elements such as foreground object
of two shots and can cause intensive cognitive effects to
viewers. Moreover, in NS-Narrative work 1, irrational relationship between sound and image is also used. Because
we used the non-centric computer program and pinhole
camera, situations “unfamiliar” to the viewer is emerged.
The situation, NS-Narrative, can cause intensive cognitive
effects.

Conclusions
By using the non-centric computer program and pinhole
camera for NS-type rhetoric, situations “unfamiliar” to the
viewer, NS-Narrative, can be emerged. Because the focus
of composed NS-type rhetoric is on the ﬁlm’s associations
of the objects and mood rather than on the events of a story,
the associations can cause intensive cognitive effects that
do not arise in the process of comprehending a story. Using
the system, we will continue looking for, shooting, editing,
and composing the narrative without story, NS-Narrative.

References

FRCS for NS-Narrative

FRCS for NS-Narrative includes three parts.
1) Mechanism of retrieval of shots from rhetorical techniques
2) Data base of pinhole camera’s shots
3) Mechanism of combination of shots
The user can decide which approaches to use for making discontinuities. The system then retrieves the shots
from the database that ﬁt the chosen strategy. The shots
are edited as a sequence of shots and outputted. By using
this computational approach, we could make many different ﬁlms from the same shots, moving images or stories,
and study the nature of NS-type rhetoric.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[1] Bordwell, D. and Thompson, K. Film Art: an Introduction, Fifth Edition. 1997.
[2] Kanai, A. The Story as a Constraint on Film. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Cognitive Science, 503–506, 2001.
[3] Kanai, A. Film Rhetoric and Cognition. In Proceedings of the 17th Congress of the International Association of Empirical Aesthetics, 209-212, 2002.
[4] Kanai, A., Ogata, T., and Shinohara, K. Film Rhetoric
Generation System for Intensive Cognitive Effects. In
Proceedings of 2002 IEEE International Conference
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, MP2H3, 2002.
[5] Kanai, A., and Ogata, T. Aspect of Non-Story Processing and Film Rhetoric Composition in the Narrative Generation Mechanism. In Proceedings of The
Ninth International Symposium on Artiﬁcial Life
And Robotics (AROB 9th ’04), 162-165, 2004.
[6] Kanai, A., and Ogata, T Non-Story Processing on the
Film Rhetoric Compotion System. In Proceedings of
the 18th Congress of the International Association of
Empirical Aesthetics, 433-436, 2004.

