The VEPS Project: Planning Information Visualisation
Nada Bates-Brkljac, Dr. Stefanie Dühr, John Counsell
University of the West of England, Bristol
{Nada.Brkljac@uwe.ac.uk , Stefanie.Duhr@uwe.ac.uk , John.Counsell@uwe.ac.uk}
Abstract
Information visualisation remains at the heart of the
planning system. Yet the use of the WWW for planning
purposes is a new and expanding area of research. A
focus on planning procedures at different stages helps to
recognise the difficulties inherent in planning,
particularly the outcome of changes to the built
environment and the importance of people’s involvement
in the process. Effective tools are required for citizen
based participation and development of alternative
proposals.
This paper describes the basis for the coming three
years of research in the 'Virtual Environmental Planning
System' (VEPS) project. VEPS proposes an open
standard web approach to enable citizens to view,
analyse, interact with and respond to proposed changes,
to comment and test their own alternative solutions. This
approach, it is argued, needs to be based on an
interactive three-dimensional virtual reality visualisation
that allows the viewer to experience complex information
without need for training.
Keywords- Spatial Information, World Wide Web,
3D VRML,GIS

1.

Introduction

Environmental planning is a diverse, complex and
sensitive process that requires technical, economic,
aesthetic and social considerations. These issues are in
turn wide-ranging: ‘technical’ includes urban function
and form; ‘economic’ addresses cost and benefit;
‘aesthetic’ relates to both appearance and experience;
and ‘social’ involves allocation and provision. The
planning process can be defined as: seeking advice;
appraising the site; consulting the public and experts;
briefing; developing technically acceptable proposals;
negotiating; applying for and gaining legal consent and
public acceptance. They all contribute to both “efficient
process and an improved product”[1]. A focus on
planning procedures at different stages helps to recognise
many of the difficulties inherent in planning; the
problems of site and context; the need to compromise;
the difficulties of communicating planning proposals and
the effects of changes; as well as the importance of
people’s involvement in the process. The process is
costly and so at any late stage difficult to deflect. One of
the areas that gives rise to significant public

dissatisfaction and feelings of dis-empowerment is that
of environmental planning. While the mechanisms differ
from state to state in Europe [2], the problems as
perceived by the public are often the same, including
lack of meaningful consultation resulting in lack of
influence over developments and changes, particularly
those affecting the home and its immediate environment.
These concerns have yet to be addressed by EC
harmonisation and initiatives, such as: E-Europe 2005;
and INSPIRE.
Yet, it is becoming increasingly important to
European democratic governments to increase public
participation. Government bodies at various levels
(national, regional, and city) are now turning their
attention to web based approaches to easing access and
empowering public involvement and debate on the
issues. Individual citizens are unlikely to gain influence
in the environmental planning process unless they
adequately address the issues, and present positive
alternative proposals. Effective tools are required for
citizen to examine and analyse the proposals of others
and to gain understanding and develop alternative
proposals. It is argued in this paper that replication of
existing plan and cartographic-based approaches to
planning on the web will tend to perpetuate the
requirement for trained interpretation, thereby
contributing to the exclusion of the general public from
participation.
This paper describes the basis for the coming three
years of research in the Virtual Environmental Planning
System (VEPS) project. VEPS proposes a new open
standard web approach to enable citizens to: view;
analyse, interact with and respond to proposed changes;
collaborate and comment together; and pose and test
their own alternative solutions. It is argued that this
needs to be based on an interactive three-dimensional
virtual reality (VR) visualisation that allows the viewer
to experience highly complex information without
needing explicit training in reading plans or maps. To
increase participation it is considered essential that it be
free at the point of use, so it will make use of the web
and open source tools. It is intended to test this system in
different demonstration case studies. The project is thus
expected to improve future public participation
procedures on planning strategies and development
proposals by making planning information more
accessible and easier to understand for the general

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

public, while at the same time facilitating the decisionmaking structures of planning authorities.

2.

The planning process in Europe

In the UK, for example, guidance on planning policy
and process can be found in various places in the Central
Government Planning Policy Statements (PPS) to
planning authorities. However these are at times
conflicting thereby permitting latitude to developers and
professionals, to the greater confusion of the public. PPS
1 on 'Delivering Sustainable Development' [3]
emphasises the importance of proper presentation of
planning applications and PPS12 on Local Development
Frameworks [4] draws attention to the importance of
local participation and the need for local authorities to
prepare detailed plans and drawings which show the
proposed development in its setting. Yet according to a
statistical analysis, coverage of these issues was until
recently still generally sporadic; and presentation of
applications, environmental impact analysis and site
analysis were only referred to in a fifth of the plans in the
UK [1].
The UK Central Government has now started
actively to seek ways to improve both the planning
process in general and public participation in that
process, through its recent e-Planning Blueprint,
published in August 2004 [5]. Initiatives since launched
include the national PARSOL (Planning and Regulatory
Services Online) project, a range of ‘Pathfinder’ projects
and the Implementing e-Government (IeG) initiative.
The main focus of these initiatives is to develop a set of
toolkits, standards and ‘demonstrator’ projects with the
aim of assisting planning authorities to implement ePlanning in forms that citizens will both comprehend and
use in their dealings with the councils. New online
planning portals are aimed at introducing partnership
working, bringing together planning, building control
and licensing services.
In comparison to the flexible and discretionary
planning system in the UK, German Städte und
Gemeinden (cities and municipalities) have a
constitutional right of self-government. Local land use
planning in Germany is largely about zoning and a
municipal responsibility, documented in preparatory and
subsequently binding land use plans. The cornerstone of
local land-use planning is the power to designate land for
specific uses (for example residential and commercial
use, public purposes), or to impose restrictions (for
example maximum dimensions of development including
number of storeys and roof structure). All municipalities
are required to have a Flächennutzungsplan, a zoning
plan that lays out in general terms the types of land use
prevailing or envisaged for the whole of the municipal
territory. Preparatory land-use plans are in most cases
drawn to a scale of 1:10,000, or occasionally 1:20,000,
and have to take into consideration the planning
objectives and principles at higher level as set out in the
respective Landesentwicklungsplan and Regional plans
[6]. Thus, although local authorities are solely

responsible for the preparation of their local land use
plans, the legal framework provides mechanisms that
ensure conformity between different levels of plans
('duty of compliance'). The second type of plan at local
level is the Bebauungsplan (B-Plan), a plan which
contains legally binding designations, drawn up to a
scale of 1:5,000 or 1:1,000, regarding the proposed
development and structure. [7].
A cartographic representation of the territory of the
municipality and the proposed land uses forms the
central part of both types of local land use plans in
Germany. Public participation requirements on plans at
local level and development proposals (which have to
comply with the regulations set out in the
Bebauungsplan) are clearly set out in the Baugesetzbuch.
For development proposals, these usually only extend to
third parties that would be directly affected by the
development. The most recent revision of the
Baugesetzbuch (2004) has made provision for public
participation requirements to be met through the use of
new media, such as online plans and proposals. This is a
major innovation for the German planning system, which
until recently has had strict requirements for twodimensional print versions of local level plans, and will
allow local authorities to make better use of other online
tools as well, such as three-dimensional models.

3.

The VEPS project approach

VEPS is a newly commenced Interreg IIIB funded
European project focused on the North West Europe
region [8]. The project brings together partners from the
UK, Germany and France, with skills in geographic
visualisation and spatial planning, led by the
Environment Agency for England and Wales. VEPS has
received additional support from the UK government as
a potential contribution to its e-Planning programme.

Figure 1. Landscape visualisation based on
LIDAR and CASI data by Environment Agency
for England and Wales
The project preliminary analysis suggested that there
are three viable approaches to public consultation and
engagement in the planning process. Firstly, the complex

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

information in a planning consultation may be “dumbed
down” to a level that can be understood by the average
member of the public without a qualification in planning.
Secondly, full information can be presented but the
citizen might need to receive training in order to
understand it, particularly because plans and maps
require training to read and interpret correctly because
for an 'untrained' user they often contain ambiguities.
Thirdly, (the proposed VEPS project approach) an
interactive three-dimensional (3D) virtual reality (VR)
visualisation would allow the viewer to experience the
highly complex information without the need for
training, because they can see and experience what the
visual impacts of the planned development will be in the
associated model. This approach is also supported by the
existing literature which claims that the use of 3D
visualisation is particularly powerful in visualising urban
and built environments as it gives the option to deliver
the relevant information in an intuitively comprehensive
form [9].
In this respect newly available highly accurate three
dimensional LIDAR data is becoming more widely
available. LIDAR stands for Light Detection and
Ranging and is a (usually) airborne mapping technique
which uses a laser to measure the distance between the
aircraft and the ground. LIDAR is a range imaging dataacquiring method, which is used, in conjunction with the
Global Positioning System (GPS), to deliver highresolution digital elevation models. There is a flash
movie that demonstrates the principles on the
Environment Agency Website 1.

Figure 2. LIDAR data coverage
A potential case study area near Bristol
This data can be sufficiently accurate for the precise
judgments demanded in planning to be made, and, as
image 1 shows, provides a digital context in which new
proposals can be viewed. The issue that is then posed is
how best to represent proposed changes in this
environment, so that they are credible - and the
judgments that may be made by non-technical people are
1

http://www.environmentagency.gov.uk/science/monitoring/131047/349529?lang
=_e&theme=&region=&subject=&searchfor=lidar

reliable - without making the proposals so photo-realistic
that they are 'read' as certain.
The VEPS project focuses on the master planning
stage where visualisation can assist in avoiding delays in
the planning process - here, the judgments required can
be made before a specific proposal has been formulated
and / or before an application for planning approval. The
project also proposes to develop means of enabling the
public to 'what-if', to modify proposals and to examine
the impact of their modifications, or to upload alternative
proposals. An underpinning Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) will assist analysis of the potential
impact. The benefits of GIS in this context is borne out
by current research in this field which states that "the
potential for extensive and alternative use will be directly
reflected where GIS will prove to be powerful” [10]. In
the VEPS project, an underpinning GIS technology will
be crucial throughout, from data acquisition to modeling
process, to enable on-demand responses and for
maintenance of the system.

4.

The role of environmental
visualisation in the planning process

Communication and visualisation are already at the
heart of the planning system. The rationale for
visualisation in environmental planning and design,
according to Langendorf [11] is based on three premises:
• To understand nearly any subject of consequence it is
necessary to consider it from multiple viewpoints, using
a variety of information;
• Understanding complex information about urban
planning and design may be greatly extended if the
information is visualised;
• Visualisation aids in communicating with others.
Traditionally, there is a strong relationship between
plans and cartographic representations, and the planning
discipline. Maps, plans, sketches, images or other
cartographic representations are (besides language)
important communication media for planning. According
to some researchers only these media are able to clearly
demonstrate visually the complexity of different
demands on space [12]. However, there has been little
consideration given to these aspects of 'mapping' in the
planning literature to date. Likewise, cartographic
science has failed to connect theory and research to the
real-world tasks of spatial planning, and the question of
how communication through 'planning maps’ could be
improved has been given little attention [7].
Over the last thirty years, many perception and
cognition studies have been undertaken in cartographical
science, and the effects of visual variables have been
investigated systematically [13] [14] [15]. However,
there is growing recognition amongst cartographers
worldwide that there will never be an all-embracing
theory of map reading or, of cartographic communication
in general. This is due to the fact that there are certain
variables which are difficult to control or even to identify
in the process, such as the map user’s skills and
capacities, and the purpose the map is used for in

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

different circumstances. Rase for example stated that ‘we
are not sure what really attracts the attention of the
reader, how the essence of the map is extracted, how the
content is stored in memory, or what makes a specific
map type superior to another one under certain
conditions’[16].
As a result, empirical research and the theories
proposed appear disjointed and unconnected. In the light
of a missing comprehensive theoretical framework, many
cartographers thus create maps and cartographic
illustrations following their knowledge and experience
rather than any ‘universal’ and comprehensible rules and
guidelines [6]. Cartography is thus often still applied as a
craft discipline rather than a science, and knowledge of
map acceptance and map perception is mostly based on
intuition, assumptions and personal experience, and to a
lesser extent on scientific evidence.
There is little previous work that explicitly addresses
the relationship between planning and cartography, and
the role and function of cartographic representations in
the planning process [7] [17]. The majority is published
in the “home-country language” focused on regional,
urban or local planning processes, and thus intended to
inform 'domestic' policy-making, rather than to provide a
basis for comparative research. Neuman for Spain,
Lussault for France, and Gabellini for Italy, for example,
have investigated the communicative potential of
visualisations in urban planning [18] [19] [20].
Söderström’s work has concentrated on understanding
how visualisations structure the activity of planners in a
Swiss town [21]. There is also some work on the
communicative potential and significance of architectural
drawings for architects themselves [22]. Overall,
however, it remains difficult to see how the interpretation
of plans and their cartographic symbols can be made
adequately transparent to the untrained user.

4.1 3D Computer Visualisation: limits and
opportunities
According to the research literature recent
moves towards computer generated visualisation models
reflect the acknowledgement that conventional
techniques fail to communicate environmental
information effectively and clearly [9]. In regard to
computer-generated visualisation, architecture, for
example, has been greatly influenced by computer
technologies such as computer-aided design (CAD)
software packages. In parallel GIS have been extensively
developed with urban planning as a major area of
application in most European countries. The sheer
diversity of computer technologies and the versatility of
their application has encouraged an interest in their use
for visualisation in planning. A UCLA (USA) group of
researchers Ligget, Jepson and Friedman have pioneered
exemplary information rich 3D modelling environments,
while other researchers such as Day at Bath University
have tested CAD generated computer visualisation of
urban environments [9]. Findings by a research group at
the Queensland University of Technology, Australia, led

by Buccolo, tested computer visualisation on the design
for the new town centre of Capalaba and the Brisbane
Airport [23]. This research group identified certain
advantages in the use of computer visualisation when
compared to the traditional static tool, such as a better
comprehension of the depicted scene, way-finding and
evaluating physical change but they suggested that more
systematic research would need to be carried out to prove
the reliability and validity of new technologies and tools.
Similarly Mahmoud confirmed this conclusion and
extended it by proposing more experimental research to
be conducted to investigate the benefits of these methods
for the potential users [24].

5.

Computer visualisation as support
for participation in planning

At present there is a wide range of three-dimensional
digital urban models and visualisation methods used to
support the planning decision-making process. The
importance of visualisation is being recognised as crucial
for almost all environmental and planning professionals
who need to represent, communicate and evaluate design
ideas and planning proposals [25]. According to
Sawczuk “the design and planning process revolves
around client’s needs and therefore the client should be
part of the team…”[26]. The findings of some current
research have revealed that while skilled participants
appreciate traditional media, such as drawings, unskilled
participants prefer photorealistic presentations. Similarly,
it was reported that when lay-people were exposed to
architects’ drawings “plans had little meaning as the
people could not understand what was represented” [27].
The use of the web for planning purposes is a new
and expanding area of research. More precisely, one area
that is receiving a great deal of attention lately is the
visualisation of urban forms and landscapes. As the
Internet has become accessible and faster, an increasing
number of applications are being tested and developed in
encouraging public participation in planning process.
Research shows that these new tools have improved the
communication process [28] and that 3D forms of
representation “made the plan understandable” [29].
Daniel and Meitner cite several experimental studies that
have demonstrated the power of visualisations “to affect
attention, to alter interpretations of complex concepts
and differentially to arouse positive and/or negative
emotions” [30]. Although researchers' views vary on the
appropriate use and place of visualisation in the planning
process, all agree that communicating design can be
more effective and improved if computer generated
visualisation is used as the means. Pietch states that with
“increasing participation of non-design professionals
such as elected council members and members of the
public, the demand is there for a better communication
medium than conventional 2D drawings” [31].
In the VEPS project, the purpose of visualisation is
to assist users to make decisions together about proposals
for change, using a digital environment that represents
the proposals. It is regarded as critical that they then

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

endorse those early decisions when they are confronted
by the final built outcome. Hence to start with, for this
research, visualisations will be created and published
using existing commercial and / or open standard file
formats, such as VRML; to create a web based virtual
reality that users can freely explore. This is intended to
lead to user engagement in the research process and to
user driven optimisation of the final system. The final
system would be expected to fall into the category of
those systems with 'full analytical features' [32]. It is
hoped that this will indicate improvements in the way in
which users participate in the planning process and
decision-making.
Little research has been undertaken to date that
addresses these issues. Some research does, however,
suggest that three-dimensional and interactive computer
visualisation (based on using 3D VRML in research into
community based 'planning for real') is one of the “most
important developments in visual communication for
urban planning and urban design since the development
plan” [33] [34]. That research also indicated that the
significance of this type of environmental visualisation
over others, such as cartographic means, when used in
the early stage of the planning process, is measurable by
the extent to which it provides an adequate level of
detail. However, one of the main questions on the use of
3D visualisation in planning remains that of establishing
what is the minimum level of detail necessary to
adequately support informed decision making. (This is
particularly applicable to the VEPS project whose
outcomes are expected to contribute to this debate).
While it is recognised that 3D visualisation,
optimised for the web, tends to offer lower levels of
detail than CAD generated 3D models, initial
investigation within the VEPS project questions the
extent to which endorsable decisions are enhanced by
photo-realism and to which ‘too much’ detail acts as a
distraction to focused decision making at early proposal
stages, when it is more important to assess a range of
potential interpretations. Accordingly, effectiveness of
the environmental decision-making process is closely
related to the level of detail. Feary considers information
to be more effective if the data is presented at the right
level of detail [10]. Thus, a sufficient level of detail for
various stages and purposes within the planning process
still need to be defined. Generally, it can be argued that
in the early stages of the planning process relatively little
architectural information is required. At these stages the
decisions are still crude and there is little concern for
detail. Information, such as space organisation, building
materials are not necessarily required in the visualisation.
Therefore, the visualisation techniques can be relatively
abstract (and probably should be so to avoid fixation on
detail that does not address the general issues) to allow
different alternatives to be explored in terms of the
overall scale of the development, massing and relation to
the existing built context. Kaplan and Kaplan state that
“a simplified model is more likely to parallel people’s
cognitive structure. Hence the very simplicity of the
model may encourage its use. A simplified model also

encourages generality; details make things particular,
thus narrowing their range of appropriateness. Finally,
simplification reduces the total load to one’s processing”
[35].

6.

Conclusions

It is argued that replication on the web of existing
plan and cartographic-based approaches to planning will
tend to perpetuate the requirement for trained
interpretation, thereby excluding the general public.
Effective tools are held to be required for collaborative
citizen based examination and development of
alternative proposals. This paper has described the basis
on which the VEPS project, which is just commencing,
intends to establish a new open standard web approach to
enable citizens to view, analyse, interact with and
respond to proposed changes, to collaborate and
comment together and pose and test their own alternative
solutions. This approach, it is argued, needs to be based
on an interactive three-dimensional virtual reality
visualisation that allows the viewer to experience highly
complex planning information without need for training.
It is also argued that there is a need for more research
into how citizens can make reliable informed decisions at
an early stage in the planning process to guide, rather
than react to, detailed proposals. It is suggested that
neither photo-realism nor overly detailed representation
are likely to assist in this process, so web based
visualisation may not demand the bandwidth required by
highly photo-realistic interactive large area models, and
more sketch-like or 'unfinished' visualisation might be
more appropriate to effectively engage the user.

Acknowledgements
The project work presented in this paper is cofinanced through the INTERREG IIIB North West
Europe programme. Parts of the work presented in this
paper are based on recently completed PhD research
entitled 'Exploring cartographic representations for
spatial planning in Europe' (by Stefanie Dühr, University
of the West of England, Bristol, 2005) and on the final
draft of the PhD thesis " Depicting architecture through
visual representations" (by Nada Bates-Brkljac,
University of the West of England).

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Punter J., Carmona M. (1997), The Design Dimension of
Planning, E& FN Spon, London
Seaton, K.; Nadin, V.; Dühr, S. (2001) European
Planning Systems Update. London: DETR
ODPM Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (2005)
Planning Policy Statement 1: Delivering Sustainable
Development.
Available
online:
http://www.odpm.gov.uk/stellent/groups/odpm_planning
/documents/pdf/odpm_plan_pdf_035506.pdf
ODPM Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (2004)
Planning Policy Statement 12: Local Development
Frameworks.
Available
online:

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]

http://www.odpm.gov.uk/stellent/groups/odpm_planning
/documents/pdf/odpm_plan_pdf_031155.pdf
ODPM Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (2004) EPlanning Programme Blueprint. Available online:
http://www.odpm.gov.uk/stellent/groups/odpm_planning
/documents/downloadable/odpm_plan_030468.pdf
Dühr, S. (2004). The form, style and use of cartographic
visualisations in European spatial planning – examples
from England and Germany. Environment and Planning
A, Vol. 36, No. 11, pp. 1961-1989
Dühr, S. (2005) Exploring cartographic representations
for spatial planning in Europe. Unpublished PhD thesis.
University of the West of England, Bristol.
Virtual Environmental Planning System funded Dec
2004 to 2007 by INTERREG IIIB NWE-ENO (a
Community Initiative Programme funded by the
European
Regional
Development
Fund
www.nweurope.org)
Day, A. (1994) New Tools for Urban Design, Urban
Design Quarterly: 51
Feary, H. (1999) Fast fact take away, The Grocer, issue
30, pp42-43
Langendorf, R. (1992) The 1990's; information systems
and computer visualisation for urban design, planning
and management, Planning and Design (19) pp 723-738
Lutterbach, D. (1998) Auswirkungen moderner
Visualisierungstechniken auf die kartographische
Kommunikation in Planungsverfahren. Kartographische
Nachrichten, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 52-58
Medyckyi-Scott, D., Board, C. (1991) Cognitive
cartography: a new heart for a lost soul. Advances in
cartography. Muller, J. C. (ed.), Essex: Elsevier Science
Publishers Ltd, pp. 201-230
Gill, G. A. (1988) Experiments in the ordered perception
of coloured cartographic symbols. Cartographica, Vol.
25, No. 4, pp. 36-49
Wenner, A. (1989) Welche Aussagen läßt die
Blickregistrierung über die Gestaltung aktueller
Planungskarten zu?. Wiener Schriften zur Geographie
und Kartographie, No. 3, pp. 221-232
Rase, W.D. (1991) Computer-assisted Map Design, in
Muller, J.C. (ed) Advances in Cartography. Elsevier,
Essex, pp 181-200.
Dühr, S. (2003) Illustrating Spatial Policies in Europe.
European Planning Studies, Vol. 11, No. 8, pp. 929-948.
Neuman, M. (1996) Images as Institution Builders:
Metropolitan Planning in Madrid. European Planning
Studies, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 293-312
Lussault, M. (1994) La Ville Clarifiée. Essai d'analyse de
quelques usage carto et icono-graphiques en œuvre dans
le projet urbain. EIDOS, Vol. 9-10, pp. 37-58
Gabellini, P (1996) Il disegno urbanistico. Rome: La
Nuova Italia Scientifica
Söderström, O. (2000) Des images pour agir. Le visuel
en urbanisme. Lausanne: Editions Payot.
Robbins, E. (1997) Why Architects draw. Cambridge,
MA; London: MIT Press
Buccolo et al. (2001),Client Expectation of Virtual
Environments for Urban Design, Proceedings of IIV2001
Information Visualisation International Conference,
IEEE 2001, California, pp690-694
Mahmoud A.H. (2001) Can Virtual Reality Simulation
Techniques Reshape the Future of Environmental
Simulations? in Online Planning Journal WEBLINK??

[25] McKechnie, G. E.( 1997) Simulation techniques in
environmental psychology in Stokols, D.(ed.)
Psychological perspectives in environment and
behaviour, Plenum Publishing Corp. New York,
[26] Sawczuk, B (1992) The management of the design
process, in Nicholson, M. (ed) Architectural
management, E&FN Spon, London, pp84-89
[27] Harrlichack M.A, (1993) The effect of rendering
technologies on the evaluation of computer generated
design simulation, Master thesis, College of Env. Science
and Forestry, State University of New York, Syracuse,
NY
[28] Al-Kodmany, K. (2001) Supporting imageability on the
World Wide Web: Lynch's five elements of the city in
community planning, Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design , volume 28, pp805-832
[29] Appleton, K. and Lovett, A. (2003) GIS-based
visualisation of rural landscapes: defining 'sufficient'
realism for environmental decision-making, Landscape
and Urban Planning, v.65, issue 3, pp117-131
[30] Daniel T. and Meitner, M. (2000) Representational
validity of landscape visualisations, Final report, USDA
Forest Services, Forest Health Technology, Enterprise
Team
[31] Pietch S.M. (2000) Computer visualisation in the design
control of urban environments: a literature review,
Environment and Planning : Planning and Design,
volume 21, pp 521-536
[32] Holtier s. Steadman, J.P. and Smith M.G. (2000) Threedimensional representation of urban built form in a GIS,
Environment and Planning B:Planning and Design 27,
pp51-72
[33] Smith., A.H. et al. (1998) Visual communication in
urban planning and urban design, Paper 2, Online
Planning Journal , http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk
[34] Shiode, N.(2001) 3D Urban models: recent developments
in the digital modeling of urban environments in threedimensions, GeoJournal 52, pp263-269
[35] Kaplan R. and Kaplan S. (1983) Cognition and the
environment, Preager, New York, USA

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

