Applying Graphical Design Techniques to Graph Visualisation
Martyn Taylor, Peter Rodgers
University of Kent, University of Kent
{mt63@kent.ac.uk, P.J.Rodgers@kent.ac.uk}
Abstract
This paper contains details of new criteria for graph
layout, based on the concepts used in graphical design.
Current graph layout criteria have been shown to be
effective in measuring the quality of a graph layout, but
they are ad-hoc and often miss subtle appearance
considerations such as balance and distribution.
We discuss how the principles concerning the layout
of text and diagrams from design can be applied to
graph layout and show how two new metrics can be
implemented based on these criteria. We also give
preliminary examples of layout generated using the new
metrics.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years there has been much work in
the field of graph visualisation with the goal of improve
the layout of graphs to increase users’ comprehension of
the information represented by the diagram. A widely
applied technique in this field is to measure the quality of
a layout using a number metrics. The result of these can
then be combined to give an overall fitness for the graph
drawing. At present, commonly applied metrics are
based on software designers’ perceptions of what
constitutes a good graph drawing, and as such they do
not always correspond to users’ perception of what a
good layout is.
In this paper we attempt to improve this work by
examining the criteria used by graphical designers in
producing a pleasing and comprehensible layout for
diagrams and text. The results of our work are new
metrics based on graphical design techniques that may be
combined with existing metrics to give a more accurate
measurement of the quality of the graph. We also give
some examples of preliminary work in using these
metrics to lay out graphs using a multi-criteria optimiser.
There are many existing metrics to measure the
aesthetics or usability of a graph, listed in Section 2.1.
However, little use of the parallel work in the field of
graphical design as been applied to graph visualization.
There are also many conventions used when laying out a
diagram or a page, many of these are listed in Section

2.2. In both fields there has been shown to be a positive
correlation between the criteria when applied to
displayed material and usability [2] [7] [8].
In order to adapt graphic design criteria for use in
graph layout, it is necessary to develop measurement
methods for them. We illustrate this with metrics that
attempt to measure two criteria, Concentration and
Homogeneity. Concentration is how evenly distributed a
graph is within the area it occupies. Homogeneity is how
even the distribution of graph elements is between top
and bottom, or left and right.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. The
largest section, Section 3 describes implementations for
both the more widely used graph drawing criteria and
two criteria, Concentration and Homogeneity, which
have been used in graphic design. Section 3.3 illustrates
the use of the criteria in a multi-criteria graph drawing
system. Section 4 gives our conclusions and details some
further work to move on from this preliminary
investigation.

2. Design Criteria
In this section we consider a number of criteria for
producing good layout. First, we briefly summarise the
commonly adopted graph drawing criteria. We then look
at criteria commonly used in the field of graphic design
and discuss how they might be used in a graph context.

2.1. Graph Drawing Criteria
When considering the graph drawing metrics in
isolation, the commonly adopted aesthetics [2] [4]
include:
Edge crossings are generally considered to be one
of the major factors in reducing understanding of a
graph. Empirical studies support this intuitive notion [7].
Total Edge Bends: A human eye can follow a
straight edge more easily than an edge that zigzags
through the picture. Reducing this simplifies the graph in
terms of visualisation and for certain applications (such
as circuit diagrams where bends in wires are trouble
spots) can be detrimental to the overall layout.
Uniform Bends: Restrictions can be placed on the
angles and positions of bends in lines to make the
diagram more regular.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Area: Visual space is often at a premium and
reducing the overall area of the bounding box of the
graph is often desirable. The shape of the graph can also
be important, so that it has a certain aspect ratio, hence
fitting well on a page or screen.
Total Edge Length: Minimisation of the sum of the
length of the edges should cause a reduction of the area
of the graph. Minimising the maximum edge length can
also be beneficial.
Uniform Edge Lengths often make the regions in a
graph into regular shapes that should be easier to
visualise than complex shapes and should give each edge
the same visual emphasis.
Angular Resolution: A small angle between edges
emanating from a node makes the edges difficult to
distinguish.
Symmetry: It is often important to reflect a graph’s
symmetry in its visualisation, however this is not a trivial
task. Symmetry can be local (a subgraph of the graph) or
global (the whole graph).
Node Separation: Nodes should be sufficiently far
apart from their nearest neighbour to be easily
distinguished and to avoid occlusion.
Node Clustering: Displaying close relationships
between nodes by placing related nodes closer together
allows for good visualisation of the groups within a
graph.

2.2. Graphical Design Based Criteria
These criteria are more generalised than the graph
drawing criteria and have been drawn from the principles
underlying the layout of graphics, text and user interface
components. Many of the criteria overlap with those
relating to graph drawing.
Ngo, Teo and Byrne [6] have collated a series of
fourteen metrics that can be applied to a layout to
measure its aesthetic appeal. These metrics try to
quantify different visual effects. However the ways they
are calculated, and their relative weighting, have not
been validated for their efficiency and accurate
representation of human aesthetic measurement. The
different metrics are described below.
Balance is the distribution of optical weight within
the layout. Optical weight refers to the perception that
some objects appear to be heavier than others. Dark
colours, unusual shapes, and larger objects are heavier,
whereas light colours, regular shapes, and small objects
are lighter. Balance is achieved by providing an equal
weight of visual elements in each quadrant.
Equilibrium is the stabilisation of the layout in the
centre of the visual area. On a screen this involves
making sure the overall centre of mass of the objects is
the centre of the screen.
Symmetry is the extent to which the layout is
symmetrical in three directions: vertically, horizontally,
and diagonally.
Sequence refers to the arrangement of objects in a
layout in a way that facilitates the movement of the eye
through the information displayed. Normally the eye,

trained by reading, starts from the upper left and moves
back and forth across the display to the lower right.
Perceptual psychologists have found that certain things
attract the eye; it moves from big objects to small
objects, from bright colours to subdued colours, from
colour to black and white, and from irregular shapes to
regular shapes.
Aspect Ratio (Cohesion): The term aspect ratio
refers to the relationship of width to height. Changing the
aspect ratio of a visual field may affect eye movement
patterns sufficiently to account for some of the
performance differences. The aspect ratio of a visual
field should stay the same during the scanning of a
display.
Proportion relates to the optimum aspect ratio, as
well as the optimum size for visual elements, preferred
by different people and cultures. Marcus [5] describes
the following shapes as aesthetically pleasing: Square
(1:1), Square root of two (1:1.414), Golden rectangle
(1:1.618), Square root of three (1:1.732), Double square
(1:2). Aesthetically pleasing proportions should be
considered for major components in the layout.
Unity: Creating coherence, a totality of elements
that is visually all one piece. With unity the elements
seem to belong together, dovetailing so completely that
they are seen as one thing. Using similar sizes, shapes, or
colours for related information and leaving less space
between elements of a screen than the space left at the
margins achieves unity.
Simplicity is achieved is by optimising the number
of elements on a screen and minimising the alignment
points. Tullis [9] has derived a measure of screen
complexity for text-based screens based on the work of
Bonsiepe [3], who proposed a method of measuring the
complexity of typographically designed pages through
the application of information theory.
Density differs from the standard graph notion of
density, which describes the relationship between the
number of nodes and edges in a graph. In design, this is
the extent to which the layout is covered with objects.
Optimal density is achieved by minimising the density
levels without making the layout too sparse. This result
from minimising the number of visual elements being
displayed or by making sure they are evenly spaced so
the density is constant across the layout. A measure of
density, derived by Tullis [9], is the percentage of
character positions on the entire frame containing data.
Regularity is a uniformity of elements based on
some principle or plan. Establishing consistently spaced
horizontal and vertical alignment points for visual
elements and minimising the number alignment points
achieves regularity in screen design.
Economy is the careful and discreet use of display
elements to get the message across as simply as possible.
Economy is achieved by using as few styles, displays
techniques and colours as possible.
Homogeneity: The relative degree of homogeneity
of a composition is determined by how evenly the
objects are distributed among the four quadrants of the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

layout. A more even distribution amongst the quadrants
gives a more homogeneous graph.
Rhythm refers to regular patterns of changes in the
elements. This use of order with variation helps to make
the appearance exciting. Rhythm is accomplished
through variation of arrangement, dimension, number
and form of the elements.
Order (and conversely Complexity): The measure
of order is the weighted sum of the above measures for a
layout. The scale may be considered with order at one
end and extreme complexity at the other.
Other suggested aesthetic qualities for layouts [1]
are included below.
Hierarchy and Focus: An objects importance in a
layout can be determined by its prominence of position.
Tension: Using heightened visual weight or close
position, in moderation, creates tension between objects
and can enhance the aesthetic quality of a layout.
However over use makes a layout difficult to understand.
Depth: Manipulating the scale of objects and zorder can create an illusion of 3D position. The object
with the largest apparent size will dominate the
foreground of the layout.
Scale: As with depth, the relative size of elements
affects the prominence of objects within the layout.
Movement Usually figurative, with elements angled
or poised like bodies in motion, movement can also be
created with such optical effects as linear repetition,
visual vortexes and the like. Used deliberately, suggested
movement can have a marked emotional and physical
impact on a viewer.

2.3. Design Criteria for Graph Drawing
Some of the criteria described above are very
similar. For example, symmetry and aspect ratio which
both appear in graph and graphical design criteria.
Aspect Ratio has the same meaning in both metrics,
however Symmetry tends to be a global metric when
looking at page layout in graphical design whereas few
graphs will be globally symmetric and symmetry will
tend to be localised in clusters. Some criteria seem
related in a less direct way, for instance Economy of
layout relates to several of the graph aesthetics, as adding
both edge bends and edge crossings creates complexity
and reduces Economy.
Candidates for new criteria for graph drawing must
be both relevant to graph layout and measurable. The
ability to use a quantifiable metric representing a
particular criterion is important when measuring the
overall goodness of a diagram. Many of the criteria
above are too abstract to be applied in such a way; for
instance, there has been little success in developing
metrics for symmetry in graph for it to be applied as a
global metric.
The following design criteria have been identified as
potentially useful in graph drawing.
Homogeneity is a measure of effective use of area
and equal density across the layout. A graph that is
spread out equally should have nodes spaced across the

canvas and thus have a homogenous number of nodes in
each quadrant. A homogenous graph should be relatively
well balanced and centred, so long as each element of the
graph has equal visual weight, because the nodes will be
equally distributed across the quadrants of the layout.
Density, which we rename to Concentration in
order to differentiate it from the traditional graph
meaning of density, measures a graph layouts’
distribution of nodes. A layout that has an uneven
distribution of nodes has a poor concentration, whereas a
layout without dense groups of nodes and having an even
spread of nodes will have a good concentration.
In the next section we describe in detail our metrics
for measuring both Homogeneity and Concentration in a
graph, and demonstrate how they can be applied in a
multi-criteria optimising approach.

3. Implementation of the Criteria
The section below details the implementations of
both the graphical design inspired criteria and the
existing graph criteria as well as an evaluation of the
preliminary results comparing graphs laid out using only
the existing graph criteria compared to graphs laid out
using both sets of criteria.

3.1. Graphical Design Based Metrics
Concentration measures if there is an equal spread
of nodes throughout the layout. To simplify the
calculations a ª n º× ª n º grid is used for an n node graph
and an optimal solution should have an even spread of
nodes throughout the grid with either zero or one node in
each grid area. The following formula is used to
calculate concentration.
∀x, y:

( x ∈ `,1 ≤ x ≤ ª«

Grid( x , y )

= Count of nodes within grid area

M Density

=

n º , y ∈ `,1 ≤ y ≤ ª n º
»
« »

)

¦ Max ( Grid( x, y ) − 1: 0 )
n −1

In the graphs below there are always nodes on the
edge of the grid. This is because a bounding box around
the graph is used to calculate the grid rather than a fixedsized grid as it allows the metric to cater for graph that
exceed the bounds of the page and allows for later
resizing of the graphs.
Start Graph

Finish Graph

The graph above shows how applying only the
concentration metric to a multi-criteria optimiser can be

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

used to separate nodes. The nodes in each cluster have
been forced apart and, although an optimal concentration
has not been reached, there are now only one or two
nodes in each grid.
Start Graph

This gives a metric value between 0 (optimal
distribution) and 1 (worst distribution).
Again, a bounding box around the graph is used to
calculate the position of the quadrants and so some nodes
will always appear on the outer bounds of the grid.

Finish Graph

Start Graph

These graphs highlight a problem with the
concentration metric when it is used on its own. The
metric measures the number of nodes within each grid
square but it does not measure their position. This means
that there can be nodes on either side of the boundary
between grid squares and the metric will register it as a
good layout even though the node separation can be bad.
Homogeneity is a measure of how evenly the
objects are distributed amongst the four quadrants of the
display and is measured using a comparison between the
combinations of ways objects can be organised for the
given distribution compared to an optimal distribution.
Ngo, Teo and Byrne [6] define W as the number of
combinations of ways a group of n objects can be
arranged for a given distribution amongst the quadrants.
Given n objects, there are n! different ways of ordering
them (n ways to pick the first object, (n-1) ways to pick
the second object, and so on). If the objects are split up
between four quadrants, so there are nUL, nUR, nLL and
nLR objects in the upper-left, upper-right, lower-left and
lower-right quadrants respectively, then there are nj!
ways of ordering the objects in quadrant j. Therefore
there are nUL!nUR!nLL!nLR! ways of ordering all objects in
the four given quadrants. Given that the order of objects
in the quadrants does not matter then W is defined as

W=

n!
.
n UL !n UR !n LL !n LR !

It follows that W is maximum when the n objects are
evenly allocated to the quadrants. Therefore with n
objects each quadrant will contain ¬n 4 ¼ objects. To ensure
n
that 4 is an integer value, and that Wmax is greater than
or equal to W for all values even when n is not exactly
n
divisible by 4, 4 is rounded down. Therefore Wmax is
defined as:

Wmax =

n!

(¬ 4 ¼ !)
n

4

The graph above shows how the homogeneity metric
moves the nodes so they are spread equally throughout
the quadrants of the graph.
Start Graph

Finish Graph

Similar to the density metric, the metric does not
measure the position of nodes within the quadrant. As
the graph above shows with little movement a node can
move from one quadrant to another and improve the
metric. The graphs also show that this factor can produce
nodes with a small degree of separation with nodes on
either side of the boundary between grids.

3.2. Existing Graph Metrics
In this section we briefly describe the standard graph
drawing metrics implemented to allow comparison with
the new design inspired metrics.
Angular Resolution is only calculated for edges
smaller than the angular resolution, in this case 15°. The
metric for each node is calculated using the square of the
angle of incidence between edges at a node divided by
the square of the angular resolution.
∃Edge i , Edge j : where Edge i and Edge j connect to Node n

θ = Angle between Edge i and Edge j

.

Therefore the Homogeneity metric can be defined
as:

M Homogeneity = 1 −

Finish Graph

W
.
Wmax

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Metric i , j = 1 −

Min(θ ,15) 2
15 2

Metric Angular = ¦ Metric i, j

Aspect Ratio is calculated as the proportional
difference between the graphs aspect ratio and the
viewing panels aspect ratio.

AspectGraph =

Metric Aspect =

WidthGraph
HeightGraph

AspectView =

WidthView
HeightView

(
) −1
Min ( AspectGraph , AspectView )

Max AspectGraph , AspectView

Edge Overlaps is an extension of Edge Crossings as
it measures, for each pair of intersecting edges, the ratio
of length of the edge compared to the length of the
smallest line-segment created by splitting the edge at
their point of intersection. Minimising this has the effect
of trying to push the centres of the edges away from each
other, minimising the distance the edges overlap by.
Nearest Neighbour Distance minimises the
variance in distance between closest neighbours, trying
to make the minimum distance between neighbouring
nodes equal.
Uniform Edge Length minimises the variance in
edge lengths, trying to make each edge the same length.

3.3. Preliminary Results
The graphs below were processed using a hill
climbing multi-criteria optimising system. This system
measures the quality of layout by finding the values for
several metrics, weighting each metric and adding the
weighted values to find an overall value for the quality of
the layout. The graph is then modified in an attempt to
reduce this overall value, and so improve the layout.
Our hill climber iterates through the nodes, testing
each node by moving it to eight compass points. The
node is moved to the point that has the lowest overall
value for the metrics, or if the original position is lowest,
no move is made. The hill climber starts by making 10
pixel moves until it completes a full iteration in which no
node has moved. At this point it decrements the
movement value and continues the process to find a
solution with a better resolution until the movement
value reduces to zero when the iterations stop. This
approach was chosen to allow rapid movement towards
the optimal solution and then fine tuning of the solution.
Metric
Angular Resolution
Aspect Ratio
Edge Overlaps
Nearest Neighbour Distance
Node-Edge Distance
Uniform Edge Length
Concentration
Homogeneity

Weighting
0.01
0.000001
1.0
0.0001
0.01
0.001
1.0
1.0

The graphs use six current metrics. Each was given a
weighting, shown in the table above. These values were
decided by the investigators, based on an attempt to both
normalise the metrics, so that the resultant values are in
the same order of magnitude. In addition, the two new
metrics are given a high relative weighting to emphasise
their impact on the results.
The following graphs are produced using the same
starting graphs and identical weightings for the six
traditional metrics.
Without New Metrics

Metric
Angular Res.
Aspect Ratio
Edge Overlaps
Nearest N’bour
N-E Distance
Uniform Edges
Concentration
Homogeneity

With New Metrics

Value
Weight
0.0
0.01
0.478113
0.0000001
0.0
1.0
35.68553
0.00001
0.0
0.01
0.119961
0.001
0.25
1.0
0.666667
1.0
Overall layout quality

Total
0.0
4.78x10-7
0.0
3.57x10-3
0.0
1.20x10-4
0.25
0.666667
0.920356

As an illustration of the actual values of the metrics,
above are the values for the metrics for the graph with
the hill climber not including the graphical design
metrics and below are the results when the design
metrics are included. The values for graphical design
metrics are included in both tables.
Metric
Angular Res.
Aspect Ratio
Edge Overlaps
Nearest N’bour
N-E Distance
Uniform Edges
Concentration
Homogeneity

Value
Weight
0.0
0.01
0.271946
0.0000001
0.0
1.0
27.69453
0.00001
0.0
0.01
0.154999
0.001
0.0
1.0
0.666667
1.0
Overall layout quality

Total
0.0
2.72x10-7
0.0
2.77x10-3
0.0
1.55x10-4
0.0
0.666667
0.669591

The results show that concentration metric has
improved significantly using the graphical design metrics
and this can be seen in the graph by the improved spread
of nodes over the canvas. This is also reflected in the
nearest neighbour separation and shows an almost 25%
reduction in the variance in distance between the closest
nodes. There has, however, been an increase in the
variance of the uniformity of edge lengths but the
numerical results show this is not as significant as the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

nearest neighbour reductions and does not show upon
visual inspection of the graphs.
Without New Metrics

With New Metrics

The graphs above show improvements in both
concentration and homogeneity when using the new
metrics. The graph produced using only the existing
metrics has no nodes in the lower left quadrant. The
graphical design based metrics change this, moving two
nodes over the border between quadrants giving optimal
values for both new metrics.
Visual comparison of the graphs show the new
metrics have produced a greater node-edge resolution
and the graph does not look as cluttered.
Without New Metrics

With New Metrics

4. Conclusions and Further Work
We have described our preliminary work in applying
graphic design criteria to graph visualization. The criteria
make subtle alterations to the layout, which should have
a beneficial effect on users’ comprehension of data
represented as a graph.
A major focus of our future investigation will be the
implementation of improvements to the current metrics
and the introduction of further metrics. Criteria
describing the effective use of white space, regularity
and unity are all possible criteria for which metrics could
be developed.
Future work will also look at application areas for
graph visualization. This paper has described the effect
of the new metrics on abstract graphs. However, to fully
apply the benefit of design techniques, the metrics must
be applied in the context of an application. This may also
result in new criteria that are application dependent.

5. References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

The graphical design metrics offer a subtle
improvement over the existing metrics. Increasing the
area of the graph, spreading the nodes out and generally
increasing the node-edge separation and angular
resolution. This gives the apparent result of making the
graph less cluttered.
Without New Metrics

[6]

[7]

With New Metrics
[8]

[9]

The layout produced using the new metrics shows a
poor result in this case. By trying to improve the spread
of the nodes the angular resolution and node-edge
separation has been sacrificed. This can be improved by
increasing the weighting of these metrics.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

ARTS 350 Course Euphrates, William Paterson
University
http://euphrates.wpunj.edu/courses/arts350
/aesthetics.html
Giuseppe Di Battista, Peter Eades, Roberto Tamassia,
Ioannis G. Tollis. Graph Drawing, Algorithms for the
Visualisation of Graphs. Prentice Hall 1999 – ISBN 013-301615-3
G. Bonsiepe A Method of Quantifying Order in
Typographic Design Journal of Typographic Research 2
(1968) 203-220.
Michael Kaufmann, Dorothea Wagner (Eds). Drawing
Graphs: Methods and Models. Springer Publishers 1998
– ISBN 3-540-42062-2
A. Marcus. Graphic Design for Electronic Documents
and User Interfaces ACM Press, New York, 1992.
David Chek Ling Ngo, Lian Seng Teo and John G.
Byrne. Modelling Interface Aesthetics. In Information
Sciences 152 (2003) 25-46. Summarised at
http://www.mi.sanu.ac.yu/vismath/ngo/
Helen C. Purchase, Robert F. Cohen, Murray James.
Validating Graph Drawing Aesthetics. In F. J.
Brandenburg, editor, Graph Drawing (Proc. GD ’95),
vol. 1027 of Lecture Note in Computer Science, pp. 435446. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985.
N. Tractinsky, Aesthetics and Apparent Usability:
Empirically Assessing Cultural and Methodological
Issues. In CHI ’97 Conference Proceedings, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, 1997
T. S. Tullis An Evaluation of Alphanumeric, Graphic,
and Colour Information Displays Human Factors 23
(1981) 541-550.

