Linguistic Learning: A New Conceptual Focus in Knowledge Visualization
Stefan Bertschi
University of St. Gallen
stefan.bertschi@unisg.ch

Noah Bubenhofer
University of Zurich
noah.bubenhofer@access.unizh.ch

Abstract

normative structures in language [1, p. 8]. It concerns
“preferences for the understanding and the production
of phrases” [1, p. 19, our translation]. These preferences emerge through a process of selectivity generated in communication. Feilke termed this mechanism
of linguistic structuring idiomatic coinage (‘idiomatische Prägung’). The words people use in everyday
communication become semantically coined: “The
principle of idiomatic coinage is based on the fact that
expression units (‘Ausdruckseinheiten’), which can be
combined relatively freely because of their paradigmatic qualities, are coined on the syntagmatic axis and,
therefore, become figure-like (‘gestalthafte’) expression units.” [1, p. 17, our translation]
Feilke recognizes this basic principle on different
levels of language structure: on the level of phonemes
(phonotactic clusters), morphemes (usual compounds
or derivatives), syntactic phrases (lexical collocations,
idioms, phraseologisms etc), sentences and phrases
(abstract sentence patterns, routine formulae) and finally on the level of whole texts (textual patterns) [1].
We shall not elaborate in further detail on the principle
of common sense competence, but instead refer to [2]
and [3].

In this paper we examine the metaphorical face of
knowledge visualization and weave our observations
into a wider perspective. We discuss a fundamental,
but less scrutinized, precondition: the interrelation of
metaphor, ‘linguistic learning’ and mediation of
knowledge through visualization. By presenting preliminary thoughts on this interrelation, we wish to
avoid the risk of simplification within this new field of
research and to provide a potential theoretical foundation.

1. Linguistic preliminaries
...as reported yesterday – is survived by – let us
propose a toast – for immediate release – passed into
eternity – we showed that – with kind regards...
These phrases have a familiar ring. Still we have
trouble to accept them as meaningful in the shown
combination. Yet individually they remind us of specific text types (or genres, ‘Textsorten’) or communicative settings. These examples represent more or less
fixed multi-word units, so-called phraseologisms. They
emanate, for example, from the following text types:
press report (‘as reported yesterday’),
press release (‘for immediate release’),
address (‘let us propose a toast’),
obituary (‘is survived by’ or ‘passed into eternity’),
scientific paper (‘we showed that’) and
private letter (‘with kind regards’).

1.1. Patterns and communication
According to linguist Helmuth Feilke, such patterns
(or exemplariness, ‘Musterhaftigkeit’) come into existence by means of communication. The social behavior
of speakers, their common sense competence, leads to

1.2. Patterns and culture
If the exemplariness of a language is constituted by
its speakers’ social behavior, it suddenly reflects social
structures (a culture). This would imply that, in return,
the exemplariness of a language can be analyzed to
reveal and describe this specific culture. Some approaches of cultural and discourse analysis try to avail
themselves of this interrelation [4, 5]. Still, exemplariness of language is rarely analyzed to the necessary
extent, and there are other approaches evolving. For
example, one that proposes determining basic semantic
figures in discourse (‘diskurssemantische Grundfiguren’) by analyzing semantic fields or feature oppositions [6].

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Nevertheless, it can be demonstrated how exemplariness can be fruitfully used in cultural analysis. In a
historical context, “linguistic forms, [...] routines and
patterns of language use” are considered in order to
analyze the “production and dynamic sampling of sociocultural processes” [7, p. 46, our translation]. The
cultural conditionality of language not only helps the
observer to describe culture and transculturation, but in
the first instance, it helps a society to constitute itself
and its perception (or even its cognition which is a
synonym for knowledge). Hence, this social knowledge is relevant in two ways: First, from an observer’s
perspective, it is the observer’s intention to become
acquainted with the society’s knowledge. But in doing
so, knowledge is concurrently reconstructed through
the process of observation. Second, from the perspective of the observed, knowledge is a subject of communication and is constantly being reconstructed
through communication.
Therefore, this reconstruction is carried out by language use and – this is the clou – by applying the exemplariness of language. By using linguistic patterns
one does not have to verbalize knowledge assets every
time anew and in person, but can tap these assets
through already existing patterns, and refer to them
with a few signs. (This once again reveals the neglected connection between language and culture, and
between phraseologisms and the cultural prerequisites
for understanding and using them.)

2. Knowledge Visualization: prima vista
Techniques that are subsumed under the term
knowledge visualization aim particularly at portraying
the reconstruction of patterns:
“Knowledge visualization [...] facilitates the transfer and creation of knowledge among people by giving
them richer means of expressing what they know. [...]
[K]nowledge visualization primarily is used to augment knowledge-intensive communication among individuals. [...] Knowledge visualization can help to solve
several predominant, knowledge-related problems in
organizations. [...] Knowledge visualization designates
all graphic means that can be used to develop or convey insights, experiences, methods, or skills.” [10]
Prima vista, it seems as if knowledge visualization
is more concerned with pictures than with words. But
Eppler and Burkhard propose a whole framework of
practices to mediate knowledge through visualization
[10]. Among them is the so-called visual metaphor (see
section 3.3).
Knowledge visualization aims to graphically ‘illustrate’ a common cultural process, i.e. to use the exemplariness of language to negotiate knowledge. If such
an illustration is depicted graphically, it is at best rele-

vant as a means of learning psychology. More relevant
is the question of whether new illustrations, which are
not integrated into a society’s knowledge, are possible
at all, and, if they are possible, do they make sense?
This is questionable because an illustration can only be
processed efficiently if it follows basic semantic figures in discourse and if it is compatible with existing
linguistic patterns.

3. Knowledge Visualization: secunda vista
Visualization often means representing what is not
visible beforehand: “To convert tacit knowledge into
explicit knowledge means finding a way to express the
inexpressible.” [17] If a benefit is to be obtained, every
visualization has to be an idealization of reality and,
therefore, runs the risk of oversimplification and falsification [10]. In the following, we take a ‘secunda
vista’ at knowledge visualization by analyzing the use
of metaphors and visual metaphors in particular.

3.1. Metaphors
In the majority of cases, it is not possible to communicate in pictures alone. For this purpose, pictures
are too complex, even if (or possibly because) they
seem to be worth a thousand words. In alleging to
transfer knowledge more effectively they seriously
belie their complexity. Communication always calls for
language, be it imaginary or articulated. In most cases,
pictures need a caption. In addition, there is the impossibility of non-metaphorical thought because metaphoricity of language is total [8, 29]. Linguistic visualization is the application of metaphors in the broadest
sense. Regarding its metaphoricity, we contend that
pictorial and linguistic visualization is one and the
same. These two visualizations are two sides of the
same coin: They are complementary parts of communication.
We mentioned the significance of linguistic patterns for successful communication, and, at the same
time, we referred to the social conditionality of these
patterns. In order that a visualization is notably impressive and effective, it may be necessary to choose a
rather unusual one for a specific context, but it most
definitely needs to have a high profile or high name
recognition. Every visualization is a frequently used
linguistic pattern or is, at least, based upon one. Visualization, for example, works with an unobtrusive ‘pie
chart’ or a more complex ‘tube map’ which can be
exhausted of its metaphoricity [15, 30]. Because users
of such visualizations lay claim to common linguistic
patterns, they directly tap the connecting section of a
social or cultural discourse. While there is obviously a
benefit to be gained from such visualizations, as is ac-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

centuated by Eppler and Burkhard [10], there are still
unmentioned risks as well. The potential perceptions
and interpretations are severely restrained.
To illustrate this, let us think of ‘market shares’
visualized by a pie chart. It is common to speak about
‘pieces’ (of a pie) which are ‘cut off’ or which are ‘distributed among each other’, which are ‘evenly spread’
or ‘redistributed’, which are ‘(too) small’ or ‘(too) big’.
This imagery biases our perception of ‘market’ (which
is obviously also a metaphor).
Let us tentatively explore an alternative (threedimensional) imagery. This uses a ‘starry sky’ to visualize the penetration of a community of consumers
with goods from specific manufacturers. Each star
represents a product. In an infinite space there are
brighter and darker stars, emerging and waning stars.
The distances between the stars vary depending on the
observer’s position. The stars’ situation in relation to
each other depends on gravitation. It should be palpable that this imagery evokes another impression or reality of ‘market shares’. The metaphor of a ‘tube map’
restrains the potential perceptions (of project organization) too. Alternative metaphors are possible and can
suddenly evoke different impressions of the matter.
The picture we are using to illustrate a specific circumstance is defined by the language use in a specific
culture at a specific time. It is questionable whether it
would be possible to use the metaphor of the ‘starry
sky’ to visualize market shares in an annual report.
This is mainly because such a practice would infringe
an unspoken rule of visualization patterns in a specific
context.
The picture is suddenly stabilized not only because
it is context-dependent but also because “[m]etaphors
may create realities for us, especially social realities.”
[8] By doing so it can be expected that they produce
their own context, and therefore, get into a more or less
stable shape [29]. But before they become stabilized
through language use, they have one remarkable attribute: Metaphors get attention [15] because they are a
driving force in representing novel concepts: “Metaphor is a tool of conceptual economy, but that does not
exhaust its role. It is also a tool of discovery, providing
a way of imposing or discovering structure within
novel or unfamiliar situations.” [29] Structure is, at the
same time, both an advantage and a disadvantage of
metaphors, and of visualized metaphors in particular.

3.2. Social construction of reality
Pictures are said to be efficient because humans
think in pictures [14, p. 7]. With this proposition the
whole foundation that defines the way an individual
thinks in pictures is factored out. The remarks on cultural dependencies already illustrated this. The signifi-

cation or meaning of pictures (including those of a linguistic-metaphorical nature) depends decisively on the
viewer. It is up to him or her “to re-construct meaning.” [10] In other words: “[K]nowledge must be recreated in the mind of the receiver” [10]. The recipient
has (to be able) to retranslate the visuals used into his
or her own language.
A suitable model for such ‘re-translation’ can possibly be detected in a sociolinguistic theory of learning
(as shown below). Generally, the most ostensible question would be: What is knowledge as seen by the sociology of knowledge or from a constructivist perspective? “The principal thesis of the sociology of
knowledge is that there are modes of thought which
cannot be adequately understood as long as their social
origins are obscured.” [26, p. 2] Even though thinking
is closely connected to individuals, greater scope is
necessary to understand its true meaning. Therefore,
the more recent sociology of knowledge concentrates
on this meaning: “And insofar as all human ‘knowledge’ is developed, transmitted and maintained in social situations, the sociology of knowledge must seek
to understand the processes by which this is done in
such a way that a taken-for-granted ‘reality’ congeals
for the man in the street. In other words, we contend
that the sociology of knowledge is concerned with the
analysis of the social construction of reality.” [11, p. 3]
Sociology of knowledge deals with pattern recognition
(asking how we are able to ‘see’ the world through the
eyes of other people and to understand the subjective
meaning of their experiences). Together with the former contention this leads back to the phraseologisms
and metaphors mentioned earlier. For the recipient to
be able to recognize and assign certain patterns or contents, he or she must acquire (or better: learn) certain
skills.
Pattern recognition is connected to the notion that
“a certain knowledge [...] is not only informative, entertaining or opinion-making but in principle it can
have an infinite number of functions” [12, p. 31, our
translation]. The process of mediation comes to the
fore (including arrangements and attributes of recipients, situation, length and form of presentation etc). In
economic settings this is usually done overhastily (because, after Drucker [27], there is still a mystification
of knowledge in place within the knowledge economy)
whereupon crucial details are ignored. For example,
the medium of knowledge visualization is in most
cases a metaphor: “Visual metaphors combine the creative leap of sketches with the analytic rationality of
conceptual diagrams and employ graphic metaphors to
structure information and convey normative knowledge
through the connotations of the employed metaphor.”
[14, p. 10] Following this description, the contextual
subject and theme, the social and cultural relevance are

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

quickly ignored. This is problematic because exactly
these details are included in a metaphor. Moreover,
these manifold dependencies suggest that continuously
planned and generated mediation can hardly exist [13].
At least it cannot be explicit and effective to the full
extent.

3.3. Visual metaphors
As stated earlier, visual metaphors are an important
means of knowledge visualization: “Visual metaphors
used for knowledge transfer or creation can either be
natural objects or phenomena (e.g. mountains, icebergs, tornados) or artificial, man-made objects (e.g. a
bridge, a ladder, a temple), activities (e.g. climbing,
etc), or concepts (e.g. war, family). Their main feature
is that they organize information meaningfully. In doing so, they fulfill a dual function: first, they position
information graphically to organize and structure it.
Second, they convey an implicit insight [into] the information represented through the key characteristics
(or associations) of the metaphor that is employed.”
[10, our italics] But even visual metaphors cannot ensure that meaning is transferred identically to all recipients.
This is rather severe because not only the ‘visualization format’ or ‘visualization type perspective’, specifically labelled as visual metaphors, uses metaphors
as a primary instrument [18, 25]. ‘Heuristic sketches’,
‘conceptual diagrams’, ‘knowledge animations’ as well
as ‘knowledge maps’ use metaphors more or less to
confer expression and to optimize knowledge transfer.
This can certainly be stated for diagrams and maps
[30]. Metaphoricity can be seen best by considering the
‘tube map visualization’ as an example. This format “is
a powerful metaphor” per se [as stated in 14, p. 19, see
15]. If additionally ‘storytelling’ [16] is taken into account as a ‘visualization type perspective’, as in [25],
the ‘visual language’ in its purest form is achieved.
Solely through language, pictures automatically come
into existence in the reader’s head – but with the constraint that these pictures are not necessarily identical
in different recipient’s heads.
The advantages of common ‘visual metaphors’,
their dual function is seen in [10], have already been
quoted earlier. From a practical point of view it can be
added that “the viewer can relate what is new (the expert’s insights) to what he or she already understands
(the metaphor’s main characteristic).” [30, p. 81] Visual metaphors offer powerful templates to communicate with non-experts. Apart from their ability “to organize information and to give it additional meaning”
[30, p. 82], visual metaphors can “facilitate the process
of learning.” [10] Because of their visibility and metaphoricity they get more attention than other formats,

therefore, they facilitate remembering and provide
cognitive focus [15].
In our brief analysis of metaphors, we criticized a
specific aspect and showed that this specific visualization method, using metaphorical tools like ‘pie charts’
or ‘maps’, is severely restricting. Eppler mentions “the
risks inherent in using such forms of visualization” but
specifies only “the difficult maintenance of the diagrams and maps, the reification of (at times) invalid
views, and hence the possible manipulation of users, or
the possible distortion of reality through misinterpretation.” [30, p. 87] The risks mentioned are limited to
those initiated by sender or receiver. The potential risks
of using metaphors do not appear. This is, besides the
fact that reflected basic principles are still rudimentary
in knowledge visualization, our main point of criticism.
Because critical reasoning is widely lacking, knowledge visualization acts on the assumption that the
framework and its effectiveness are hardly vulnerable.
This may relate to the fact that the discipline of (business-oriented) knowledge visualization is still young
[18] and attempts to define it have only been made for
a short time [10, 14]. The mentioned mediation can
only come into existence and be effective under commensurate conditions. We assume that the outline of
such conditions can be based on principles of ‘linguistic learning’.

4. A constructivist concept of learning
The fundamental idea of all learning lies in processing information and converting/translating it into
evident knowledge. Or speaking with Wittgenstein:
“Knowledge is often in the eye of the beholder, and
you give meaning to the concept through the way you
use it” [19]. Knowledge is not something that is available constantly and at an arbitrary rate. Similar to
metaphors it needs to be actively developed and kept
alive by intense cooperation with other people.
Watzlawick et al. [20, p. 260] distinguish between
two (actually three) levels of knowledge: “knowledge
of things and knowledge about things” (partly comparable to ‘knowing how’ and ‘knowing that’ in Ryle’s
[28] terminology). First-order knowledge refers to the
awareness of objects that our senses convey. On this
level the subject does not know anything about the
sensed object yet. The next level contains the knowledge about things (or second-order knowledge). This
metaknowledge makes it possible to reveal meaning,
build associations, achieve improvements. The sheer
knowledge that an artefact (or thought) simply exists
(first-order) does not include the ability to handle it.
Such an ability is based on the knowledge of how to
approach it and how to handle information properly
(second-order). This reflection, as third-order know-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

ledge, needs to be improved and used consequently. To
sum up in one sentence: I understand why it is important that I am able to assimilate and use this artefact (or
thought).
As an important ‘building block’ in a complex
world, third-order knowledge [20, p. 261], comprehension or conclusion about meaning, can assure a hint of
certainty. This could be expressed in the following
way: It is like it is, because I understand how it is and
why it is that way. This three-stage process even allows more. As exemplified by language acquisition, it
“makes the acquisition itself progressively easier.” [20,
p. 262] This involves continued activity that needs to
find continuous connection, i.e. needs to be kept alive.
Only knowledge (about artefacts/thoughts and their
meaning) allows us to explain, reason and adopt specific phenomena. This, likewise, needs to be a precondition for knowledge visualization. Hence, the sender
of a message has no possibility to verify whether the
recipient has fully understood the imparted knowledge
in the way the sender intended [20].

218, our italics] This is one possible way that such
functions are constituted externally.
The following step, the way by which higher mental functions become individual, is called ‘internalization’. Internalization is the “internal reconstruction of
an external operation” by which social activities become mental activities. Thus “[a]n operation that initially represents an external activity is reconstructed
and begins to occur internally.” [22, p. 56] During this
operation, “an interpersonal process is transformed into
an intrapersonal one” [22, p. 57]. As defined by Vygotsky, it does not merely copy object reality into the
mind, “concepts are not absorbed ready-made” [21, p.
161]. Instead, internalization involves people actively
processing these object realities or concepts. Following
this description, mental functioning is actively constructed by the individual and is the result of social
experience. In such an understanding, learning is solely
a constructivist activity. Finally, the most interesting
aspect is that Vygotsky believed that thought and language could definitely not exist without each other.

4.1. External construction

4.2. Internal construction

The underlying notion (that again leads back to the
starting point of this paper) was established by Vygotsky, a Russian developmental psychologist in the early
1930s: According to him, higher mental processes are
by definition culturally mediated, and are “a function
of socially meaningful activity” [23, p. 113]. Because
they are functions of mediated activity, the learning
process connects the sociocultural sphere to a proximately internalized thought or mind-set (outside—
inside). What Vygotsky defines as learning is based on
the assumption that higher mental functions are always
socially or culturally mediated and context-specific.
These functions develop through social interaction,
they are social processes.
The source of mediation can be of different kinds:
an artefact, a system of symbols, or the behavior of
other people. It is, on all occasions, a sociocultural
mediation. But, according to Vygotsky, language (i.e.
signs and symbols) mediates thought most. He asserted
that thought development has to be determined by language: “The relation of thought to word is not a thing
but a process, a continual movement back and forth
from thought to word and from word to thought. In that
process the relation of thought to word undergoes
changes which [in] themselves may be regarded as
development in the functional sense. Thought is not
merely expressed in words; it comes into existence
through them. Every thought tends to connect something with something else, to establish a relationship
between things. Every thought moves, grows and develops, fulfills a function, solves a problem.” [21, p.

A different approach has been proposed by Stahl.
On first glance his model seems similar because it “is
an attempt to understand learning as a social process
incorporating multiple distinguishable phases that constitute a cycle of personal and social knowledgebuilding.” [24, p. 70] But contrary to Vygotsky he
starts from the internal mind-set or personal unterstanding and moves on to social knowledge-building.
The transition between the internal and the external
is depicted by “how personal beliefs that we become
aware of in our activity in the world can be articulated
in language and enter into a mysterious social process
of interaction with other people and with our shared
culture.” [24, p. 71] It is understood that this is not a
one-way process because “culture, in turn, enters into
our personal understanding”. Because of Stahl’s interest in collaborative knowledge-building, his main route
is in opposition to Vygotsky’s (i.e. inside—outside).
Nevertheless, people’s “network of ‘personal’ meanings ultimately has its origin in interpersonal language
and culture.” [24, p. 72, see 19] Because it is not possible to process all (especially problematic) aspects of
personal understanding internally, people enter social
settings and create new meanings collaboratively. This
is done via language and through public statements. At
this point a certain transfer takes place using the route
mentioned above. If the following negotiation leads to
an “acceptance of a common result, then such a result
is accepted as knowledge.” [24, p. 72] Similar to Vygotsky, Stahl asserts that knowledge is a socially mediated product. But this time it happens in such a way

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

that “beliefs become knowledge through social interaction” [24, p. 72]. Stahl’s approach regarding collaborative knowledge-building centers around “the fact that
the group has the power to evolve the knowledge further” [24, p. 76].

4.3. Visual construction
Both approaches are constructivist in nature. Constructivist theories of learning emphasize meaningmaking through people’s active participation in social
and cultural contexts and settings. Similar approaches
can be found in visual perception theory. Therefore, it
is notable that Burkhard devotes a mere three lines to
such an approach: “Constructive [visual] perception
[...] believes that an individual’s perception is based on
the combination of sensory information with prior
knowledge and previous experience.” [25] We prefer
this approach to one that privileges direct perception,
meaning “that all the information we need to perceive
is in the sensory input we receive.” [25]
This is the moment when metaphors, connotations
and phraseologisms come back into mind. They are
irrevocably connected to our innate ability to process
visual representations. Metaphors are an excellent
method of expressing such notions. They are coined
with recognisable patterns and, therefore, they are both
invaluable and extremely fragile.

5. Conclusion
If knowledge visualization is to function effectively, it has to include preliminary concepts. These are
usually of a linguistic nature and embedded in a specific context. First, we have shown that people’s possibilities of perception and thinking are shaped by language use. This is because language is a product of
social acting and negotiating [9], it is culturally determined. After all, language is a constraint on using
techniques of knowledge visualization. Second, it becomes apparent that learning has to be regarded as a
constructing process which is influenced by the
learner’s cultural background.
These considerations lead to the problem of how to
effectively use knowledge visualization which, at the
same time, has to be impressive and has to work identically in all recipient’s heads. But obviously knowledge visualization cannot transcend the cultural and
linguistic constraints because it has to be conformable
to existing linguistic patterns. Our excursus to a constructivist and linguistic concept of learning aimed to
present a potential approach to resolve this issue. To
use knowledge visualization effectively, the cultural
context of communities and possible patterns of perception need to be studied intensely. Linguistic pat-

terns and their acquisition for subsequent recall are
important indicators for viable ways of visualization.
Some questions, especially concerning visualized
metaphors, need much more attention and have yet to
be resolved. Using knowledge visualization as an example, it appears that this discipline (momentarily)
cannot be more than a mirror image of linguistic (or
idiomatic) coinage, which in turn is a mirror image of
culture and, again, context. Thus, this is a circular argument which can only be fundamentally solved theoretically. In this paper we presented first steps toward a
semiology of the communication of knowledge.

References
[1]

Helmuth Feilke. Sprachlicher Common sense und
Kommunikation. Über den ‘gesunden Menschenverstand’, die Prägung der Kompetenz und die idiomatische Ordnung des Verstehens. In Der Deutschunterricht (VI). 1993. 6-21.
[2] Helmuth Feilke. Common sense-Kompetenz. Überlegungen zu einer Theorie des ‘sympathischen’ und ‘natürlichen’ Meinens und Verstehens. Frankfurt/Main,
Suhrkamp. 1994.
[3] John Stewart, Ed. Beyond the symbol model: Reflections on the representational nature of language. Albany, NY, State University of New York Press. 1996.
[4] Dietrich Busse. Historische Semantik. Analyse eines
Programms. Stuttgart, Klett-Cotta. 1987.
[5] Fritz Hermanns. Sprachgeschichte als Mentalitätsgeschichte. Überlegungen zu Sinn und Form und Gegenstand historischer Semantik. In Sprachgeschichte
des Neuhochdeutschen. Gegenstände, Methoden, Theorien. Andreas Gardt, Klaus Mattheier and Oskar
Reichmann, Eds. Tübingen, Niemeyer. 1995. 69-101.
[6] Joachim Scharloth. Die Semantik der Kulturen. Diskurssemantische Grundfiguren als Kategorien einer
linguistischen Kulturanalyse. In Brisante Semantik.
Neuere Konzepte und Forschungsergebnisse einer kulturwissenschaftlichen Linguistik. Dietrich Busse,
Thomas Niehr and Martin Wengeler, Eds. Tübingen,
Niemeyer. 2005. 119-135.
[7] Angelika Linke. Begriffsgeschichte – Diskursgeschichte – Sprachgebrauchsgeschichte. In Herausforderungen der Begriffsgeschichte. Carsten Dutt, Ed. Heidelberg, Winter. 2003. 39-49.
[8] George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. Metaphors we live
by. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 1980.
[9] Helmuth Feilke. Sprache als soziale Gestalt. Ausdruck,
Prägung und die Ordnung der sprachlichen Typik.
Frankfurt/Main, Suhrkamp. 1996.
[10] Martin J. Eppler and Remo A. Burkhard. Knowledge
Visualization. In Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management. David G. Schwartz, Ed. Hershey, PA, Idea
Group. 2005, forthcoming.
[11] Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann. The social
construction of reality: A treatise in the sociology of
knowledge. Garden City, NY, Doubleday. 1966.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[12] Klaus Merten. Wissensveränderung durch Medien.
Aufriss und Kritik. In Wissensveränderung durch Medien. Theoretische Grundlagen und empirische Analysen. Karin Böhme-Dürr, Jürgen Emig and Norbert M.
Seel, Eds. München, Saur. 1990. 21-39.
[13] Werner Wirth. Von der Information zum Wissen. Die
Rolle der Rezeption für die Entstehung von Wissensunterschieden. Opladen, Westdeutscher Verlag. 1997.
[14] Martin J. Eppler and Remo A. Burkhard. Knowledge
Visualization. Towards a New Discipline and its Fields
of Application. ICA Working Paper 2/2004, University
of
Lugano.
http://www.knowledgecommunication.org/
KnowledgeVisualizationWorkingPaper.pdf (Retrieved on February 21, 2005).
[15] Remo A. Burkhard and Michael Meier. Tube Map
Visualization: Evaluation of a Novel Knowledge Visualization Application for the Transfer of Knowledge in
Long-Term Projects. In Journal of Universal Computer Science (Special Issue on Business Process Oriented Knowledge Infrastructures). 2005, forthcoming.
[16] Michael Loebbert. Storymanagement: Der narrative
Ansatz für Management und Beratung. Stuttgart, KlettCotta. 2003.
[17] Ikujiro Nonaka. The Knowledge-Creating Company.
In Harvard Business Review 69 (6). 1991. 96-104.
[18] Remo A. Burkhard. Learning from Architects: The
Difference between Knowledge Visualization and Information Visualization. In Eighth International Conference on Information Visualization (IV04). London.
July 2004.
[19] Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophical Investigations.
New York, Macmillan. 1958.
[20] Paul Watzlawick, Janet Beavin Bavelas and Don D.
Jackson. Pragmatics of Human Communication: A
Study of Interactional Patterns, Pathologies, and Paradoxes. New York, Norton. 1967.

[21] Lev S. Vygotsky. Thought and language. Cambridge,
MA, MIT Press. 1986.
[22] Lev S. Vygotsky. Mind in society: The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press. 1978.
[23] Alex Kozulin. Vygotsky’s psychology: A biography of
ideas. New York, Harvester Wheatsheaf. 1990.
[24] Gerry Stahl. A Model of Collaborative KnowledgeBuilding. In Fourth International Conference of the
Learning Sciences. Barry J. Fishman and Samuel F.
O’Connor-Divelbiss, Eds. Mahwah, NJ, Erlbaum.
2000. 70-77.
[25] Remo A. Burkhard. Towards a Framework and a
Model for Knowledge Visualization: Synergies between Information and Knowledge Visualization. In
Knowledge and information visualization: Searching
for synergies. Sigmar-Olaf Tergan and Tanja Keller,
Eds. New York, Springer. 2005, forthcoming.
[26] Karl Mannheim. Ideology and Utopia: An Introduction
to the Sociology of Knowledge. New York, Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. 1936.
[27] Peter F. Drucker. Post-Capitalist Society. New York,
Harper. 1993.
[28] Gilbert Ryle. The concept of mind. London, Hutchinson’s University Library. 1949.
[29] William Grey. Metaphor and Meaning. In Minerva: An
Internet Journal of Philosophy (4). 2000.
http://www.ul. ie/~philos/vol4/metaphor.html (Retrieved on February 22, 2005).
[30] Martin J. Eppler. The Image of Insight: The Use of
Visual Metaphors in the Communication of Knowledge. In Journal of Universal Computer Science. Proceedings of I-KNOW ’03. Graz. July 2003. 81-88.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

