Enhancing 3D File Search with Landscapes and Personal Histories:
Exploring the Possibilities of TerraSearch+
Anthony Faiola, Dennis P. Groth
School of Informatics, IUPUI and Indiana University
{afaiola@iupui.edu, dgroth@indiana.edu}
Abstract
Most users today have difficulty locating files due to
memory, i.e., an ability to recreate the personal history of
where they placed the document in the first place.
Microsoft XP search provides the standard file search
functions according to human semantic memory.
However, depending exclusively on this human system for
file acquisition can be problematic and very limiting for
users who perform well in 3D space. The prototype system
utilizes three-dimensional environments that are
augmented with second-order information that depicts the
relationships between the first-order properties by a visualization system. This system maintains user trace data
in a way that enhances their ability to locate files
according to place, time, and content. Early results of
cognitive walkthroughs and questionnaires indicate users
could more easily find files through search tools, but that
unfamiliarity with the interface could be a barrier to
acceptance.

1. Introduction
Creating a file is easy – finding a file is difficult. This is
because there is a common breakdown in memory of events
over time, especially when we apply cognitive functions that
limit our ability to managing computer files. A further point
can illustrate this if we ask anyone where they were and what
they were doing one month ago from this moment.
Obviously, this would be rather difficult to answer. However,
if we were to ask anyone these questions concerning deeply
significant events in their lives, the response would be quite
different. This is because these types of events have
embedded time, location, and the surrounding images in
long-term memory. This example illustrates how establishing
links between common historical events, along with their
place and time, make memory an important issue for
supporting our need to manage and access files.
Human memory comes in two major categories,
declarative and nondeclarative, with each having specific
functions and interrelationships with other memory in a

unified system. Episodic memory (declarative memory) in
particular “receives and stores information about temporally
dated episodes or events,” as well as the “relationship among
those events” [11, p. 252]. Episodic memory can include
recent events, such as eating breakfast this morning. It can
also provide distant, but specific events of significance, such
as the day you bought your first new car. For anyone to
experience episodic memory, the act of remembering must
be causally connected to the past experience being
recollected. Martin and Deutscher [7] suggest that to increase
the production of recollective experiences, the past
experience itself must have been causally operative,
suggesting the existence of some kind of “memory trace”
that serves as a continuous bridge across the temporal gap
that supports the connection between past and present [8, 10].
Declarative memory also includes semantic memory
which is the repository for words, concepts, rules, and
abstract ideas, and is necessary for language. It is critical for
organizing knowledge about words and verbal symbols, their
meaning, referents, and their interrelationship [13]. Without
semantic memory we could not name files or organize them
in folders in a hierarchical fashion. Our ability to retrieve
from memory the location of files is the result of wellorganized information in semantic memory. However, how
episodic and semantic memory work together is important
relative to how we name, save, and access files within a
larger file management system. For example, the memory
retrieval process itself for locating files depends upon
episodic memory, but to remember the actual name of the
file, its folder, and their hierarchical order and location, we
depend on semantic memory.
Episodic and semantic memory stand in contrast to
procedural memory (nondeclarative memory) from which
we spontaneously draw upon for knowledge to take routine
actions commonly done day after day. For example, you do
not think about your experience of driving to work each
day. You simply remember the way to drive the car to arrive
at the destination. Similarly, one might routinely save a text
document every 30 minutes to a pre-designated folder. By
taking the action - Ctrl S (save) multiple times, users don’t
consider the specific saving of the document as a special

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

historical event in time. Nor do they take note in memory or
in written form of the event. However, the content at the time
of saving the file and the location of the saved file may be
highly significant if accessed in the distant future.

more quickly access files from locations in visualized space
may prove to be more efficient in file retrieval.

1.2 Expanding Search Options using SecondaryOrder Information

1.1 Visual Memory & Spatial Cognition
Research has shown that the mind’s ability to form
cognitive maps, allows us to more readily recall visual and
spatial knowledge [3, 13, 14]. This is because of our capacity
to store and recall rout and survey knowledge. Rout
knowledge is related to the specific pathways used to get
from one place to another and survey knowledge deals with
more global relationships between environmental cues [11],
i.e., those employed during navigation. When visual and
declarative memory works in unison, the mind associates
imagery with events in time. As such, two-dimensional (2D)
and 3D imagery are likely to be used in fact retrieval if the
(event-related) fact is about a visual property that a person
has seen [17]. Interactions with space are explicit as we move
here and there in time. Other interactions are implicit, i.e.,
there is an awareness of where we are and what things
surround us [16]. Knowledge obtained from these
interactions comes from a range of sources in the
environment (e.g., visual cues) that support spatial movement
or navigation.
The critical elements of space navigation are the
landmarks, paths, links, and nodes that memory records.
Vinson refers to these elements more specifically as streets,
canals, rivers, neighborhoods, town squares, statues, signs,
etc. [18]. Space navigation is a mental construction that is
schematized. This visual schematized information takes
advantage of our human capacity to reason about space, such
as estimating distances and direction. These graphic
representations are also preserved in memory, acting as
historical records, off-loading working memory and
processing and promoting inference and discovery by
externalizing memory and other cognitive operations [16].
Tversky further states “human ability to make spatial
inferences and on widespread spatial metaphors, they are
relatively easy to understand and use” [16, p.78].
The traditional file management systems of today depend
heavily on declarative memory for naming and organizing
files hierarchically. However, if users could visualize their
database geographically, visual memory and spatial
cognition would play a greater role in file acquisition. As
opposed to declarative memory that depends only on internal
representations, visual memory interacts with external
representations that enable cognitive operations in different
ways. Visualizations that represent semantic and symbolic
information on a computer display could provide users with
other forms of file management not yet successfully
developed. Because visual memory has an exceptional
storage capacity for geographic information, the potential to

Today’s operating systems utilize a folder metaphor for
organizing files. When we consider individual desktop
system usage we are faced with one choice for the placement
of individual files. Certainly, users can create symbolic links
or shortcuts to create references to files that are physically
(actually) located elsewhere. However, this placement
constitutes a relatively high burden on the user to decide
where to place a file. A common organizational strategy
employed by users is to group related files into a common
folder structure. This organization, of course, occurs at the
time that a file is created, and requires user action to relocate
the file if a different grouping of files is desired.
At the same time, when we consider certain properties of
files, some are explicitly determined by users, e.g., content,
file name, and folder location. Simultaneously, other
properties of files are implicitly set (i.e., automatically set by
the system), namely, date created, last modification date, and
number of pages. These first-order properties are the typical
target of search functions available to users. In this project the
authors focused on relationships between first-order
properties as searchable information. For example, files that
are accessed near each other in time can be represented
visually to the user in order to improve their ability of recall
[2]. In this case, files can be graphically represented to the
user in order to better facilitate their recognition ability and
retrieval of documents. The authors’ file management
system, referred to as “TerraSearch+,” working as a shell
over MS XP, utilizes a 3D terrain-based landscape for file
management that is augmented with second-order
information that graphically depicts the relationships between
first-order properties.
As mentioned above, episodic and semantic memory are
limited in their ability to support user recall of the location of
files from past events. As such, discovering their
whereabouts can be a very frustrating task. Part of the
problem lies with a users’ inability to effectively recreate the
historical conditions of past interactions with documents.
Also, because we cannot expect users to document each of
these interactions (e.g., creating, modifying, and saving), a
3D visualization system, such as TerraSearch+, may better
support a “memory trace” to help bridge time and events of
file management with a geographic visualization. To better
facilitate file management, the facts related to place, time,
and content, play a collective role in enhancing a user’s
experience of file acquisition. In the exponential increase of
files created by typical users, file organization and retrieval
are critical. As such, the authors posit that our human ability
to recall the location of documents based on declarative and
visual memory provides another possible model for file

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

management in 3D space. Once files are searched and
located in a 3D terrain, users can then manipulate thumbnails
(linkable shortcut icons) of the original artifacts, as well as
allow direct application launch. Such ability is important for
addressing file retrieval, especially for users who are more
orientated toward 3D cognitive processes of discovery rather
than 2D hierarchical word (file name) search.

2. Related Research
A key file retrieval system that inspired our file search
system was Robertson, Czerwinski, Munzner, and Cook’s
Data Mountain [11], which is a simplified virtual desktop
environment that takes advantage of user 3D perceptions.
Rather than leave the desktop flat on the screen, the
developers tilted the desktop upward and eliminated
extraneous look-alike icons such as the telephone and
folders, with the result of a 2.5D landscape (rather than full
3D). The authors reported an improved user ability to retrieve
specific Web site thumbnails from among dozens of others.
The most current desktop metaphor has recently been
released by Sun Microsystems, called, “Project Looking
Glass” [12]. Sun has announced this as a 3D user interface,
presented on a flat surface. It brings 3D windowing
capabilities to the desktop to offer a user experience for work
and home use. Sun suggests that their prototype provides a
display where applications are no longer stacked upon each
other with flat icons and buttons to represent them. Rather,
they are viewed in a 3D environment and manipulated as 3D
objects. Cockburn and McKenzie [7] introduced a 3D
interface that resembled the inside of a rectangular metal
duct, in which users could position thumbnails of files in 3D
space. The files hang in the air within the 3D “duct,” and can
be grouped together. In retrieval tests, Cockburn and
McKenzie found that retrieval time was actually longer using
the 3D interface than when using the 2D or 2.5D interfaces.
Christoffel and Schmitt [5] have developed an application
for remotely browsing, searching, and selecting books at the
library of the University of Karlsruhe. This interface is based
on the popular Quake II 3D game engine for “first person
shooting.” Christoffel and Schmitt replaced the weapon with
a laser pointer. Chao [4] reworked the game of Doom to
manage UNIX system tasks, referring to it as “PSDoom.” As
a mix of the afore mentioned technologies, as well as an
integration of the authors’ special search and navigation
features, the authors’ intention is that TerraSearch+ would
provide first person navigation, with slow move and zoom to
actions, for managing files with further support of an
integrated search engine.

3. The TerraSearch+ System
3.1 TerraSearch+: Using File History

Much of visual cognition is given over to a determination
of 3D relationships. The human ability to formulate a world
view in 3D has distinct advantages. The result is that humans
can place a variety of objects in a 3D space and find those
objects years after their original placements. This is because
the typical 3D environment is rich with location cues that
allow humans to rapidly find and retrieve desired objects
from memory. To date, a range of visualization researchers
have explored, with mixed results, to what degree humans
can or prefer to organize, locate, and retrieve files in a 3D
environment interface. In the most prevalent operating
systems (e.g., Microsoft Windows, Apple X, etc.) the
placement and organization of files located in
representational “folders” within other “folders” in twodimensional hierarchies are deeply nested to make losing
files a common occurrence.
Other file management schemes have attempted to
include a third dimension by emulating a stack of folders on
a desktop. Unfortunately, such models suffer from the
inability to help users to clearly see what they have placed
beneath the top folder in the stack. Ideally, an environment
that depends on 3D navigation would take advantage of the
user’s innate cognitive ability to recognize the location of
file-objects in space. Existing research of 3D file navigation
applications, like the “Data Mountain” [11] could be
extended into a fully 3D terrain-based interface. In
TerraSearch+, a user can move to and from mountains as
they might in a 3D game or use the enhanced 3D search
engine. The files are stored by the user on a mountain as
thumbnails of memos, documents, spreadsheets, databases,
or anything else the user could directly access. When saving
a file, the user could instruct the creating application to “Save
to TerraSearch+”, and the thumbnail would appear in the
TerraSearch+ window, where it could be placed by the user.
The environmental configuration or visualization can vary,
i.e., it is not restricted to a geographic terrain, but rather can
include a cityscape, a forest, a village square, or the inside of
an apartment. Like other navigation environments,
TerraSearch+ would have an integrated search capability to
search for files across first and second-order information.

3.2 Second-Order Property Representations
The model that the authors propose was developed into
paper prototypes and demonstrates how users might interact
with their file history, which includes the location of the file
and the time it was saved. A dynamic prototype is currently
being developed to demonstrate how the model can be used
to enhance user navigation. The problem that is addressed in
this project is that of how to best visualize the location of
files. File systems track a variety of metadata about files that
are useful for filtering and ordering lists of available files
within a folder. The authors refer to these types of properties
as first-order properties, since each property can be directly
inspected on any given file. The authors are especially

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

interested in second-order properties of files that are derived
from the usage patterns. For example, files that are opened by
a user within a specific time frame might be related to the
same project, regardless of the physical location of the file,
thus establishing a pattern of time usage among various files.
The advantage is that rather than re-order the display based
on temporal access, as is done in hierarchical folder
interfaces, the authors’ system augments the display with
visual cues to represent second-order properties.

Figure 1. Dimensions of search space for
locating personal files in the PTC model.
The authors consider temporal relationships between files
as an initial objective for users to recall files of interest. The
second-order properties the authors are currently
investigating can be represented by three orthogonal
dimensions of place, time, and content. The authors are
particularly interested in relationships between the
dimensions. The visual representation the authors have
chosen to use is a terrain-based layout of the file system that
utilizes 3D shapes for physical placement of files. The
authors’ early prototypes were primarily focused on physical
placement of files on the terrain [1]. The primary benefit
offered by the physical placement was that users could
simply drop files onto any part of the landscape without
navigating the directory, with the goal of maintaining line of
sight to as many files as possible.
However, the TerraSearch+ interface intends to provide
full 3D capability identical to that found in games, permitting
users to “zoom” to location with search or navigate there
manually with support from the PTC search engine. Figure 1
depicts the relationship between the first-order file properties.
File search by time highlights in color-code the geographic
location of desired files. The user can view the location of
identified files from a birds-eye view or from the ground for

second-order information of temporal and other contentbased relationships found in the geographic locations. Figure
2 and 3 illustrate the paper prototypes of TerraSearch+ that
were intended to create a virtual experience for the user, but
quickly evolved into a fully operational search engine.
TerraSearch+ users could perform any function that other file
navigation systems permitted, e.g.: search, drag and drop,
and double-clicking to launch an application, and files can be
placed by the user anywhere on any location, in any grouping
desired. TerraSearch+ allows thumbnails to be visually
coded by time, location, and type of file. The number of
objects in the interface’s environment can be set by the user.
Files enter the interface through drag-and-drop from another
interface or by saving from an application directly to
TerraSearch+ interface. The saved file appears initially in the
holding station at the bottom of the interface window as a
thumbnail and is manually moved into position on a
mountain.
TerraSearch+ has clickable icons for help and a range of
other traditional and geographic search tools (see Figure 4-5).
As mentioned above, selecting your own 3D environment is
also an option. The operating system provides a range of
geographic landscapes and city-scapes to select from, much
like the background options for the user interface of
Windows. Users can also import .W3D files created in 3D
Studio Max if they desire to create their own landscapes or
environment that they are personally aware of their
apartment or neighborhood.

4. Methodology
An exploratory prototype study was done that included
cognitive walkthrough tasks and a post-task questionnaire.
The data was not subjected to significance testing, but was
intended to provide guidance to building the dynamic
prototype. Seven graduate student volunteers participated as
a sample of convenience. The subjects were asked to execute
a cognitive walkthrough of TerraSearch+ using paper
prototypes of the product. The participants were instructed in
the purpose of the product, the functionality of the interface,
including each icon and how all the menus worked. They
were then given general instructions on the cognitive
walkthrough tasks and how to use the paper prototypes.
Subjects received ten tasks that consisting of multiple
subtasks. The tasks included: 1) Launch TerraSearch+ from
the MS Start button, 2) Use the Zoom function, 3) Use the
Navigate function, 4) Place a document on the terrain by
drag-&-drop, 5) Use the grid system and place sign post to
mark a special area on the terrain, 6) Place a document by
moving to a pre-named quadrant located at a special grid
location, 7) Search for a document by recognizing its
geographic location, 8) Search for a document by file name,
9) Search for a document by time, and 10) Search for a
document by association.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 2. Open landscape screen of
TerraSearch+ with search menu.

Figure 5. Picture shows pointer function.
After executing the tasks, the participants were asked to
respond to nine self-reporting questions using a Likert
Scale (1=disagree – 5=agree), and to specific feedback
questions regarding a range of inputs about the prototypes.
The questions covered general topics related to ease of use
and learning, including product concept, navigation/task
flow, interface content, product value, and user
requirements.

5. Findings

Figure 3. Grid system mode using input function
for guardant naming.

Table 2 shows measures of central tendency (mean,
median, and mode) on a five-point scale (1=disagree 5=agree) of the seven participants who responded to
questions related to prototype concept, navigation, content,
value, and requirements. In this case, ease of use of search
functions (Q4) drew the highest median and mode scores,
while the highest mean came from Q8 related to how the
product would be the most useful for user who prefer
spatial navigation.
Participant responses of a qualitative nature included a
range suggest and problems they encountered with the
prototypes. Participants suggested that there is a need for
multiple file selection features. They also indicated
potential problems with finding the map, and often needed
help locating and using it. Participants further commented
that if the filename was not known, a search was
particularly problematic. Participants wanted better visual
cues on the landscape, such as the ability to place any range
of objects beyond the signposts. They also expressed the
opinion that while such an interface might be suitable for
home use, it might suffer in the workplace because it looks
too much like a video game.

6. Discussion
Figure 4. Approaching mountain location after
using search function.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Correlations performed between demographic data and
responses did not produce recognizable patterns of
association. This is not surprising considering the nature of
the questionnaire and the small sample.

5

means of doing the same thing within huge networks, with
various nodes or servers being represented as geographic
locations. The authors do not pretend that TerraSearch+
will appeal to all users, but maintain that it may become an
important addition to the navigation schemes of many users
who might prefer retrieving files located in spatial contexts
rather than hierarchical ones.

4
M ean

3

M edian

2

M ode

1
0

1

2

3

4

5

3.6

3.7

4

3.7

3.4

M edian

4

4

4

5

4

3

4

4

4

M ode

4

4

4

5

4

3

4

4

4

M ean

6

7

3.1 3.3

8

9

4.4 3.3

Table 1. User mean, median, and mode on a fivepoint scale (1=disagree - 5=agree).
The results indicate further investigation is warranted
using a dynamic prototype, but intrinsically the data is
indicative, not predictive. Ultimately, the authors believe
that the cognitive walkthrough, while instructive, was
limited in presenting TerraSearch+ adequately. One of the
problems the authors initially faced when planning the
walkthrough was how to provide participants a full 3D
interface effect. In part this was due to the participants’
having to struggle to envision a true 3D environment in the
2D boundaries of paper. Nevertheless, user response was
overall positive, as especially noted by the median and
mode (Q4) and mean (Q8), which may further indicate that
they acknowledge the potential usefulness of the product in
spite of the limitations of the prototypes.
Also, the authors expected some cognitive dissonance in
participants from associating 3D constructs and file
management. However, the authors noted rapid learning of
the paper prototype’s affordances, which leads us to
conclude that a fully functional prototype could be quickly
learned and used.

Conclusion
The authors have presented here a novel concept for a
3D interface for file navigation, based on the 3D
experience. This interface is intended to investigate the
possibility of utilizing users’ inherently excellent abilities to
navigate in 3D space to retrieve files from among dozens or
hundreds of possible locations. Cognitive walkthroughs
using paper prototypes were promising, albeit incomplete.
Further work should include the development of a
functioning prototype, as well as incorporation of the
suggested changes from the walkthroughs. The authors can
see the expansion of TerraSearch+ into more than single
user applications. The authors also see TerraSearch+ as a

References
[1] Altom, T., Buher, M., Downey, M. & Faiola, A. (2004). Using
3D landscapes to navigate file systems: the MountainView
interface. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Information Visualization, 645-649.
[2] Anderson, J. R. & Bower, G. H. (1972). Recognition and
retrieval processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 79, 97123.
[3] Campbell, J. (1994). Past, space, and self. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
[4] Chao, D, (2001). Doom as an interface for process
management. Proceedings of the SIGCGI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, Seattle, WA, 152-157.
[5] Christoffel, M., & Schmitt, B. (2002). Accessing Libraries as
Easy as a Game. Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Visual Interfaces for Digital Libraries.
[6] Cockburn, A. & McKenzie, B. (2002). Evaluating the
effectiveness of spatial memory in 2D and 3D physical and virtual
environments. CHI 2002.
[7] Martin, C.B. and Deutscher, Max. (1966). Remembering,
Philosophical Review, 75, 161-196.
[8] Perner, Josef (2000) ‘Memory and Theory of Mind’, in E.
Tulving and F.I.M. Craik (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Memory.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 297-312.
[9] Robertson, G., Czerwinski, M., & Larson, K. (2002). Data
Mountain: Using spatial memory for document management.
Proceedings of UIST '02, 153-162.
[10] Shoemaker, Sydney (1970) ‘Persons and their Pasts’,
American Philosophical Quarterly 7, 269-285.
[11] Solso, R. L. (2001). Cognitive psychology. Boson: Allyn and
Bacon.
[12] Sun Microsystems Website. (n.d.). Retrieved March 1, 2005,
from http://www.sun.com
[13] Taylor, H. A. & Tversky, B. (1992). Descriptions and
depictions of environments. Memory & Cognition, 20, 483-496.
[14] Thorndyke, P. W. & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation. Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 580-589.
[15] Tulving, E. (1999). Episodic vs semantic memory’, In F. Keil
& R. Wilson (Eds.), The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive
Sciences (pp. 278-280). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[16] Tversky, B. (2003). Structures of mental spaces: How people
think about space. Environment and Behavior, 35(1), 66-80.
[17] Tversky, B. 1991. Spatial mental models. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.). The Psychology of Learning and Motivation 27 (pp. 109145). New York: Academic Press.
[18] Vinson, N. G. (1999). Design guidelines for landmarks to
support navigation in virtual environments. Proceedings of
CHI’99, Pittsburgh, ACM Press, 178-185.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

