Watch This: A Taxonomy for Dynamic Data Visualization
Joseph A. Cottam∗

Andrew Lumsdaine†

Chris Weaver‡

Indiana University

Indiana University

University of Oklahoma

A BSTRACT
Visualizations embody design choices about data access, data transformation, visual representation, and interaction. To interpret a
static visualization, a person must identify the correspondences between the visual representation and the underlying data. These correspondences become moving targets when a visualization is dynamic. Dynamics may be introduced in a visualization at any point
in the analysis and visualization process. For example, the data
itself may be streaming, shifting subsets may be selected, visual
representations may be animated, and interaction may modify presentation. In this paper, we focus on the impact of dynamic data.
We present a taxonomy and conceptual framework for understanding how data changes influence the interpretability of visual representations. Visualization techniques are organized into categories
at various levels of abstraction. The salient characteristics of each
category and task suitability are discussed through examples from
the scientific literature and popular practices. Examining the implications of dynamically updating visualizations warrants attention
because it directly impacts the interpretability (and thus utility) of
visualizations. The taxonomy presented provides a reference point
for further exploration of dynamic data visualization techniques.
Keywords: Dynamic Data, Interpretation.
Index Terms: H.5.1 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—Multimedia Information Systems; I.3.6
[Computing Methodologies]: Computer Graphics—Methodologies
and Techniques
1 I NTRODUCTION
Dynamic visualizations—visualizations that change over time—
are increasingly common. The way that a visualization actually
changes impacts how it can be interpreted, both immediately and
over time. Simple decisions, such as choosing to modify a color
scale in response to updated data, drastically change what the visualization intuitively reveals. Such decisions can be the difference between building insights and misleading. Understanding and
controlling visual dynamics requires an appreciation of the origin
and manifestation of underlying data dynamics [22]. This paper
presents a taxonomy of dynamic visualization techniques.
Simply put, “dynamics” are changes over time. In the pipeline of
the information visualization reference model [12] , dynamics can
arise at any stage (see Figure 1). User interaction for navigation
or to build dynamic queries are two of the most common sources
of dynamics in visualization tools. However, the underlying data
itself may change as well. These changes may be in response to
an external event, such as a sensor update, resulting in streaming
updates. Changes may also be in response to modified requirements
of the visualization with entirely new data sources seen as relevant.
When a visualization changes, regardless of the reason, that
change must be considered in its interpretation. Choosing how the
∗ jcottam@indiana.edu
† lums@osl.iu.edu
‡ weaver@cs.ou.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

Updated Hypothesis

Streaming

Dynamic Query

Source
Data

Data
Tables
Data
Transforms

Remapping

Animation/Navigation

Visual
Abstraction
Visual
Mappings

Views

View
Transforms
Dynamics

Reference Model

Figure 1: Information visualization reference model [12] and
sources of dynamics at each stage.

visualization changes (i.e., in what way a visualization is dynamic)
is an important part of the overall visualization design.
Visualization dynamics is too broad a topic to address as a single
unit. Important differences are found between user-driven and datadriven changes. This paper focuses on dynamic data, specifically
the effects of streaming data on a visualization. Streaming data is
important (1) because it is growing in prevalence, (2) because data
changes are part of the InfoVis Reference Model, and (3) because
it affects techniques further down the pipeline.
Bertin’s description of visualization techniques decomposes the
visual space into two groups: Spatial and Retinal variables [9].
Spatial variables determine positions, while retinal variables cover
the other visual aspects.‘ Spatial and retinal variables are the basic
building blocks of data visualization. Data is encoded using these
variables. Dynamic visualizations change over time by modifying
the values of these variables.
Our taxonomy organizes the dynamics possible in a streamingdata visualization into four retinal and four spatial categories (Section 2). This organization is the basis for the presented taxonomy of
dynamic visualizations (Section 3). A useful description of the role
of element identity directly results from the retinal and spatial discussion (Section 4). Guidelines for selecting a dynamic representation (Section 5) and discussion of several existing visualizations
(Section 6) are also provided.
2

TAXONOMY D IMENSIONS

Prior on classifying static visualizations provides a foundation for
classifying time-varying, dynamic visualizations. This taxonomy
decomposes visualizations using distinctions made by Bertin: spatial and retinal variables [9]. The spatial variables are the coordinates in space: X and Y for two-dimensional visualizations. Retinal
variables are the size, value, orientation, texture, hue and shape of a
visual element. Unlike Bertin, the taxonomy presented in this paper
is not concerned with the individual properties in either dimension.
Instead, it examines how these variations can be presented within
each group and the implications of different variation styles.
2.1

Spatial Variable Treatments

Spatial dimensions describe the position of an element. Position
and quantity are intrinsically related because all visual elements
must have a position. The fundamental positional information consists of the X and Y position; Z position is a direct extension that
can be applied as needed (e.g., for layering). Positional information
is considered relative to a canonical “registration point,” not regard-

193

ing the entire extent of the element (which is further influenced by
size and rotation, see Section 2.4).
Spatial dimension may be dynamic in two ways: changing existing values and changing the number of visual elements (adding or
deleting). These two general change types can be expressed as four
general categories:
Fixed: The spatial dimensions do not change. The number of visual elements is fixed at the start of the visualization. Visual
elements do not move.
Mutable: The number of elements remains fixed throughout the
visualization process, but the location of elements may change
over time. (Destructive updates are referred to as “mutation”
of that entity.)
Create: New elements may be created in response to incoming
data. Existing element positions may be mutated.
Create & Delete: Elements may be created or deleted in response
to incoming data. Mutability is implicit in this category because C REATE & D ELETE can be used to simulate mutation
to retinal attributes.
Mutation of spatial position generally falls into two styles. Both
styles of mutation can cause significant spatial changes over time
but are not significant at the level of abstraction of this taxonomy.
However, a detailed investigation of any given visualization may
benefit from noting the degree to which each case applies because
they represent different types of relationships. The first style is a
change to reflect a changing context. This style is common when
the spatial information is not directly tied to underlying data, such
as graph layout. When the context changes, visual elements move
but that does not imply a change to the related data, only the context. The second style of spatial mutation occurs when spatial positions are directly tied to underlying data. In this case, entity movement directly reflects data changes tied to the given element. Most
statistical graphics employ spatial layouts of the second type, and
thus have movement dynamics in this second category.
2.2 Retinal Variable Treatments
Bertin’s retinal dimensions are size, value (light vs. dark), orientation (or rotation), texture (or patterning), hue (or color), and shape.
Retinal dimensions do not affect the number of individual elements
(as position does), but they can affect how elements are perceived
to group. Retinal values change over time as the attribute they are
associated with do. The user of a visualization employing retinal
encoding must interpret the degree of change as a corresponding
value change. Depending on how much change is permitted, the
complexity of this interpretation changes. The categories of retinal
dimension dynamics, in increasing order of complexity, are:
Immutable: Retinal variables are set and left unchanged.
Known Scale: The scale is fixed, but future data may change the
retinal presentation of an existing elements. The known scale
implies that all values that may be presented are covered by
the scale’s regular divisions, which are established when the
visualization is initialized. For categorical encodings, known
scale means that the number and order of categories is known
in advance. For continuous encodings, the range of values is
provided in advance and divided into regular intervals.
Extreme Bin: An extreme bins scale is a known scale with sentinel categories (usually at the endpoints). These sentinel categories may be due to an unknown actual extent of values,
special/sentinel categories, or to provide details in a specific
sub-range. Values outside of the regular range are assigned to

194

a top or bottom catch-all “bin.” Scales like this are typically
include labels such as “100+”, “less than 0”, “No Data” or
”Error”. These open-ended categories are distinguished and
outside of the normal divisions of the scale.
Mutable Scale: Updates may change the representation of an element and the mapping function itself. In this category, scales
may grow or shrink dynamically to accommodate the data being visualized. For example, this category may apply if the
number of levels in a categorical variable is not known in advance. When modifying scales, a single new data point may
cause existing visual elements to change representations, even
though the underlying data did not change.
Retinal dimensions are closely related to gestalt principals [44],
and thus do not include symbolic meaning. This distinction indicates that letters, words, geographic outlines of countries, etc. are
not visual elements in-and-of themselves. Interpreting words or elements “from the real world” depends strongly on cultural context.
In contrast, the ability to recognize variation in retinal variables is
less influenced by cultural context [44]. Retinal dimensions have
inherent bandwidth. Appropriate limitations are assumed to remain
constant in the face of incremental updates and assumed to be respected in the visualization.
2.3 Identity
Comparison is a fundamental task of visualization interpretation [1,
9,41]. However, a visualization that includes dynamics complicates
the task of comparison by inviting comparisons to be made across
time. This taxonomy examines how dynamics influence the task
of comparison over time. Identity can be constructed in spatial or
retinal variables or in combinations of the two.
Comparisons in dynamic visualizations can be divided into two
rough categories: identity based and nonidentity based. Identitybased comparisons rely on the ability to recognize an element as
representing the same real-world entity at multiple times. For example, in a social network, identity based comparisons require the
ability to recognize that a given node represents the same person
as the visualization changes. Identities may be low-level (e.g., recognizing individual people) or high-level (e.g., recognizing large
groups of people that live in the same state). High-level identity is
referred to as “group identity.”
Dynamics in a visualization make identity potentially fragile.
The more an element changes, and the more that change happens
in characteristics with strong visual salience, the more care must be
taken if identity must be preserved. Identity preservation can occur
at different time scales. In general, identity preservation enables
detailed comparisons both within and between different time steps.
Long-term identity preservation enables comparisons at arbitrary
time differences. However, short-term identity preservation can be
used to communicate incremental changes.
Non-identity based comparisons do not enable the fine-grained
observations that identity-based comparisons do. However, they do
allow observations of distributions (within time steps) and observation of distributional changes (between time steps). Non-identity
based comparisons have fewer time-scale issues [42], so small and
large time changes affect interpretation less.
2.4 Special Considerations
Because the taxonomy is focused on the influence of dynamic data,
data-derived visual attributes are the principal consideration. Nondata derived attributes are assumed to be constant in this taxonomy.
Since any change to the representation can introduce interpretation
issues comparable to those driven by data, it is important to note
that this assumption is not strictly true. Two major circumstances
generally introduce changes to non-data derived attributes: graphic
design considerations and user interaction. Changes predicated on

Radial
50

Linear
Immutable

0

50

100

Figure 2: Linear and radial meters with registrations points marked.

graphic design considerations, such as resizing text to avoid overlapping labels, can introduce interpretation issues comparable to
those driven by data. However, such events are relatively rare and
thus not considered significant in this taxonomy. If the taxonomy
focused on interaction or remapping (see Figure 1), such changes
would be more significant.
Registration and transparency introduce ambiguities with respect
to quantity and position. Treating visual elements as if they were on
exact points is an abstraction. Visual elements have spatial extent
and therefore contain more than one X/Y position. The canonical position of the visual element is called its “registration point.”
Rotation and size changes may induce a motion-like effect without
changing the registration point. The difference between radial and
linear meters illustrates this difference (see Figure 2). The pointer
on a radial meter maintains a fixed registration point, though value
changes drive rotation and thus extent changes. In contrast, value
changes shown on a linear meter drive changes to the registration
point itself. Our taxonomy only considers changes to the registration point as spatial changes. Extent changes are treated as retinal
variable changes.
Treatment of transparency depends on the eventual visibility. If
the element is always visible, transparency change is treated as a
retinal variable change. However, if the visual element is made
fully transparent, then it is treated as element deletion.
User interaction is a complex issue and generally deferred to future work (see Section 8). The core difficulty with user interaction
is that changes in response to user actions are typically semantically distinct from those in response to source data. On the surface,
a user can be treated as any other dynamic data source. User induced changes are no more nor less extensive than data-induced
changes. However, the user induced changes imply a shifting mental state in advance of the visualization and an intentional connection to the change. These are the opposite conditions to those found
from other data source dynamics. The distinct connection between
user interaction and interpretation means that this taxonomy is less
applicable to such changes than to data-driven dynamics.
Different retinal dimensions have different properties, but this
taxonomy aggregates all retinal dimensions. This simplification focuses the taxonomy on issues above the level of individual retinal
dimension variation. It is considered safe because variation between retinal dimensions is generally of degree and not of kind.
For example, eight colors is a practical maximum to use in many
contexts, despite a theoretical maximum of two million [11]. Similar maxima exist for other retinal dimensions [44]. Additionally,
we only consider the retinal dimension with the greatest variation if
multiple levels of variation are used in a visualization.
Many visualizations exhibit different behaviors at different
phases. Initialization commonly exhibits distinct behaviors. When
categorizing visualizations, we focus on the behavior after initialization but do not make further phase distinctions.
3

TAXONOMY

Visualizations can be organized according to the dynamics present
in spatial and retinal dimensions. Four divisions of variability for
both spatial and retinal variability were identified and described in
detail in Section 2. In brief, the spatial properties of a visual element may be (1) fixed at the start (F IXED), (2) mutable over the

Quantaty/Spatial
Categories

0
100

Fixed
Mutate
Create
Create &
Delete

Retinal Categories
Known
Extreme
Scale
Bins

Mutable
Scale

Identity Preserving
Transitional
Immediate
(a) Technique Matrix

Spatial×Retinal
F×I
F×KS
F×EB
F×MS
M×I
M×KS
M×EB
M×MS
C×I
C×KS
C×EB
C×MS
CD×I
CD×KS
CD×EB
CD×MS

Description
No dynamics present
Elements are statically positioned with dynamic
retinal encodings.
Retinal encodings with details in a limited range
of the data.
Retinal encodings where the value and the value’s
scale convey dynamic information.
Mobile elements with constant appearance.
Elements may move and their appearance may
change in a priori known ways.
Moving elements with emphasized retinal range.
A fixed number of elements, but retinal encodings
and scales are dynamic.
Elements may be created with fixed appearance.
Created elements are always retained, but their appearance may change over time.
Element creation with emphasized retinal range.
Number of elements can increase, their appearance
(including the scales) change with data.
The set of elements can grow or shrink, but appearance is fixed.
Elements appear and disappear; existing elements
can change appearance.
Elements appear and disappear, with representation providing details within a range.
Quantity, retinal encoding, and scales can change.
(b) Technique Descriptions

Figure 3: Retinal vs. Spatial Mutability matrix and brief description
of technique categories. Descriptions are labeled with abbreviated
spatial and retinal categories.

course of the visualization (M UTABLE), (3) new visual elements
may be added (C REATE) or (4) existing spatial elements may be
deleted (C REATE & D ELETE). Spatial modification in options 3
or 4 also changes the quantity of elements in a visualization. Four
divisions of retinal variability were also introduced: (1) set at creation time (I MMUTABLE), (2) mutable on a fully-defined and regular scale (K NOWN S CALE), (3) mutable on a defined scale with
distinguished ‘bins’ (E XTREME B INS) and (4) scales may update
in response to new data (M UTABLE S CALE).
Since spatial and retinal variables are orthogonal to each other,
the degrees of variability in each are also orthogonal. Combined,
they define a 4-by-4 matrix of technique categories (see Figure 3).
Visualizations within a technique category share identity-related
properties, and neighboring categories generally represent incremental changes to those properties. This section describes each of
the technique categories, including examples in existing visualizations and a discussion of identity properties.

195

3.1

Dynamic Technique Categories

The taxonomy matrix includes sixteen technique categories. This
section provides a more detailed description of each category.
F IXED×I MMUTABLE (F×I)
Visualizations that are fixed in spatial dimensions and immutable in
retinal dimensions are static. This is the degenerate case of dynamic
visualization. From the standpoint of identity, visualizations of this
class have strong identity characteristics and thus enable arbitrary
comparisons, but really only ever show one time step.
F IXED×K NOWN S CALE (F×KS)
A fixed spatial representation can present a stable reference system,
on which retinal dimensions indicate changing information as an
overlay. A road atlas is a static version of such a system, with road
positions as the reference and road type (divided highway, highway, unpaved road, etc.) as retinal annotations. A dynamic traffic
map [36] extends this idea to dynamic data: as the road congestion
changes, so does the coloring (i.e., retinal encoding) of the road segment. In such maps, the road positions do not change, so identity
is tied directly to position. Overlay of symbolic data in a headsup display works in a similar fashion, but the reference system is
the real world [3]. A “map of science” can form a metaphorical
substrate for other data to be encoded on the retinal variables [10].
Staying within a known scale for retinal variation can be achieved
in post-hoc displays of historical information or using scales in a
historically or analytically derived safe range.
F IXED×E XTREME B INS (F×EB)
Combining extreme bins with a fixed reference system provides
a stable presentation of potentially complex data. A temperature
map is a common form in this category. The map coloring corresponds to temperature. However, when the color enters the highest
or lowest bins, the only safe statement is that temperature exceeded
the normal scale. F IXED×EXTREME BINS visualizations are useful when the entities are known (such as frequency bins in a music
equalizer or physical locations on a map) and a subset of possible
range is interesting or common. Such visualizations may also provide a focus+context effect [37]. The focus area is a sub-range of
the input values, but the context is provided by the extreme bins.
F IXED×M UTABLE S CALE (F×MS)
At any give time, visualizations in the FIXED×MUTABLE SCALE
category appear like those in other FIXED categories. However, in
this category, the retinal scale itself changes to accommodate the
data. For example, if color used to communicate a range of values,
the color of an element indicates the relative position of the value in
a range and the scale communicates what that range actually is. In
general, visualizations using a mutable scale must be interpreted as
a composite of the value displayed and the scale it is displayed on.
If value-vs-extrema (e.g., min or max) is important, this category is
appropriate. However, if absolute values are important, visualizations in this category may be more difficult to interpret.
M UTATE×I MMUTABLE (M×I)
Visualizations employing spatial change have objects which may
move around but otherwise have fixed appearance. Visualizations
in this category are effective when the most important aspect of
comparison naturally maps to a coordinate space, such as spatial
tracking of specific entities. When used for tracking, identity is established by the retinal characteristics. This places a practical limit
on the number of distinguishable elements or element categories
(as was done in [16]). Visualization in this category can be used to
view distributions of large quantities of elements as well (see NY
Taxi cabs [34] and the Sexsperience 1000 [35]).

196

For visualizations where spatial mutation is possible but entity
deletion is not, a common technique is to use a distinguished location to indicate “out of selection” or ”other” (used by We Feel
Fine [21] and Sexsperience 1000 [35]). Having a distinguished
location may introduce spatial non-uniformity, (e.g., if the spatial
scales are otherwise linear). This can lead to mis-interpretation if
the distinguished location is not properly labeled.
M UTATE×K NOWN S CALE (M×KS)
Visualizations in this category can move elements in space and
modify their properties as they do so. Such visualizations generally preserve element identities in the short-term (e.g., if spatial
movement is done slowly). However, because position and retinal values can change over time, long-term identity preservation is
not guaranteed. Despite the ability to change any attribute, changes
are bounded to known ranges. Spatially, the quantity of elements
is fixed. Retinal presentation may only vary over pre-determined
ranges. The Zugmonitor [39], as it presents the position and expected delay of trains, fits in this category.
M UTATE×E XTREME B INS (M×EB)
Visualizations in this category are similar to those in MU TATE × KNOWN SCALE in that variation is bounded. However, in
MUTATE × EXTREME BINS only a subset of the dynamics underlying the retinal variables can be represented. In some ways, visualizations in this category focus on an interesting range whereas those
in MUTATE×KNOWN SCALE use the entire retinal space more uniformly. M UTATE×EXTREME BINS visualizations provide details in
context, and can do so with both spatial and retinal values. However, comparisons across long time spans are difficult since no element of the visualization is necessarily stable.
M UTATE×M UTABLE S CALE (M×MS)
In this category, visualizations present a fixed number of entities,
but may modify the retinal encoding in arbitrary ways. The treemap stock market representation at Smart Money fits this category [8, 45]. The number of tree cells in the maps of the market
is fixed, each corresponding to an individual stock. The color of
the cells represents percent value change. However, the color scale
changes as new data is acquired, always accommodating the largest
percentage change currently in the map. Therefore, the same high
saturation color in a cell in any given time-step may represent substantially different values. M UTATE×MUTABLE SCALE visualizations show detail for the current state when only a fixed number of
visual elements are required.
C REATE×I MMUTABLE (C×I)
Introducing new elements to a visualization introduces an additional level of complexity. Depending on how mutability is used,
visualizations in this category may or may not preserve identity.
Generally, if identity is created by position then it can be preserved
over short time periods, but large position changes (even cumulative) make long-term identity preservation unlikely. However, if
identity is preserved via the retinal variables, it is preserved indefinitely. Dynamic timelines belong in this category of visualizations,
such as Yanni Loukissas’s Apollo 11 visualization [25]. As time
progresses, new elements from a variety of data sources are added
to the left-hand side of the display.
C REATE×K NOWN S CALE (C×KS)
Visualizations in this category can employ element creation, positional mutation and mutable appearance along a known scale. Without fixed retinal representation, identity establishment is further
complicated over CREATE×IMMUTABLE. As with all categories
in the CREATE row, judicious use of retinal and spatial mutation
counteracts these effects. Visualization in this category can be used

to track an increasing number of elements. For example, in The
New York Talk Exchange [32], positional mutation is not used because location is based on physical geography. In contrast, dynamic
graph layout algorithms that do not preserve context use positional
mutation extensively as new nodes are added [4, 5].
C REATE×E XTREME B INS (C×EB)
As with all extreme bins visualizations, visualizations in this category enable more detailed presentation of specific ranges of values. Adding the ability to create new elements introduces a new
dynamic over just spatial mutability. For example, new information
can be retinally emphasized but eventually presented more consistently (as is done in by Nathan Yau to show growth of the retail
stores Target, Walmart, and Sam’s Club [48]). Another common
pattern in this category of visualizations is to subdue superseded or
excluded values without fully removing them. Subdued values remain in position and provide context, but belong to a retinal ‘bin’
that de-emphasizes them. Visualizations in this category can be
used to represent deleted elements [5].
C REATE×M UTABLE S CALE (C×MS)
In this category, visualizations tend to use a stable spatial substrate,
but accumulate elements and constantly re-encode retinal variables.
The Digg Arc [15] visualization belongs in this category. New elements are accumulated into individual arcs, but color re-encoded as
percentages shift to different parts of the circle. When used with a
slow-changing reference system (such as Digg Arc uses), this visualization can retain identity over short time periods. However, this
identity preservation is not generally guaranteed. The mutable scale
and ability to add an arbitrary number of elements over time make
long-distance comparisons difficult. As a MUTABLE SCALE visualization, the current state shows maximal detail on retinal variables.
C REATE & D ELETE×I MMUTABLE (CD×I)
Visualizations that allow elements to be created and deleted (as well
as mutated) enable the tracking new elements over time without retaining old elements. Retinal dimensions may also encode additional data. Identity can be established with the retinal encoding.
Despite the immutability of the retinal encoding, identity cannot
be guaranteed over long periods since elements may be removed.
Visualizations in this category are suited to tracking elements of
transient interest, like HDPV does with memory objects [40].
Strictly speaking, any visualization that allows creation and deletion of elements can simulate mutability. An element can be removed and a new element instantiated with slightly modified retinal
characteristics. The distinction between this category and CREATE
& DELETE×KNOWN SCALE relies not on capability, but rather observed behavior. If visual elements maintain their retinal characteristics throughout their time in the visualization, they belong in the
I MMUTABLE column, even though modification can be simulated
without violating the behavioral characteristics of this category.
C REATE & D ELETE×K NOWN S CALE (CD×KS)
Visualizations in this category behave much like those in CREATE
& DELETE×IMMUTABLE. However, in this category retinal representation of individual elements can also change. Such changes
decrease the ability to make identity-based comparisons, but facilitate greater flexibility to represent shifting categorizations of values. Techniques in this category can include fading values out over
time [7] and radar-like tracking [6].
C REATE & D ELETE×E XTREME B INS (CD×EB)
In this category, elements can be created and deleted, with transient information displayed in retinal variation. Extreme bins allow
a specific data range to be highlighted. These techniques are used
in Wattenburg’s wind-speed visualization [46], and NASA’s ocean

current diagram [28]. Related techniques are used to represent the
stock market via Boids [27]. In all of these cases, the flow is an
emergent property of many small motions and supplemental information is overlaid in the flow. Comparisons in short time-steps
focus on group trends in position, overlay values or both. Visualizations in this category have very weak identity properties for
individual elements, though group identity may be present.
C REATE & D ELETE×M UTABLE S CALE (CD×MS)
This final category of visualization techniques can present the
current data state with the highest degree of fidelity. However, it is the weakest for comparisons across time. Much like
FIXED × IMMUTABLE visualizations, comparisons are restricted to
what is presented at any given instant. However, in CREATE
& DELETE×MUTABLE SCALE visualizations, the visualization
changes over time, inviting comparison. Such comparisons must
be made carefully, as changing scales reduce the ability to recognizably encode group identities. Despite this restriction, visualization
in this category can communicate step-by-step changes in a complex space. Short term comparisons can be made when changes are
made slowly and vary a small number of elements at once (this is
further helped by following animation guidelines [18]).
4

H IGHER - LEVEL C ATEGORY: I DENTITY G ROUPS

Identity properties form three groups from the techniques presented
in Section 3. The three identity groups, in decreasing order of
identity preservation, are: Preserving, Transitional and Immediate.
These groups are formed from the interplay between spatial and
retinal categories. The identity groups are an emergent structure
in this taxonomy. They have implications for the pervasive task of
comparison through time [5, 18, 42].
Preserving
Preserving techniques maintain the association between visual elements and underlying data across arbitrary time scales. This preservation of identity is achieved by holding some part of the representation of an element constant. Fixed locations preserve identity in
four of the techniques groups in this category. Position is of high
visual salience, and thus the identity association is strong and easy
to decode. In contrast, visualizations in the MUTATE×IMMUTABLE
category keep the retinal encoding constant, while permitting position to change. This allows greater expressiveness in the spatial
dimension, but increases the cognitive load for fine-grained comparisons (though they remain possible). Preserving techniques do
not require additional effort for identity preservation; it is inherent in the bounds on dynamics. Preserving techniques can represent a great deal of dynamic information. They are most easily
achieved when the range of dynamic inputs are known. Preserving
techniques are essential when comparisons need to be made over
long periods of time.
Transitional
Transitional techniques often retain identity associations, but the
association is not as strong as for Preserving techniques. Transitional techniques retain identity associations across time by limiting
changes to only known values. From the standpoint of quantity, new
elements may be added or changed (but not both if long-term identity is needed). Retinal encodings are also bounded. Transitional
techniques preserve identity association over short time scales without difficulty. However, each technique category has at least one
way that identity associations can be destroyed by design decisions.
Transitional techniques balance encoding flexibility with detailed
comparison across time. Fine-grained comparison is easily supported over short time spans, but degrades over longer spans. They
provide greater degrees of freedom for presenting and contextualizing current information than Preserving techniques.

197

Should comparisons be
prioritized across or
in the current time?

Is there a stable Is there temporal variation
reference
in supplemental data?
system?
Immutable
Yes

Unknown
Known
None

No

None
Known
Unknown

Time comparison

Start
Yes

None
Known
Unknown

No

None
Known
Unknown

Current state

Known
Scale

Extreme
Bins

Mutable
Scale

Identity Preserving

Fixed
Mutate

Transitional
Create

Immediate

Create &
Delete

Figure 4: Decision tree for mapping from specific tasks to a techniques through the taxonomy.

The CREATE×IMMUTABLE technique category is the only IM MUTABLE Transitional category. The inclusion of spatial mutation
in CREATE visualizations makes this category transitional. Unless
the retinal characteristics are specifically used to encode identity,
identity is difficult to establish across time. New elements and moving old elements quickly degrade identity characteristics.
Immediate
Immediate techniques may retain identity associations, but only
through careful design choices. Those design choices also fall outside the scope of this taxonomy (such as varying one visual dimension widely but fixing another, see Section 2.4). By default, Immediate techniques do not preserve the identity association. In the case
of categories in the CREATE & DELETE row, identity is destroyed
whenever an element is removed from the visualization. For visualizations in categories of the MUTABLE SCALE column, identity
is destroyed whenever a retinal scale is remapped. This identity
association destruction may prevent comparisons over short timescales as well as long time scales. (Removed items cannot be found
and remapped color scales cannot be compared in subsequent time
steps, even if there is only one time step between the two images).
Immediate techniques are valuable techniques, despite limited
identity preservation. They provide the detailed information in the
most flexible format right now. They are poor for making comparisons across time steps.
5

TASK

TO

T ECHNIQUE M ATCHING

The Preserving, Transitional and Immediate identity groups presented in Section 4 are central to effectively applying this taxonomy to new visualization problems. A common task is to have a
dynamic-data visualization problem, and to need a technique to fit
the problem. Since not all techniques enable the same kinds of
comparisons, selection is a process of matching project priorities to
technique capabilities. Once a suitable technique category is identified, neighboring techniques can also be considered because neighbors in the taxonomy hold similar characteristics. Changes from
one technique category to a neighboring technique category are incremental but cumulative (therefore, diagonal neighbors are two
significant changes away). The process of selection can be pursued
in three questions: (1) “Should comparisons be prioritized across

198

time or in the current time?”, (2) “Is there a stable reference system?” and (3) “Is there temporal variation in supplemental data?”
Answers to theses questions select an identity group, a spatial technique category, and a retinal row. This mixture of task and data-type
questions is not uncommon in visualization taxonomies (for example [1, 37, 47]). Practically, the questions may be answered in any
order convenient. These questions, and the suggestions offered in
this section based on their responses, are derived from Gestalt principals [44] and supported by pre-existing evaluations of techniques
presented by others. Figure 4 illustrates the process.
The initial question of the decision tree is: “Should comparisons
be prioritized across time or in the current time?” Selecting the desired characteristics of comparison determines identity preservation
properties. If comparisons across a large amount of time are required, then (identity) Preserving techniques are preferable. Preserving techniques retain a strong sense of context over time. Context construction and preservation improves interpretation of analysis for questions that rely on it [4]. In contrast, if only the immediate
context is required, visualizations from the Immediate categories
present this context with increased fidelity. Transitional techniques
may be adapted to either circumstance, but are so categorized because they preserve short-term context. Short-term context can be
used for analysis tasks where long-term context is not required [7].
“Is there a stable reference system?” is the second question. A
reference system is composed of the quantity of elements combined
with some task-significant relationship between them. Geography
and slow/unchanging social relationships can be used as stable reference systems [1,10]. If a reference system exists and it is relevant
to the task, then representing it improves analysis performance [5].
Visualizations commonly represent reference systems via spatial
encoding [10]. Spatial techniques in the upper taxonomy rows retain spatial reference systems more than those lower in the matrix.
If a reference system is not applicable, the lower parts of the matrix
yield more representational flexibility.
The final question is: “Is there temporal variation in supplemental data?” This question clarifies the role of data supplementing
which supplements the data used in spatial encoding. The supplemental data is encoded in retinal variables. “None”, “Known”
and, “Unknown” are the possible answers to this question. These
responses map directly on to columns in the matrix.

In general, using a technique from a neighboring category will
yield similar results because encoding and identity properties are
similar. For example, the EXTREME BINS column is not directly
indicated by any of the responses to the third question. It represents an intermediate category between the “Known” and “Unknown” cases, and may be effective in many circumstances for either. Whether to choose the indicated column or shift to EXTREME
BINS is task-dependent. Providing more detail in a specific range is
a reason to shift from KNOWN SCALE; improving long-term interpretability is a reason to shift from MUTABLE SCALE. In general,
deciding to make such a shift may be predicated on conventions of
the target audience, available mapping functions, additional knowledge about the data set or detailed task requirements.
An example application will clarify the search process. Starting
with a group of people in a social network and a set of elements they
may “up-vote”, design a visualization to address the question, “Do
people who like the same things tend to provide new, shared upvotes around the same time?” This question is a precursor to treating social behavior as an “infectious” phenomenon [20]. Since the
time-scale of comparisons is not known, we will assert (in response
to question 1) that long-distance comparisons are important. The
social network is not a stable substrate—membership changes, as
may member roles– providing a negative response to question two.
Finally, “up-voting” an element is a binary response, so variation
is “known” in supplemental data. Preferring long-distance comparisons over an unstable substrate with known variability in supplemental information leads to the CREATE×KNOWN SCALE category. CREATE×IMMUTABLE may be used if up-vote quantity does
not matter; asserting that it is only significant that an item received
some up-vote. If the number of items that may be voted on is fixed,
a MUTATE×IMMUTABLE may be used instead, but this changes the
visualization’s focus from people to items. If the number of people
is known in advance (changing the dynamics assumed in question
two), a MUTATE×IMMUTABLE technique may also be employed.
The example question above is closely related to the research questions underlying New York Times Labs: Project Cascade [29]. One Project Cascade visualization belongs to the CRE ATE × IMMUTABLE category. In Project Cascade, nodes represent
events. New events induce new nodes that are given stable locations (placing it in the CREATE row). Each event is categorized
at creation time, with retinal variables representing this category.
Therefore, Project Cascade essentially presents a dynamic timeline
of events. Because events are created, but not generally moved,
Project Cascade visualizations have higher identity preservation
than most Transitional visualizations.
6

DYNAMIC V ISUALIZATION E XAMPLES

The taxonomy presented in Section 3 can be used to describe and
critique dynamic data visualizations. In this section, we have selected exemplar visualizations to analyze using it.
6.1

Gapminder World

(a) Default Configuration

(b) Traces Enabled

Figure 5: Gapminder World’s time-dependent visualizations [17].

The Gapminder World tool [17] generates visualizations for observing trends over time. In its default configuration, it presents a
scatter plot of values as they progress over time (Figure 5a). The
scatter plot mutates the position of a fixed number of elements and
modifies size on a known scale as data changes. Therefore the presentation mode is in the MUTATE×KNOW SCALE category. This
category is consistent with the goal of enabling comparisons between time steps that focus on the values selected for the axes.
Gapminder World can be configured to provide different types
of visualizations. For example, prior node positions can be retained
over time (the “traces” option), creating a visualization in the CRE ATE × KNOWN SCALE category where no mutation is used. The
taxonomy structure suggests that performance between traces and
non-traces would be similar, given that they belong to adjacent taxonomy categories. Robertson, et al. confirm this hypothesis [33].
6.2

Flow Lines

Figure 6: Flow lines example taken from [43].
Flow lines represent dynamically shifting, emergent structures
(Figure 6). This visualization is constructed by generating a texture of discrete points in response to an input topology [43]. As
the topology changes, so does the texture. The texture may be animated to illustrate flow direction and magnitude. Flow lines present
information about the underlying topology through ephemeral entities; therefore, long-term identity preservation is not required and
may not even be desirable. In its common form, this visualization belongs to the CREATE & DELETE×KNOWN SCALE category,
a member of the Immediate identity group. Textual points, the basic unit of this visualization, may be created and deleted. Retinal
variables may be used to encode specific information about points.
For example when using “dyes,” color communicates origin. It may
also be used to emphasize velocity or direction (as is used in Wattenburg’s wind visualization [46]).
6.3 code swarm
The code swarm visualization [31] shows the shifting relationship
between documents and their multiple authors. It uses the position
of points (representing documents) around text labels (representing
authors) to describe the activity of a software repository (Figure 7).
The labels are the only elements that preserve identity; they have a
consistent representation and move slowly. The positional information and quantity of elements are revealed dynamically as emergent
properties of developer activity. Color is used to indicate both file
type and recent activity on an EXTREME BINS scale. This is a more
complex encoding than the KNOWN SCALE used to encode size.
The net effect of the presentation decisions is to generate a sense of
trends that are composed of individual elements in the visualization,
but trend membership changes over time. This presentation conforms to the CREATE & DELETE×EXTREME BINS category. Com-

199

6.5

Map of the Market

Figure 7: code swarm visualization of developer activity in a repository. Documents are represented as points that are animated in response to developer activities.

parisons do not involve individual elements, but rather patterns of
fluid collections of elements shifting through time.
6.4

Taxis cab Tracking

(a) Taxis of London

(b) Taxi!

Figure 8: Taxi activity in London [24] and New York [34] (contrast
adjusted). These visualizations reveal how different treatments of
the same dynamics affect interpretation.
The Taxis of London visualization [24] is one of many in the
British Broadcasting Company “Britain from Above” series (see
Figure 8a). It is similar to other usage-based visualizations [23, 30,
39]. The task of this visualization is to represent road utilization
in London. The road network forms a fixed reference system and
taxi information is presented in the context of that usage. Though
the precise mapping function is not indicated, it appears to use a
known-scale projection (levels appear consistently spaced, with no
catch-all extreme-bin at the top). Therefore, this visualization belongs to the FIXED×KNOWN SCALE. In this category, arbitrarily
separated times can be compared directly to discern differences in
road usage.
In contrast, Taxi!
project [34] presents a CREATE &
DELETE×I MMUTABLE visualization of taxis in New York. In Taxi!
(Figure 8b), the principal elements are the taxis themselves. The
roads appear through the distribution of the taxis over time. Since
the quantity of taxis is not constant across time (taxis are added and
deleted), this project presents a CREATE & DELETE×I MMUTABLE
visualization of taxi activity. The Taxi! visualization is less suitable
for comparison than the Taxis of London and it is unclear which
comparisons Taxi! invites.

200

Figure 9: Portion of the Map of the Market on a relatively quite day
(image from June 20, 2012).
“Map of the Market,” presented at Smart Money [45], represents stock market activity. Leaf tree cells represent stocks. The
stocks included are fixed, barring navigation. Cell size represents
current price as percentage of the total of all included stocks. Coloring represents percentage change. The tree-map layout [8] rearranges the cells as current values change (i.e., it mutates their location and size). The cell coloring range is adjusted to accommodate
the largest percentage change present. The positional changing and
mutable scales indicate that this visualization belongs in the MU TATE × MUTABLE SCALE category. Visualizations in this category
belong to the Immediate identity group. Current state information
can be acquired at a glance by examining the current color scale
and overall hue/saturation of a region. Comparison across time requires referral to the range of the color scale and potentially shifting
correlating positions. More stable comparisons could be made by
changing to a fixed layout from the dynamic tree-map or with an
EXTREME BINS color scale. However, the chosen visualization is
effective for monitoring market status.
7 A LTERNATIVE TAXONOMIES
The taxonomy presented in Section 3 is not the first taxonomy of
information visualization, or even the first to examine the effect of
dynamics. This section compares our taxonomy to existing ones.
Shneiderman’s Type by Task Taxonomy decomposes static visualizations according to seven data types and seven tasks [37]. Although the tasks focus on static data types, several introduce dynamics through interaction. Our taxonomy looks specifically at dynamic data sources. In many ways these two issues are orthogonal,
thus TTT can be used in conjunction with the taxonomy presented
in this paper.
More recently, Heer and Shneiderman presented an interactive
dynamics for visual analysis taxonomy (IDV) [19]. This taxonomy
focuses on the tools of visualizations creation and the interactivity
found in those tools. Like TTT, IDV derives most of its dynamics from interaction. Our taxonomy provides details for the “Visualize” category in IDV, where specific encoding is selected. IDV
does recognize that visualizations change over time (especially in
the “Record” and “Guide” categories), but does little to discuss the
implications of those changes on comparison and evaluation.

Heer and Robertson present a taxonomy of animation techniques [18]. Since data dynamics often appear as animation, their
taxonomy provides useful context. Specifically, the spatial variation
described in our taxonomy provides detail to their “Substrate Transformation” category. Similarly, the retinal variation of our taxonomy provides four subcategories for their “Visualization Change.”
Their discussion of congruence [18,42] provides useful information
about maintaining comparison capabilities in the face of changes to
a visualization.
Keim, et al. indicate temporal data analysis as a significant area
of analytics research and a need for “...identification of patterns (...),
trends and correlations of the data elements over time...” [22]. They
further identify presentation selection as a significant challenge for
all visual analytics processes. Our taxonomy presents a means to
select visual representations based on the the types of comparisons
desired (Section 5), and to categorize a visualization to understand
its potential weaknesses (Section 3).
Chi presented a taxonomy for describing visualization processes
based on the data-state model of visualization [13]. Chi’s taxonomy
describes the design space for data transformation by enumerating
the different transformation stages. This taxonomy is applied by
enumerating the processing performed at each stage of the information visualization pipeline (Figure 1) [12]. Chi’s taxonomy is
largely agnostic to data dynamics and does not attempt to provide
guidance in design. Our taxonomy treats dynamics specifically. In
addition to being descriptive, the search procedure from Section 5
aids directly in design by mapping low-level data characteristics to
high-level properties of the visualization.
Several taxonomies of time-varying data have been presented [1,
2, 14, 47]. However, most of these taxonomies assume that the data
is historical, and thus static from the standpoint of analysis and visualization. In the terminology of [47], there is no variation in user
time driven by changes in the data. These static, time-oriented taxonomies focus on how analysis and representation can be used to
effectively convey historical dynamics. Our taxonomy presents a
framework for discussing how changes to the visualization itself
affect interpretation over time. These other taxonomies do provide
insight into mechanisms for effective interpretation. For example,
the different options for presenting event-based analysis results presented in [2] can be categorized according to our taxonomy. The
process described in Section 5 can assist in matching user tasks and
data characteristics to a visual representation.
Aigner, et al˙present a taxonomy for time oriented data that
specifically includes dynamic representations [1]. However, they
treat all dynamic representations as equal and do not “...investigate
the subtle details of the variety of visual approaches available.” Our
taxonomy addresses this omission directly for dynamic representations in the same way that earlier static taxonomies do for static
representations [26, 49]. In their discussion of dynamics, Aigner,
et al. (supported by others [19, 38]) indicate that long-term comparisons are often untenable due to the limits of visual memory,
noting that “...the animation takes too long for users to remember
its course.” This issue is a principal disadvantage of visualizations
in the I MMEDIATE category of our taxonomy, but visualizations in
the P RESERVING and T RANSITIONAL categories (when treated appropriately) can present the cumulative history, eliminating much
of this cognitive loading. Access to images from prior time-steps
may also reduce the cognitive load of comparisons across large time
ranges by reducing memory effects [18, 42].
In summary, the taxonomy presented in this paper is unique in
that it provides an analysis of dynamic data representations. It provides a description of eight different types of variation (four spatial
and four retinal) and three higher-level categories. These categories
have been useful in exploring the properties of existing visualizations. Our taxonomy does not provide guidance about working with
different types of time (cyclic vs. linear, etc.) and does not pro-

vide a detailed analysis of the comparison process (only comparison
aids). It also does not provide guidance to the specific analysis to
perform, only broadly restricting it based on representational properties. Where many prior taxonomies investigate the entire analytical process from a high-level perspective, our taxonomy focuses on
representation and interpretation.
8

E XTENSIONS

AND

C ONCLUSIONS

The taxonomy presented in this paper focused on streaming data.
However, the distinct characteristics of other types of dynamics are
not addressed. For example, the distinction between user-requested
and data-derived changes to the visualization is qualitatively significant but not considered. Though zoom/pan navigation can be
thought of as a mutable position technique, zoom and pan do not
modify the reference system; instead, they modify the viewport onto
that reference system. This distinction is significant to interpretation, but not considered in the taxonomy. Similarly, brushing techniques may mutate retinal properties, but the changes are more akin
to a transient overlay than source data or encoding changes. Preliminary investigation indicates that our taxonomy can be used to
describe some of the dynamics derived from interactivity. However, it is also clear that this taxonomy is incomplete with respect
to this expanded task. Similarly shortcomings exist for dynamics
introduced at other stages of the InfoVis pipeline.
The suggestions for visualizations presented in Section 5 are not
validated by user studies. They are derived from cognitive principles and existing studies of specific visualizations. Each category
essentially represents a hypothesis that can be tested by user studies
comparing visualizations from each category on relevant tasks.
The taxonomy presented may be extended by investigating different time scales, differences between retinal variables, mixtures
of retinal treatments, and additional spatial categories (i.e., “create
without mutate”, “delete but not create”, “modifiable spatial scale”,
“abstract spatial scale”). Using visualizations from different categories concurrently (i.e., coordinated multiple views), may present
interesting combination effects.
In preparing this taxonomy of dynamic visualizations, exemplars were not uniformly distributed. For example, visualization
in the CREATE & DELETE row were more plentiful than other rows.
Columns IMMUTABLE and MUTABLE SCALE were more prevalent
than other columns. Why some visualization categories are more
plentiful than others is not known, and deserves further investigation. Possible sources for this skew to/from certain techniques lies
in: (1) our survey methods; (2) that the technical barriers of moving
between some techniques is lower than for others; or (3) the types
of questions being answered with dynamic data visualizations tend
to favor certain characteristics.
Dynamic data visualization is a field of growing importance. Understanding the characteristics that make creating and interpreting
a dynamic visualization is an important task. Examining analysis
from the standpoint of identity and mutability leads to a deeper understanding of existing visualizations. Furthermore, these aspects
indicate a number of research areas that are not currently well understood but that show promise for fruitful future investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is partially by a grant from the Lilly Endowment and and
NSF Grant No. 1111888.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. M¨uller, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski.
Visualizing time-oriented data-a systematic view. Comput. Graph.,
31(3):401–409, June 2007.
[2] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. M¨uller, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski.
Visual methods for analyzing time-oriented data. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(1):47–60, Jan. 2008.

201

[3] C. R. Aragon and M. A. Hearst. Improving aviation safety with information visualization: a flight simulation study. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, CHI
’05, pages 441–450, New York, NY, USA, 2005. ACM.
[4] D. Archambault, H. Purchase, and B. Pinaud. Animation, small
multiples, and the effect of mental map preservation in dynamic
graphs. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
17(4):539–552, Apr. 2011.
[5] D. Archambault, H. C. Purchase, and B. Pinaud. Difference map readability for dynamic graphs. In Proceedings of the 18th international
conference on Graph drawing, GD’10, pages 50–61, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer-Verlag.
[6] R. Azuma, H. Neely, M. Daily, and R. Geiss. Visualization tools
for free flight air-traffic management. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl.,
20(5):32–36, Sept. 2000.
[7] P. Baudisch, D. Tan, M. Collomb, D. Robbins, K. Hinckley,
M. Agrawala, S. Zhao, and G. Ramos. Phosphor: explaining transitions in the user interface using afterglow effects. In Proceedings
of the 19th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and
technology, UIST ’06, pages 169–178, New York, NY, USA, 2006.
ACM.
[8] B. B. Bederson, B. Shneiderman, and M. Wattenberg. Ordered and
quantum treemaps: Making effective use of 2d space to display hierarchies. ACM Trans. Graph., 21(4):833–854, 2002.
[9] J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics. Reprinted by University of Wisconsin Press, 1967.
[10] K. B¨orner, C. Chen, and K. Boyack. Visualizing knowledge domains.
In B. Cronin, editor, Annual Review of Information Science & Technology, volume 37, pages 179–255, Medford, NJ, 2003. American
Society for Information Science and Technology.
[11] C. Brewer. Designing Better Maps: A Guide for Gis Users. Environmental Systems Research, 2004.
[12] S. K. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufman, 1999.
[13] E. H. Chi. A taxonomy of visualization techniques using the data
state reference model. In INFOVIS ’00: Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Information Vizualization 2000, page 69, Washington,
DC, USA, 2000. IEEE Computer Society.
[14] C. Daassi, L. Nigay, and M.-C. Fauvet. A taxonomy of temporal data
visualization techniques. Revue Information Interaction Intelligence,
5(2):41–63, 2006. Paru en 2006 pour un Volume en 2005.
[15] Digg Labs and Stamen Designs.
Digg:
Arc.
www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/project.cfm?id=585, June 2012.
[16] Dynamic
Diagrams.
Digital
Orrery.
www.dynamicdiagrams.com/work/orrery/, June 2012.
[17] Google. Gapminder: World. www.gapminder.org/world/, 2008.
[18] J. Heer and G. Robertson. Animated transitions in statistical data
graphics. IEEE Trans. Visualization & Comp. Graphics (Proc. InfoVis), 13:1240–1247, 2007.
[19] J. Heer and B. Shneiderman. Interactive dynamics for visual analysis.
Queue, 10(2):30:30–30:55, Feb. 2012.
[20] A. L. Hill, D. G. Rand, M. A. Nowak, and N. A. Christakis. Emotions as infectious diseases in a large social network: the SISa model.
Proceedings of the Royal Society (B), July 2010.
[21] S. Kamvar. We Feel Fine: An Almanac of Human Emotion. Scribner,
2009.
[22] D. Keim, G. Andrienko, J.-D. Fekete, C. G¨org, J. Kohlhammer, and
G. Melanc¸on. Visual analytics: Definition, process, and challenges.
In A. Kerren, J. T. Stasko, J.-D. Fekete, and C. North, editors, Information Visualization, pages 154–175. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
[23] A. Koblin.
Visualizing amsterdam sms messages.
sandbox.aaronkoblin.com/projects/amsterdam/index.html, June 2012.
[24] Lion Entertainment and British Broadcasting Corporation. Britain
from Above, chapter Taxis in London. Pavilion, August 2008.
www.bbc.co.uk/britainfromabove/stories/visualisations/taxis.shtml.
[25] Y. Loukissas and D. Mindell. A visual display of sociotechnical data.
In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems Extended Abstracts,
CHI EA ’12, pages 1103–1106, New York, NY, USA, 2012. ACM.

202

[26] J. Mackinlay. Automating the design of graphical presentations of
relational information. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 5(2):110–141,
1986.
[27] A. V. Moere. Time-varying data visualization using information flocking boids. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, INFOVIS ’04, pages 97–104, Washington, DC, USA,
2004. IEEE Computer Society.
[28] National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Perpetual
ocean. svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/vis/a000000/a003800/a003827/, June 2012.
[29] New York Times Labs.
Project Cascade.
nytlabs.com/projects/cascade.html, June 2012.
[30] D. Offenhuber. Visual anecdote. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Art
Gallery, SIGGRAPH ’10, pages 367–374, New York, NY, USA, 2010.
ACM.
[31] M. Ogawa and K.-L. Ma. code swarm: A design study in organic software visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 15(6):1097–1104, Nov. 2009.
[32] C. Ratti, K. Kloeckl, M. E. Haller, F. Rojas, F. Calabrese, A. Koblin,
A. Vaccari, Yahoo! Design Innovations Team, W. J. Mitchell, and
S. Sassen. Design and the Elastic Mind, chapter The New York Talk
Exchange. The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, USA, March
2008. senseable.mit.edu/nyte/.
[33] G. Robertson, R. Fernandez, D. Fisher, B. Lee, and J. Stasko. Effectiveness of animation in trend visualization. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1325–1332, Nov. 2008.
[34] J. F. Saldarriaga, E. Montgomery, and T. McKeogh. Taxi! juanfrans.com/taxi, Oct 2011.
[35] Sexsperience and Ipsos MORI.
The sexsperience 1000.
sexperienceuk.channel4.com/the-sexperience-1000, June 2012.
[36] S. Shekhar, C. Lu, R. Liu, and C. Zhou. Cubeview: A system for
traffic data visualization. In Proceedings of the the IEEE 5th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pages 674–
678, Washington, DC, USA, 2002. IEEE Computer Society.
[37] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
on Visual Languages, pages 336–343, Boulder, CO, September 1996.
IEEE.
[38] D. J. Simons and R. A. Rensink. Change blindness: past, present, and
future. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(1):16–20, 2005.
[39] S¨uddeutsche Zeitung Digitale Medien GmbH. Zugmonitor: So
p¨unktlich ist die bahn. zugmonitor.sueddeutsche.de/, June 2012.
[40] J. Sundararaman and G. Back. HDPV: interactive, faithful, in-vivo
runtime state visualization for C/C++ and Java. In Proceedings of
the 4th ACM symposium on Software visualization, SoftVis ’08, pages
47–56, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[41] E. R. Tufte. The visual display of quantitative information. Graphics
Press, Cheshire, CT, USA, 1986.
[42] B. Tversky, J. B. Morrison, and M. Betrancourt. Animation: can it
facilitate? Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., 57(4):247–262, Oct. 2002.
[43] J. J. van Wijk. Image based flow visualization. ACM Trans. Graph.,
21(3):745–754, July 2002.
[44] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan
Kaufman, San Francisco, 2000.
[45] M. Wattenberg. Visualizing the stock market. In CHI ’99 extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, CHI EA ’99, pages
188–189, New York, NY, USA, 1999. ACM.
[46] M. Wattenberg and F. B. Viegas. Wind map. hint.fm/wind/, June 2012.
[47] M. Wolter, I. Assenmacher, B. Hentschel, M. Schirski, and T. Kuhlen.
A time model for time-varying visualization. Computer Graphics Forum, 28(6):1561–1571, September 2009.
[48] N. Yau. Visualize This: The FlowingData Guide to Design, Visualization, and Statistics. Wiley, 2011.
[49] G. Zelazny. Say It With Charts. McGraw-Hill, New York, USA, 3rd
edition, 1999.

