Infographics at the Congressional Budget Office
Jonathan A. Schwabish*
Congressional Budget Office

ABSTRACT
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is an agency of the
federal government with about 240 employees that provides the
U.S. Congress with timely, nonpartisan analysis of important
budgetary and economic issues. Recently, CBO began producing
static infographics to present its headline stories and to provide
information to the Congress in different ways.
Keywords: infographics, data visualization, federal budget,
federal government.
Index Terms: E.0 [Data—General]: A [General Literature.
1

INTRODUCTION

In the nearly 40 years since its founding, the Congressional
Budget Office (CBO) has released thousands of reports about
various budgetary issues and tens of thousands of cost estimates
of proposed legislation. In the summer of 2011, CBO started
releasing static infographics—stand-alone documents that present
data, statistical results, text, and graphics in a more easily digestible format. Over the next year, CBO published 12 infographics,
ranging in topic from the federal budget to deforestation and
greenhouse gases, the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formerly Food
Stamps), and the Disability Insurance program. CBO’s
infographics are generally tied directly to a report on the same
subject, so some readers can use them to glean the headline story,
and others can use them as an entry point into the longer report
that contains details of the analysis. The success of CBO’s
infographic efforts—as indicated by positive reactions from
Members of Congress, their staffs, other policy analysts, the press,
and the public—suggests that such efforts are aiding CBO’s
mission of providing information to the Congress.
2

A PRIMER ABOUT THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE

CBO was founded in 1974 to furnish the Congress with
independent, nonpartisan, timely analysis of economic and
budgetary issues to support the Congressional budget process.
CBO does not make policy recommendations, and the
assumptions, methods, and data that it uses are disclosed in its
reports and cost estimates.
CBO provides budgetary and economic information in a variety
of ways at different points in the legislative process. Its products
fall into 9 broad categories:
• Economic forecasts and baseline budget projections.
CBO’s reports on the outlook for the economy and the
federal budget cover the 10-year period used in the
Congressional budget process.
• Long-term budget projections. CBO also provides the
* jonathan.schwabish@cbo.gov
LEAVE 0.5 INCH SPACE AT BOTTOM OF LEFT

IEEE
Symposium
on Visual
Analytics
Science and Technology
COLUMN
ON FIRST
PAGE
FOR COPYRIGHT
BLOCK 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

Congress with budget projections that focus on longer time
spans—typically 25 years, but in some cases as much as 75
years into the future.
• Analysis of the President’s budget. CBO estimates the
budgetary impact of the proposals contained in the
President’s budget using its own economic assumptions and
estimating techniques.
• Cost estimates. CBO provides formal written estimates of
the cost of virtually every bill “reported” (approved) by a
Congressional committee to show how the bill would affect
spending or revenues over the next five years or more.
• Analysis of federal mandates. CBO analyzes the projected
costs that state and local governments or the private sector
would incur as a result of mandates in proposed legislation.
• Scorekeeping for legislation. CBO provides the Congress
with frequent tabulations of the budgetary impact of
Congressional actions that affect spending and revenues.
• Budget options. CBO periodically produces reference
volumes that discuss a variety of options for reducing
budget deficits.
• Monthly Budget Review. CBO issues a monthly analysis of
federal spending and revenue totals for the previous month,
the current month, and the fiscal year to date.
• Studies. CBO produces a large number of studies and
analyses on a wide array of other topics related to the
federal budget and the economy, such as health care,
income security, education, tax policy, energy, the
environment, national security, financial issues, and
infrastructure.
In fiscal year 2011, CBO released over 1,200 formal publications,
including 475 formal cost estimates, 440 mandate statements, and
175 scorekeeping tabulations. Between August 2011 and August
2012, CBO also released 12 infographics.
3

CREATING CBO’S INFOGRAPHICS

To date, CBO’s infographics are static representations of reports
that try to present information and analysis in new and innovative
ways. Those infographics highlight the most important elements
of an analysis for readers. With many topics, interested readers
might have to search through one or more reports to find the
information they are looking for; infographics try to present the
most important numbers in a form that can be absorbed quickly
and easily.
3.1 Software and Preparation
CBO’s infographics are generally constructed using a
combination of software products including Excel, Stata, SAS, R,
Processing, and StatPlanet. Other programs are used as needed.
The Adobe Creative Suite (Illustrator, Photoshop, and InDesign)
is used to pull all of the text, graphic, and design elements
together.
CBO’s infographics are the culmination of significant amounts
of research, data analysis, and model building that CBO conducts
as part of its mission to support the Congress. Underlying each
infographic is a team of analysts who perform research about
questions of interest to lawmakers.

241

3.2 CBO’s Infographic Design Principles
As an agency, CBO does not have a defined set of principles for
infographic design. For instance, it does not use a single color
scheme, font type, or graphic design theme in all of its
infographics. With each infographic, however, CBO provides
sources and links to associated reports, as well as a PDF version
of the infographic for readers who want a printed copy. In general,
CBO tries to follow the principle of reducing chart junk, as set out
by Edward Tufte (1983), and good data visual design concepts, as
discussed by, for example, Stephen Few (2009). Thus, for
example, CBO tries to minimize the number and importance of
gridlines and tick marks.
The structure of CBO’s infographics typically follows the
organization of the associated report. For example, in its
infographic on the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(see Figure 1)—which accompanied a CBO issue brief—panels of
the infographic more or less matched the sections of the
accompanying report. The infographic also contained some
information not explicitly shown in the report, and vice versa.

Figure 1: The first panel of CBO’s infographic on the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program.

CBO has released four infographics on components of the
federal budget that were not explicitly tied to a particular report.
Its first infographic on the entire federal budget presented details
about spending, revenues, deficits, and debt over time. It also
included basic definitions for readers who may not be familiar
with various budget concepts. With the success of that graphic,
CBO produced three other infographics that showed more detail
about the components of spending and revenues.
4

FEEDBACK

CBO’s infographics have received positive reactions from
Members of Congress and their staffs as well as from various
think tanks, government agencies, members of the press, and the
data visualization community. Responses have indicated that the
graphics are successfully highlighting the most important pieces
of information in an easily digestible format. Even some
researchers familiar with the topics in question have reported that
they found CBO’s infographics to be useful summaries of
information. In addition, CBO has received reports of teachers
using the infographics in their classes. Several of the infographics
have also been featured on various websites and blogs and have
been used in Congressional hearings.

242

5

CONCLUSION

CBO produces independent, nonpartisan, timely analysis of
economic and budgetary issues to support the Congressional
budget process. The agency's long tradition of nonpartisanship is
evident in each of the dozens of reports and hundreds of cost
estimates that its economists and policy analysts produce each
year. CBO now also produces infographics for readers who want a
more graphical format that highlights the most important points of
an analysis. CBO’s infographics are not meant to replace the
agency’s complex analyses or reports but rather provide a
complementary way to present information—thus helping
Members and their staff to better understand the issues that CBO
analyzes and the results of those analyses.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

E. Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire,
CT: Graphis Press, 1983.
S. Few. Now You See It: Simple Visualization Techniques for
Quantitative Analysis. Oakland, CA: Analytics Press, 2009.

