A visual analytics approach to understanding cycling behaviour
Roger Beecham∗

Jo Wood, Member, IEEE

City University London

City University London

†

Audrey Bowerman‡
Transport for London

A BSTRACT
Existing research into cycling behaviours has either relied on detailed ethnographic studies or larger public attitude surveys [1] [9].
Instead, following recent contributions from information visualization [13] and data mining [5] [7], this design study uses visual
analytics techniques to identify, describe and explain cycling behaviours within a large and attribute rich transactional dataset. Using data from London’s bike share scheme1 , customer level classifications will be created, which consider the regularity of scheme use,
journey length and travel times. Monitoring customer usage over
time, user classifications will attend to the dynamics of cycling behaviour, asking substantive questions about how behaviours change
under varying conditions. The 3-year PhD project will contribute
to academic and strategic discussions around sustainable travel policy. A programme of research is outlined, along with an early visual
analytics prototype for rapidly querying customer journeys.
1

Figure 1: An early visual analytics prototype, which links customer
segments (top left), with a spatial (centre) and temporal (bottom)
view.

I NTRODUCTION

Despite recent investment into sustainable travel, there is little evidence that levels of cycling in the UK are increasing [9]. Results
from the National Travel Survey show that cycling accounted for
2% of all trips of 5 miles or less made in Great Britain in 2010, and
that the average number of trips per person made by bike has generally fallen over the last 15 years [4]. A tranche of research aimed at
better understanding cycling behaviours has subsequently emerged
within the social sciences [9]. Much of this work has been based
on empirically collected datasets - attitudinal surveys and deeper
ethnographic studies - and has identified distinct but nuanced attitudes towards cycling [9] [1]. Studies focussing on actual rather
than self-reported behaviour have generally relied on GPS logs [3]
or automated traffic counts at fixed sites [6]. Due to their complexity, the former have been relatively small in scale and the latter, only
reporting counts and timestamps at specific locations, too coarse to
meaningfully identify behaviour.
Shared-bicycle schemes offer new research possibilities. In
many recent schemes, data on usage are continually reported to central databases. Researchers working within data mining [5] [7], and
information visualization [13] have queried these data to identify
patterns of scheme use, as well as more nuanced space-time journey
flows. This analysis has nevertheless been constrained by the level
of detailed information made publicly available. Whilst a complete
set of journey records, including journey origin-destination (OD)
and start and end times was used by Wood et al. [13], these data
could not be linked back to individual customers. Cyclists’ journey histories, and the context framing those journeys, could not be
identified. This limits the extent to which such data can be used to
engage with the more complex questions around motivations and
barriers to cycling [7] [13]. Working collaboratively with Trans∗ e-mail:

roger.beecham.1@city.ac.uk
j.d.wood@city.ac.uk
‡ e-mail: audreybowerman@tfl.gov.uk
¹Transport for London’s cycle hire website.
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

port for London (TfL), customer records reporting a unique customer identifier, gender and postcode the customer registered with,
have been made available. So too has a complete set of user journeys. Linking with geodemographic and other contextual information, and querying these attribute rich data within a visual analytics
application, we attempt to explore and explain cycling behaviour
from an individual customer perspective.
2 O BJECTIVES AND APPROACH
The research project aims to:
• Classify bike share customers according to the journeys they
make.
• Validate, rewrite and add qualitative descriptions to these classifications paying attention to journey context; by querying
the dataset at particular space-times, in response to changes
internal and external to the scheme.
• Furnish social scientists, and strategists within TfL, with generalisable insights into the barriers, incentives and conditions
that motivate cycling behaviour.
This approach sits comfortably within a visual analytics framework [11]. We will take a large and attribute rich dataset, query
it to identify general and distinct space-time journey patterns, before creating modelled data and subsequently querying the models.
Attempting to engage with difficult questions around cycling behaviours, it will be necessary to quickly consider many combinations of contextual variables and customer attributes. This might be
best achieved through a highly flexible visual analytics application.
3

E ARLY ANALYSIS AND FIRST VISUAL ANALYTICS PROTO TYPE

At the time of writing, the dataset contained 114,947 valid customer
records, linked to 6,490,479 journeys. After loading data into an
SQLite database, relevant derived variables were computed. Linking customers with their journeys, recency-frequency (RF) segmentation, a technique used within direct marketing [8], was performed. Matching customers’ postcodes to geographic coordinates,

207

a straight-line ‘distance to nearest docking station’ variable was created and customer records were further augmented by linking the
postcode variable to a geodemographic classifier.
Access to the customer dataset enables a profile of London bike
share members. We found the geodemographic composition of
members to reflect relatively closely that of London’s residents,
that the average (median) ‘distance to nearest docking station’ for
members with valid postcodes is 1.7km, with the middle 50% of
members ordered according to nearest docking station living between 0.2km and 13km of a docking station. Comparison by RF
scores suggests an association between usage and proximity to a
bike share docking station. For high RF segments (combined RF
scores of 4/5), the median distance to a docking station is 0.4km,
whereas for lower segments (combined RF scores of 1/2) the median distance is 2.8km.
Whilst the summary statistics are instructive, without very detailed analysis it is difficult to describe the temporal and spatial
extent of particular member journeys. We therefore propose a visual analytics prototype for rapidly exploring space-time patterns of
customer cycling behaviour (Figure 1). Three integrated views are
presented. In the centre, a spatial overview of journeys is achieved
by drawing lines between sets of OD pairs. For a given pair of
bike share docking stations A and B, flows from A to B are made
distinct from those between B to A. Following Wood et al. [13],
this was implemented using Bezier curves made to be asymmetric; the straight end of an OD pair represents an origin, the curved
end a destination. To emphasise flow magnitudes, and to partially
overcome problems of salience bias, a weighting factor determines
the transparency, thickness and colour of flow lines [13]. Existing
analysis into the London bike share scheme has found that usage is
highly temporally regular [7], and that journeys made within these
regular usage intervals have a distinct spatial expression [13]. The
temporal view therefore displays hourly usage by day of week as
a cycle plot [10]. Finally, to the top left, a customer segment view
appears as a Recency (column) Frequency (row) matrix (RF matrix) [12] [8]; the most frequent and recent customers can be found
in the top right cell. It is possible to brush [2] values from the RF
view and therefore describe the spatial pattern of journeys made by
particular RF segments, compare their temporal structure (blue) to
that of the total customer population (grey) and contrast the relative
number of journeys made by the selected segment with the relative
number of customers that segment comprises (bars below the RF
view).
Brushing the RF view first on high RF scores, the most recent
and frequent scheme users, a dominant commuting function can be
identified. Within the temporal view, higher than expected peaks
appear during weekdays and, compared to all users, these members
make relatively few journeys during the weekends. Within the spatial view, journeys between major rail stations, central London and
the City of London also become more prominent. The corollary
is true of low RF segments: the weekend pattern is reinforced and
journeys within Hyde Park (centre left) and west London become
more salient. Selecting on high frequency, low recency scores, the
view that appears in Figure 1, reveals a more complicated pattern.
The temporal structure of journeys is broadly comparable to that of
all journeys. Flows originating from inner city areas south of the
river, however, become more prominent, and these journeys generally extend over greater distances. Journeys associated with both
leisure and commuter cycling also appear equally significant. Finally, when brushing low to high recency scores the spatial and temporal structure of journeys throughout the scheme remains broadly
consistent. Members making more recent journeys, however, tend
to travel between a wider set of docking station locations; and this
is irrespective of how frequently they use the scheme. For those
that have not recently used the scheme (lower recency scores), journeys are ostensibly between the larger and most visible docking

208

stations, and we speculate that as the scheme matures, members become more confident in finding, or at least are made better aware
of, the full set of bike share docking stations available to them.
The second iteration of the application will support greater levels of interaction. Brushing of both the temporal and spatial views
and allowing filtering by gender, geodemographic group, ‘distance
to nearest docking station’ and user travel times, will allow substantive exploratory potential. If more difficult questions around
motivations and barriers to cycling are to be engaged with, then the
application will also need to more fully attend to journey context,
supporting flexible querying at various spatial and temporal resolutions.
4 C ONCLUSION
We outline a programme of research and an early visual analytics prototype for interrogating customer cycling behaviour within a
large, transactional dataset. Our approach enables space-time patterns of bike share cycling behaviour to be associated with customers’ usage characteristics. Due to its scale and complexity, we
feel the dataset and our approach can offer new insights into understanding the barriers and incentives that motivate cycling behaviour.
Future work will consider alternative customer classifications and
more fully attend to the context framing these classifications.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank colleagues at Tranport for London for their guidance in
directing research questions and enabling access to the dataset.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. Aldred. On the outside: constructing cycling citizenship. Social &
Cultural Geography, 11:35–52, 2010.
[2] R. Becker and W. Cleveland. Brushing scatterplots. Technometrics,
29(2):127–142, 1987.
[3] J. Dill and J. Gliebe. Understanding and measuring bicycling behavior: A focus on travel time and route choice. Bicycling, 29:1 – 70,
2008.
[4] Department for Transport. National Travel Survey 2010. Technical
report, Department for Transport, London, UK, 2011.
[5] J. Froehlich, J. Neumann, and N. Oliver. Measuring the pulse of the
city through shared bicycle programs. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Urban, Community, and Social Applications
of Networked Sensing Systems, pp.16–20, Raleigh, North Carolina,
USA, Nov. 2008.
[6] G. Gordon. Developing methodological approaches to analysing single point bicycle counts. In Proceedings of the Universities Transport
Study Group 45th Annual Conference, University of Aberdeen, UK,
Jan. 2012.
[7] N. Lathia, S. Ahmed, and L. Capra. Measuring the impact of opening
the London shared bicycle scheme to casual users. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 22:88–102, 2012.
[8] R. Parekh and R. Kohavi. Visualizing RFM segmentation. In Proceedings of the 4th SIAM International Conference on Data Mining,
Florida, USA, Apr. 2004.
[9] C. Pooley, M. Tight, D. Horton, G. Scheldeman, A. Jopson, C. Mullen,
and A. Chrisholm. Understanding walking and cycling: Summary
of key findings and recommendations. Technical report, Lancaster
University Environment Centre, Lancaster University, UK, 2011.
[10] N. B. Robbins. Creating More Effective Graphs. Wiley-Blackwell,
New Jersey, USA, 2005.
[11] J. Thomas and K. Cook. A visual analytics agenda. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 26(1):10–13, 2006.
[12] J. Wood, R. Radburn, and J. Dykes. vizLib: Using the seven stages of
visualization to explore population trends and processes in Local Authority research. In Proceedings of the GIS Research UK 18th Annual
Conference, University College London, UK, Apr. 2010.
[13] J. Wood, A. Slingsby, and J. Dykes. Visualizing the dynamics of London’s bicycle hire scheme. Cartographica, 46(4):239 – 251, 2011.

