Feature-Similarity Visualization of MRI Cortical Surface Data
Ian Bowman∗

Shantanu H. Joshi†

Vaughan Greer‡

John Darrell Van Horn§

Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90095

A BSTRACT
We present an analytics-based framework for simultaneous visualization of large surface data collections arising in clinical neuroimaging studies. Termed Informatics Visualization for Neuroimaging (INVIZIAN), this framework allows the visualization of
both cortical surfaces characteristics and feature relatedness in unison. It also uses dimension reduction methods to derive new coordinate systems using a Jensen-Shannon divergence metric for positioning cortical surfaces in a metric space such that the proximity
in location is proportional to neuroanatomical similarity. Feature
data such as thickness and volume are colored on the cortical surfaces and used to display both subject-specific feature values and
global trends within the population. Additionally, a query-based
framework allows the neuroscience researcher to investigate probable correlations between neuroanatomical and subject patient attribute values such as age and diagnosis.
Index Terms:
I.3 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism; I.3.3 [Viewing Algorithms]; I.3.8 [Applications]
1 I NTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in imaging protocols combined with the reduction in storage cost has led to an upsurge of neuroimaging data
in clinical as well as research settings. A typical brain imaging
database can now contain image volumes in excess of hundreds or
thousands of subjects, making the task of the neuroimaging specialist both computationally demanding as well as operationally overwhelming. The basic step used throughout common neuroimaging
analysis frameworks is to fit the imaging data of each subject to
a common spatial frame of reference in the form of a standardized brain atlas. Generalized parameter based statistical methods
are relevant to group-based analysis, but do not take advantage
of the structured information within MRI surface data appropriate for graphical user-interaction. None of these techniques allow
the neuroscientist to visualize relationships between neuroanatomy
and subject metadata within a common reference frame. Most neuroscientific researchers follow a similar analytical approach which
begins with the raw data, proceeds through image processing and
feature extraction steps and finally produces tabulated or graphical
results detailing statistical estimates of significance.
Here, we propose the ability to display multiple brain data sets
simultaneously, allowing users to examine patterns of similar brain
anatomy in advance of subsequent processing, atlas fitting, averaging, and computational analysis. Through the process of exploring
the similarity of brain anatomy from across a large sample of subjects, a user is ideally positioned to identify patterns in the data
which would not be appreciated by averaging or by inspection of
the metadata alone.
∗ e-mail:

ibowman@loni.ucla.edu

† e-mail:sjoshi@loni.ucla.edu
‡ e-mail:vaughan.greer@loni.ucla.edu
§ e-mail:jack.vanhorn@loni.ucla.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

2

M ETHODS

The following comprises the workflow of INVIZIAN:
1. The MRI surface volumes are preprocessed for skull stripping
and brain segmentation, and the cortical surface geometry, as
well as global and regional surface values are extracted. Using
the Jensen-Shannon divergence [2] criterion, INVIZIAN first
calculates the pairwise distances, projects them in a lowerdimensional (2D or 3D) space, and positions the representative surfaces along a two-dimensional plane where proximity
indicates feature similarity. We term this interactive environment a Feature-Similar Display (FSD) in which users interact
with hundreds of complex brain geometries at once.
2. Each surface is rendered with quintile-based color mapping
(Fig. 1 left). The system provides for panning, zooming and
rotation of the surfaces.
3. Within the FSD feature-similar clusters are easily identifiable
due to feature-respective coloring and positioning (Fig. 1 middle). A subject metadata query tool highlights probable correlations between cortical feature and subject metadata, and any
such correlations discovered by the user can be recorded with
a grouping interface. Each group has a user-specified name,
color, and optional description attached, and is saved to the
INVIZIAN scene file across sessions (Fig. 1 right).
4. An interactive coordinated projection displays a dot plot of
the cortical subjects, also colored by user-assigned group. The
coordinated plot allows INVIZIAN to display both zoomedin local surface feature values, and global feature surface relationships simultaneously (Fig. 2). Instead of manipulating parameter driven statistical models, INVIZIAN allows the neuroscientist to explore sizable neuroimaging datasets entirely
within a spatial visual interface.
2.1

Results

We present as a use-case the visualization of gray matter thickness distribution, as present within disease-related clinical study
data. The data consisted of a set of 120 MRI volumetric images
(3T, MPRAGE) from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset [1] with 40 normal control (NC) subjects,
40 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients , and 40 mild cognitively impaired (MCI) subjects.
We computed pairwise Jensen-Shannon divergences for the feature values across all subjects and used classical MDS to project
the data in a two-dimensional (2D) space before loading the data
into INVIZIAN. Figure 1 (left) shows the colormap subdivided into
quintiles used to map colors to the (0 to 5mm) thickness valued
features on the cortical surface. Figure 1 (middle) shows all 120
subjects colored according to thickness and situated in the FeatureSimilar Display. We observe a general trend of colors from more
blue on the left, to more red and yellow on the right. This describes the subjects having large thickness deficits on the left that
gradually decrease toward the right. Using the query input, we observe that that the subjects towards the left are AD patients, while
the subjects on the right are NC subjects. Figure 1 (right) shows

211

Figure 1: Visualization of cortical thickness in INVIZIAN’s Feature-Similar Display. (Left) Quintile-based colormap legend representing 0 to 5mm
thickness values. (Middle) The observed feature trend is an increase in thickness from left to right. (Right) Each brain is annotated by a glyph
according to diagnosis, red representing AD (Alzheimer’s Disease) and blue representing NC (Normal Control). The clustered groupings of AD
and NC subjects on the left and right respectively indicate that cortical thickness is a strong predictor of Alzheimer’s disease.

the subjects grouped according to diagnosis metadata value, with
red glyphs representing patients with an AD value, and blue glyphs
representing subjects with an NC value.
To gain a better understanding of local structural changes due to
disease, we use coordinated projection to zoom in on a neighborhood of brains that share similar feature characteristics. Figure 2
(left) shows a screenshot of the zoomed-in view of the AD subjects
(red dots in the coordinated projection plot), while Fig. 2 (right) is
a zoomed-in view of the NC subjects (blue dots in the coordinated
projection plot). The two side-by-side views highlight a noticeable
decrease in cortical thickness for AD patients, particularly in the
frontal, temporal, and some parts of the parietal region. The NC
subjects not only have increased thickness values overall compared
to AD subjects, but also show distinct patterns or structure and feature.
3

D ISCUSSION

AND

C ONCLUSION

INVIZIAN aims to be intuitive to the visually trained neuroimaging
specialist, avoiding numerical, parameter-driven techniques. The
FSD environment anchors query-based grouping of clusters, and
feature-wise coloring for visual exploration of neuroanatomically
similar groups. The coordinated projection illustrates global feature
relationships without disrupting the detailed view of local cortical
structure. From a visual analysis standpoint, the user looks for a
gradient shift along one axis of the FSD. Such gradients indicate
that neuroanatomical feature values increase or decrease among the
subjects along the axis. The user then queries the subject metadata values, identifying clusters of similarly valued subjects within
regions of the display. After grouping the clusters, the user employs the coordinated projection to zoom in and view cortical surface detail and global relationships simultaneously. Such navigation allows the user to find regional trends within each group. The
simplicity of the interactive workflow demonstrates that INVIZIAN
can be successfully used by researchers for performing exploratory
analytical investigations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported in part by NIH grants RC1MH088194 and
P41 RR013642.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. R. Jack, M. A. Bernstein, N. C. Fox, P. Thompson, G. Alexander,
D. Harvey, B. Borowski, P. J. Britson, and et al. The Alzheimer’s disease Neuroimaging initiative (ADNI): MRI methods. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 27(4):685–691, 2008.

212

Figure 2: Visualization of regional cortical thickness for AD
(Alzheimer’s Disease) patients (red circles) on the top, and NC (Normal Control) subjects (blue circles) on the bottom. The coordinated
projection plot in the top and bottom images renders a small rectangle to represent the region of the FSD currently occupying the view.
The AD and NC groups both show thinner cortices in granular postcentral gyrus regions. However, AD patients show larger cortical atrophy in frontal and temporal regions with respect to controls.

[2] S. H. Joshi, I. Bowman, A. W. Toga, and J. D. V. Horn. Brain pattern
analysis of cortical valued distributions. In IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, pages 1117–1120,
2011.

