Time-Oriented Visualization and Anticipation
Cindy Chamberland
Université Laval

1

François Vachon
Université Laval

2

Jean-François Gagnon
Université Laval

ABSTRACT
Temporal awareness is pivotal to successful real-time dynamic
decision making in a wide range of command and control
situations; particularly in safety-critical environments. However,
little explicit support for operators’ temporal awareness is
provided by decision support systems (DSS) for time-critical
decisions. In the context of functional simulations of naval anti-air
warfare and emergency response management, the present study
compares operator support provided by two display formats. In
both environments, we contrast a baseline condition to a condition
in which a temporal display was integrated to the original
interface to support operators’ temporal awareness. We also wish
to establish whether the implementation of time-based DSSs may
also come with drawbacks on cognitive functioning and
performance.
Keywords: Temporal awareness, time management, decision
support, human factors.
Index Terms: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human Factors; H.4.2 [Information Systems Applications]: Types of Systems—Decision Support; I.6.7 [Simulation
and Modeling]: Simulation Support Systems—Environments.
1

INTRODUCTION

For most tasks related to the control of complex situations in
safety-critical environments, real-time dynamic decision making
(DDM) is required [1]. An important part of DDM complexity
comes from the interaction between different aspects of the
temporal dimension such as the time taken to make a decision, the
tempo at which the situation evolves, and the timeliness of the
decisions [2]. Such temporal interactions make DDM a very
challenging endeavor that can therefore benefit from support.
Although time is crucial to DDM, there is little work on its
contribution to DDM and even less on its support. Yet it is crucial
for the decision maker placed in dynamic complex situations to
construct an optimal level of ‘temporal awareness’. By this we
mean the quality of the mental representation of recent events and
of what will or could occur next [3]. Promoting and supporting
temporal awareness in DDM has been a major challenge both
from the human cognition and the technological perspectives.
We aim at examining whether a decision support system (DSS)
that provides an external time-based representation of the current
situation and its evolution can promote temporal awareness in the
context of command and control (C2). We present two projects in
which tools designed to promote temporal awareness are tested.
1

e-mail: cindy.chamberland@psy.ulaval.ca
e-mail: francois.vachon@psy.ulaval.ca
3
e-mail: jean-francois.gagnon.22@ulaval.ca
4
e-mail: simon@lookingglasshf.com
5
e-mail: sebastien.tremblay@psy.ulaval.ca
2

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

3

4

Simon Banbury

Looking Glass HF, Inc.

5

Sébastien Tremblay
Université Laval

These DSS focus on two time-based cognitive aspects involved in
DDM: the capacity to select the optimal window of opportunity to
act (when-to-decide) and the ability to anticipate future outcomes
(what-if). Such cognitive functions are key components of
adaptive DDM. In both cases, our goal is to assess these timebased DSSs in a holistic manner [4] by looking at both the
benefits and drawbacks of the tools on cognitive functioning and
performance. To this end, we adopt a method that bridges the gap
between basic and applied research by preserving both empirical
control and external realism through the use of a synthetic
environment called a ‘microworld’.
1.1 Supporting ‘When-to-Decide’ Capabilities
The DSS designed to support the timeliness of the decisions was
implemented in the Simulated Combat Control System (S-CCS)
microworld [5]; a simplified C2 emulation of naval anti-air
warfare that provides a functional simulation of the cognitive
activities performed by a tactical coordinator aboard a ship. The
simulation is dynamic and evolves according to the participant’s
actions. Typical scenarios involve multiple airborne contacts
moving in the vicinity of the ship with possible attacks requiring
retaliatory missile firing from the ship. The participant plays the
role of tactical coordinator who must be cognisant to changes in
the operational space, conduct threat evaluation (including the
categorization and prioritization of threats), and schedule the
application of combat power.
A control interface involving no specific DSS was contrasted to
an interface in which a DSS was implemented to support
prioritization and scheduling activities (Figure 1). In the No DSS
(control) condition, a group of participants used the S-CCS in its
simplest version. Its basic visual interface can be divided into
three parts: 1) a tactical geospatial display, 2) a contact-parameter
text list, and 3) a set of action buttons. In the DSS-TOD condition,
another group of participants were presented with a temporal
overview display (TOD) added to the original interface [6]. This
tool represents temporal information (time to decide and time to
hit a target) by explicitly depicting each contact across a timeline.
Preliminary results revealed that participants in the DSS-TOD
condition showed enhanced situation awareness as measured by
the QUASA technique [7] compared to the baseline condition.
The tool also tended to promote the use of a time-based decision
heuristic relative to a distance-based heuristic when scheduling
engagement of hostile contacts. Despite these clear benefits to
temporal awareness, the DSS actually seemed to impair other
aspects of the cognitive work. Indeed, the addition of the TOD
exerted a rather negative impact on the application of defensive
measures as well as on the sensitivity to detect critical changes in
the operational environment.
1.2 Supporting ‘What-If’ Capabilities
Technological support for what-if abilities is integrated within the
C3Fire microworld [8]; a computer-controlled simulation of forest
fire-fighting. The main goal of the task is to limit the fire’s
progression on the geospatial map by extinguishing cells that are

215

on fire as quickly as possible before the fire spreads to adjacent
areas and burns houses. Environmental factors (wind, type of
vegetation) interact with the fire model (a cellular automaton) to
exhibit complex behaviors that are difficult to anticipate.

time constraints. This necessitates more holistic evaluations of the
cognitive impacts of decision support technologies [4].

Current situation

No DSS

Situation predicted 5 minutes later

DSS-TOD

Figure 1: Screenshots of the control and TOD conditions with the
S-CCS microworld.

A baseline condition is compared in a between-subjects design
to a DSS condition in which an anticipation tool is implemented
within C3fire interface. Both conditions comprise a two-monitor
setup in which the geospatial map and fire-fighting actions are
made from the left monitor. In the Predictive condition, the right
monitor displays an anticipation tool that participants can used to
simulate future outcomes of the situation (Figure 2). With this
tool, participants can see the predicted fire evolution in various
time delay (the next 10 s, 30 s, 1 min, or 5 min), helping them to
adjust current decisions or plan future actions. In the control
condition, the anticipation tool is replaced by a paint format of the
current map and participants have to circle all houses shown on
the map while performing the main task on the left screen. This
project is in progress and data collection is still at an early stage.
2

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

CONCLUSION

Emerging decision support technologies and visualization
techniques can provide a great opportunity to enhance temporal
awareness for operators working in complex dynamic situations
such as C2 operations. However, the implementation of decision
support technologies can add to the complexity of the situation so
that their benefits for some aspects of the task may be hindered by
interference on other aspects.
Preliminary results from our laboratory suggest that the benefits
of DSS designed to support various facets of temporal awareness
may be accompanied by an overhead with adverse effects on task
performance; particularly in situations of high cognitive load and

216

Figure 2: Screenshots of the anticipation tool implemented within
C3fire, showing the current situation (top) and a prediction of the
situation 5 minutes later (bottom).

[6]

[7]

[8]

F.J. Lerch and D.E. Harter. Cognitive support for real-time dynamic
decision-making. Information Systems research, 12: 63-82, 2001.
D. Ariely and D. Zakay. A timely account of the role of duration in
decision making. Acta Psychologica, 108: 187-207, 2001.
V. Grosjean and P. Terrier. Temporal awareness: Pivotal in
performance? Ergonomics, 42: 1443-1456, 1999.
D. Lafond, F. Vachon, R. Rousseau, and T. Tremblay. A cognitive
and holistic approach to developing metrics for decision support in
C2. In Advances in Cognitive Ergonomics, eds. D. B. Kaber and G.
Boy, pp. 65-73. CRC Press, 2010.
F. Vachon, D. Lafond, B.R. Vallières, R. Rousseau and S. Tremblay.
Supporting situation awareness: A tradeoff between benefits and
overhead. In Proceedings of CogSIMA 2011, 282-289, IEEE
Conference Publications, 2011.
R. Rousseau, S. Tremblay, D. Lafond, F. Vachon, and R. Breton,
Assessing temporal support for dynamic decision making in C2. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 51st
Annual Meeting, pages 1259–1262, 2007.
B. McGuinness. Quantitative Analysis of Situational Awareness
(QUASA): Applying signal detection theory to true/false probes and
self-ratings. In 2004 command and control research and technology
symposium, San Diego, CA, 2004.
R. Granlund. The C3Fire microworld. In Co-operative process
management, ed. Y. Waern, 91-101, Taylor & Francis, 2008.

