Visualizing Flows of Images in Social Media
Masahiko ITOH1 , Masashi TOYODA1 , Tetsuya KAMIJO2 , Masaru KITSUREGAWA1
1 Institute

of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo
2 Rakuten,

Inc.

A BSTRACT
Mass and social media provide ﬂows of images for real world
events. It is sometimes difﬁcult to represent realities and impressions of events using only text. However, even a single photo might
remind us complex events. Along with events in the real world,
there are representative images, such as design of products and
commercial pictures. We can therefore recognize changes in trends
of people’s ideas, experiences, and interests through observing the
ﬂows of such representative images. This paper presents a novel
3D visualization system to explore temporal changes in trends using images associating with different topics, called Image Bricks.
We show case studies using images extracted from our six-year
blog archive. We ﬁrst extract clusters of images as topics related
to given keywords. We then visualize them on multiple timelines
in a 3D space. Users can visually read stories of topics through
exploring visualized images.
1

I NTRODUCTION

Mass and social media such as blog, twitter, and Flickr provide
ﬂows of images with time stamp for real world events. Even a
single image provides realities and impressions of complex events.
Images play a role as an effective proxies for a content to visually
tell stories of our interests and experiences [1].
We can observe changes in trends of interests of people and society through chronologically exploring the ﬂowing images. Exploration for the images enables us to visually grasp situations and
timings of events that people have participated in. We can understand how the news programs report interesting events through observing pictures on news contents. We can recognize changes in
key persons and objects related to politics and happenings. It also
allows us to observe changes in popularity of design of products
and commercial pictures.
Many systems to visualize changes in trends of topics extracted
from textual contents have been provided [2, 4, 6]. In the case of
image contents, Leuken et al. [5] extract clusters from retrieved images, however, they did not mention temporal changes in clusters.
Gomi et al. [3] visualize images categorized by time, location, and
person in a life log data, however, they did not visualize thematic
changes in other aspects. Flake’s Pivot1 provides visualization of
cover photos of magazines from a particular facet. His method uses
a histogram displaying images in each year from the selected facet.
On the other hand, our system enables us to simultaneously compare histograms of images from different aspects.
In this paper, we propose a novel visualization system to explore
time varying changes in trends using images on timelines, called
Image Bricks. To visually analyze trends from ﬂows of images
describing various topics, ﬁrst, a function for visualizing a ﬂow of
various images in each timing is required. We therefore adopt a

ĢIUUQXXXUFEDPNUBMLTHBSZ@GMBLF@JT@QJWPU@B@UVSOJOH@QPJOU@
GPS@XFC@FYQMPSBUJPOIUNM


IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012

October
14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA

978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE


histogram of images by stacking images on a timeline. This design
enables us to ﬁnd out the beginning timing of the topic, changes
in trends of the topic, bursting points, and a lifetime of the trends.
Second, a function for visualizing images on different aspects is
necessary to easily compare multiple situations. We hence arrange
multiple histograms of images in a 3D space. This design allows us
to observe different situations between different topics, sequence of
trends, and events in the same timing in different topics.
This paper introduces a system for visualizing trends extracted
from images on the blog as case studies. To visualize changes in
trends in the blogosphere, we ﬁrst extract clusters of images as topics from our six-year blog archive. We then visualize them using
our system. We can analyze temporal changes in society and read
some stories related to the speciﬁed keywords through exploring
visualized images.
Our approach can be applied not only to blog contents but also
to other kinds of media such as Flickr, life log, and news contents.
2

V ISUALIZATION AND E XPLORATION

Our system visualizes changes in images in topics in a 3D visualization space. It uses x-axis for the timeline, y-axis for stacking
images in the topic with a speciﬁed time window, and z-axis for
arranging topics.
Figure 1 visualizes 20 topics about given keywords related to
“Prime Minister Hatoyama”. Each topic is colored differently. A
frame of each image uses the same color in each topic. Timelines
for topics are also colored by topics’ colors. These colored lines
represent topics’ active periods. Images in a topic are aggregated
per a speciﬁed time window, such as one month, one week, or one
day, and are stacked on the timeline (described as a histogram of
images). In Figure 1, we aggregate images every week. Labels that
annotate topics can be visualized under the stacks of images. We
can display arbitrary number of labels, but we normally visualize
one or two labels from the point of view of readability.
It enables users to zoom, rotate, and pan the 3D space to interactively change a region being focused on and to avoid occlusion
problem. Moreover, users can interactively pick images to zoom
in and see them in detail. The selected images are highlighted and
the ﬂoor panels that have the same time windows with the selected
images are also highlighted to support to compare multiple topics.
Users can access original information including the selected images. The system has also a function to connect with our text based
analyzing and visualization system [4] to explore trends related to
the keywords and the selected timings in detail.
3

C ASE S TUDIES

We ﬁrst retrieve images and text around images related to a given
query from our six-year blog archive to visualize changes in trends
in the blogosphere. We next extract clusters of the images from
similarity matrix based on image features, textual features, and time
stamps. We treat extracted clusters as topics of images associated
with the query, and then rank clusters to select important topics and
remove noises. For this purpose, we ﬁrst calculate weight of images
from image similarity. We then calculate a score of each cluster
from weights of images included in the cluster, and rank clusters

229

Images-axis
Selected image

(f)

(d)
(e)

(h)
(g)

Topics-axis
(b)

Topic’s active period
Timeline
(a)

(c)

(f)

Selected Ɵme window

Figure 1: Example for visualizing changed in clustered images about a given query related to “Prime Minister Hatoyama”.

and (d) become popular only on the Web though social media), (f)
the problem of the relocation of a U.S. military base on Okinawa
Island became huge (there are four clusters related to this problem), (g) dismissal of a cabinet minister (because of the problem
described in (f)), and (h) resignation.
Figure 2 visualizes changes in trends of new products related
to“Kitkat” in Japan. We can ﬁnd out seasons that various kinds of
new ﬂavors of “Kitkat” become popular. In Jan. 2006 and 2007 in
Figure 2 (a-b), “cherry taste Kitkat” become popular for “pass praying for entrance exam” because the sentence “a cherry tree blooms”
is sometimes used for representing “success in an examination” in
Japan and “Kitkat” means “surely win” in a play on words in Japan.
In Figure 2 (c), cluster related to “candied sweet potato taste Kitkat”
becomes popular in Jan.2009 for almost the same reason.

(a) Jan. 2006
(b) Jan. 2007

R EFERENCES
(c) Jan. 2009
Candied sweet potato taste

Figure 2: Visualizing changes in trends related to varieties of “Kitkat”

based on calculated scores. Moreover, we extract labels for clusters
from text around images to annotate topics.
Figure 1 visualizes clustered images about a query related to
“Prime Minister Hatoyama”. In this example, top-20 clusters are arranged from front to back according to clusters’ ranks. We can read
a story of “Prime Minister Hatoyama” through exploring movements of topics; (a) election of a president of the Democratic Party
of Japan (after that, he took ofﬁce as a Prime Minister), (b) a collage image representing “Hatoyama is a marionette of Ozawa” became popular (this cluster continues to exist till the last), (c) cluster related to false contribution scandal, (d) spreading strange photographs of his youth, (e) appearance on a fashion show (cluster (c)

230

[1] A. Campbell, C. Wienberg, and A. S. Gordon. Collecting Relevance
Feedback on Titles and Photographs in Weblog Posts. In Proc. of IUI
’12, pages 139–148, 2012.
[2] W. Cui, Y. Wu, S. Liu, F. Wei, M. Zhou, and H. Qu. Context-Preserving,
Dynamic Word Cloud Visualization. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 30:42–53, 2010.
[3] A. Gomi and T. Itoh. A Personal Photograph Browser for Life Log
Analysis based on Location, Time, and Person. In Proc. of SAC ’11,
pages 1245–1251, 2011.
[4] M. Itoh, N. Yoshinaga, M. Toyoda, and M. Kitsuregawa. Analysis and
Visualization of Temporal Changes in Bloggers’ Activities and Interests. In Proc. of PVis ’12, pages 57–64, 2012.
[5] R. H. van Leuken, L. Garcia, X. Olivares, and R. van Zwol. Visual
Diversiﬁcation of Image Search Results. In Proc. of WWW ’09, pages
341–350, 2009.
[6] F. Wei, S. Liu, Y. Song, S. Pan, M. X. Zhou, W. Qian, L. Shi, L. Tan,
and Q. Zhang. TIARA: A Visual Exploratory Text Analytic System. In
Proc. KDD ’10, pages 153–162, 2010.

