The spatiotemporal multivariate hypercube for
discovery of patterns in event data
Fred Olislagers *

Marcel Worring †

Intelligent Systems Lab Amsterdam
University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands

Intelligent Systems Lab Amsterdam
University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands

ABSTRACT
Event data can hold valuable decision making information, yet
detecting interesting patterns in this type of data is not an easy
task because the data is usually rich and contains spatial, temporal
as well as multivariate dimensions. Research into visual analytics
tools to support the discovery of patterns in event data often
focuses on the spatiotemporal or spatiomultivariate dimension of
the data only. Few research efforts focus on all three dimensions
in one framework. An integral view on all three dimensions is,
however, required to unlock the full potential of event datasets.
In this poster, we present an event visualization, transition, and
interaction framework that enables an integral view on all
dimensions of spatiotemporal multivariate event data. The
framework is built around the notion that the event data space can
be considered a spatiotemporal multivariate hypercube. Results of
a case study we performed suggest that a visual analytics tool
based on the proposed framework is indeed capable to support
users in the discovery of multidimensional spatiotemporal
multivariate patterns in event data.
Keywords: Coordinated and multiple views, Visual knowledge
discovery, Field studies, Multidimensional data, Visual analytics.
Index Terms: H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human
information processing – Visual Analytics; I.6.9 [Visualization]:
information visualization.
1

INTRODUCTION

Event data can hold valuable information to support decision
making processes. Based on for instance highway incident data,
tight road work budgets can effectively be used to improve
infrastructure. In epidemics research, the data about the
occurrences of diseases can be used to take effective actions to
prevent spreading. The key to extracting this valuable
information, is the ability to recognise and interpret patterns
present in the event data.
Discovery of interesting patterns in event data can be a complex
task, mainly because so many variables can play a role. This,
along with the fact that the patterns of interest are complex, call
for support of the human pattern detection capabilities by
interactive visualisations [2]. Various visual analytics tools for
dealing with spatial, temporal and/or multivariate data have been
described in literature. Few do, however, consider all three
dimensions space, time and multivariate in one framework. And
even if they do they often visualise two dimensions for the first
* e-mail: fred.olislagers@gmail.com
†
e-mail: m.worring@uva.nl

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

Figure 1 – The spatiotemporal multivariate hypercube: a metaphor
for considering spatiotemporal multivariate event data in one
integrated visualization, transition, and interaction framework to
support the detection of multidimensional patterns.

step of analysis, and provide information about the third
dimension after selection and filtering operations in the first two
dimensions. This does not necessarily support the discovery of all
spatiotemporal multivariate patterns in the data. As argued by
Gatalsky et al. in their plea for the space-time cube [1], selection
and filtering operations on the spatial and temporal dimensions
create a sort of ‘space slices’ or ‘time slices’ which allow for
analysis of temporal patterns at different places or spatial patterns
at different times, but not both. To really detect spatiotemporal
patterns, they argue that both must be considered in unison. As an
integrated solution, we propose the spatiotemporal multivariate
hypercube along with a visualization, transition, and interaction
framework consisting of rules that should be taken into
consideration in the design of the visualizations and interactions
(see figure 1 for an overview of the concept). We put this
framework to the test in a case study involving a visual analytics
tool we built using this framework, and expert users.
2

T HE SPATIOTEMPORAL MULTIVARIATE HYPERCUBE

As the spatiotemporal multivariate event data contains more
dimensions than can be visualized at once, we investigate how we
can accomplish an integral view on all dimensions, using multiple
coordinated views. This should be done in such a way that all
dimensions can indeed be considered together, thus overcoming
the traditional problem of ‘space slices’ or ‘time slices’. We think
that the key to providing an integral overview can be found in the
fact that the spatial, temporal, and multivariate dimensions of
event data are in fact three dimensions of the same date (namely
the where, when and what dimensions identified by Peuquet [3]).
As these dimensions describe different and, to a large extent,
independent aspects of the same data, these dimensions can be
considered orthogonal. Hence, the search space for patterns in this
data can be considered a cube, or in fact a hypercube, as depicted
in figure 2, because the spatial and multivariate dimensions are
multidimensional themselves.

235

3.2 Transition rules
The established rules also dictate how transitions between the
projections are handled. Rules 1, 2, and 3 deal with the
consistency of the way in which dimensions are visualised. When
transitioning from one projection to the other, the dimension that
is shared by the projections should remain constant, and the
representation of distribution of events should not change. These
rules also imply that when selections are made or aggregates are
shown in one projection, the same selections and aggregates must
also be shown in the other projections.
4

Figure 2 – Abstract representation of the spatiotemporal
multivariate hypercube. In the developed tool, each projection
shows a set of juxtaposed visualisations per variable. Framework
rules ensure integral overview when transitioning from one
projection to another.

3

VISUALIZATION, TRANSITION AND INTERACTION FRAMEWORK

The visualization, transition and interaction framework must
ensure that the individual dimensions space, time and multivariate
as well as their pair wise projections onto the orthogonal planes of
the hypercube are connected in such a way that the user is
provided with an integral overview of all three dimensions in
unison without actually visualising them all at once. This means
that it must provide rules for the individual visualisations of the
projections, for the interactions with each visualisation, and for
the transition from one projection to the other.
3.1 Rules for visualization and interaction
Based on an analysis of literature, we established the following
rules for the visualization of the various dimensions and
projections, and the interaction with the visualizations. The first
three rules stem from the observation that the tool must provide an
integral and concise overview of the three dimensions.
Rule 1: The dimensions space, time, and multivariate must be
visualized in a similar, consistent way in each of the projections
that they are part of.
Rule 2: Interaction with the visualization must be consistent
across all projections.
Rule 3: Selections within one projection must be marked within
all projections and the way in which selections are marked must
be consistent across projections.
The fourth rule is based on the fact that when searching for
patterns in data, the user specifically searches for clusters that
make a part of the data stand out from the rest of the data [1]. This
means that distribution of events or event values is important and
that absolute values are of lesser importance.
Rule 4: In each projection, the distribution of events and event
values must be visualized.
When trying to reason why the identified cluster exists, the user
will need to compare the cluster to other parts of the data. This
allows the user to analyse why a selected cluster of the data is
different from other parts of the data.
Rule 5: The user must be able to select two regions within the
data, and compare those regions.
Based on rules 3 and 5 selections must also be marked in the
other projections, and care must be taken to ensure that it is clear
to the user which data is part of which selection.

236

CASE STUDY

In order to evaluate if the proposed framework enables users to
discover true spatiotemporal multivariate patterns in event data,
we put the framework to the test in a case study. We built a visual
analytics tool based on our framework, and evaluated its
performance using an actual air traffic control event dataset (flight
positions and times, event conditions etc.) and actual air traffic
control event analysis experts. For the purpose of the case study,
we selected a small, relevant and complex subset of the available
data (78 events) that would normally be selected interactively in
the first step of the visual analytics mantra (‘analyze first – show
the important’). From the results of this case study it can be
concluded that the visual analytics tool based on the proposed
framework actually provides true insight into spatiotemporal
multivariate patterns. Of all patterns that were found, 84%
involved at least two dimensions (e.g. space and time) or two
variables. The experts even found a pattern including all three
dimensions: “In the south, all events that happened during high
workload, happened in the fourth quarter of 2008”. The analysis
of the actions of the experts reveals that, before arriving at an
insight, in many cases the expert used multiple projections for the
discovery and subsequent verification of potential patterns.
5

CONCLUSION

Based on the notion of a hypercube, we presented a
visualization, transition, and interaction framework for visual
analytics tools supporting discovery of patterns in spatiotemporal
multivariate event data. This framework makes explicit the rules
to be taken into account when designing such a tool, to ensure that
the spatial, temporal and multivariate dimensions of the event data
can be considered in unison. Thus it allows the discovery of
complex, multidimensional patterns in the data. In a case study
with real world event data and experts on this data, we showed
that a visual analytics tool based on the proposed framework is
indeed capable to do so. The experts discovered several
interesting patterns in the data that they were not aware of
beforehand. The case study reveals that even for small datasets,
the complexity of the patterns of interest requires a visual
analytics approach. Future work will focus on making the
techniques scale to large collections of event data.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Gatalsky, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko, "Interactive analysis of
event data using space-time cube," in Information Visualisation, 2004.
IV 2004. Proceedings. IEEE, 2004, pp. 145-152.
[2] D. Keim, F. Mansmann, D. Oelke, and H. Ziegler, "Visual analytics:
Combining automated discovery with interactive visualizations," in
Discovery Science, 2008, pp. 2-14.
[3] D.J. Peuquet, "It's about time: A conceptual framework for the
representation of temporal dynamics in geographic information
systems," in Annals of the Association of American Geographers,
volume 84, number 3, 1994, pp. 441-461.

