Using Translational Science in Visual Analytics
Tera Marie Green* & Brian Fisher
School of Interactive Arts + Science
Simon Fraser University

ABSTRACT
We introduce translational science, a research discipline from
medicine, and show how adapting it for visual analytics can
improve the design and evaluation of visual analytics interfaces.
Translational science “translates” knowledge from the lab to the
real-world to “ground truth” by incorporating a 3 phase program
of research. Phase 1 & 2 include protocols for research in the lab
and field and Phase 3 focuses on dissemination and
documentation. We discuss these phases and how they may be
applied to visual analytics research.

Phase 1 research is where is all begins. Questions considered
basic science – the knowing for the sake of knowing – are
“translated” to a lab where their first uses are tested. At this stage
there is no question of immediate implementation. Empirical
laboratory research is conducted to evaluate the validity and
reliability of carefully constructed research questions using
standardized protocols. We could call this exploratory research
because it tests ideas and applications which have not been
applied and whose usefulness are not yet known. See Figure 1.
2.2

Phase 2

Keywords: cognition, evaluation, experimental studies
1

INTRODUCTION

Visual analytics interfaces are not casual endeavors. Expertise
from computer science, graphics, computational analytics,
cognitive science and related behavioral sciences, as well as
domain expertise used to inform design requirements are all
integral parts of any visualization. Once developed, the interface
is used as part of an analytical process which may include
multiple analysts and multiple visualizations. Human analysts are
not all the same; they bring cognitive and learning styles to the
interface which “pre-select” their preferred method of organizing
and manipulating information. It’s easy to see how many variables
can be present, and how complex the analytical process can
become.
Currently, there is no systemic approach to how visual analytics
design and evaluation are conducted. Approaches to both tend to
be case-based and inconsistent. There are few standardized and
generally accepted best practices, nor is there any method for
creating such. And this slows the field emergence as a mature
visualization domain. What we introduce is an extant framework
from medicine, Translational Science, that could be used to
address these needs and introduce a more holistic approach to VA
design.

2 TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE
Translational Science comes from the health sciences, where,
much like some applications of visual analytics, there is little
room for error and people’s lives and wellbeing are on the line. In
Translational Science, design and evaluation are part of a whole
life cycle approach to development [1]. It starts with exploratory
research and ends with well-tested ideas being incorporated into
the literature and practice of the discipline. We will look at each
phase in Translational Science before considering how it could be
adapted for Visual Analytics.
2.1

Phase 1

* terag@sfu.ca

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

Figure 1: Translational Science in medicine. From [2].

In Phase 2, laboratory research is translated to the field: clinic,
doctor’s office, or other “application.” This is where the rubber
meets the road. Laboratory participants give way to real patients
and laboratory tasks to real-world scenarios. Whatever doesn’t
survive this reality check is sent back to Phase 1 or scrapped.
Phase 2 research does not leave this stage until it has been
satisfactorily shown to be successful or effective.re432
2.3 Phase 3
In Phase 3, well tested concepts or techniques from the field are
documented and disseminated to other researchers to become part
of best practices for the discipline. In this phase, the body of
literature is changed and the research in question becomes part of
the “ground truth.” In medicine, this means changes in policy
which are then disseminated to practitioners who will use the
applications of this research to save lives or improve patients’
quality of life [3].
Translational Science is full life cycle, (Fig. 1) guiding the
research from inception to dissemination and providing

221

safeguards so that ineffective ideas never see the mainstream or
are given undue credence by the body of researchers and medical
practitioners that use and depend on the research results.

3 TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE IN VISUAL ANALYTICS
Current practices in Visual Analytics design and evaluation are
somewhat scattered. Design research tends to consist of some
combination of developer decisions, visualization literature
review, and/or discussion with a handful of experts. (see for
example [4][5].) Translational Science provides a theoretical
framework in which to fit process-oriented methods like usercentered design. By delineating research into phases, researchers
have new ways to describe and motivate research. One important
question that translational research can attack in a systematic
fashion is how a “successful” visual analytics interface should
best be defined in light of its heavily interdisciplinary nature.
Along the way, research is likely to define new questions or
provide answers to questions no one thought to ask.
Plaisant has defined 4 evaluation types in visualization[6]. Each
of these evaluation types is useful to a degree but none of them
answer the essential question: Does this interface effective meet
all objectives for its use in a real-world environment? By
incorporating a Translational Science framework using extant
research protocols from disciplines such as interaction design,
HCI, and social sciences, we can start to conduct VA research
which can answer that question.
3.1

Phase 1 in VA

For Visual Analytics, Phase 1 has many uses. It can be used to
explore new visualization and interaction techniques, improve
algorithms and functions for computation, or explore aspects of
analytical cognition which play a part in the visual analytical
process. None of these aspects is simplistic or small, and yet, too
often, they are assumed. Phase 1 research, especially in the
cognition of VA, will likely involve quasi-experimental or
correlational methods to explore human thought and behavior.
Systemic methods such as Activity Theory and Participatory
Design [7] such as can also be used to explore analytical cognition
in a more explanatory way.
In many ways, Phase 1 in VA is part of the design stage and
uses design-related methods. Questions specific to the application
under consideration can be answered, as well as questions that
generalize to the field as a whole.
3.2

Phase 2 in VA

While Phase 1 is likely to be focused on design, Phase 2 is
more focused on evaluation. In addition to methods already used,
Phase 2 demands real-world testing under more realistic
conditions. This means placing the Visual Analytics tool,
technique or concept in situ for a period of time (much more than
a single session) and empirically evaluating how it is used and
whether it does what was expected.
Currently, this type of research is not often done in Visual
Analytics; thus, there is little in the literature to be used as a
guide. Related knowledge domains such as interaction design can
provide a starting point.
Heuristic evaluation, cognitive
walkthroughs, participant observation, and unstructured
interviews are all commonly used in interaction design and HCI.
Participatory Design includes tools for evaluation of user-centered
design. Audio/video recording allows observational sessions to be
coded for post-study analysis. Each method offers insight into
how tools perform outside of the laboratory.

222

Figure 2: Translational Science in Visual Analytics

3.3

Phase 3 in VA

Once the concept, technique or tool has been thoroughly tested
in the “real-world” over time, some evaluation can be made of
how this new knowledge adds to what is known about visual
analytics and its interfaces. Ground-breaking discoveries or
applications should alter the “ground truth” of Visual Analytics,
allowing the field to mature and progress. This would build a
compendium of “best practices” and standards that could be used
to build and extend on what is known. More than just a literature
review, a Phase 3 would create a generally-accepted, empiricallytested handbook on how to design and build for VA. This
handbook would also be used to inform new Phase 1 research,
which makes a Translational Science for VA cyclic rather than
linear. And with each iteration of the cycle, Visual Analytics
makes an impact not only on its own knowledge, but the
knowledge of all the fields (graphics, cognitive science, etc.) to
which it contributes.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

F. Marincola. Translational Medicine: A two-way road. Journal of
Translational Medicine, 1(1), 1. 2003.
http://www.ahscstrategicplan.org/strategicgoal4.aspx
M.E.J. Lean, J.I. Mann, J.A. Hoek, R.M. Elliot, and G. Schofield.
Translational research. BMJ 337. pp. 705-706. 2008.
D..H. Jeong, W. Dou, F. Stukes, W. Ribarsky, H.R. Lipford, and R.
Chang. Evaluation the relationship between user interaction and
financial visual analytics. Proceedings the of IEEE Visual Analytics
Science and Technology, Columbus, OH, October 24-27. 83-90.
2008.
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, and S. Wrobel. Visual analytics tools
for analysis of movement data. ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter – Special issue on visual analytics, 9(2). 38-46. 2007.
C. Plaisant The challenge of information visualization evaluation.
Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces, Gallipoli, Italy, 2004.
T.M. Green, R. Wakkary, and R. Arias-Hernandez, “Expanding the
scope: Interaction Design perspectives for visual analytics,”
Proceedings of Hawai’I International Conference on System
Sciences 44, January 2011, Koloa, Hawai’i. (2011).

