Do we need Stereoscopic displays for 3D Augmented Reality
Target Selection Tasks?
Jamie Sands, Shaun W. Lawson and David Benyon
Human Computer Interaction Group, School of Computing, Napier University,
10 Colinton Road, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. EH10 5DT.
{j.sands, s.lawson, d.benyon}@napier.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper describes our work in developing the
human-computer interface of an augmented reality (AR)
system designed to facilitate the accurate selection of
real world locations in 3D space using 3D cursors. The
results of two experiments undertaken to evaluate the
influence of certain sources of additional depth
information and degree of interface control are
presented. The merits of stereoscopic displays and
various cursor designs are also investigated. Results
indicate that the benefits of stereoscopic displays do not
significantly outweigh the benefits offered by increased
control and additional positional information when
performing simple object selection tasks in unprepared
AR environments.

1 Introduction
The proceedings on Telemanipulator and
Telepresence Technologies in 1994 broadly defined
augmented reality (AR) as ‘augmenting natural feedback
to the operator with simulated cues’ [1]. The aim of the
augmentation is to make the experience of an event or
task easier or more compelling. The intention of our
particular research is to assist the 3D positioning of an
augmented cursor to facilitate the teleoperated
examination of remote/hazardous environments. AR
applications are not restricted to mapping of remote
environments, potential applications are numerous and
wide-ranging [2].
The areas of calibration and accurate dynamic
registration have dominated AR research, including
some of our own [3]. Other areas of important research,
in particular the psychological and cognitive limitations
of AR have generally been overlooked. Human
Computer Interaction (HCI) studies of AR systems
appear sparingly in the literature with usability studies
receiving very little attention. Whilst common problems
exist between Virtual Reality (VR) and AR research,
fundamental differences exist between AR and VR. For
example, certain input/output modalities, tools and
metaphors can be shared between AR and VR whilst
immersion and presence are also common problems.
However AR, by definition, contains an element of real
world content, of which little or no prior knowledge may

be available. Unlike VR, AR cannot therefore utilize an
underlying projection model to provide information
about the position of objects, collisions etc. The physical
laws of the real world, laws that VR systems can
disregard or manipulate, may also restrict AR systems.
Similarly in the interests of realism, AR must obey the
lighting and shading rules of the real world, whereas VR
environments can create their own lighting rules. This
can result in poorly conveyed, and even conflicting depth
cues to the user of AR systems.
Essential to successful AR systems is the ability for
the real and virtual to appear to co-exist in the same
space. However as no underlying projection model of the
real world exists, no information is available to suggest
that a virtual object has made contact with a real object.
An augmented cursor would therefore constantly appear
on top of real world objects, even when positioned
behind. The ability to judge the contact between real and
virtual objects is critical to the successful application of
many AR systems. One area of particular interest is the
accurate alignment of a 3D cursor with a real world
location in order to measure distance. If a system is
correctly calibrated, positioning a 3D cursor at two
locations in an unprepared world allows the accurate
measurement between these points. Such a system may
not require the physical presence of a user;
measurements can be made ‘offline’ using only the
captured stereo images, allowing detailed investigation
of remote environments such as lunar landscapes,
seabeds etc (Figure 1).

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 1. Inaccessible environments including
deep-sea wrecks such as the Titanic may be
mapped using 3D AR cursors.

This paper presents our attempts to produce general
guidelines to aid the accurate positioning of selection
tools such as augmented 3D cursors. We describe an
experiment conducted to evaluate the accuracy of a
simple 3D cursor via the addition of sources of artificial
depth information displayed using a stereoscopic display.
A second experiment assesses the usefulness of these
cues during a ‘real world landscape’ environment and the
benefit afforded by stereoscopic displays. We conclude
by reviewing the sources of depth information and
indicating possible limitations.

2 Cursor Design
There is great scope for possible AR applications,
and the ability to choose specific locations or objects is
essential to many of these. For example the selection of a
person, or an object or the exact highlighting of a tumor
in a patient all require the ability to position a cursor
accurately. Our own previous work has focused upon the
development of AR systems for the exploration and
remote mapping of inaccessible environments, such as
underground pipes for example. These systems generally
utilize 3D AR cursors to measure the dimensions of
features or cracks etc [3,4,5]. Potentially, using tracking,
such a system could be scaled to allow extensive
mapping of complete environments such as bombsites or
for remote exploration.
At the ETC-Lab at the University of Toronto a team
of researchers have been conducting similar work to our
own [6]. They use a stereoscopic display or HMD and a
3D interface (often 6 degrees of freedom (DoF)) to
locate real positions in 3D space. Within the same group,
Hou investigated the ability of subjects to locate the
surface of real objects with varying densities of surface
texture using a virtual cursor [7]. He discovered that
subjects could more accurately position a cursor with the
surface of a more densely textured object, as there was
more depth information available with which to
distinguish the two objects as separate once they had
collided.
Related work on positioning accuracy of virtual
objects has come from VR research. Compelling work
on the effect of manipulated shadows has been provided
by Kersten [8]. This work shows how the manipulation
of virtual shadows can greatly alter the perception of the
location of an object. Slater also utilized this shadow
information in an attempt to increase the perception of
presence in a simple object selection task [9]. The results
of this experiment indicated that the addition of shadow
information proved inconclusive with respect to depth
perception, but increased subjects sense of presence in
visually-dominant subjects.
Literature on the design of 3D cursors is limited;
however one paper by Surdick evaluated the available
depth cues in visual displays [10]. This comparison
assessed the benefits to accuracy and effectiveness of a
number of depth cues in simulated stereo displays. The
cues evaluated were relative size, relative height, relative
brightness, foreshortening, linear perspective, texture,

stereopsis and a combination of all of these cues.
Foreshortening, linear perspective and texture gradient
were categorized as perspective cues; these cues utilize a
ground intercept; that is they indicate an intersection
with the ground, allowing for easier judgment of depth.
These perspective cues proved to be vastly more
effective than other cues.
VR can offer AR numerous tools with which to aid
the selection of objects in 3D environments. However
many of these interaction techniques may not be well
suited for use in mixed reality environments. As already
stated, when used in unprepared environments, AR
systems have no prior knowledge about the position of
real world objects. Therefore a 3D cursor would always
appear on top of the real world objects no matter its
position. Certain VR pointer methods such as ray casting
would also suffer from this limited information. In VR
ray casting can identify where a ray intersects a virtual
object whereas in AR the ray would simply sit on top of
all objects within the display.
It may appear that the accurate manipulation of 3D
cursors in AR suffers from the limited information it
offers the user. The cues that are offered to the user can
also often appear contradictory, Even stereoscopic
presentation of the environment cannot remove these
often-contradictory cues. Other factors such as the
general awkwardness and poor resolution of 3D
stereoscopic displays and interface devices such as 3D
mice also serve to make cursor manipulation a difficult
task, and one in which differences in individual ability
may play a significant role.
It is the aim of our research to investigate the
possible benefits of additional sources of synthetic depth
information. In an attempt to determine the effect of
certain depth cues a typical target selection task was
conducted using a stereoscopic video see-through AR
system. In particular it was decided to investigate users
performance accuracy when subjected to additional
synthetic shadow information, textual position
information, scalar information and the manipulation of
user control by selectable constraints over the number of
degrees of freedom (DoF) available to the user when
manipulating the cursor. A base measurement with no
addition information was also used in order to facilitate
easy evaluation of individual depth cues .

3 Experimental Conditions and Procedure
A detailed description of an early version of our AR
system can be found in [3]. In brief, our system utilizes
two fixed colour CCD cameras situated in parallel
viewing a scene containing known real world locations.
The left and right analogue PAL camera signals are
overlaid with corresponding graphics streams (using
analogue luma -keying devices) and presented to a user in
a remote room via a 5DT stereoscopic HMD. A static
calibration of the system is performed as described in
[3].

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 2 Screenshots of base condition
display containing 3 marker cones.
The primary aim of the experimentation was to
discover whether the addition of synthetic information to
the 3D cursor would improve performance accuracy. It
was hypothesized that any additional depth information
would assist users performance. Subjects were required
to position a 3D virtual cursor at 3 pairs of real world
targets of differing sizes. Figure 2 shows a typical
screenshot of the Base condition. The 3D cursor (blue
cone) can be seen attempting to drop markers (orange
cones) at the tips of the 6 targets in the environment.
Subjects’ performance was calculated as a
measurement of error in millimeters between the correct
measured distance between corresponding pairs of
targets and the subjects’ results. Differences in accuracy
were investigated as individual sources of depth
information were manipulated by the addition of extra
depth cues. The particular depth cues introduced were a
correctly and incorrectly oriented additional shadow,
texture and scalar information and co-ordinate
information indicating the absolute position of the
cursor. Also as comparison to the simple cone cursor, a
crosshairs cursor condition was also implemented.
Figure 3 presents illustrations of the additional sources of
depth information.

X 27.03
Y –13.21
Z 57.44
a)

d)

b)

Figure 4 shows the addition of a correctly oriented
synthetic shadow, this shadow behaved normally
however the shadow could not be occluded by real world
objects and would disappear if the subject positioned the
cursor under the surface of the table. Similar to this
condition an oppositely oriented shadow condition was
also employed, in this condition the shadow behaved as
the in the correct shadow condition but was presented on
the opposite side of the cursor and moved ‘against’ the
light source. Others sources of depth information include
textual co-ordinate information indicating to the user the
absolute location of the cursor as a set of X, Y and Z coordinates, scale information was presented by the
inclusion of a scale of known size into the world and
texture gradient cues by the inclusion of a texture onto
the surface of the virtual cursor.
As an alternative to the cone design a crosshairs
cursor condition was also emp loyed, this gave the user a
visual representation of the x, y and z dimensions as the
crosshairs spars were created along these axis. During
these conditions, subjects were given control over the x,
y and z dimensions and could ‘switch off’ any dimension
at the push of a button. In order to examine the affect of
this control on performance subjects also conducted a 3D
motion condition where all 3 dimensions of movement
were always activated. A more detailed description of
the experimental procedure can be found in [4].
The additional depth cues described above can be
separated into two broad groups, cues that assist the
positioning of cursors by indicating a ground intercept
and those that assist the user by offering scalar
information. In the tasks reported here, the shadow
conditions can be seen as perspective cues by offering
the user a visual indication of the starting height. The coordinate condition may also be considered a perspective
cue as it also offers this information, albeit in a more
abstract, non-graphical fashion. In accordance with [10]
it can be assumed that these ground intercept conditions
will outperform the conditions that do not indicate a
ground intercept. Figure 4 illustrates the correct shadow
condition showing the shadows indication of the
‘ground’ level.

c)

e)

f)

Figure 3 Illustrations of additional depth
cues. From top left to bottom right – a)
Correctly oriented shadow, b) Incorrectly
oriented shadow, c) Co-ordinate information,
d) Scale information, e) Texture information
and the f) Crosshairs cursor conditions

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 4 Screenshots of correct shadow
condition display indicating the ground
intercept.

4 Results

4.2 Experiment 2

4.1 Experiment 1

It is assumed that the accuracy discovered in
Experiment 1 may have been partially due to the fact that
the tabletop coincided with the Y=0 co-ordinate. This
would allow subjects some visual feedback when
attempting to find the base of the targets thus
accentuating accuracy. In response, a second experiment
was conducted to further examine user’s ability to
position a virtual cursor when the tabletop was occluded.

Table 1 presents the mean results for each experimental
condition. In order to assess the additional stimulus each
condition was compared to the base condition where no
additional stimulus was present. Only the 3D movement
condition provided a higher mean error than the base
condition, all other conditions had a lower mean error.
This suggests that all additional experimental conditions
increased performance over the base condition. In order
to assess the benefit of the additional depth cues; seven
paired sample t-tests were carried out on all possible
combinations of base vs. experimental condition. Table 2
shows the results of the t-tests.

Table 2 t-test results.
Condition vs.
Base Condition
3D motion
Co-ordinate
display
Correct Shadow
Crosshairs
Cursor
Incorrect Shadow
Scale
Textured cursor

Table 1 Mean error, standard deviations and
variance for all experimental conditions.
Condition
Name
Base condition
3D motion
Co-ordinate display
Correct Shadow
Crosshairs Cursor
Incorrect Shadow
Scale
Textured cursor

Mean
Error /mm
12.41
46.82
8.38
6.97
12.29
8.46
10.44
9.25

Std.
/mm
8.47
34.65
6.74
6.09
8.06
9.63
8.83
7.05

Variance
/mm
71.65
1200.89
45.37
37.13
64.90
92.77
77.93
49.66

Bonferroni correction was applied to the p value for
the t-tests, this correction takes into account the multiple
comparisons made and maintains the possibility of
making a Type 1 error at a value of less than 0.05. After
correction p<0.007 was required to achieve significance.
It is apparent from Table 2 that the 3D motion, Coordinate and Correct shadow conditions all reached the
required significance level. Only the 3D motion
condition provided a significantly higher mean error than
the base condition with both the co-ordinates and correct
shadow conditions having significantly lower mean
errors. The addition of synthetic shadows and textual coordinate information can therefore be said to
significantly increase performance accuracy in
comparison to the base condition.
The findings of [10] are also supported; the shadow
and co-ordinate information conditions outperformed all
other experimental conditions. These conditions offered
the user information by highlighting the cursors position
with respect to its position in height above the ground.
This ‘ground intercept’ indication appears to offer the
user more useful information than possible sources of
scalar knowledge. It is interesting to note however that
the incorrect shadow condition did not reach the required
level of significance. Suggesting that the correct
orientation of the shadow with respect to the light source
is important in order to maximize the shadows
usefulness.

Mean
difference
34.41

Significance
t(55) = 7.38, p<0.007

-4.04

t(55) = -3.39, p<0.007

-5.45
-.124

t(55) = -4.55, p<0.007
t(55) = -0.09, p>0.007

-3.96
-1.98
-3.17

t(55) = -2.43, p>0.007
t(55) = -1.33, p>0.007
t(55) = -2.51, p>0.007

Experiment 2 incorporated a white gravel landscape
into the environment, this served two purposes: to make
the scene more realistic (real environments would rarely
have a flat surface) and also served to occlude the
tabletop (Y=0) thus eliminating any visual feedback.
Subjects conducted the base, shadow and co-ordinates
conditions as in Experiment 1, but also completed a
combined condition (Figure 5), which combined the
shadow and co-ordinates together to assess the additive
nature of the depth information. Also investigated was
the difference between stereo and monoscopic displays
and subjects accuracy under timed conditions.

Figure 5 Combined condition display with
landscape
As can be seen in Table 3, the combined condition
provided the lowest mean errors throughout Experiment
2 whereas the base condition provided the highest errors.
Variance in performance was also greater for the base
condition than any other. The monoscopic conditions
gave the highest mean errors. As with Experiment 1 a
within subjects repeated measures ANOVA was

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

conducted to search for any significant differences in
these results, however no significance was found. This
suggests that the landscape condition introduced a
general additional error to all conditions, clouding any
significant differences between conditions by producing
large variances for all conditions. Subjects were asked to
rate each of the cursor types (base, shadow, co-ordinate
and combined) for ease of use and perceived accuracy,
they were also asked to do the same for the display type
(stereoscopic and monoscopic).
Table 3 Mean error, standard deviations and
variance for all experimental conditions.
Condition
Name

Std.
/mm

Variance
/mm

Base condition
Shadow condition

Mean
Error
/mm
22.70
20.75

16.11
7.55

259.46
56.93

Co-ordinates
Combined
Mono-Base conditi on
Mono-Combined
Timed Base condition
Timed Combined

17.09
16.98
23.06
20.40
22.43
18.75

8.81
8.19
15.11
11.13
14.77
11.01

77.64
67.12
228.44
123.97
218.23
121.08

Table 4 presents a summary of the subject’s ratings
in order of preference. Subjects rated the combined
condition as both easiest to use and most accurate and
the base condition as worst to use and least accurate.
This is in line with the mean error scores highlighted in
Table 3. However contrary to the mean error scores,
subjects preferred the shadow condition to the coordinates. Surprisingly subjects also preferred the
monoscopic display in favor of the stereoscopic display.
These results do not fully support the idea that the more
depth information available the better.
Table 4 Ratings for cursors condition and
display type in order of preference.
Ease of Use
Combined > Shadow > Co-ordinates > Base
Monoscopic > Stereoscopic
Perceived Accuracy
Combined > Shadow > Co-ordinates > Base
Monoscopic > Stereoscopic
To evaluate the effect of the addition of the
landscape on performance the results of Experiments 1
and 2 were compared. Table 5 shows the mean
differences and significance results of the one-way
ANOVA’s conducted. It can be seen that there are large
differences in the means of conditions for Experiments 1
and 2; these differences are also shown to be significant
for each cursor type. Therefore accuracy was
significantly worse during Experiment 2 where an

additional landscape was introduced. This result
indicates that the occlusion of the tabletop (Y=0) has a
significant effect on reducing performance accuracy. As
the nature of the additional depth information differs
between cursor type (i.e. synthetic shadow and textual
co-ordinates), the effect of the inclusion of a landscape
may also differ depending on this information.
Effect sizes for the addition of a landscape on
performance of each cursor type were calculated in order
to investigate possible differences. These effect sizes are
presented in Table 5. It can be seen that for the base
condition 16.9% of the variance can be attributed to the
addition of a landscape. 23.8% of the co-ordinates
variance and 50.1% of the shadow conditions variance
can be attributed to the additional landscape. These
results suggest that the predominantly visual cue added
in the shadow condition is effected more y the occlusion
of the tabletop than the other cursor types.

5 Discussions and Conclusions
The results presented here indicate that the addition
of extra sources of depth information can increase
accuracy when conducting a simple stereoscopically
displayed target selection task using a 3D cursor. Certain
depth cues provide more useful information than others
and combining these can further increase performance
suggesting a summative method of assessing depth
information. Allowing subjects to constrain the motion
of the cursor also increases accuracy.
In particular, the addition of synthetic shadows and
textual co-ordinates improves performance most of all.
Combining these two sources of depth information
increased performance further, suggesting that both the
shadow and co-ordinates boost performance by offering
different kinds of information to the user. This influence
can be reduced, but not fully removed, by the inclusion
of a landscape that occludes the base of the targets. It is
assumed that some degree of advantage is maintained as
subjects can use these depth cues as guides to assist the
positioning of the cursor at a baseline unseen by the user
Contrary to expectations, subjects preferred the
monoscopic to the stereoscopic display. Although mean
errors indicated that viewing the scene in stereo gave
higher performance accuracy users rated the monoscopic
condition as easier and accurate to use compared to the
same stereo condition. It is assumed that these
preferences were found as subjects found it easier to
reconcile the similar monoscopic images into a single
image than the separate stereoscopic images. Also
contrary to the mean errors discovered was a subject
preference for the shadow condition compared to the coordinates. It is hypothesized that although less accurate,
subjects preferred the shadow condition as the added
synthetic shadow offered the subjects an easily
interpretable visual guide to follow, whereas the textual
co-ordinates provide a more abstract interpretation of the
cursors position. However, when followed, this abstract
representation of the absolute cursor position provided a
more accurate guide.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Table 5 Results comparing accuracy of cursor type for Experiment 1 and 2
Condition
Base condition Exp 1
Base condition Exp 2
Shadow condition Exp 1
Shadow condition Exp 2
Co-ordinates display Exp 1
Co-ordinates display Exp 2

Mean Error/mm

Mean difference /mm

12.417
23.086
6.97
20.75
8.38
17.09

It can again be seen that the cursor conditions that
utilize a ground intercept (the shadow and co-ordinate
conditions) perform mo re accurately than the base
condition. However investigation of effect size also
yielded some interesting results indicating fundamental
differences between the type of information offered by
shadows and textual information. It was found that 50%
of variance in performance for the shadow condition
could be attributed to the introduction of the landscape,
whereas this influence halved for co-ordinate
information. Therefore the inclusion of a landscape has a
larger detrimental effect on the shadow condition. This
indicates that for complex landscapes; any conflict
between perceived real world ground intercept and the
virtual ground intercept is detrimental to overall
performance accuracy. These results suggest that the
shadow information is based primarily on visual cues,
which can more easily be affected by altering the visual
environment, by adding a landscape for example. Such
interference has less impact upon the abstract textual
information.
The results presented here have implications for the
selection of targets in all 3D unprepared environments.
The addition of shadows, co-ordinates, or both, and the
control over the individual dimensions of movement by
the user all appear to improve subjects’ accuracy.
Stereoscopic display also appears to improve accuracy;
however the benefits afforded by binocular vision appear
to be outweighed by the additional depth information
offered by co-ordinates or shadows. The type of
environment examined also influences performance; in
particular an uneven landscape has a more detrimental
affect upon shadow information than textual coordinates. Although these results highlight methods by
which the accuracy of a 3D AR cursors performance can
be accentuated, many other problems exist. In particular
the interface device and display quality can have a large
bearing on the overall efficacy of the system. Future
investigations into the most appropriate interface device
would offer valuable information to the development of
AR research.

Acknowledgments

-10.067
-13.78
-8.71

Significance Results
F(1,84) = 17.08;
p< 0.001
F(1,84) = 84.39;
p< 0.001
F(1,84) = 26.26;
p< 0.001

Effect size
R2 = 0.169
R2 = 0.501
R2 = 0.238

References
[1]

H. Das (ed). Telemanipulator and Telepresence
Technologies, Proceedings of SPIE, Vol. 2351
Bellingham, WA, 1994.
[2] R. Azuma, Y. Baillot, R. Behringer, S. Feiner, S. Julier,
and B. MacIntyre. Recent Advances in Augmented
Reality. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
25(6), 2001, 24-35.
[3] S.W. Lawson, J.R. Pretlove, A.C. Wheeler, G.A. Parker.
Augmented Reality as a Tool to Aid the Telerobotic
Exploration
and
Characterization
of
Remote
Environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 11(4), 2002, 352-367.
[4] J. Sands, S.W. Lawson. Towards a usable stereoscopic
augmented reality interface for the manipulation of
virtual cursors. To be presented at ISMAR 2003, 2nd
IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality, Oct. 2003, Tokyo, Japan.
[5] J.R. Pretlove, S.W. Lawson. Integrating Augmented
Reality and Telepresence for Telerobotics in Hostile
Environments, Proc First IEEE International Workshop
on Augmented Reality (IWAR’98) A.K. Peters, 1998,
101-107.
[6] P. Milgram, and D. Drascic. Perceptual Effects in
Aligning Virtual and Real Objects in Augmented Reality
Displays. Proc. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
41st Annual Meeting, 1997.
[7] M. Hou. User Experience with Alignment of real and
Virtual Objects in a Stereoscopic Augmented Reality
Interface. CASCON 2001 Annual Conference. Toronto
Canada, November 2001.
[8] D. Kersten, P. Mamassian, and D.C. Knill. Moving cast
shadows and the perception of relative depth. Technical
report, Max Planck Institut fur biologische Kybernetik,
March 1994. CogSci Memo No. 6.
[9] M. Slater, M. Usoh, Y. Chrysanthou. The Influence of
Dynamic Shadows on Presence in Immersive Virtual
Environments, Eurographics Workshop on Virtual
Environments, Proceedings ed. M. Goebel, Monte Carlo,
Jan 31-Feb 1st, 1995.
[10] R.T. Surdick, E.T. Davis, R.A. King, and L.F. Hodges.
The perception of distance in simulated visual displays:
A comparison of the effectiveness and accuracy of
multiple depth cues across viewing distances. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 6(5): 513--531,
1997.

This work has been funded by the UK Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under
Grant No. GR/R25309/01.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

