The Use of Multiple Co-ordinated Views in Three-dimensional
Virtual Environments

Carsten Maple

Rob Manton

Helen Jacobs

Department of Computing and Information Systems
University of Luton, Luton, LU1 3JU, U.K.
carsten.maple@luton.ac.uk
rob.manton@luton.ac.uk
helen.jacobs@luton.ac.uk

Abstract
There is increasing use of co-ordinated and multiple
views for the study of complex data. In this paper we
discuss the use of multiple co-ordinated views as an aid to
navigation and orientation through three-dimensional
virtual environments. Such virtual environments have
many applications including military, medical and
educational uses. We determine whether there is an ease
of navigation and orientation arising from offering users
multiple views.

1

Introduction

The use of co-ordinated and multiple views as an
aid to viewing complex data sets is a growing area of
research, see for example [1] and [3]. It is wellknown that users can gain a better understanding of
information if they view the information from
different perspectives.
This is also true when
considering navigation through 3D virtual worlds.
The use of 3D worlds is obviously massive with
many diverse application areas including military
use, e-commerce and education. However, users
experience a number of difficulties when faced with
tasks that involve navigation through 3D virtual
Ben Shneiderman of the Institute for
worlds.
Systems Research at the University of Maryland
gave the keynote address at the 7th International

Conference on 3D Web Technology in 2002. He
noted that research that had been undertaken by his
team concluded that technologies such as Web3D
left users with problems of navigation and
disorientation.
The motivation for this work arises in the
educational use of 3D virtual environments from a
learning and educational standpoint. The paper
describes the Wayfarer Project, part of an EEDA
(http://www.eeda.org.uk/) funded project named the
Training Adventure.
The Wayfarer project
concerned the development of a game to be used as a
package for teaching map reading and navigation
through unknown territory by the use of 3D virtual
worlds. The game was developed between 2001 and
2002 by team of academics at Cambridge University
and West Herts College, Watford, for details see,
(http://www.caret.cam.ac.uk/projects/wayfarer.htm).
The Wayfarer project was established to develop and
apply tests of the usefulness of 3D virtual
environments as educational tools.
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2
we describe the use of three-dimensional virtual
environments in an educational context, including a
description of the Wayfarer simulation software. We
then go on to describe the navigational and
orientation problems that arise in 3D virtual
environments, before describing the use of multiple

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

views as an aid to overcome these problems. We
conclude the paper by presenting and discussing the
results of the work.

2

The Use of 3D Virtual Environments in
Education

The educational potential of 3D virtual environments
and in particular 3D computer games has been
explored in two complementary parallel tracks.
Some researchers have investigated the potential of
existing commercial games packages to achieve
desirable
learning
outcomes.
BECTA
(http://www.becta.org.uk) [2] for example, in their
report on the Computer Games in Education Project
conclude that the playing of a number of specified
commercial games had positive outcomes in terms of
ICT skills, motivation, collaboration and thinking
skills. Teachers Evaluating Educational Multimedia,
TEEM, (http://www.teem.org.uk/) [19] in their
report on the educational use of games identify three
types of learning supported by games:
•
•
•

learning as a result of tasks stimulated by the
content of the games;
knowledge developed through the content of
the game;
skills arising as a result of playing the game.

Other researchers have developed game
prototypes to help identify new pedagogical models
for the application of game technology to learning.
The Games to Teach project at MIT [7],
[http://www.educationarcade.org/gtt] has developed
a number of conceptual prototypes exploring how
games might be used in the teaching of science,
engineering and mathematics.
NestaFuturelab
(http://www.nestafuturelab.org)
have assisted in the development of a number of
experimental prototypes including the VMULE
project at the International Centre for Digital Content
at
Liverpool
John
Moores
Univesity
(http://www.icdc.org.uk/) [21]. VMULE is a multiplayer 3D simulation seeking to explore
collaborative problem solving.
The Wayfarer project sits alongside these other
experimental prototypes in exploring new ways of

achieving desirable learning outcomes using 3D
game technology. The idea for the game originated
from the public services department, which has to
teach map reading skills to the 14 + age group. The
objectives of the project were to use computer game
technology to help motivate disaffected students,
(“computer games seem to motivate young people in
a way that formal education doesn't.” [6]) to
investigate the applicability of the navigational skills
acquired in a virtual reality world to the physical
world, and also to ease the logistical burden of taking
students on field trips.
The game is essentially an orienteering simulator.
The intended use of the game is to support the
teaching of map reading and it is expected that
students would have already received some
classroom exposure to the principles of map
symbols, grid references and compass bearings.
The player is given the grid references for a set of
waypoints that they have to mark on a physical map
of the local terrain (representing a 4 by 6km area).
During the game the player has to navigate the
virtual terrain and locate the other waypoints. A
compass reading and odometer are both visible on
screen. In traditional orienteering the player uses a
map and compass to plan a route through the
environment and then travels measured distances
along planned bearings. In the Wayfarer simulation
the player is able to use the same technique.
The game was conceived to use an environment
with a high level of visual fidelity for two reasons.
To achieve acceptance by the target age group it
would need to demonstrate production values and
features comparable with commercial computer
games. To this end, the game features photorealistic
3D animated characters, background music, sound
effects and a voice-over.
It should also provide sufficient distinctive and
memorable landmarks to aid navigation, many of
which are recognisable on the game (paper) map.
None of the buildings in the environment can be
entered. The game predominantly uses a first person
viewpoint.
Points are awarded for locating waypoints within a
fixed time period. Additional points are awarded for

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

the successful completion of mini games, which
occur at each waypoint. These mini games currently
include drag and drop exercises involving the
identification of map reading symbols. A potential
future development is to extend the customisation
potential of these mini games so that the game could
be modified by the teacher to provide content
specific to local needs.
A competitive element is provided by the scoring
system and leader board, which appears at the end of
the game.
The software was produced using tools that are
standard in the commercial computer games
industry. The program was written in C++ using the
Renderware (http://www.renderware.com) library.
3D models were produced using 3Dstudio Max.

The locations of objects may be understood and
communicated in absolute terms (using grid
references for example), using an egocentric relative
frame of reference (centred on the self) or an
intrinsic relative one (centred on an object). A person
is considered to be oriented when they know their
own location relative to other objects in the
environment [9]. There is evidence that navigators
learn to understand their environment via three
sequential stages: first they recognize places, then
they locate places relative to each other, then they
plan routes from their own location to a target place.
[17].
Strategies for wayfinding both in the real world
and in virtual environments have been well
researched. Darken [5], for example differentiates
between three kinds of wayfinding: naïve search in
which the navigator has no prior knowledge of the
target’s location, primed search in which the
navigator does know the location of the target and
exploration in which there is no target. He notes that
although the three categories are mutually exclusive,
they may be compounded so that a navigator may for
example perform a primed search to locate the
general position of the target then a naïve search
within that area.
A large amount of research has been done into the
particular difficulties that users face when navigating
virtual environments. These difficulties include
understanding their position, their orientation and the
size and shape of the world around them.

Figure 1. Screen shot of the Wayfarer
game.

3

Orientation and Navigation in 3D Virtual
Environments

There is a large body of research into perception
of physical environments and the ways in which
people navigate within them. Hunt and Waller [9]
define orientation as “an awareness of the space
around us including the location of important objects
in the environment”. Wayfinding as defined by
Gluck [8] is “the process used to orient and navigate.
The overall goal of wayfinding is to accurately
relocate from one place to another in a large-scale
space.”

Position
Potential clues to the user’s location include
recognisable landscape features and maps. Ruddle et
al. [14] conclude that map views, particularly
combinations showing both local and global detail
provide the optimum support.
There is mixed evidence to support the assertion
that environments containing recognisable landmarks
are easier to navigate than those with abstract
landmarks. Some studies have found slight
improvements when recognisable features are
present (see for example [15]) others like the future
pizza project (http://www.kyb.mpg.de/~restat) have
not identified any significant differences. In this

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

latter study, participants have been equally
successful in navigating an environment containing
identical buildings in a green landscape as they have
with a landscape containing differentiated buildings.
Kaur et al. [10] found some evidence that
environments containing distinguishable objects
allowed users to achieve greater navigational
productivity. There is also evidence that different
people use local and global landmarks in different
ways [18].
There have been a number of attempts to develop
design guidelines for virtual environments to support
navigation. Marsh and Wright find that exit and
entry points such as paths and roads, and objects
‘partially out of frame’ can help users to visualise off
screen space [11]. Vinson [20] identifies five
different types of landmark element and recommends
that all five be included. These include paths such as
roads to help channel movement, nodes like a town
square to act as focal points for travel, and landmarks
like statues which act as reference points but aren’t
entered by the traveller. He also recommends that
landmarks be made distinctive and visible at all
scales of navigation.

disorientated. Ruddle and Jones also compare
different movement systems and conclude that a
view direction interface in which the user has to stop
moving in order to look around the environment
provides for faster searching than a system in which
movement is decoupled from viewing direction..
Objects in cluttered environments have been found
to impede users from moving effectively where a
‘stop algorithm’ is used to respond to collisions.
‘Guidance’ algorithms where the user slips past
objects are found to enable easier movement.

4

Multiple Views to Assist Navigation in 3D
Virtual Environments

The wayfarer game predominantly features a first
person view, however a third person inset view can
also be enabled, which provides a view looking north
showing the player’s avatar in the terrain. Thus the
player can have available three different mechanisms
for judging their orientation: the on-screen compass,
the third person view of their avatar in the inset view
and the location of landscape features like hills and
rivers. Figure 2 features a screen shot of the view
presented to the users.

Orientation
Users have been shown to suffer a deterioration in
their ability to estimate their orientation after more
than two changes of direction [15]. Ruddle notes the
usefulness of ‘global orientation information’ such as
that provided by a compass or virtual sun. Darken
and Sibert [4] conclude that ‘when not given an
adequate source of directional cues, disorientation
will inhibit both wayfinding performance and spatial
knowledge acquisition.’
Darken states that Wayfinding tasks require that
the navigator be able to conceptualize the space as a
whole [5]. The size and shape of the world can also
be easier understood with the aid of a map [5].
Modjeska [12] finds that a map based view of an
environment was easier to navigate than a 3D view.
Other aspects of navigation and movement within
virtual environments have been explored by Ruddle
and Jones [16] for example, who have studied the
effect that field of view has on the user’s awareness
of the environment and observe that users with a
reduced field of view are more likely to become

Figure 2. A screen shot of the interface presented
to the users. The small inset window is a third
person view constantly positioned northward
looking.

A map view has also recently been made
available, which allows the player to see their current
location and orientation on an overhead view of the

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

terrain, which matches the physical paper map. The
map view can be enabled or disabled by a change to
the program’s configuration file to allow for the
comparison in navigational achievement between
players with and without access to the map feature.
The map does not feature on the main screen for fear
of cluttering the screen and confusing the user. The
map is accessed and withdrawn by striking the m
character on the keyboard.

5

Results

Analysis of the initiation files determined that the
group which were allowed to view the location map
collected significantly more flags then the other
group (P >0.05, T-test). On average the group with
the location map enabled collected 7 flags compared
to an average of 3.5 flags for the group with the
disabled map. The group which were not able to
view the location map often became disorientated
and tended to travel in a random manor. There was
no significant difference in the number of flags
collected by males or females in either test group.
There was a positive correlation between the number
of times the map was viewed and the number of flags
collected by the subject (Figure 4), suggesting a
more logical directed approach compared to the
group with the location map disabled.

Times map viewed

A total of 46 subjects aged 13 or 14 were used to
test the Wayfarer program. The subjects were given
a set of basic instructions to read before they were
exposed to the program and were also given verbal
instructions and help whilst testing the program.
Subjects were expected to travel through a virtual
world using a compass and paper map to navigate to
check points (marked on the map) where flags were
collected. The subjects were given twenty minutes
to complete the task. Twenty-four subjects (11
female and 13 male) were asked to complete the task
without the use of a location map, the remainder of
the group (11 female and 11 male), were allowed to
use the location map. Figure 3 shows the map used
for this test.

of questions about their previous experience of
computing, gaming and orienteering, and they were
also asked to comment on a number of aspects of the
Wayfarer program.

150

100

50

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

Flags collected

Figure 3. A screen shot of the map used in
testing. Some users were given access to this
map (that displays the position in the virtual
environment of the avatar and the flags
magnified by a factor of ten) others were not.

A log file was kept to log the number of times the
subjects looked at the location map (where enabled)
and the number of flags the subjects collected. At
the end of the test the subjects were asked a number

Figure 4. Correlation between the number
of times the location map was viewed and the
number of flags collected.

Of the 46 subjects tested, 14 had no prior
experience of orienteering or using a compass,
however this did not have any effect on the subject’s
ability to navigate the program. All subjects were
experienced in using computers, however those who
regularly played computer games on average
collected one flag more then those who didn’t play
computer games, although this result was not

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

statistically significant. All subjects in the group that
were not allowed to view the map perceived the
program to be difficult, compared to a just 31% of
the group with the map enabled. When asked if the
third person inset view was useful for navigation,
54% of subjects said no. The majority of these, 76%,
were in the group with the map view disabled. These
results demonstrate that the inclusion of the location
map in the program greatly aids the subjects’ ability
to navigate through the virtual world.

[8] Gluck, M. (1990) Making Sense of Human
Wayfinding: A Review of Cognitive and Linguistic
Knowledge for Personal Navigation with a New
Research Direction. Myke Gluck School of
Information Studies, Syracuse University, Syracuse,
NY.

6

[10] Kaur, K., et al. (1998) Improving interaction
with virtual environments. Paper presented at IEE
colloquium on ‘the 3d interface for the information
worker’, London 1998.

References

[1] Baldonado, M., et al., (2000) Guidelines for
Using Multiple Views in Information Visualization",
Proc. ACM Advanced Visual Interfaces 2000.
[2] BECTA Computer Games in Education
Project details available online at http://
www.becta.org.uk/research/research.cfm?section=1
&id=2826
[3] Boukhelifa, N. & Rodgers, P. J. (2003) A
Model and Software System for Coordinated and
Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization,
Information Visualization, 2, 4.
[4] Darken, R.P. & Sibert, J.L., (1996)
Wayfinding Strategies and Behaviors in Large
Virtual Worlds, Proceedings of the CHI '96
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
[5] Darken, R.P. (1995) Wayfinding in LargeScale Virtual Worlds, CHI 95 Conference
Companion.
[6] Facer, K. (2002) Computer Games and
Learning: Why do we think it's worth talking about
computer games and learning in the same breath?
http://www.nestafuturelab.org/research/discuss/02dis
cuss04.htm
[7] The Games to Teach Project (2003) Designing
Educational Games: Design Principles from the
Games-to-Teach Project. Educational Technology,
September-October, 2003.

[9] Hunt, E., Waller, D. (1999) Orientation and
Wayfinding: A review, ONR technical report
N00014-96-0380, Arlington, VA: Office of Naval
Research.

[11] Marsh, T. & Wright, P. Using
cinematography conventions to inform the design
and evaluation of virtual off-screen space. Available
http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/hci/inquisitive/papers/smar
tgraphics00/TMarsh00.pdf
[12] Modjeska, D.K. (2000) Visualising
hierarchical data in desktop virtual reality.
[13] Ruddle, R. A., et al. (1999a) Navigating
large-scale virtual environments: What differences
occur between helmet-mounted and desk-top
displays? Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 8, 157-168.
[14] Ruddle, R. A., et al. (1999b) The effects of
maps on navigation and search strategies in verylarge-scale virtual environments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5, 54-75.
[15] Ruddle, R. A., et al., (1998) Navigating large
scale "desktop" virtual buildings: Effects of
orientation aids
and familiarity. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 7, 179-192.
[16] Ruddle, R. A. & Jones, D. M. (2001)
Movement in cluttered virtual environments.
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
10, 511-524.
[17] Siegel, S.A & White, S.H. (1975) The
development of spatial representations of large scale
environments, in H.W.Reese (Ed). Advances in child

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

development and behaviour, 10, 9-55, New York:
Academic Press.
[18] Steck, S.D. & Mallot, H.A. (2000) The role
of global and local landmarks in virtual environment
navigation. Presence. Teleoperators 9, 69-83.
[19] TEEM report on educational use of games at
http://www.teem.org.uk/publications/teem_gamesine
d_full.pdf
[20] Vinson N.C. (1999) Design guidelines for
landmarks to support navigation in virtual
environments. Proceedings of CHI 1999.
[21]
The
VMULE
http://www.icdc.org.uk/Vmule

project

at

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

