Landmark representation in 3-D nautical charts
Thomas Porathe
Information Design, Department of Innovation, Design and Product Development (IDP),
Mälardalen University, S-631 05 Eskilstuna, Sweden
{ thomas.porathe@mdh.se }
Abstract
This paper first presents an overview of a research
project in the field of information design concerning a
new 3-D decision support system for nautical navigation,
a 3-D cart. The paper then discusses landmark
representation in the virtual environment of the chart;
particularly the representation of forested islands and
coasts where the tree canopy is an important feature in
the silhouette. Experiment with removing certain parts of
laser scanned data, shows promising results when it
comes to recreating the silhouette of islands with forests
or groves of trees in the virtual environment.
Keywords--- navigation, nautical chart, 3D, GIS,
information design, landmark

1. Introduction
During the last decades it has become more common
with commercial vessels operating in high speeds.
Traditional merchant and passenger ferries operate in the
velocity span of 15 to 25 knots, while the so called High
Speed Crafts (HSC) operates in the span of 30 to 40
knots. [1] During this time a number of accidents have
occurred were high speed has played an important part.

In Scandinavian waters the most noticeable accident
occurred in 1999 when the HSC passenger ferry Sleipner
struck a rock and sank on the Norwegian west coast and
16 people drowned. The reason was a navigational error
leading to a disaster because of the high speed and too
short decision time. [2]
In an information design research project, the issue
of cognitive workload during navigating in high speeds is
addressed. Often large amounts of information have to be
considered in short time. The project aims at developing
a more intuitive and integrated decision support system
based on a 3-D chart. See figure 1.
In this paper I will first provide an overview of the
research project. I will then focus on a current research
issue of landmark representation in the 3-D chart, in
particular the representation of forested archipelagos
which are common in Sweden. The tree representation
often presents a performance problem for the real-time
environment of the chart system.

2. A three-dimensional nautical chart
From an information design point of view, the 3-D
chart aims at reducing the amount of information
presented to the navigator to only the most necessary and
to present it in a more intuitive and “natural” way. [3]
This is done with the help of three methods: the

Figure 1. A screen shot from the authors’ prototype using both the traditional bird’s eye chart perspective (left) and the
bridge perspective (right) of the coastal view. The new is that the dynamic motion of the eye position always reflects the
position of the ship in the real world. The entrance to Mariehamn in the Åland archipelago in the Baltic Sea.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

bridge perspective, No-Go Area polygons and the road
metaphor.
The first two methods depend on the existence of a
3-D terrain model of land and undersea surfaces.

2.1. The terrain model
The chart is a geographical information system
(GIS) containing a geographical database with traditional
chart information contained in layers. The geo-database
consists of a surface model of land and underwater
terrain. Surface models are sometimes referred to as 2.5D, as the elevation values are kept as attributes in a 2-D
grid structure, this as opposed to solid model, with a true
3-D grid, where the cells are three dimensional and
called voxels instead of pixels, allowing the user to
model, for example, temperature and salinity in a water
volume. [4]
The surface model is assembled from land and
underwater data. The land part is produced from official
digital elevation data (DEM), photogrammetry or
airborne laser scans of land areas, and the underwater
surface from bathymetrical data from sonar, airborne
laser bathymetry or official depth data from nautical
charts.

2.2. The bridge perspective
Up until the 17th century navigational information
was normally distributed in the form of printed sailing
descriptions, verbal narratives giving a sequential
description of a voyage from an onboard perspective.
From the 16th century they were often illustrated with
coastal views, drawings of the land contours as seen from
deck. From the 17th century and on, the bird’s eye
perspective chart has been the main method of presenting

Figure 2. The bank of Rakkeboene outside Stavern on
the Norwegian south coast. Norwegian Sjokartverket
chart no. 5, 1986. 1:50.000.

navigational information. [5]
Wickens and Hollands [6] stated that in tasks
involving understanding the structure of space, an
exocentric viewpoint (e.g. a bird’s eye perspective) is
best suited, while in tasks involving navigation or actual
travel through space, an egocentric viewpoint is to prefer.
They pointed out three reasons for this: First the egocentered, immerged viewpoint is the “viewpoint of our
eyes when we walk or control a vehicle and hence the
most ‘natural’”, second, such a bridge perspective
provide the traveler with a better view of obstacles that
lie in the forward path and last, the map user need not
mentally rotate the map when traveling in a direction
other than north.
In order to provide such an egocentric viewpoint the
information on a traditional chart is not sufficient,
lacking, for the most parts, both topographical and
textural records of islands and coastal areas. I will in
section 3 return to the question of landmarks.

2.3. No-Go area polygons
One of the most obvious problems for the voyager at
sea is the danger of underwater shoals. The remedy for
this problem has been to make soundings of the water
and present depth as figures in the nautical chart. Even in
modern day charts the sheer amount of soundings can
cause cognitive strain. See figure 2.
The problem with the presentation of depth data the
way it is done in figure 2 is that every number has to be
read before one can make a decision whether a ship will
have enough water under the keel or not.
An improvement to this problem is called chart
generalization. Soundings are classified into depth
intervals connected with isobars called depth curves.
Standard curves are, for example, 3, 6 and 10 meters. A
generalized chart is much easier to read. See figure 3.

Figure 3. Example of generalized depth soundings on the
Swedish east coast. Swedish Sjofartsverket, chart no.
624, 1988. 1:50.000

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Although the chart in figure 3 is a lot easier to read
than the previous one, there will still be some mental
calculations to be done if a sudden evasive maneuver is
forcing a ship off its planned route. Draft, tidal level and
wave amplitude has to be compared to the sounding
figures. A dynamic display is instead suggested, taking
the above parameters into account and presenting the
navigator with a chart showing only two types of areas:
No-Go and deep-water. See figure 4.

Figure 5. Interface from an GPS
navigator using the highway
metaphor. Screen from a Silva
Multi Center.

Figure 4. No-Go area warning polygons added to the
chart in figure 3. The polygons show navigational waters
for a vessel with a draft of 4 meters and the water level
being 1 meter below mean.

The No-Go area polygons can be dynamically
created in real-time from a 3-D surface model with input
from onboard sensors, tide tables and an on-line weather
data. [7]

But the metaphor has not been fully developed. The
interface show a single lane, “my own track”, laid out on
a flat surface. The point is to keep a boat symbol or the
forward field of view (FFOV) in the middle of the lane.
The lane is a track connecting two waypoints
programmed into my navigator. There is no automatic
connection to a common system with traffic separation.
Waypoints for popular routes may be downloaded from
public waypoint libraries offering the possibility of
meeting another boat traveling the opposite direction
along the same track.
A suggested extension of the road metaphor would
therefore involve laying out the official chart fairways in
the 3-D chart making traffic separation commonplace
and extending the network of fairways. See figure 6.

2.4. The road metaphor
When we drive our cars down the highway we might
think of the road as a practical convenience, the smooth
surface making it easier for the wheels to roll and thus
giving us a more comfortable ride. Maybe we never think
of the road as a elaborate system, simplifying decisionmaking by dividing space into lanes for different traffic
flows, thus making it easy to see where other cars are
going, and chunking the actual navigation to particular
places, junctions, with easy to read signs. If you ever
crossed diagonally over an empty warehouse parking lot,
skipping the painted lanes, and suddenly meeting another
car, you will know what I mean.
The highway metaphor is no novelty on the bridge,
being used in GPS navigators very early in their history.
See figure 5.

Figure 6. An extended road metaphor with traffic
separation. Screen dump from prototype of Stockholm
archipelago. From the authors prototype.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

3. Landmarks
Navigation might be defined as the aggregated tasks
of wayfinding and motion. [8] An important part of
wayfinding is to understand the structure of space and to
develop a cognitive map. This type of configurational or
topological knowledge is defined as survey knowledge.
[9]
Now, it is not necessary to understand the structure
of space just to drive along a road in an unknown
landscape. The GPS interface mentioned above is an
other example of “following the road.” Using an
electronic chart plotter in a head-up mode facilitates both
understanding of space and correct relative directions
vis-à-vis your own course. But to anchor the display
representation to the real world outside the windscreen,
landmarks are needed.
The term was originally used by Lynch [10] to
denote buildings but can be used about any recognizable
place with outstanding characteristics. [11]
Whereas the bird’s eye chart shows the form of
islands and coast from a view that the navigator seldom
has a chance to see, the dynamic coastal view presented
by the 3-D chart has landmark qualities making a direct
comparison possible in daylight and good visibility thus
facilitating the build of survey knowledge.
Wickens and Hollands stated that including distinct
landmarks in a real or virtual space will help to retain
user orientation, particularly if the presentation has an
egocentric viewpoint.

One might ask how detailed should the virtual
reality of the 3-D chart be? Purves et al. refers to the
result of a survey done after testing a virtual reality
mountain guide that those learning mountain navigation,
requested more detail to the virtual environment than the
bare hill formations offered by the application. [12]
Whitaker and Cuqlock-Knopp [13] stated that
landmarks are more useful if they represent artifacts (e.g.
buildings and roads) than natural objects.
In a coastal environment artifacts might be for
example beacons, lighthouses, buoys and other buildings
placed in the vicinity of the beach. Another important
feature would be the silhouette of islands and land. In the
barren outer archipelagos of Sweden and Finland the
characteristics of the low skeries are not very prominent,
and so the importance of buildings and other artifacts
become more obvious. See figure 7.
On the other hand, in the inner archipelagos of
eastern Sweden and southern Finland forests are
predominant. Photogrammatically measured elevation
models often use bare earth elevation not taking the
height of the forests into account, leaving a 3-D chart
were the silhouette does not fit with reality and thus is
misleading used in navigation. See figure 8.

Figure 8. The absence of tree representations leads to
faulty silhouettes of forested islands in the terrain models.
Top, a photo and bottom a screen dump from the 3-D
chart. From the authors prototype over Ingaröfjarden in
the Stockholm archipelago.

3.1. Laser scanned elevation models

Figure 7. Kobbaklintar pilot station at the entrance to
Mariehamn in the Åland archipelago shows the
importance of landmarks in a cluttered archipelago of low
skerries. From the authors prototype.

Laser scanned elevation data is becoming
increasingly accessible and offer new solutions to the
construction of 3-D charts. They have a high density
point cloud giving good resolution to the over water
terrain. Buildings today still has to be modeled by hand,
but the point cloud facilitates scaling and positioning. Se
figure 9.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

system. The first and the last of these reflections is
normally saved thus giving a clear indication of the
presents of a tree.
When a bare earth elevation model is produced the
first reflections are filtered away, but by filtering off the
last (ground) reflection, a tree canopy can be produced.
In the bottom picture in figure 11 a cross-section of a tree
grove can be seen. Ground reflections are filtered in
purple and first reflections in green.

Figure 9. Laser scanned elevation model. Top: the
orthophoto draped polygon model made from raw laser
data. Middle, the 3-D chart with hand made buildings.
Bottom, a photo from the real world. Gäveskar lighthouse
in the Gothenburg archipelago. From the authors
prototype.

Software products for working with point data from
laser scans are getting better at automatically identify
buildings and roof shapes and swap these data points for
a 3-D vector model of the building. [14] A remaining
problem is that texture for the walls of buildings can not
be extracted from air photos but has to be collected
locally.
The representation of land formation by orthophoto
draped terrain models is very realistic. One lasting
problem is both the collection and presentation of coasts
with steep, overhanging cliffs and caves.
Recognizing the importance of correct land
silhouettes along forested coasts and archipelagos, one
could try to represent trees the way traditionally done in
virtual environments: letting each tree be represented by
one or two textured polygons. The result is appealing but
the modeling is very time consuming to ensure that the
islands get the right appearances. Also: although it only
takes one or two polygons to represent each tree, an off
coast panorama would display many millions of trees
bringing also very powerful real-time systems on their
knees. Ordinary polygon reduction and level-of-detail
(LOD) techniques would here be of little use as they
would strip far off islands from trees and thus making the
silhouette incorrect.
Instead laser scanned elevation data offer an
interesting possibility. The laser beam that is thrown
from the helicopter and passes through the foliage of a
tree is sending multiple reflections back to the laser

Figure 11. Classification of laser point cloud. In the
picture ground reflections under the trees are colored in
purple and top reflections from foilage in green. The
ground reflections are then removed to produce a
polygon mesh of the type that can be seen in figure 12.
Screen dump from Terrasolids software Terra Scan.

By removing the ground reflections in forested areas
a polygon mesh can be created that answers well to
polygon reductions methods and standard LOD
techniques without compromising the important
silhouette feature.
In figure 12 a visualization of a grove on Aspholmen
in the Gothenburg archipelago can be seen. Top, the real
world and bottom, the 3-D model.

Conclusions
Landmark representation in the virtual environment
of the 3-D chart is important. During daylight conditions
it gives the user an easy way to check and to gain
confidence in the system. In reconnaissance mode it
helps the navigator in memorizing visual cues for the
route ahead.
Not all features are landmarks, but prominent ones
need to be represented in the virtual environment.
These landmarks are either man-made constructs or
natural features like characteristic cliffs or islands.
Artifacts like buildings, lighthouses and buoys are,
as jet, not represented in a satisfactory way by the
automatic process of point cloud software working on
laser data. Instead vector models has to be brought in
from a model library or has to be hand made. Progress in

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

software development might in
the future make this progress
more automatic.
Natural features like the land
form of coast and islands are
represented
very
well
by
orthophoto draped terrain from
photogrammaticaly measured, or
laser scanned elevation models.
In coastal navigation the
silhouette of land and islands is an
important landmark. The presence
of forests and groves has dramatic
influence on the character of the
silhouette therefore bare earth
elevations can not be used to
produce the terrain model. Instead
point clouds from laser scans has
been used and modified. By
removing the points from the
laser ground reflections the tree Figure 12. Aspholmen in the archipelago of Gothenburg. Top is a photo from the
canopy has been recreated in the real world. Bottom is an orthophoto draped polygon mesh made from interpolated
polygon mesh in a way that laser points classified so as to remove the ground reflections in the tree grove. The
satisfactory
represents
the mesh answers well on polygon reduction techniques without losing its silhouette. Air
silhouette of the real landscape. photo draping is taken at fall and the photo in the summer.
These meshes answers well to
[6] Christopher D. Wickens and Justin G. Hollands,
traditional polygon reduction methods needed to
Engineering Psychology and Human Performance,
optimize the real-time environment.
Prentice-Hall, 2000.
Future research in this area includes using novel
[7] Thomas Porathe. Visualisering av No Go Areas i
vegetation software to increase the close range realism of
tredimensionella nautiska navigationssystem. Report in
forested over water terrain.
Geoinformatics, University of Lidkoping. 2002. url:

References
[8]
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Sjöfartens Bok 2004. Svensk Sjöfartstidning no. 23.
Breakwater Publishing. 2003
Hurtigbåten MS Sleipners forlis 26. November 1999.
Rapport fra undersøkelseskommisjonen oppnevnt av
Justis- og politidepartementet 1. desember 1999 med
hjemmel i forskrift 28. november 1980 nr. 7 om
undersøkelseskommisjoner etter sjøloven, 2000, Justi- og
politidepartementet, url: http://odin.dep.no/jd/norsk/publ/
rapporter/sleipner/sleipner.pdf
Thomas Porathe and Åke Sivertun. “Information Design
for a 3D Nautical Navigational Visualization System”. In
Proceedings of The Eight International Conference on
Distributed Multimedia Systems 2002. 673-676.
September 2002.
Ronxing Li. “Multiform Data Models for Marine and
Coastal Geographic Information Systems”. In Marine
and Coastal Geographic Information Systems. Wright
and Bartlett (Ed.), 549-554. Taylor & Francis, 1999.
Thomas Porathe and Gary Svensson. “From Portolan
Charts To Virtual Beacons; An Historic Overview Of
Mediated Communication At Sea”. In Changing Tides.
Selected Readings of the 2003 International Visual
Litteracy Conference. Griffin, Lee and Chandler (Ed.).
233-241. October 2003.

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

http://www.idp.mdh.se/personal/tpe01/publicering/porath
eNoGoAreasLowres.pdf
Rudolph P. Darken and Barry Peterson. “Spatial
Orientation, Wayfinding, and Representation”. In
Handbook of Virtual Environment Technology. Stanney,
K. (Ed.) 2001.
Rudoph P. Darken and John L. Sibert. “Wayfinding
Strategies and Behaviors in Large Virtual Worlds”, AMC
SIGCHI 96, 142-149. 1996.
Kevin Lynch, The Image of the City, Cambridge, MIT
Press. 1960.
Reginald G. Golledge. Place “Recognision and
Wayfinding: Making Sense of Space”, Geoforum. Vol.
23. No. 2. 199-214. 1992.
Ross Purves, Steve Dowers and William Macaness.
“Providing context in virtual veality”. In Virtual Reality
in Geography. Peter Fisher and David Unwin (Ed.)
Taylor & Frances. 2002.
Whitaker, L.A. and Cuqlock-Knopp, V.G. “Human
Exploration and perception in off-road navigation”. In
Local applications in the ecology of human-machine
systems. Hancock, Flash, Card & Vicente (Ed.) Hillsdale,
Erlbaum. 1995.
Terrasolid Ltd, 2005. url: http://www.terrasolid.fi/ENG/T
uote_kuvaukset/TScan.htm

