Development of a Visualizing Web Search System
Norifumi SUNAOKA
The Japanese Supplementary School in Luxembourg
sunaoka@internet.lu
Setsuo YOKOYAMA
Tokyo Gakugei University
yokoyama@u-gakugei.ac.jp

Abstract
Existing Web search systems have the following problems. They cannot show Web contents that are related to
the keywords but do not match to them. And the relationship between contents is unknown. This makes continuous
navigation between contents through keywords impossible.
The purpose of this study is to solve these problems, as examined in terms of visualization of the search results and
of the strengths of relationships between Web contents. The
paper proposes some visualization models, it also describes
the development of a Web search system. The system has the
following functions: (1) Reference based on the strengths of
relationships between Web contents. (2) Visualization of the
relationships among Web contents. (3) Continuous navigation between Web contents through characteristic keywords.
By using the system, users can navigate on Web pages from
different viewpoints.
KEYWORDS: Web search system, Visualization, continuous navigation

1 Introduction
Various kinds of information have become available with
the spread of Internet and the World Wide Web. The quantity of this information will continue to increase; yet it is
becoming harder for users to obtain their required information [1]. To efficiently obtain the required information from
a lot of information, search systems (search engines) are
widely used. Existing search systems simply display the
Web contents that match the keywords input by the user for
searching. As a result, the following problems arise:
- These systems cannot show Web contents that are related
to the keywords but do not match to them.
- They show contents in order of conformity with the keywords, therefore the relationships between Web contents are

Yoshiki SATO
Tokyo Gakugei University
yoshiki@cs.u-gakugei.ac.jp

Youzou MIYADERA
Tokyo Gakugei University
miyadera@u-gakugei.ac.jp

unclear.
- Since the relationships between the extracted contents
and the keywords characterizing them are unclear, continuous navigation between contents through keywords is impossible.
The purpose of this study is to solve these three problems, as examined in terms of visualization of the search
results and of the strengths of relationships between Web
contents.
The research fields related to this study include information retrieval, information visualization, and visualization
of the relationships between Web contents. Information retrieval studies propose methods of extracting information
related to the keywords input by users, based on a synonym
dictionary and a thesaurus [2] [3]. However, the purposes
of these studies are to refine dictionaries and improve the
reference speed, and the content of the information is not
considered, unlike our study. On the other hand, information visualization studies have provided some useful results
[4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9]. In these studies, the objects being visualized were a directory structure, the bookmark structure
of a Web browser, the relationships among scientific papers,
and others [10] [11] [12] [13]. These objects all differ from
the object we consider in this study. Finally, the visualizations of relationships between Web contents have also been
investigated [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19]. These studies
examined linked information in Web contents and tried to
understand it from many viewpoints, including the interaction with users. They did not, however, visualize the relationships among contents and the relationships among contents and related keywords. An advantage common to all
this previous research is that grasping the directory structure
and self-location within an information space like the Web
is comparatively easy, therefore it is possible to view the
whole information space in these cases. Reference [20], for
example, mentions that the visualization shape is uniquely
provided by the system. Furthermore, the study of informa-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

tion visualization to aid creative concept formation has also
been examined previously [21] [22].
By applying these studies, we propose four visualization
models in this study, and we also consider the possibility of
aiding creative concept formation by providing users with
a new viewpoint. Our purpose, then, is to develop a Web
search system with the following functions that can solve
the problems described before:
(1) Reference based on the strengths of relationships between Web contents.
(2) Visualization of the relationships among Web contents.
(3) Continuous navigation between Web contents through
characteristic keywords.
By using the system, users can navigate on Web pages from
different viewpoints. We first propose a method of quantitatively grasping the relationships among Web contents. We
then describe the development of a search system to visualize these relationships. There is no navigation system on
Web pages from different viewpoints. Therefore, the development of our proposed system would be significant and
original.
Section 2 proposes four visualization models based on a
user model for search activities and the characterization of
Web contents. We also give the requirements for our Web
search system. In Section 3, we review the development of
the system. We then present an example of a search activity
using this system and discuss its practical use in Section 4.
Finally, in Section 5, we provide our conclusions and note
future problems.

users to repeatedly refer to Web contents unrelated to their
purposes, which takes more of their time.
In this study, we try to visualize the relationships between Web contents in order to develop a system that embodies this user model.

2.2 Quantification
To visualize relationships between Web contents, it is
necessary to quantify the strengths of these relationships.
We begin by defining this strength, which we call the “related value”.
(1) Characterization of Web contents
As Figure 1 illustrates, Web contents can be characterized by combining a keyword (called a ”characterized keyword”) contained in the contents and its weight. The
characterization of a particular content x is defined by
expression (1). We abbreviate the characterized keyword as ”CharW ordxi ” and the characterized weight as
”CharW txi ”.

2 System Design
2.1 User Model
The users of a search system cannot necessarily choose
appropriate keywords for their search requirements. Existing systems only extract the Web contents in which keywords occur; therefore, users may not be able to obtain
appropriate contents. If a search system could also provide contents related to the extracted contents, this would
be helpful to users who could not choose appropriate keywords for their search requirements.
In addition, because existing systems display search results in order of hit frequency, users cannot view the relationships between contents. It is thus hard for them to find
other Web contents closely related to a particular content.
Therefore, if a search system could also show the relationships between the extracted contents and the related contents, even though their keywords did not match, it would
become easier to navigate to Web contents more closely related to the users’ requirements.
The relationships among the extracted contents displayed by existing systems are also unclear. This causes

Figure 1. Model for Web content characterization

Ch(W ebx ) ≡ [(CharW ordx1 , CharW tx1 ), (CharW ordx2 ,
CharW tx2 ), ..., (CharW ordxn , CharW txn )]

(1)

As expression (2) indicates, a value CharW txi calculated by the tf ∗ idf method is used to characterize a Web
content. The tf (term frequency) value is calculated for the
content and indicates the frequency of a word occurring in
a content. The idf (inversed document frequency) value indicates the number of contents in which a particular word
occurs within a set of content. The idf value is calculated
for the whole database. Thus, when the value CharW txi
calculated by the tf ∗ idf method is large, the CharW ordxi
is presumed to characterize the content x. CharW txi have
to be normalized from 0.0 to 1.0.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

CharW txi ≡ tf (x, CharW ordxi ) ∗ idf (CharW ordxi )
(2)
(2) Related value
We define a related value based on the CharW t values for
the common CharW ords between Web contents. The related value, which we abbreviate as ”RelV al”, is defined
in expression (3) and indicates the strength of a relationship
between Web contents x and y. The RelV al(x, y) is calculated by the CharW ts of the common CharW ords that
appear in the contents x and y. Figure 2 shows the model of
the RelV al.
m

RelV al(x, y) ≡

n

a∗w∗v

i=1 j=1
w = 1 − |CharW txi − CharW tyj |,
v = 1/2((CharW txi )2 + (CharW tyj )2 )
if (CharW ordxi = CharW ordyj ) then a =
if (CharW ordxi = CharW ordyj ) then a =

(3)

1
0

developed four different visualization models, as shown in
Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6. The rectangular nodes indicate Web
contents, while the elliptical nodes indicate CharW ords.
The RelV al reflects the arrangement of the nodes in each
visualization.
In Visualization Model 1, shown in Figure 3, the RelV al
is taken as the x-axis, and the CharW t is taken as the yaxis. The origin of the coordinate system is positioned at
the upper left, and the target Web content is placed at the
origin. The contents extracted based on a user’s keywords
are arranged throughout the coordinate system. Relative to
the target Web content, the strength of the relationship between an extracted content and the search keyword is higher
if the content is closer to the x-axis. On the other hand, the
RelV al between the target Web content and an extracted
content is stronger if the content is closer to the y-axis. The
RelV al expresses the relation strength between the target
content and the others. The target content is the starting
point of Web navigations. Web navigations can be achieved
from various view points from the target content . In Figure
3, compared with content (2), content (1) is not as strongly
related to the target Web content, although the CharW t of
content (1) with respect to the search keyword is higher than
that of content (2).
The rectangle’s length depends on the title of the contents.

Figure 2. Model for the related value between
Web contents x and y
Let us assume that contents x and y have certain
CharW ords with m and n instances, respectively. By using expression (3), a RelV al based on the CharW t value
of a common CharW ord with m and n instances is calculated. If the expressions 0.0 ≤ CharW txi ≤ 1.0 and
0.0 ≤ CharW tyj ≤ 1.0 are satisfied, then RelV al(x, y)
is normalized from 0.0 to 1.0. The value w decreases as
the difference between CharW txi and CharW tyj increases.
For a certain CharW ord, contents are characterized as
close when the relationship between them is strong. In the
case of value v, by squaring CharW txi and CharW tyj , a
content with CharW ords whose CharW ts are larger is
more strongly characterized by these CharW ords.

2.3 Visualization Models
In our proposed visualization approach, the Web contents are arranged in a 2-dimensional plane. In fact, we have

Figure 3. Visualization Model 1
For Visualization Model 2, illustrated in Figure 4, only
the RelV al is considered; it is taken as the y-axis. Again,
the origin of the coordinate system is positioned at the upper
left and the target Web content is placed at the origin. Contents closer to the origin have stronger relationships with
the target content. Visualization Model 2 achieves purpose
(1) described in Section 1, namely reference based on the
strength of the relationship between Web contents.
In Visualization Model 3, shown in Figure 5, the relationships among Web contents and CharW ords are visualized based on CharW ts and RelV als. In other
words, the CharW ts and RelV als among the Web con-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 4. Visualization Model 2
Figure 6. Visualization Model 4
tents are reflected by the arrangement of Web contents and
CharW ords. After the contents are extracted and arranged
according to Models 1 and 2, the model 3 shown in Figure 5 can be constructed. As an example of this approach,
when content (1) is extracted, a transition to content (2) via
CharW ord (1) is possible. Continuous navigation, such
as the transition to content (3) via another CharW ord (2),
also becomes possible. By applying Visualization Model 3,
purpose (3) described in Section 1, continuous navigation
between Web contents via CharW ords, can be achieved.
In addition, purpose (2), the visualization of relationships
between Web contents, can be achieved by applying Models 1 and 3 together.

2.4 System Requirements
The requirements for our system are listed below.
(1) Web contents that match the search keywords input
by users are displayed in order of conformity with the keywords (same function as existing search systems)(Model 1,
Figure 3).
(2) In addition to the requirement (1), the RelV als among
Web contents are showed together (Model 1, Figure 3).
(3) The search results are expressed based on the RelV als
between the target Web content and the extracted contents
(Model 2, Figure 4)
(4) The relationships between the CharW ords and the
contents are displayed (Model 3, Figure 5), (Model 4, Figure 6).
(5) Browsing must be possible (same function as existing
systems).
(6) CharW ords can easily be shown simply by specifying
contents.

3 System Development
3.1 Outline of the System
Figure 5. Visualization Model 3
In Visualization Model 4, shown in Figure 6, the treestructure is constructed with root as input keyword. The
keyword has child nodes that are Web contents related
to it. Each Web content has also child nodes that are
CharW ords of it. Like these, the tree-structure has hierarchy of Web contents and CharW ords. In this case,
a Web content can be duplicated in the tree. By looking
CharW ords, users can easily navigate to the next Web
content as a target. The Visualization Model 4 achieves purpose (3), namely continuous navigation among Web contents.

The visualizing Web search system developed by us consists of the visualization database construction subsystem
and the visualization subsystem, as shown in Figure 7. We
next describe these two subsystems.

3.2 Visualization Database Construction Subsystem
In this subsystem, the Web content collection module
first collects contents automatically, and the characterization module then extracts CharW ords and computes
CharW ts. Next, the related value calculation module

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

3.2.3 Related value calculation module
Expression (3) given in Section 2.2 is used to calculate the
related values. The values are stored in the characteristic
relation database.
3.2.4 Characteristic relation database design

Figure 7. Outline of the system

computes the RelV als between Web contents, which are
recorded in the characteristic relation database.
3.2.1 Web content collection module
This module applies the same technique as the commonly
used robot searching. Multithread operation is achieved
by allowing a maximum of ten threads. For this reason,
to manage the threads, the URLs of the Web contents collected by each thread are recorded in a file. These URLs
are reflected by a directory structure, and the contents are
accumulated in a database that includes HTTP header information. This database, called the content accumulation
database, becomes unnecessary after the characteristic relation database is created.
3.2.2 Characterization module
CharW ords are extracted for the collected contents.
Chasen, a morphological analysis system, is used to extract
the CharW ords [23]. Although Chasen can only perform
Japanese morphological analysis in its default state, it is
designed to enable morphological analysis in another language, such as English, if a dictionary is added. We thus
constructed an English word dictionary with about 100,000
words by using WordNet, an English thesaurus, and it was
added to Chasen [24]. The allowable parts of speech for
the extracted morphemes were limited to nouns. While
extracting the CharW ords, the tf values are computed
and are stored in the characteristic relation database. In
CharW ord extraction, uncharacterized words like ”it” and
”for” were eliminated because they are unnecessary. About
300 unnecessary words are still stored as the unnecessary
words in the system at present.

The schema of the database table used in this system is
shown in Table 1 ∼ 4. The symbol [*] in the tables refers
to the main key of each table and to the indexed field. The
symbol [@] refers to the field with an index attached to increase the reference speed.
Table 1 stores information peculiar to the extracted Web
contents. The URL, title, modification date, and others are
included as fields. The ID is a unique identifier used in this
system. The title is a character sequence displayed in the
node label when it is visualized. Table 2 stores information
about the CharW ords extracted from the Web contents.
The information includes the CharW ords, CharW ts, and
IDs pointing to the table storing the contents. By combining Tables 1 and 2 and the content IDs, information about
the Web contents can be acquired via CharW ords. Table 3 stores the RelV als between contents. By combining
content ID1, content ID2, and the content ID from Table
2, the content information and the RelV als between contents can be acquired. Table 4 stores the idf values of the
CharW ords. By combining Tables 2 and 4, the idf values
can be acquired and the CharW ts can be computed. Table
4 is used temporarily and is unnecessary for the visualization system. The titles of the Web contents extracted from
the content information table are acquired and displayed in
the labels for the node contents.
Table 1. Content information table
Field
Explain
ID
* primary key
URL
@ URL of the content
title
title of the content
morpheme number
the total number of the
morphemes in the content
content size
file size of the content
modification date
the latest modification date
collection date
the latest collection date
by the robot

3.3 Visualization Subsystem
The visualization module uses a ”Java applet” running
in the Web browser to acquire the keywords input by users
for searching. The information required for visualization

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Table 2. CharW ord table
Field
Explain
ID
* primary key
content ID
@ ID of the content information table
CharW ord @ CharW ord
frequency
@ the number of appearance of
the CharW ord
CharW t
@ CharW t of the CharW ord

Field
ID
content ID1
content ID2
RelV al

Table 3. RelV al table
Explain
* primary key
@ ID of the content information table
ID of the content information table
related value (0.0 ∼ 1.0)

is acquired from the characteristic relation database (implemented in MySQL) and returned to the Java applet. Based
on this information, the node coordinates are determined
and other processes are performed to enable visualization
with the applet. Double-clicking a content (node) on the visualizing window causes the browsing module to start, enabling browsing.

the target content is the starting point on Web navigations.
In Step 2, the RelV als between the contents acquired in
Step 1 and the target Web content are acquired from the
RelV al table (Table 3). These RelV als are reflected by
the distances between nodes. In Step 3, the reciprocals of
the RelV al acquired in Step 2 are squared. The reciprocal is taken to enable us to arrange the contents near the
target content, so that the strengths of the relationships are
large. The values are then squared to highlight the differences between contents with large and small RelV als. The
coordinates are determined by considering these computed
values and the size of the display screen. An object that inherits from the ”JLabel” of a component is created during
the arrangement, and this becomes the node of the content
presented by ”Swing”. The title of the content is displayed
in the node label, and the URL is displayed in the tool hint.
A ”panel object” that inherits from ”JPanel” is created, and
the node is positioned based on the coordinates that have
been determined. In the case of Model 3, the determination
of the coordinates of nodes uses the Spring model.
3.3.2 Browsing module
This module is started when the user double-clicks a node in
the visualized Web contents. The module passes the URL of
the chosen content to the Web browser, which then acquires
the content directly from the Internet.

3.3.1 Visualization module
In the visualization module, the following procedure is followed to enable visualization of the relationships between
Web contents.
(Step 1) The contents matching the user’s keywords are acquired.
(Step 2) All the related values of the extracted contents are
acquired.
(Step 3) The nodes are arranged.
In Step 1, the content information table (Table 1) and the
CharW ord table (Table 2) are joined, and the Web contents that match the keywords are acquired. The contents are sorted in ascending order of the tf value in the
CharW ord table. Then, we let the content listed first be
the target Web content, which is positioned at the upper left
and displayed in yellow color. Although the acquired title
is displayed on the content node, if the title cannot be acquired, the node label is displayed as ”(no title)”. All time,

3.3.3 Visualization interface
The visualization interface of the system is shown in Figure
8. Users search by inputting keywords into the keywordinput component. The search results are shown in the display component, and the Web contents can be expanded or
reduced by using the zoom-regulation component. Upon
choosing a content, its information is displayed in the titleand-URL component, and the list of CharW ords is displayed in the CharW ord-display component. In addition,
the target content is changed by clicking a selected node,
and the re-draw button is clicked, then the visualization is
changed. This visualization is focused in the changed target content which is arranged at the upper left. The changes
corresponding to Visualization Models 1, 2, 3 and 4 are implemented by the draw-method selection component. The
ten Web contents most closely related to the selected content are shown in the related-content display component.

3.4 Database Implementation
Table 4. idf value table
Field
Explain
ID
* primary key
CharW ord @ CharW ord
idf value
idf value (0.0 ∼ 1.0)

The visualization database construction subsystem was
implemented by using Perl, along with modules dealing
with the HTTP protocol and Chasen [23]. Moreover,
database access is easily performed. The visualization subsystem was developed by using Java/Swing with high affin-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

4.2 Search Activity Example
Keyword-input component
Title-and-URL component
CharWord-display
component
Display component
Related-contents-display
component
Draw-method selection
component
Zoom-regulation
component
Re-draw button

Based on the construction described above, an example
of reference activities using the visualization subsystem is
shown below. Figure 9 illustrates an example of searching with the keyword ”education.” Each node in the display
component shows a Web content. The content at the upper
left end is the target Web content, which is colored by yellow, and the related nodes are drawn in the vertical direction
in order of their conformity to the keyword. In the horizontal direction, they are drawn in order of RelV al strength
with respect to the target content. If we only consider the
vertical direction, this is the same as an existing search system. Figure 9 corresponds to Visualization Model 1 and
satisfies system requirements (1) and (2).

Figure 8. Visualization Interface
ity for a Web browser. MySQL was chosen as the relational database management system, because its reference
speed is fast and it supports standard SQL. The visualization
database construction subsystem operates on UNIX, while
the visualization subsystem operates on the same OS as the
Web browser.

4 Practical Use of the System
4.1 Visualization Database Construction
In this study, results were acquired by inputting the keywords ”project” into Google, and these results were considered as the starting point for Web content collection. Approximately 10,000 Web contents were collected, with a total of 1,750,000 extracted CharW ords, and the number of
related value combinations was approximately 50 million.
We worked in the following computing environment: Solaris 8 as the OS, with a 600-Mz PentiumIII CPU, 384 MB
of memory, and a network throughput of 1.5 Mbps. About
seven days were spent acquiring contents, about 16 days
were spent on characterization, and about 3 days were spent
calculating the related values. The size of the content accumulation database reached about 150 MB, and the total
capacity of all the characteristic relation database reached
about 800 MB, including the idf table (Table 4).
Given the above description, we understand that our system spent much time constructing the database. However,
if the system could be applied in limited fields, the functions implementing purposes (1), (2), and (3), as described
in Section 1, would be effective. Furthermore, if we could
apply the new method of constructing a database given in
the reference [25], the field limitation could be avoided.
Therefore, the system could be useful for search activities.

Figure 9. Search activity example 1
In the display shown in Figure 9, clicking a node causes
the node to become the target Web content. The display
shown in Figure 10 obtained immediately by choosing Visualization Model 2 (in order of RelV al) in the draw-method
selection component. Figure 10 illustrates an example in
which the target Web content, which is selected by clicking a node in Figure 9, is arranged at the upper left, but the
nodes are arranged in order of their relationships with the
target content. In this case, because the nodes are arranged
in this order for all the contents stored in the characteristic relation database, the keyword ”education” inputted in
Figure 9 has no meaning. This example corresponds to Visualization Model 2 and satisfies system requirement (3).
Figure 11 and Figure 12 illustrate examples based on the
relationships between Web contents expressed through the
CharW ords. From the draw-method selection component

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 10. Search activity example 2

Figure 12. Search activity example 4

in Figures 9 and 10, “relationship by characterized keyword” is chosen and the relationships are drawn. In the case
of Figure 11, user can select the next contents via the distance between the target Web content and the others. In the
case of Figure 12, user can select the next web contents by
comparing its CharW ords and the others’ CharW ords.
Through the use of CharW ords in these visualizations
(Figure 11 and Figure 12), transition to other Web contents
and continuous navigation can be achieved. These examples correspond to Visualization Models 3 and 4, and satisfy
system requirement (4).

In Figures 9 ∼ 12, clicking a node enables users to see
CharW ords in the CharWord-display component. This
feature helps predict Web contents, without actually referring to them. This satisfies system requirement (6). Furthermore, selected Web contents can be referred to by doubleclicking, which satisfies system requirement (5). Finally,
the whole screen can be expanded or reduced by moving
the slider bar of the zoom-regulation component to the right
or left, respectively.
Because the four visualization models were implemented and the six system requirements were satisfied, the
three purposes described in Section 1 could be attained.

Conclusions

Figure 11. Search activity example 3

In this study, a prototype visualizing Web search system
was developed to attain three purposes: (1) reference based
on the strengths of the relationships among Web contents;
(2) visualization of these relationships; and (3) continuous
navigation between Web contents by using keywords. The
benefits of this system are that it can extract closely related
Web contents based on the importance of characterized keywords common to these contents, and it can visualize the results. No existing search system can attain these three purposes. Therefore, the development of the proposed system
should be useful for future search activities.
Among future problems, it will be necessary to evaluate
the characterization of Web contents, the relationships between Web contents, and the actual use of the system by
a real user. Moreover, we have to try to improve our system by applying the new method of database construction
described in Section 4.1 [25].

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Acknowledgments
This study is supported in part by the Grant-in-Aid for
Scientific Research (B)(1) (No. 10190802) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
of Japan.

References
[1] Internet Exceeds 2 Billion Pages - Newsroom
- Cyveillance.
http://www.cyveillance.com/web/
newsroom/releases/2000/2000-07-10.htm, 2000.
[2] IEEE-DL. http://www.ieee.org/web/search/.
[3] ACM-DL. http://www.acm.org/search/.
[4] http://www.cs.orst.edu/˜burnett/vpl.html.
[5] G. G. Robertson, J. D. Mackinlay, and S. K. Card.
Cone Trees: Animated 3D visualizations of hierarchical information. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’91), pages 189–194. Addison-Wesley, 1991.
[6] Emiko Orimo and Hideki Koike. ZASH: A Browsing
System for Multi-Dimensional Data. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages (VL ’99), pages 288–295.
IEEE Computer Society, 1999.
[7] Ben Shneiderman. Dynamic Queries for Visual Information Seeking. IEEE Software, 11(6):70–77,
November 1994.
[8] Ben Shneiderman. Designing the User Interface. Addison Wesley Longman, third edition, 1998.
[9] Stuart K. Card. Visualizing Retrieved Information: A
Survey. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
16(2):63–67, March 1996.

[13] Syo Tanabe, Kayoko Oyobe, Norifumi Sunaoka,
Sttsuo Yokoyama, and Youzou Miyadera. A Visualization System of Relationships among Papers
Based on the Graph Drawing Problem. In Intnational
Conference on Information Visualization (InfoVis’02),
pages 202–210. IEEE, 2002.
[14] Kunkel C. Willet A.. Hemmje, M. Lyberworld – A
Visualization User Interface Supporting Fulltext Retrieval. In 17th ACM SIGIR Conference, pages 249–
259. ACM, 1994.
[15] http://www.kartoo.com/.
[16] Sougata Mukherjea, James D. Foley, and Scott Hudson. Visualizing Complex Hypermedia Networks
through Multiple Hierarchical Views. In Proc. CHI95.
IEEE Computer Society, 1995.
[17] Jeffrey Dean and Monika R. Henzinger. Finding Related Pages in the World Wide Web. Computer Networks (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 1999.
[18] S. Mukherjea and Y. Hara.
Visualizing WorldWideWeb Search Engine Results. In Proceedings International Conference on Information Visualization
IV’99, pages 400–405. IEEE Computer Society, 1999.
[19] Hidekazu Siozawa, Haruhiko Nishiyama, and Yutaka Matsushita. The Natto View: An Architecture for Interactive Information Visualization. IPSJ,
38(11):2331–2342, November 1997. (in Japanese).
[20] Teruhiko Teraoka and Minoru Maruyama. Adaptive
Information Visualization Based on the User’s Multiple Viewpoints. IPSJ, 39(5):1365–1372, November
1998. (in Japanese).
[21] Yasuyuki Sumi, Kazushi Nishimoto, and Kenji Mase.
Personalizing Information in a Conversation Support
Environment for Facilitating Collaborative Concept
Formation and Information Sharing. IEICE, J80-DI(7):542–550, July 1997. (in Japanese).

[10] Anne Bruggemann-Klein, Rolf Klein, and Britta
Landgraf.
BibRelEx: Exploring Bibliographic
Databases by Visualization of Annotated ContentBased Relations. In IEEE Information Visualization
2000, pages 19–24. IEEE Computer Society, 2000.

[22] Konomu Dobashi. Interactive Visualization of Problem Structure Integrated with WWW and Text Mining.
Technical Report 447, IEICE, 1999. (in Japanese).

[11] Junichi Tatamura. Graphical Relevance Feedback: Visual Exploration in the Document Space. In IEEE
Symposium on Visual Languages (VL 2000), pages
39–46. IEEE Computer Society, 2000.

[24] http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/˜wn/.

[12] Youzou Miyadera, Akira Taji, and Takeo Yaku. Methods of visualizing Paper-Relation Diagrams Based on
the viewpoints of Users. In Human-Computer Interaction (HCI2001), pages 775–779, 2001.

[23] Chasen. http://cl.aist-nara.ac.jp/lab/nlt/chasen.html.

[25] Akihiko Takano, Shingo Nishioka, Osamu Imaichi,
Makoto Iwayama, Yoshiki Niwa, Toru Hisamitsu,
Masakazu Fujio, Takenobu Tokunaga, Manabu Okumura, Hajime Mochizuki, and Tadashi Nomoto. Development of the generic association engine for processing large corpora.
http://geta.ex.nii.ac.jp/pdf/
itx2002.pdf, 2001.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

