Scaled Molecular Models and Sculptures
Edgar Meyer

Molecular Modelling Laboratory
University of New Mexico-Taos
508 Verde Road, Taos, NM 87571 USA
Atomic models (e.g., plastic CPK1 models) are
available commercially for ca. $1/atom, but constructed
molecular models are limited to the typical size-domains
of organic or inorganic chemistry, i.e., less than 100
atoms. So how might we construct a 3-D model of a
protein binding pocket or an enzyme active site
containing several hundred atoms? This article describes
the use of a computer numerically controlled (cnc)
milling machine to create scaled molecular models and
sculptures.

ABSTRACT
Atomic coordinates and computer graphics are used to
compose and define input parameters to a computer
program, “SCULPT”, which generates “G” code for a
cnc milling machine. Molecular models or sculptures are
carved from a single piece of wood or, for more
elaborate models of binding sites, are carved from
successive planks of wood, which are then laminated.
The method is briefly described and examples of recent
models and sculptures are given, together with a brief
overview of molecular modelling.

BACKGROUND
The earliest known molecular models2 (water,
methane, etc.) were presented by August von Hofmann
to the public forum at the Friday Evening Discourse at
London's Royal Institution on April 7, 1865. In his
autobiography, Emil Fischer [2] described using pieces
of bread and toothpicks to model carbohydrate
molecules. As the structures of biological molecules
(e.g., DNA – [3]) began to emerge, brass rods3 [4] at a
scale of 1.25 cm (0.5 inch)/Å were used to construct
models of proteins and nucleic acids. In real space, these
models were built to correspond to electron density maps
(from reciprocal space) in an optical-mechanical device
called the Richards Box [5]. In the 1950s these humanscale models could be manipulated, providing a tactile
sense of molecular architecture to complement related
visual perceptions. To the general public, they may have
looked like brass spaghetti, but at least the
submicroscopic structures were made visible and
tangible. However, these physical models were tedious to

INTRODUCTION
The molecules of life are generally one-billionth
too small to be seen with the eye but, thanks to the
science of X-ray crystallography, can be elucidated to
atomic precision.
Since the middle 1960s,
crystallographers have had increasing access to computer
graphics
for
visualizing
and
manipulating
macromolecular models. Advances in both hardware and
software have enhanced the ability of interactive
graphics to depict molecular structures. But graphical
media have inherent limitations. The image of 3-D
molecules projected on the display screen is twodimensional (2-D). While the kinetic depth effect [1]
makes it possible to visualize a rotating object as a 3-D
entity, the life-time of an image is defined by the refresh
rate of the hardware (generally 0.03-0.05 sec), so the 3-D
effect is lost unless special tricks are employed (e.g.,
right-left stereo pairs).

1

http://www.harvardapparatus.com/catalog/query3.asp
http://www.chem.yale.edu/~chem125/125/history99/6Stereochemistry/
models/models.html#Hofmann/
3
http://img.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/BCA/obits/jck.html
2

1
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

construct, bulky to store, and fragile to maintain. As
technology advanced, solid, tactile models were slowly
replaced by computer graphics images beginning in the
1960s. In the 1970s, computer graphics facilitated the
construction and manipulation of molecular structures
directly linked to experimental electron density maps [6].

short enough (ca. 2 min.) to be incorporated into
classroom lectures to teach concepts in 3-D and flexible
enough to be stopped at a selected frame, run backwards,
and repeated. This allows for emphasis on the content
while implicitly enhancing the deeper message, that
nature holds hidden beauties at the atomic level. One
might even judge specific images to be artistic.

Early graphics software (cf. review [7]) was
machine specific and limited (e.g. small memory,
machine-specific software) in most respects and early
graphics systems were enormously expensive. Thanks to
advances in computer speed and memory capacity and
especially the game-driven speed of graphics chips,
computer graphical images of molecules are available on
the web (even as screen-savers!) and a growing number
of scientists in their disciplines have begun to make use
of graphical representations of molecular structures for
teaching and research – and most importantly, structural
information is being incorporated into their thinking and
creative efforts. Missing from these representations,
however,
is the tactile component; in addition,
commercially available atomic models are not adaptable
for building macromolecular models.

SOLID MODELS
Scaled models
The manufacturing industry increasingly uses
rapid prototyping to address the challenges of computer
aided design (CAD) and manufacturing (CAM), to create
3-D models in paper or plastic. In the last few years,
rapid prototyping has been used to create commercially
available molecular models; web sites 5,6,7,8,9 provide
attractive views of various structures with various
modeling methods, which will not be discussed here.
The Boston Museum of Science commissioned
a CPK-scaled model of the aspirin (ibuprofen, etc.)
binding site of prostaglandin synthetase (cyclooxygenase-1, COX-1; PDB=1CQE; [9]) as part of an
exhibit on scientific models10 which opened September,
2003. The model (33cm x 28cm x 15cm) was
constructed of individual slabs of birds-eye maple with a
penultimate slab of plexiglas to provide better visibility
of the buried binding site. The bottom side of each slab
was carved, varnished, and then glued to the previous top
of the growing model. Four brass pins were used to
assure positive registration. Because the active site of
COX-1 is deeply buried and accessible only through an
extended tunnel into the enzyme’s active site, aspirin and
similar analgesics function by blocking the tunnel’s
access/egress. Therefore, an entrance was inserted in the
front face of the model to permit access to the tunnel.
This demonstrates hands-on access to the “lock-and-key”
[2] fit of the inhibitor. A sister sculpture, executed in
walnut, was presented to the Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University,
on the occasion of my retirement after 35 years of
teaching
and
research.
Cf.
http://www.tamu.edu/biograph/MOS/aspirin.htm

While the use of facile graphics is routine for
the dedicated scientist who has had the opportunity to
gaze deeply into the minute beauties of nature, the
broader dissemination of molecular structures, while
limited, does establish these salient points:
- The structures are real and can be visualized.
- The models have consistent and decipherable
patterns.
- One can learn nature’s secrets by studying these
images in three dimensions (3-D).
The paedagogical implications of attractive structural
images are well utilized in college textbooks (as 2-D
projections) but progressively disappear in textbooks of
younger pupils. A 6-year-old child has the visual facility
to appreciate a depiction of a molecular structure,
coupled with the profound curiosity to learn about
nature. At least in the U.S., textbook publishers have no
space for molecular graphics because of the commercial
imperative to prepare students for standardized tests. The
key question is: how does one design and evaluate
examination questions based on molecular structures?
Students seem to be more motivated to learn what might
appear on an examination.
Several college textbook publishers are now
distributing supplemental materials, including MolScriptlike [8] molecular graphics. The textbook publisher,
John Wiley, will be distributing high-resolution
molecular videos4 this coming year. These videos are
4

5

http://www.scripps.edu/pub/olson-web/
http://www.rpc.msoe.edu/3dmd/
7
http://www.molecular-models.com/
8
http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/groups/mml/people/hstucki/Chemistry.htm
9
http://www.rpc.msoe.edu/cbm/technology.php
10
http://www.mos.org/whats_happening/new_exhibits.html
6

“Molecular Movies”; I. Botos and E. Meyer

2
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 1
Figure 2
Contrary to lore and scientific dogma, termites
have been demonstrated [10,11] to generate the enzyme,
cellulase, to digest the cellulose and lignin of wood. The
first structure of an insect cellulase was elucidated [12]
and the atomic coordinates used to create a scaled model
of termite cellulase; figure 2 depicts the extended
binding site of termite cellulase carved to the scale of
commercially available CPK atomic models. A total of 8
planks of red oak (50cm x 28cm x 15cm) were carved
with a ball-tipped end mill bit. Each plank was carved on
the bottom side, varnished, and glued to the growing top
side of the model. This procedure is necessary because
this CNC milling machine cannot carve around corners
to create cavities, so each piece is carved in both vertical
directions to provide a true contour of the molecular
surface. This model was presented to the A&M
Consolidated High School for use in the teaching of
biology and chemistry in College Station, Texas. A
second model is being used for the same purpose at Taos
(New
Mexico)
High
School.
Cf.
http://www.tamu.edu/biograph/pics/cellulase.htm

These scaled molecular modes are being used for
teaching both sighted and visually handicapped high
school students, as well as biochemistry students at the
university level.

Sculptures
Abstract sculptures were created in wenge wood
and walnut to depict the organo-metallic gold-carbonnitrogen core of this complex [13]. Figure 3 illustrates a
sculptural abstraction of the Ag-C-N core of an
organometallic complex.
Cf. http://www.tamu.edu/biograph/trinitatis.htm and
http://www.tamu.edu/biograph/pics/more-trinitatismodels.htm for similar models in the trinitatis series of
sculptures.

Figure 3

3
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

An attempt to answer the challenge posed at the
beginning of this paper is to create models in quality
hardwoods. Earlier models were exhibited on the Texas
A&M University campus in 200211 and most recently a
bas relief (5x compression) model of the 1.09Å
resolution structure of the active site of human
metalloelastase (MMP-12), was part of a juried
exhibition of wood art in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Figure
4 depicts a model of the active site of human
metalloelastase (MMP-12;PDB=1JK3) determined at
1.09Å resolution [14]. The zinc ion (left-center) bonds to
the nitrogen atoms of three histidine groups, one of
which (His 222) is shown extending to the right. This bas
relief sculpture has the vertical dimension compressed 5fold. It has been executed in Texas mesquite (44.5cm x
19.0 x 4.8cm). A sister sculpture was presented to Prof.
Dr. Wolfram Bode in honor of his 60th birthday.

Figure 5

METHOD
Figure 4
Program SCULPT is written in Fortran 77. It
accepts orthogonal atomic coordinates and the
orientation matrix provided by one of several interactive
graphics programs (SPOCK, FRODO, PRONTO, etc.).
The typical 3-axis cnc milling machine is a 2.5dimensional cutting tool, i.e., it makes a vertical “z” cut
(like a drill press) while the table moves in the horizontal
(x,y) plane. Programming a cnc milling machine is
similar to programming a x-y plotter (move, draw).
Program SCULPT offers two milling options (lateral and
circular cutting) to define the exterior surfaces of
relevant atoms. Most commonly, the lateral cutting
process is performed first to remove ‘void volume’,
followed by the step-wise circular carving of contours
about atomic surfaces (spheres with specific atomic
radii). A subsequent version will incorporate Platonic
solids and other geometric shapes. The program also
produces a PostScript file that depicts the path of the
cutting tool. This file is enormously helpful in defining
final dimensional parameters and can be visualized with
PhotoShop or with “ghostscript” on Linux systems to
fine-tune the input parameters to program SCULPT. The
program generates “G” code as an ASCII
(alphanumeric) file, which is input to the DynaPath 500
cnc bed milling machine. Such machines have a
precision of 1 mil (0.025mm). The 3-axis DynaPath

To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the
structural elucidation of ferrocene, which was seminal to
the field of organo-metallic chemistry, a model (Figure
5) of ferrocene utilized atomic coordinates determined at
98° K [15]. Two matched pieces of Texas mesquite were
carved on both sides and glued (12.8cm x 16.7cm x
9.6cm); an opening was milled into the top to permit a
clear view of the interior Fe ion. A sister sculpture was
presented to Prof. Jack Dunitz, E.T.H., Zürich, on the
occasion of the sesquicentennial of his landmark
structure.

11

http://www.tamu.edu/biograph/Benz/Benz.htm

4
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Do these molecular sculpture succeed as objects
of art? Mostly not, but occasionally – hopefully – they
do, because the artistic decision is in the eye and
especially the hand of the beholder. As Joseph Conrad
[18] observed. “A work that aspires, however humbly, to
the condition of art should carry its justification in every
line. And art itself may be defined as a single-minded
attempt to render the highest kind of justice to the visible
universe…”

machine in my shop has dimensional limitations of 78cm
x 38cm x 48cm. (There are aerospace industry machines
capable of carving whole sections of airplane wings (e.g.,
with 28m travel in the x direction and 20,000 rpm
spindle
speed).
Cf.
http://www.mmsonline.com/articles/089903.html)
As
this milling machine is unable to cut concavities, this
property of 3-D models is accomplished in a two-step
process, carving a piece then turning it over (x-axis
rotation) and carving the reverse side to create threedimensional concavities. This machine has a maximum
spindle speed of 4000 rpm. While this is considerably
less than a router (ca. 25,000 rpm), with seasoned (<5%
moisture) hardwood and a sharp cutting tool, minimal
sanding and polishing may be necessary prior to
varnishing.

In perspective, a computer graphics image lasts
1/30-1/60 sec. (the display refresh rate) whereas
anthropological restoration experts expect that a wooden
model will last at least 500 years with reasonable care.
A number of wooden objects (sarcophagi, furniture) have
been found in Egyptian pyramids dating back to the 18th
dynasty (ca. 1880 BC). Metaphorically, the molecular
structures we elucidate crystallographically are
archeological evidence reaching back, in some cases, to
the origin of life. Does it not follow that we should
provide our supporting public with aesthetically pleasing
models that will out-last the organic dyes of the printed
page, much less the refresh rate of the computer display?
Indeed, what will a future century know of the impact
structural studies have had on contemporary science, and
what legacies will our generation leave to them of this
blossoming of creative energy and profound explorations
into life and matter at the molecular and atomic levels?

This project involves the three-fold challenge
of:
- designing software to depict sub-microscopic
scientific information
- programming a cnc milling machine
- adapting the operation to a specific piece of material
(wood)
to create a novel model, a sculpture that aspires to be an
art form. There are two existential moments, 1) when the
sharp bit, like four razor blades whirling as a dervish
(Semâ) at 4000rpm, first bites the surface of a pristine
piece of wood taken from a noble tree that towered in the
forest and 2) at the last stroke, when the protective frame
falls away or when the last arc is cut to reveal the
sculpted contours of the finished product. All the
meditation, planning, composition, revision, error
compensation, and thoughtful supplication vanish in a
moment, with joy, or sorrow followed by optimism, the
dominant result.

The basic question, how our abundant structural
results have changed science over the past 50 years and
yet receive so little public attention, is partially answered
by the limitations of existing media to present
crystallographic results to the general public, but, as is
true of science in general, our thoughts and results seem
to be on a different plane from the arts and humanities,
again on a different plane from the ‘man in the street’.
Other material and graphical media will hopefully
emerge to overcome the dimensional barriers of
television and the printed page. In the mean time, as the
sequence and structural databases expand, the challenge
remains to find beauty in these studies and then to distill
our vistas into art that will transcend the confines of our
scientific worlds and reach out to a discerning public.
Then this and future generations will see and know what
we have been looking at since the first structure was
solved.

The critic will notice the scalloped contours
(which might represent harmonic ripples of wave
functions on the surface of a spherically averaged set of
electronic orbitals, e.g., the van der Waals surface) and,
more fundamentally, the static representation, when we
all know that atoms enjoy vigorous thermal motion.
Lessing [16,17] ascribes to sculpture the ability to
capture the “essential moment”. "All bodies, however,
exist not only in space, but also in time. They continue
and at any moment of their continuance, may assume a
different appearance and stand in different relations.
Every one of these momentary appearances and
groupings was the result of a preceding, may become the
cause of a following, and is therefore the center of a
present action.” "Es bleibt dabei: die Zeitfolge ist das
Gebiete des Dichters, so wie der Raum das Gebiete des
Malers."

The educational applications of these models for
teaching are being developed. The chance to work with
the visually impaired is being explored through
collaborations with several schools for the blind. An
objective of this project is to create attractive sculptures
with general aesthetic appeal: Many in the world do not
share our enthusiasm for science and our appreciation of
nature’s beauties on the molecular scale. One can hope

5
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

computer graphics images are ephemeral, I was inspired
to create scaled models and sculptures as an alternative
that has enduring value and should appeal to the aesthetic
perceptions of a discerning public. Because the scale of
the output model is a variable, this program has the
capability of creating models ranging from the
nanotechnology industry to the monumental.

that structure-inspired sculptures can help bridge C.P.
Snow’s “Two Cultures” [19] and thus contribute to a
broader and deeper appreciation of the monumental
contributions of 70 years of molecular crystallography.

REFLECTIONS

These efforts have been supported, in part, with
grants from the State of Texas Advanced Technology
Program, the Robert A. Welch Foundation, and the U.S.
National Science Foundation. Dr. Erik Meyer provided
helpful criticism and revisions. My efforts have enjoyed
the assistance and close association of Drs. Rosemarie
and Stanley Swanson and a series of talented students
and post-docs.

The beauty of growing crystals first enthused
me. Later, the thrill of watching a new structure emerge
from electron density maps sustained me in barren times.
The complexity of molecular structures challenged me to
find better ways to visualize, comprehend, and
communicate the ‘structure-function relationship”. The
opportunity to help write programs for the first
interactive graphics system [20] and the first color
graphics system [21] opened my eyes (3-D!) to the
enormous power of molecular graphics and led to the
founding of the Protein Data Bank [22,7]. Because 3-D

REFERENCES
[1] Wallach, H & O’Connell, D.N. (1953) J.Exp. Psychology
45:205-217

[13] Burini, A., Fackler, Jr., J.P., Galassi, R., Grant, T.A.
Omry, M.A., Rawashdeh-Omry, M.A., Pietroni, B.R., &
Staples, R.J. , "Supramolecular Chain Assemblies Formed by
Interaction of a p-Molecular Acid Complex of Mercury with pBase Trinuclear Gold Complexes" (2000) J.Am.Chem.Soc.
122,11264-11265

[2] Fischer, E. (1922) Aus meinem Leben, Verlag Julius
Springer, Berlin
[3] Watson, J.D. & Crick, F.H.C. (1953) Nature 171:737-8

[14] Lang, R., Kocourek, A., Braun, M., Tschesche, H., Huber,
R., Bode, W., Maskos, K. (2001) J.Mol.Biol. 312:731-742

[4] Kendrew, J. C., Bodo, G., Dintzis, H.M., Parrish, R.G. &
Wyckoff, H. (1958) Nature, 181:662-6

[15] Seiler, P. & Dunitz, J.D. (1979) Acta Cryst. B35, 10681074

[5] Richards, Frederic M. (1968) J. Mol. Biol. 37:225-230
[6] Collins, D.M., Cotton, F.A., Hazen, Jr., E.E., Meyer, Jr.,
E.F., & Morimoto, C.N. (1975) Science, 190: 1047-1053

[16] Lessing, G.E., (1766) Laokoon oder Über die Grenzen
der Malerei und Poesie. in: Gesammelte Werke, Hg. Wolfgang
Stammler, München: Carl Hanser, Bd. II, 1959

[7] Meyer, E.F., (1997) Protein Science 6:1591-1597

[17] Lessing, G.E., (1962) Laocoön : An Essay on the Limits of
Painting and Poetry. John Hopkins University Press Baltimore
and London

[8] Kraulis, P.J. (1991) J. Appl. Cryst. 24:946-950
[9] Picot, D., Loll, P.J., Mulichak, A.M., Garavito, R.M. (1994)
Nature 367; 243-249

[18] Conrad, J. (1897) Preface to “The Nigger of the
Narcissus” Everyman Paperback Classics

[10] Scrivener, A. M., Slaytor, M. and Rose, H. A. (1989) J.
Insect Physiol. 35, 935-941

[19] Snow, C. P. (1959) Rede Lecture “The Two Cultures and
the Scientific Revolution” Cambridge University Press

[11] Watanabe, H., Nakamura, M., Tokuda, G., Yamaoka, I.,
Scrivener, A. M. & Noda, H. (1997).Molec. Biol. 27, 305-313.

[20] Meyer, E., MIT Project MAC, 1966-7, unpublished

[12] Khademi, S., Guarino, L.A., Watanabe, H., Tokuda, G. &
Meyer, E.F. (2002) Acta Cryst., D58, 653-659.

[21] Meyer, E. (1968) Brookhaven National Laboratory
Annual Report, p.81
[22] Bernstein, F.C., Koetzle, T.F., Williams, G.B.H., Meyer,
E.F., Brice, M.D., Rodgers, J.R., Kennard, O., Shimanouchi, T.
& Tasumi, M., J. Mol. Biol. 112, 535-542 (1977), Eur. J.
Biochem. 80,319-324 (1977) & Arch.Biochem.Biophys. (1978)
185,584-591.

6
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

