The Effect of Shading in Extracting Structure from
Space-Filling Visualizations
Pourang Irani, Dean Slonowsky, Peer Shajahan
Department of Computer Science, Department of Statistics, Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba, Canada
irani@cs.umanitoba.ca, dean_slonowsky@umanitoba.ca, peermoh@cs.umanitoba.ca

of space remains unused in the background as a result of
creating an adequate layout for the nodes.
Space-filling visualizations have been developed to
make more efficient use of the display area. These systems
are characterized by their compactness and effectiveness at
showing the sizes of elements in a hierarchy. The basic
space-filling representation divides the display area into
blocks of nested entities, with each block representing a
node in the hierarchy. However, unlike node-link trees,
some space-filling systems represent child-parent
relationships by nesting the nodes and as a result do not
reveal the hierarchical structure explicitly.
An example of a space-filling technique is the TreeMap
[10]. In this system the display is partitioned into
rectangular regions to map an entire hierarchy of nodes
and their children (Figure 1). Each node occupies an
amount of space relative to the weight of the item being
represented in the hierarchy (such as the relative size of a
file in a directory or the volume of shares sold on the stock
market). TreeMaps are good for revealing global patterns
in the data such as large pockets of empty space on a disk
drive or nodes of a specific type (i.e. file type). However,
the underlying hierarchical structure is not as visually
explicit as that of a node-link tree (in Figure 1, parent
nodes are not visible due to the nesting of components).

Abstract
Shading information is extracted by the human visual
system during the earliest stages of the object recognition
process. While shading can enhance the visibility of
structures, it can have a negative impact on the judgment
of sizes of elements in a structure. In certain visualization
systems the underlying hierarchical structure is not
noticeably explicit, such as in space-filling techniques. We
hypothesize that in such cases, shading can make the
structure more explicit. In this paper we report the results
of a study comparing two space-filling visualizations: one
with and the other without shading. Our results show that
on structure-based tasks, users performed better with the
tool when shading information was included than without.
However we did not obtain statistically significant results
to suggest that shading information degraded users’
performance on tasks requiring comparison of local
features such as file sizes. A subjective evaluation shows
that users preferred interacting with the system when
shading was available.
Keywords -- 2½-D representation, structure-from-shading,
shading and perception, space-filling visualization, TreeMap,
CushionMap.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical data structures are abundant and interacted
with on a regular basis. They describe the relationships
among entities in organizations, in file systems, and in
family genealogies. Information structured as a hierarchy
is organized into levels. The hierarchy begins with a root at
the top most level, and all other components are related
through the root.
To adequately navigate or locate components within a
hierarchy the structure needs to be evident to the user. The
most common form of hierarchical representation is a
node-link tree (Figure 1). The structure of the hierarchy is
explicit and visually clear to the user (i.e. we can clearly
see all the child-parent relationships in the hierarchy).
However trees are not space efficient. A significant amount

Figure 1 The node-link tree to the left clearly reveals the
structure of the hierarchy. The TreeMap (an example of a
space-filling visualization) to the right depicts the relative size
of nodes but does not readily display the structure of the
hierarchy.

To make the hierarchy visually more explicit, van Wijk
et al. [14] developed a modified version of the TreeMap
called the CushionMap. The CushionMap system uses
shading to give the hierarchy a 2½-D impression, making

-1Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

the structure more explicit. However this claim was not
empirically validated. To test whether shading information
makes non-explicit hierarchical structures more explicit we
compared the TreeMap visualization to the CushionMap
system. The results of our investigation are reported here.

3. Structure-from-Shading
Research in the area of human perception shows that
our visual system extracts shading information from a
scene at a very early stage in the recognition process. In
particular, there is evidence that such information is
processed pre-attentively. A study by Enns and Rensink
[4] investigated the influence of scene-based properties
such as direction of lighting, surface locations and
orientations, and surface reflectance on visual search.
Their targets were composed of colored polygons with
white, gray, and black pixels (Figure 2) some of which
could be interpreted as three-dimensional objects. The
task consisted of locating single target items among 1, 6
and 12 objects. They found that observers were
significantly slower in finding the target when the items
were two-dimensional. They concluded that rapid search is
possible when the items consist of spatial and intensity
relations that can be interpreted as three-dimensional
objects.

2. Related Work
From the literature in information visualization, two
particular evaluations of the TreeMap are relevant to our
discussion. Turo and Johnson [13] compared TreeMap to
UNIX shell command line syntax for simple directory and
file browsing tasks. They found that subjects performed
better with the UNIX shell commands on tasks of a local
scope, i.e. comparing the size of two files. However
subjects carried out their tasks quicker and more accurately
with the TreeMap on tasks having a more global nature,
such as finding the number of files in a directory.
In another study, Stasko et al. [11] compared TreeMap
to a radial space-filling technique, called Sunburst. In the
Sunburst technique the root of the hierarchy is placed in
the center of the visual space and files and directories are
laid out radially in wedges extending from the center. Each
level of the hierarchy is a concentric circle and the deepest
level is furthest away from the center. The size of the file
or directory is represented by the angular sweep of each
wedge. Their results show that for tasks involving file and
directory size comparisons, subjects’ performance were
superior with TreeMap. On the other hand, for tasks that
necessitated creating a mental map of the hierarchy, such
as finding a file in the hierarchy, subjects performed better
with Sunburst.
Overall, the results in [11] suggest that Sunburst
conveys global hierarchical structural information better
than TreeMap but at the cost of local feature information,
such as file size. However, a drawback to a radial
technique is that the area available for the display is not
maximized. Ideally, a space-filling technique should make
optimal use of the screen space, should be capable of
displaying structure and at the same time facilitate size
comparisons between elements in a hierarchy.
The CushionMap system was designed to exploit the
use of shading to make the hierarchical structure more
explicit in the TreeMap [14]. The focus of our evaluation
has been to empirically test the effect of shading (such as
that available with CuhionMaps) on tasks necessitating
both structural information as well as local feature
information. We first present results from the literature in
perception research that suggest the importance of shading
for perceiving structure in our environment. This
underlying body of literature, referred to as structure-fromshading has motivated our investigation and the evaluation
reported herein.

Figure 2 Targets used in Enns and Rensink's experiments [4].
The target to the left corresponded to projections of simple
blocks under various lighting conditions. The pattern on the
left was perceived faster than the 2D patterns on the right.

Sun and Perona [12] extended the work of Enns and
Rensink [4] by investigating the pre-attentive perception of
elementary three-dimensional shapes. To determine
whether shading was more important than internal line
crossings (which can contribute to determining the shape
of a three-dimensional object) they compared the speed of
processing single target patterns consisting of 3D shaded
top-lit polyhedrals to their unshaded line drawing
counterparts (Figure 3). Their results suggest that the
shaded objects were processed faster and in parallel while
the line drawings of the 3D shaded objects were processed
serially. Their results are consistent with those of Braun [3]
which showed that smoothly shaded circular targets,
without any internal line edges, and which resemble 3D
shaded bubbles, are processed in parallel and preattentively based on the perception of their 3D shape.

Figure 3 Sample targets used in the experiment by Sun and
Perona [12]. A feature in common between the shaded item
and the line drawing is the embedded Y-junction that assists
in determining the shape of the object.

-2Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

the hierarchy is not explicit, such as in space-filling
representations.

Beyond pre-attentive processing, shading information
is also critical in structural object recognition. From a
high-level view, object recognition is accomplished in a
series of stages (Figure 4). At the first stage, the visual
image is analyzed into primitives of edge elements, color
and texture. This information is then used to segment the
image so that the boundaries of objects can be extracted.
Elementary shape from shading information is then used to
extract object components [8] or “blobs” [1]. At the same
time it also facilitates the creation of a structural skeleton,
containing information about how the components are
interconnected [7,2]. Ultimately, all of the information is
combined which leads to object recognition.

Figure 5 Diagrams used for comparing shading vs. no-shading
in explicit structures. Adapted from [6].

While there is evidence that shading can facilitate
structural identification, several studies have reported that
simple shading information that gives a 3D impression can
degrade users’ accuracy in tasks relating to size
comparisons. Carswell et al. [5] compared 2D bar and pie
charts to their 3D counterparts. In their investigation,
subjects were asked to make relative magnitude
estimations based on looking at the two forms of graphs.
Their results show that subjects performed better in
magnitude judgment tasks with the 2D graphs.
Zacks et al. [15] conducted an investigation to find out
whether graphs with a 3D impression influenced viewers’
ability to extract information from it. In their experiments
they varied the rendering characteristics and relative
heights of the bars and asked participants to estimate the
quantities portrayed. They found that the addition of 3D
perspective depth cues lowered accuracy.
From the results of these studies we can conclude that
shading information can be a detriment to tasks
necessitating accurate judgment of size information. We
have taken these results into consideration in the design of
our experiment.
The remainder of this paper describes the specific
visualizations we have evaluated and the results of our
experiment.

Figure 4 Theories of structural object perception propose a
series of processing stages, culminating in object recognition.
Shading plays a critical role in shape and structure extraction.

Irani and Ware [6] compared the effectiveness of
visually parsing diagrams with and without shading. The
non-shaded diagrams were constructed using solid nodes
and links and only differed from the shaded diagrams in
that the former were flat (Figure 5). Their results show that
using 3D shaded nodes and links resulted in more accurate
substructure identification (11.4% vs. 21% errors) and
shorter times (4.1 seconds vs. 5.2 seconds). The subjects
also accurately recognized more 3D diagrams than 2D
non-shaded structures (20% vs. 34% error rate). Their
results strongly suggest that shading facilitates visual
parsing and recognition of diagrams.
The results from the above investigations support the
idea that shading can enhance the visual parsing of
structured representations of data. In particular, diagrams
composed of nodes and links can benefit from shading
information. Of course, in the case of node-link diagrams
the structure of the hierarchy is already explicit. What has
not been investigated is whether shading can enhance the
representation of hierarchical data where the structure of

4. Visualization Tool
To conduct the experiment, we used SequoiaView
(version 1.3), an application developed by van Wijk et al.
[14] at the Department of Mathematics and Computing
Science of the Technische Universiteit Eindhoven [9].
SequoiaView presents file hierarchies in both the TreeMap
and CushionMap views (Figure 6). The tool is equipped
with multiple configuration options including the mapping
of file types onto color. In our experiment we controlled all
the options and only created two conditions: the presence
and the absence of shading. We used the default mappings
of file extensions onto color and only used the following
file types: “.bmp”, “.jpeg”, “.mp3”, “.exe” and “.dll”. For

-3Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

the experiment, the hierarchies (directories and files) were
randomly sorted. We kept the filter settings untouched
with the exception of not displaying hidden system files.
The hierarchies used for our experiment are a variation of
an actual hierarchy found on a machine in our lab. There
were in total 120 subdirectories and 2300 files.

common file and directory management tasks. Each
participant performed a series of tasks using both tools. To
reduce learning effects we used two hierarchies (H1 and
H2) which were different in terms of file names, order of
files and directories. However both hierarchies were
similar in structure, i.e. they each had the same number of
subdirectories and files and with similar sizes. Half the
participants started the experiment with the TreeMap and
the other half started on the CushionMap. The set of trials
consisted of {CM-H1, TM-H2}, {CM-H2, TM-H1}, {TMH1, CM-H2}, and {TM-H2, CM-H1}. After completing
the set of tasks on one tool they took a brief break and
switched onto the other. All tasks required that subjects
find files or subdirectories or perform size comparisons of
files and of subdirectories.

SequoiaView is built in such a way that by moving the
mouse over each item, a hint displays the absolute path of
the file. The user can navigate using an address bar that is
located at the top of the tool, similar to that found in
Windows File ExplorerTM. Double-clicking a subdirectory
opens it so that the entire display is covered by the
subdirectory. Browsing and navigating can be achieved by
using the “up-one-level” button but this was not offered as
an option to the users. Users were also asked to not modify
any of the settings but instead to focus on the assigned
tasks.

Based on the earlier studies in perception discussed in
section 4, we anticipated the following effects in our
experimental data:
Hypothesis 1: The shading condition (CM) will result in
higher performance on structure related tasks than the noshading condition (TM).
Hypothesis 2: The shading condition (CM) will result in
lower performance on tasks related to file and directory
size comparisons than the no-shading condition (TM).

5.1 Method
5.1.1 Subjects. Twenty undergraduate students
participated in the experiment and were randomly assigned
to one of the two conditions: CushionMap first or TreeMap
first. Subjects were primarily computer science and
engineering majors. All were familiar with the concept of
file and directory structures and had reasonable experience
performing standard file management routines. None had
any previous experience using SequoiaView and the
TreeMap or CushionMap visualization tools.
5.1.2 Materials.
Participants
performed
the
experiment on a 17” monitor running SequoiaView over
WinXP. Each task was read aloud to the participant and
was placed on a sheet beside the computer for their referral
during the experiment.
5.1.3 Procedure. Just prior to the experiment,
subjects spent time getting familiar with both visualization
systems. Then the experimenter read through a tutorial
describing the various features of SequioaView. The
tutorial was given using a different hierarchy than those
used in the experiment. It involved a series of tasks similar
to the ones that would be given in the experiment. The
experiment began only after the subjects indicated that
they were comfortable using the tool and its interface.
After the training session, each participant performed 10

Figure 6 TreeMap and CushionMap representation of the local
C: drive from SequioaView.

5. Experiment
The experiment was designed to compare the TreeMap
(hereafter referred to as TM) to the CushionMap (CM) on

-4Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

tasks using the tools on the hierarchies. A short
questionnaire was provided at the end of the experiment.
We measured participants’ performance as a success (if
the task was completed within 45 secs) or a failure
(incorrect result or timeout). The time to execute the task
was recorded in both cases. The experiment involved the
following tasks:
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

response (over all tasks involved in the given hypothesis)
for both of these variables. These measurements were
taken for each of the 20 subjects, resulting in four data sets
(structure-based, size-based u 2 response variables), each
containing 20 pairs (CM,TM). For the dichotomous
response variable, timeouts were classified as failures (0).
Average completion times were consistent with the
normality assumption in all datasets, whereas average
success rates were far from normal.

Count the number of directories in the hierarchy.
Find the directory with the most number of files.
Count the number of subdirectories in a given
directory.
Count the number of files in a given subdirectory.
Find the directory with the most number of bit
map files (.bmp).
Count the number of sub-directories that contain
bitmap (.bmp) files.
Find the smallest directory in the hierarchy.
Find the largest file in the hierarchy.
Find the largest file in a given directory.
Find the largest mp3 file in the hierarchy.

Following the methodology employed in an earlier and
related study [11], any task that was unsuccessfully
completed or a timeout was excluded when calculating the
average completion time. As a result, in the dataset of
completion times for structure-based tasks, two individuals
had an average response of 0 seconds using the TreeMap
tool (they failed in all their tasks). Since this does not
adequately measure their performance, these times were
eliminated so that the corresponding dataset had only
eighteen pairs of responses.
5.2.1 Effect of treatment and hierarchy order. Ten
of the subjects were randomly allocated to “TM, then CM”
and the remaining ten were allocated to “CM, then TM”
(these two groups remained the same in all stages of the
experiment). Likewise, independent of the allocation of
subjects to treatment order, ten subjects were randomly
allocated to “H1, then H2”, the remaining ten to “H2, then
H1”. To justify our pooling of the subjects, we first
verified that neither treatment order nor hierarchy order
had a significant effect on our data.
A one-way ANOVA F-test was conducted to test if the
order of treatments (CM or TM first) had a significant
effect on average completion times. For both structurebased tasks and size-based tasks, we did not detect a
significant difference between these two groups with
respect to the variable CMTM (F1,16=2.5311, p=0.1312
and F1,18=0.0112, p=0.9169, respectively).

These particular tasks were chosen since they constitute
representative tasks when working with file systems. Some
examples include locating a particular type of file in a
directory, finding a file occupying the largest amount of
disk space, or comparing two directories by size when
deciding which to delete. The hierarchies we tested our
subjects on were developed such that the tasks would be
relatively difficult to do.
The first six tasks were designed to test our first
hypothesis. For instance, to count the number of directories
or files in a subdirectory, the structure of the hierarchy
would need to be relatively clear. The final four tasks were
designed to test our second hypothesis. Note that to
successfully complete certain tasks, such as finding a
particular file based on its type, subjects would need to
rely on color information. However, the basic nature of the
task would still require that the subject compare sizes or
use the hierarchy structure to successfully complete it.

Similar tests were conducted to test if the order in
which subjects encountered hierarchies H1 and H2 had a
significant effect on average completion times. Once
again, a one-way ANOVA test detected no significant
effect on CMTM (F1,16=0.2247, p=0.6419 for structurebased, F1,18=0.2251, p=0.6409 for size-based).

At the start of each task the tool was refreshed to
present the root view of the hierarchy. This ensured that all
the subjects commenced the tasks from the same starting
point. At the end of the experiment participants filled out a
questionnaire stating their preference for either type of
visualization across all the tasks.

A non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test on the average
success rate data detected no significant effects of
treatment order (CM or TM first) on structure-based
p=0.2470)
or
size-based
tasks
(F2(1)=1.3401,
(F2(1)=0.4241, p=0.5149). Similarly, no significant effect
was detected for order of hierarchy (H1 or H2 first) on
either type of task (F2(1)=0.6567, p=0.4177 for structurebased, F2(1)=0.0149, p=0.9028 for size-based).

5.2 Results and Discussion
To test the two hypotheses stated in the beginning of
this section, we measured subjects’ performance on each
task with respect to two variables: time until completion (0
to 45 seconds) and successful/unsuccessful completion
(0/1). For both hypotheses, we recorded the average

-5Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

of others in suggesting that shading distorts the structure of
the display, leading to misjudgments of local size features.

5.2.2 Analysis of structure-based tasks. Table 1
summarizes the results for average completion times and
average number of tasks successfully completed. We recall
that there were 6 structure-based tasks. A paired t-test
confirms that there is a significant decrease in the mean
completion times for CushionMap over TreeMap (t17=-3.3,
p=0.0021). We notice that subjects are approximately 33%
faster with the CushionMap than with the TreeMap.
A non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test shows a
significant increase in average success rates for
CushionMap over TreeMap on structure-based tasks (p <
0.001). By comparing the average number of tasks
successufully completed with both systems, we see that the
subjects were 45% more successful with the CushionMap
than with the TreeMap.

Based on our results, the degree to which each set of
tasks (structure-based or size-based) is supported by either
type of visualization is shown in Figure 7. While this chart
may not accurately capture the entire picture, we can at
least deduce that there is still a need for a space-filling tool
that can adequately reveal global structure and at the same
time allow users to compare local size features. We are
currently investigating other forms of visualization
methods that will satisfy these criteria.

Average # of tasks
successfully completed

TM=2.7 (1.5)

TM=3.4 (0.7)

CM=4.9 (0.8)

CM=3.1 (0.9)

Table 1 Average completion times in seconds (for correct
responses only) and average number of tasks successfully
completed (standard deviations are in parentheses).

5.2.3 Analysis of size-based tasks. To test hypothesis
2, we used a paired t-test to compare the mean average
completion times of the 4 size-based tasks. Whereas the
observed mean average completion times for the 20
subjects was 2.3 seconds lower when using the TreeMap
(13% faster with TM than with CM), this difference was
not statistically significant (t19=1.6707, p=0.0556).
Using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test with the one-sided
alternative hypothesis, “average number of tasks
successfully completed among CushionMap users is lower
than those of TreeMap users for size-based tasks”, we
failed to detect a significant advantage in using TreeMaps
over CushionMaps (p=0.120). Indeed, the mean difference
in average success rates for size-based tasks among the 20
subjects was merely 0.3 in favor of the TreeMap system.

Very High

CM=20.2 (5.4)

No significant
difference between
CM and TM

?

High

TM=17.9 (5.4)

CM=16.2 (3.7)

Subjects significantly
more accurate on CM
over TM (p<0.001)

Sunburst ?

Medium

TM=21.5 (6.1)

Completion
Success

Low

Size

No significant
difference between
CM and TM

Level of Support for Tasks Based on Size

Structure

Size

CM significantly faster
that TM (p=0.0021)

Table 2 Statistical significance of TM versus CM on structurebased and size-based tasks.

These results provide very strong evidence in favor of
hypothesis 1.

Average
Completion
Time (seconds)

Structure
Completion
Time

Low

Medium

High

Very High

Level of Support for Tasks Based on Structure

Figure 7 Space-filling techniques can be approximately
positioned according to the degree to which they support
structure-based and size-based tasks. Note that the top-right
corner is empty – none of these systems fully support both
types of tasks.

5.3 Subjective Evaluation
In addition to tracking performance measures, we also
collected subjects’ opinions of each tools utility.
Participants replied to 10 statements on a Likert-scale with
responses ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree). The average scores are summarized in Table 3.

Table 2 summarizes the results of the analysis
described above. Statistically, our data strongly supports
hypothesis 1, that shading will facilitate structure-based
tasks. This confirms results from the literature in
perception on the effect of shading for identification and
extraction of structure. On the other hand, our results do
not provide conclusive evidence that shading has adverse
effects on size-based tasks and therefore do not support
hypothesis 2. As a result, we cannot corroborate the work

The questions were based on the tasks that were
completed earlier in the experiment. On average, subjects
preferred the CushionMap visualization on all the assigned
tasks. Their preference for CushionMap on size-related

-6Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

tasks was not a result of superior performance as revealed
by the experimental data. Anecdotally, several subjects
reported that the 2½D effect from the shaded
representation created a feeling of “wanting to click” onto
the objects. This invitation to click on the nodes could
have possibly contributed to the higher level of comfort
with the CushionMap system.
Statement
1. I was able to count the number of directories
using toolname.
2. I was able to find the bitmap (.bmp) files using
toolname.
3. I was able to detect the type of files using
toolname.
4. I was able to find subdirectories using
toolname.
5. I was able to find the files inside a subdirectory using toolname.
6. I was able to find the largest file using
toolname.
7. I was able to compare the sizes of files using
toolname.
8. I was able to find the largest directory using
toolname.
9. After the training session I knew how to use
toolname.
10. I found toolname confusing to use.

available. This affirms the intuition of the designers of the
CushionMap.
Although not conclusive, our data suggests the need to
improve the CushionMap so that it will facilitate fast and
accurate comparison of sizes of elements in a hierarchy.
We may potentially be able to improve performance of size
judgments and not affect visibility of the structure. This
might be accomplished by modifying the type of shading,
by using various forms of texture or by dynamically
adjusting the display based on a pre-specified task. We are
in the process of investigating and implementing these
alternatives.

TM
3.65

CM
4.40

3.70

4.60

3.95

4.55

3.60

4.35

3.05

3.95

3.50

3.95

3.30

3.90

3.70

4.40

4.00

4.35

We would like to thank Colin Ware (University of New
Hampshire, USA) for his insight and support. This
research was supported by grants from NSERC.

3.05

2.05

8. References

Our investigation also contributes to the growing body
of literature in information visualization related to
evaluation methods and techniques. As emphasized by
Stasko et al. [11], such empirical studies could be
beneficial to designers in building systems which will be
effectively utilized by real-users.

7. Acknowledgements

Table 3 Subjective preferences averaged across subjects for
both types of representations. 5 represents “strongly agree”
and 1 “strongly disagree”.

[1] Biederman, I. Recognition-by-Components: A Theory of

6. Conclusions

[2] Biederman, I. and Gerhardstein, P.C. Recognizing depth-

Human Image Understanding, Psychological Review, 94:2,
115-147, 1987.
rotated objects: Evidence and conditions for three
dimensional viewpoint invariance, Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 19:11621182, 1993.

In this paper we have presented the results of an
experiment for testing the effect of shading on visually
parsing non-explicit hierarchical structures. To conduct our
evaluation, we used two previously developed space-filling
visualizations, the CushionMap and the TreeMap.
Supported by theories of structure-from-shading, we begun
our investigation with the claim that shading will facilitate
extraction of hierarchical structures. We also postulated
that performance on size-based tasks will be impaired by
the use of shading.

[3] Braun, J. Shape-from-shading is independent of visual
attention and may be a "texton", Spatial Vision, 7:311-322,
1993.

[4] Enns, J. T. and Rensink, R. A. Influence of Scene-Based
Properties on Visual Search, Science 247:721-723, 1990.

[5] Carswell, C., S. Frankenberger, S. and Bernhard, D.
Graphing in depth: perspectives on the use of threedimensional graphs to represent lower-dimensional data,
Behaviour and Information Technology 10, pp. 459–474,
1991.

Our results confirmed the first hypothesis. Users were
faster and more accurate in completing directory
management tasks with the shaded hierarchies. This
supports and adds to the previous body of literature on the
nature and benefits of shading. On the other hand, we did
not obtain any conclusive results on the unfavorable effect
of shading for size-based tasks. This warrants a more
discerning follow-up experiment where the effect of
shading on size judgments is better controlled.

[6] Irani, P. & Ware, C. Diagramming Information Structures
using 3D Perceptual Primitives, ACM Transactions on
Computer Human-Interaction, 10:1, 2003.

[7] Marr, D. Vision: A computational investigation into the
human representation and processing of visual information,
San Fransisco, CA: Freeman, 1982.

Subjective responses suggest that the participants
preferred interacting with the system when shading was

[8] Ramachandran, V. S. Perception of shape from shading,
Nature, 331:163-166, 1988.

-7Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

[9] SequoiaView, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, available

[13] Turo, D. and Johnson, B. Improving the visualization of

at www.win.tue.nl/sequoiaview.

hierarchies
with
TreeMaps:
design
issues
and
experimentation, Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization, pp.
124-131. Boston, MA, 1992.

[10] Shneiderman, B. Tree visualization with TreeMaps: a 2d
space-filling approach. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
11(1):92–99, September 1990.

[14] Wijk, J.J. van, Wetering, H. van de. Cushion TreeMaps,

[11] Stasko, J.T., Catrambone, R., Guzdial, M. and McDonald,

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, pp. 73-78, 1999.

K. An Evaluation of Space-Filling Information
Visualizations for Depicting Hierarchical Structures
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 53,
pp. 663-694, 2000.

[15] Zacks, J., Levy, E., Tversky, B. and Schiano, D. J., Reading
bar graphs: effects of depth cues and graphical context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 4, pp. 119–
138, 1998.

[12] Sun, J.Y. and Perona, P. Preattentive perception of
elementary three-dimensional shapes, Vision Research,
36(16):2515-2529, August 1996.

-8Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

