Task Embedded Visualisation: The Design for an Interactive IR
Results Display for Journalists
Simon Attfield, Ann Blandford, Brock Craft
University College London Interaction Centre
4th Floor, Remax House, 31/32 Alfred Place
London, WC1E 7DP, Great Britain
s.attfield@cs.ucl.ac.uk, a.blandford@cs.ucl.ac.uk, brock@craft.org
Abstract
There is need for user-centred visualisation research to
engage with the activity context, information needs,
knowledge and abilities of target user-groups. With a
focus on the work of journalists, we first argue for
information-retrieval results visualisation as a suitable
browsing framework for journalists’ frequently illdefined needs and high-recall searches. We then
describe the design and rationale for a histogrambased visualisation for journalists. We also describe the
integration of this idea within a system that structures
searching as a two-step query-and-filter operation. This
approach is intended to support initial exploratory
browsing and refinement in a way that is sympathetic to
the systematic focusing that naturally occurs during
complex, unstructured task performance. Further, the
use of an enduring ‘base’ results set is intended to
encourage structural familiarity with the broader
results and therefore to enhance navigation.

1: Introduction
The landscape of visualisation research provides a
rich source of concepts and tools for the representation
of interactive, abstract information spaces. Several
approaches have been proposed for the representation
of document collections and collection sub-sets as tools
for supporting document retrieval. Notable approaches
include systems that represent document collections in
terms of hierarchical classification schemes, such as
Hearst’s Cat-a-cone [1], systems that represent
document content in terms of the distribution of query
term occurrences, such as TileBars [2] and work by
Byrd [3], and systems that represent topic clusters
within a document collection, such as SPIRE [4 & 5]
and Bead [6]. Some work has also been specifically
concerned with the visual representation of news report
document spaces—the topic of this paper—such as
Galaxy of News [7] and BreakingStory [8].

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Graphical information-retrieval displays and
interactive dynamic querying hold the promise for the
smoother integration of technology with the tasks that
bring users to need information in the first place.
However, the starting point for this paper is that, amidst
explorations of the visualisation solution space, design
is often based around intuited and implicit ideas of
users and task situations, rather than these being
empirically grounded and explicit. This is in contrast to
user-centred research in Information Science, in which
researchers have increasingly emphasised the need to
understand the ‘real-life’ contexts for information
seeking and information use in order to inform
information systems design (see for example [9] &
[10]).
We argue that there is a need for user-centred
visualisation research that engages with:
• the activity or work context of user-groups that
might bring them to use a system;
• the specific problems that this broader activity
evoke—and for which a system might provide
support;
• the typical behaviours, knowledge and abilities
that target user-groups bring to a system
interaction;
Whilst in practice, homogenous user-groups may not
always be easy to identify (library users, for example,
are notoriously diverse), there are identifiable groups
organised around particular kinds of activities, such as
professions, who have particular kinds of needs and
abilities.
The research described in this paper forms part of a
wider endeavour to explore the design of integrated
information retrieval and authoring systems with
particular emphasis on the needs and work of

journalists. This has involved field and lab studies
examining the information seeking and information
manipulation behaviour of journalists, and also how this
relates to the wider task of writing (See [11] & [12]).
In this paper, we describe the design of an
information retrieval results visualisation intended to
form part of an integrated system we are developing
with newspaper journalists in mind. In section 2, we
argue that visualisation is a particularly appropriate
approach to results-display, given journalists’ typical
search skill and needs. In section 3, we describe a
histogram-based results visualisation and present its
rationale. In section 4, we describe a two-step approach
to low-focus and high-focus searching intended to
support easy, exploratory search refinement whilst
simultaneously promoting users’ familiarity with a base
results set; we explain why this is useful for our
particular target user-group. Finally in section 4, we
summarise the paper and discuss future work.

2: Journalist end-user searching and the
need for visualisation
Over the past 20 years, electronic news cuttings
(ENC) databases have become increasingly important
as research tools within news organisations. Initially,
systems appeared in news libraries and were
predominantly accessed by news librarians acting as
search intermediaries to journalists. But before long,
access at the journalist’s workstation saw journalists
performing many of their own searches. Today,
searching an online cuttings archive is a daily activity
for many news journalists.
Journalists search ENC archives frequently, but
they also tend to be unsophisticated searchers, and
certainly lack the training and skill of a professional
librarian. A study by Nicholas [13] compared
journalists’ searches to those of their news librarian
counterparts, and found that the journalists utilised far
fewer search operators, used fewer search terms—
typically only two—and searched cuttings archives
predominantly by subject only (rather than additionally
specifying author or date fields, for example). From our
own observations, knowing how to refine a search to
improve results precision presents journalists with
particular difficulties.
Surprisingly though, Nicholas also found that the
journalists were frequent system users and were often
satisfied with their search outcomes. To reconcile low
search expertise with relatively high levels of
satisfaction, Nicholas [14] suggests that large results

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

sets, which simple, poorly refined searches typically
return, offer the journalists a browsing framework that
is well-suited to their frequently ill-defined needs. As
Nicholas puts it, “an over-refined search would not
provide sufficient noise to feed off” (14, p.230).
The general suggestion, which has been made by
other researchers (see for example [15]) is that highrecall searches, as Nicholas observed, are useful for
users engaged in complex, constructive and uncertain
information work, who are consequently often unsure
of what they are looking for—this being particularly
true during the early stages of an assignment [16][17].
Such users often wish to explore an information space
in order to develop their understanding and to explore
assignment opportunities and possibilities [12].
The question of designing search results displays
for journalists using news cuttings archives, then, in
part becomes one of supporting this high-recall search
strategy. This need becomes even more evident when
one considers that ENC archives, which may store
articles from thousands of publications—many of
which may cover the same story on the same day—are
typically vast. At the time of writing, LEXIS NEXIS
Professional, one of the most widely used commercial
news cuttings services, was advertised as offering
content from over 35,000 publications, in some cases
going back 30 years [18]. LEXIS is designed such that
searches that produce more that 1000 hits result in an
error message and an instruction to the user to refine the
search. It has been estimated that as much as 90% of
LEXIS searches by journalists at News International
result in this message [19].
Dealing with large results sets, then, is a real
problem for journalists. But traditional text-based
results displays are poor at supporting high-recall
searches. Users are forced to explore their results by
navigating through an ordered series of local textual
displays, each providing a view of only a small set of
documents. And the larger the results set, the longer
and more unmanageable the series. Navigating large,
textually displayed results can be time-consuming, and
overwhelming to the user; not least since the approach
does not lend itself to providing overviews through
which global features and areas of particular interest
can be comprehended quickly and easily.

3: A histogram-based overview
The issues we have raised so far argue in favour of
visualisation as a basis for displaying search results to
journalists, but leave open what a useful display would

be. In addressing this question, we have focused on two
primary considerations:
The first consideration relates to the episodic,
temporal character of news and its related reporting.
Documents on ENC archives usually report, or relate in
some way, to an event, and this is nearly always an
event occurring around the time of publication. This is
obviously true for news reports, but is also the case for
opinion articles and usually for features (which
typically provide background about a person or issue in
the news).
Date of publication, then, represents an informative
dimension. Documents which are about the same event
will naturally cluster on this dimension, giving structure
to a results set through which a user can orientate their
browsing. Further, by visually locating document
representations on this dimension, a user can
superimpose their own event schemas or scripts as an
aid to navigation (e.g. a report of someone’s conviction
comes about a week before a report of their sentencing
and after a report of their arrest, a report of an air crash
comes a few months before the report of the findings of
the crash investigation etc.). In this way, representing
documents on a temporal dimension might leverage a
journalist’s domain knowledge to dramatically narrow a
large document space.
The second consideration is simplicity. One of the
main reasons that journalists lack sophisticated
searching skills is that, despite good intention,
computer training is always secondary to meeting tight
publication deadlines; often they receive no training at
all. One of the challenges for information systems
design is to provide meaningful collection overviews in
which patterns can be easily recognised [20] and we
regard this as particularly true for journalists. Hence,
there is a need for a familiar representational form with
meaningful axes that are simple in derivation and so
easy for the untrained user to understand at a glance.

match the phrase query “train crash”. In addition to it
being evident from the display that hardly a month went
by during that period when an article containing the
phrase “train crash” did not appear, it is also evident
that there are also some peaks in articles containing this
phrase. Notably, five of these peaks (indicated on the
figure) correspond to five major UK rail disasters that
occurred during this period: Southall, Paddington,
Hatfield, Selby and Potters Bar.
The display shown in figure 1 provides a structured
graphical overview of a moderately large IR results set
that is intended to help the user orientate their
exploration around emergent reporting clusters, and
also by exploiting their own schemas of how news
stories unfold over time. This representation, we argue,
is far more suitable as a basis for the exploring of highrecall search results than a traditional text-based results
display.

2002

2001
Selby
Hatfield
2000

Paddington
1999

1998

1997

The design that we have chosen uses a histogram to
display a summary of search results in the form of a
frequency distribution on a date-of-publication scale. A
sample screen-shot mock-up is shown in figure 1. In the
display, horizontal bars are formed from squares, each
of which represents a single article published during a
given month that matches the user’s query. Each
document is intended to be selectable from the
representation to display the full-text article.

Potters Bar

Southall

Figure 1. Results for the query ‘train crash’
represented on a time-based histogram.
The peaks in reporting relate to major UK
crashes.

4. Search refinement by secondary filtering
The distribution of the 273 documents represented
in the example corresponds with the results of a real
search for articles within The Times/Sunday Times
archive that appeared between 1997 and 2002, and

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

The design presented so far engages with the idea
that journalists tend to perform high-recall searches and
that they value browsing large results sets. However,

during the course of a reporting assignment a journalist
may evolve specific information needs as a function of
the systematic focusing that occurs during the
performance of complex, unstructured tasks such as
writing assignments [12]. However, as discussed above,
a lack of search knowledge makes refining searches
problematic.
The solution that we propose is a design that
structures search as a two-step process. The principle is
that, in the first instance, users can submit a high-recall
query around a topic of interest and the results are
displayed in overview to support exploratory browsing
(as in figure 1). Adjacent to this display is a panel with
controls to enable additional filtering of the results of
the type proposed by Schneiderman [21]. The entire
interface, (including a full text document being
displayed) is shown in figure 2. According to our
design, rather than causing documents to disappear
from the summary, colour coding is used to highlight
documents that additionally match the filter
combination.

The rationale for this two-step search arises from
two issues:
First, by providing visual controls for search
refinement, users with a limited knowledge of Boolean
search operators should nevertheless be able to refine
and produce more complex searches. Further, tightcoupling between the filter controls and the display
would enable users to instantly see the effects of
different refinements. This should encourage the
exploration of refinement possibilities.
Second, superimposing focussed enquiries over a
single, more enduring ‘base’ search, should promote
structural familiarity, and therefore enhanced
navigation, with respect to the broader results set. One
reason this could be useful is that, in complex
information work users are not always able to
categorically judge the relevance or ‘value’ of
information as it is encountered [17]. This is
particularly true of journalists since they work in the
context of wider, dynamic situational factors that

Figure 2. Integrating the results visualisation within a system that
structures searching as a two-step query-and-filter operation.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

frequently cause revisions to be made to task
constraints mid-assignment [11]. For example, new
information can come to light about an event being
reported, and revisions can be made to editorial
decisions about the approach or angle being adopted.
As a consequence of this, journalists often wish to
return to documents to review information. By
maintaining the representation of a single broader
results set with which the user can become familiar,
document relocation should be made easier. In addition,
of course, document representations can be coded to
indicate whether they have been read before.
In terms of what filtering to provide, our research
has suggested a number of possibilities. Early in an
assignment a common journalist’s goal is to quickly
develop a deeper knowledge of the background of an
issue to enable better interpretation of recent events or
perhaps in preparation for interviewing. Typically, this
is done by submitting a broad topic search and then
browsing the results for two or three feature length
pieces. If the focus of research is a person, then they
may look for the last big interview. Some journalists
also tend to focus on articles from particular sources or
by known specialist journalists. In figure 2, we show
filters in the control panel that will draw the user’s
attention to documents above a user-defined length
threshold, ‘interview-content’ threshold, and those by a
given author or from given source.
A more specific need that often occurs is to find a
quotation. This often occurs in relation to a broader
comparison that is being made between something said
recently, perhaps by a politician, and what has been
said in the past. In some circumstances the speaker may
be defined, in others they may not. At election times,
newspapers will even hand-generate and index
documents of quotations to support this particular need.
To address this need, figure 2 shows a filter for
identifying documents incorporating particular terms
within quotations.

5 Summary and future work
The visualisation we have described in this paper
forms part of a wider project aimed at exploring the
design of integrated information retrieval and authoring
systems with an emphasis on the work of journalists.
Journalists are high-recall searchers and they like to
browse, which makes visualisation a very appropriate
mode of results representation. Based on the temporal
nature of news and the need for simplicity, our design
uses a time-based histogram showing a frequency
distribution of documents from which full texts can be
selected for display. We have shown how, on such a

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

display, documents naturally cluster around surges in
reporting and we argue that this would help the
journalist to orientate exploration, and to exploit their
knowledge of how news stories unfold over time.
We have also proposed a two-step search process
according to which the user performs a broad topiclevel search and then superimposes refinement using
dynamic visual filters to control document icon colour
coding. This approach, we argue, would help the lowskill searcher explore refinement possibilities whilst
also promoting familiarity and hence navigation of the
primary search over the course of a work assignment.
Our approach has been to base visualisation design
on our target user-group’s work, the nature of their
information needs and their search behaviour and
ability. Early design briefings with News International
and BBC News have received positive responses and
have opened the door for future collaboration.
Future work includes integration of the
visualisation into an existing prototype information
retrieval and authoring tool and performing evaluations
with the target user-group. In addition to assessing
general acceptability, we intend to evaluate issues of
scalability of the display and also the claims we have
made in this paper. These include: assessing the extent
to which the display offers a useful tool for orientating
exploration; the extent to which users can leverage their
own news story schemas for navigation; the advantages
the tool provides in supporting low-skill users to refine
their searches; and the extent to which the two-step
search approach promotes search familiarity through
measures such as search recall and recognition.

Acknowledgements
The work reported here is supported by EPSRC
grant GR/S73723.

References
[1] M.A. Hearst & C. Karadi, “Cat-a-Cone: An Interactive
Interface for Specifying Searches and Viewing Retrieval
Results Using a Large Category Hierarchy”,
Proceedings of the 20th Annual International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, July 1997, pp. 246-255.
[2] M.A. Hearst, “TileBars: Visualisation of Term
Distribution Information in Full Text Information
Access”. Proceedings of ACM CHI'95 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1, May 1995, pp.
59-66.

[3] D. Byrd, “A Scrollbar-Based Visualization for Document
Navigation”, Proceedings of the 4th ACM International
Conference on Digital Libraries, August 1999, pp. 122129.
[4] J.J. Thomas, “Information Visualization: Beyond
Traditional Engineering”, Human-Computer Interaction
and Virtual Environments, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, (NASA Conference publication
3320), 1995.
[5] J.A. Wise, J.J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M.
Pottier, A. Schur & V. Crow, “Visualizing the nonvisual: Spatial analysis and interaction with information
from text documents”, Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, IEEE, October
1995, pp. 51-58.
[6] M. Chalmers & P. Chitson, “Bead: Explorations in
Information Visualisation”. Proceedings of the 15th
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
June 1992, pp. 330-337.
[7] E. Rennison, “Galaxy of News: An Approach to
Visualizing and Understanding Expansive News
Landscapes”, Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology, November
1994, pp. 3-12
[8] J.A. Fitzpatrick, J. Reffell & M. Aydelott.
“Breakingstory: visualizing change in online news”,
Interactive posters: Proceedings of ACM CHI 2003
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2,
April 2003, pp. 900-901.

[11] S. Attfield & J. Dowell, “Information Seeking and Use
by Newspaper Journalists”, Journal of Documentation,
59(2), 2003. pp. 187-204.
[12] S. Attfield, A. Blandford, & J. Dowell, “Information
Seeking in the Context of Writing: A Design Psychology
Interpretation of the 'Problematic Situation’”, Journal of
Documentation, 59(4), 2003, pp. 430 - 453.
[13] D. Nicholas, “An Assessment of the Online Searching
Behaviour of Practitioner End Users”, Journal of
Documentation, 52(3), 1996, pp. 227-251.
[14] D. Nicholas & H. Martin, “Should Journalists search
Themselves? (And What Happens When They Do?)”,
Proceedings of Online Information, 1993, pp. 227-234..
[15] C. Cole, B. Mandelblatt & J. Stevenson, “Visualizing a
High Recall Search Strategy Output for Undergraduates
in an Exploration Stage of Researching a Term Paper”,
Information Processing and Management, 38(1), 2002,
pp. 37-54.
[16] C.C. Kuhlthau. “A Principle of Uncertainty for
Information Seeking”, Journal of Documentation, 49(4),
1993, pp. 39-55.
[17] P. Vakkari. “A Theory of the Task-based Information
Retrieval Process: A Summary and Generalisation of a
Longitudinal Study”, Journal of Documentation, 57(1),
2001, pp. 44-60.
[18] LexusNexis Professional product information
url: http://207.24.42.51/page_63.html
[Accessed March 24, 2004]

[9] T. Wilson, “Models of Information Behaviour
Research”. Journal of Documentation, 55(3), 1999, pp.
249-270.

[19] Iley, L. (2004) (Information Services Manager, News
International) personal communication, 1/3/2004.

[10] C.C. Kuhlthau & S.L. Tama. “Information Search
Process of Lawyers: A Call for ‘Just for me’ Information
Services”, Journal of Documentation, 57(1), 2001, pp.
25-43.

[20] B. Shneiderman, D. Feldman, A. Rose, & X.F. Grau,
“Visualizing digital library search results with
categorical and hierarchical axes”, Proceedings of the
5th ACM Conference on Digital libraries, June 2000, pp.
57-66.
[21] B. Shneiderman, Dynamic queries for visual information
seeking, IEEE Software, 1994, 11(6), pp. 70-77.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

