Mobile Liquid 2D Scatter Space (ML2DSS)
A visual interactive information space (ispace) for displaying large amounts of information
and allowing simple vision-based knowledge discovery on small screen sizes

Carsten Waldeck, Dirk Balfanz
ZGDV - Computer Graphics Center, Dept. Z3 (MIV)
(Mobile Information Visualization) and infoverse.org
E-mail: waldeck@infoverse.org, dirk.balfanz@zgdv.de

Abstract
This (video-) paper describes a user interface concept,
which facilitates browsing of comparably large amounts
of information on small screens.
The viewing concept is based on a visually optimized
star field display ([1] Ahlberg & Shneiderman 1994) and
is introducing new concepts like liquid browsing (an
expansion lens with pressure controlled magnetic force
simulation), selection based filtering and representation
manipulation, multimotion behavior tagging, (interaction-) transparent spaces and continuous state
animation. All this creates a very versatile information
space with a liquid-like look and feel, which can be used
in a very intuitive way, providing all the advantages of a
mature interactive scatter plot and can easily be scaled
to different screen sizes without any adjustment efforts.
This paper focuses on visual design and interaction
details and emphasizes the importance of the visual
interactive quality for mobile information visualization.
Keywords: liquid browsing, visual interactive information
spaces, mobile computing, user interface design, dynamic
interactive visualization

1. Introduction and Problem Description
In Mobile Information Visualization, one of the big
issues is the problem of small and a multitude of different
screen sizes.

In spite of diverse screen concepts like roll up displays,
or digital paper, it is most likely that we will continue to
battle with the limited screen spaces of handheld computers
for quite some time. Further, the related issue of constantly
having to adapt the view to different screen sizes presents
a complex problem.

Figure 1: many different mobile devices on the market today

A common table view on a Pocket PC or PDA allows
us to only look at 10-20 objects at a time without scrolling,
allowing to sort and compare according to one single
criterion. An interactive 2D scatter plot approach would
allow much larger amounts of information to be visualized
and is simultaneously sortable based on two criteria. In
addition, comparisons based on a multitude of criteria are
possible at the same time (according to mapping and
expressivity of the visual parameters: size, opacity, color
value, shape, orientation, ...or time animation of all these
parameters, which results in visual representations like
motion, growing/shrinking, pulsing, rotation, shape
morphing,...).

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

One disadvantage of a 2D scatter plot approach however,
is the possibility of the information objects to overlap to
some extent hindering readability and perceptibility of the
information or, worst case, even making it impossible. To
solve this problem, zoom and lens functions have been
implemented ([10] Sarkar & Brown 1992), which allow
the (partial) enlargement of the information to counter this
problem. Still, browsing high information densities this
way proved to be a very challenging task, because a simple
enlargement based fisheye lens does not reduce the
overlapping and very often has to deal with heavy distortion
issues.

Figure 4: Comparison on screen: enlargement based lens (fisheye) with
distortion on left vs. distance based lens (liquid browsing) on right

In addition, we are using rollover opacity raising for
the typography to separate the related text tag from the
background. Supplementary, the offset motion of the lens
increases this intention.

Figure 5: Comparison: Original view on left vs. opacity raised typo-detail
(to better understand this effect please refer to video).
Figure 2: Comparison: Table view (left) vs. star field display (right);
15 vs. 250 information objects on an iPaq (240x320 pixel)

2. Solutions
2.1. Liquid browsing: To address the above-mentioned
problems, we are proposing a distance manipulation
based expansion lens (in contrast to the common size
manipulation based magnification lens). By not enlarging
the information objects themselves, but rather the spaces
between them, we are solving our real problem - the
overlapping - much more effectively.

By using the pressure the user puts on the screen with
the input device (naturally a pen) to control strength and
radius of the expansion lens (also "push lens") and adding
oil- or liquid-like friction and acceleration forces, we
achieved a very direct 1:1 “impression”, which makes it
intuitively controllable and creates a nicely flowing
browsing experience. This is why people liked to refer to
it as “liquid browsing”.

magnetic repulsion strength
(distance factor)
4

pressure strength:
high
middle
low
no pressure

3

Original

Fisheye

Liquid browsing

2

1
distance: object to mouse position

By using this kind of "lens" model, we are achieving
much greater clarity with less space consumption and
minimal context distortion.

0

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

2.2. Selection based manipulation

2.3. Multimotion behavior tagging

To reduce input effort (big issue on mobile devices
without a proper keyboard) and to increase the effective
display space, we propose selection based filtering and
selection based representation adjustment in addition to
(or instead of) sliders or text input for adjusting the filters
and directly manipulating the views:

Motion or animation like blinking or flashing have
often been used for visualization purposes. Many of our
studies have revealed that it is not only possible to easily
perceive macro- and micro-movements at the same time,
but also multiple synchronized micro-movements if they
are used in succession.

Simply draw a selection and choose an action from the
context menu to set the axis filters, highlight relations or
undertake other representation manipulations.

There are many ways of using this effect. When
implementing our prototype, it was our goal to keep it
very easy to use: so we used it to transform the position
of the information object on the scatter plot into motion,
which allowed us to use the two free position dimensions
for different purposes (see movie):
Just draw a selection and choose “animate selection”.
The information objects will be animated according to
their position on the scatter plot. E.g. better movies jump
up and down, newer movies move sideways.
movement y-axis
1.

2.
movement x-axis

Figure 8: Animation pattern

Another very good way of adding more simultaneously
visualizable dimensions is the synchronization of additional
views. However, this possibility is limited due to little
available screen space on mobile devices.

2.4. (Interaction-) transparent spaces
Windows which are only displaying information and
do not offer own interaction possibilities, can be transparent:
Thus the screen space behind the window can still be seen
as well as interacted with. This method is only adequate,
if applied in the right way (opacity level, contrast of
information objects, etc,...) and to the right viewing
technique ([8+9] Harrison, B.L, et al. 1995). This concept
can greatly contribute to the solution of the small screen
problem.

Figure 7: Screenshot of a selection with context menu

Figure 9: Screenshot of interaction-transparent detail window

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 10: Screenshots of a state animation in 5 phases
(images can not really communicate this effect)

2.5. Continuous state animation
All position changes of information objects are
continuously animated, which explains complex processes
in a very straightforward way and makes it possible to
detect clusters of object masses and very detailed object
movements simultaneously, as well as following
information objects to a new position in a different context.
To better understand (or better: experience!) this effect it
is very important to have a look at the video.

Naturally, it is advantageous to avoid contrary
correlations of visual parameters to achieve the maximal
expressiveness. But for our prototype, we used this effect
on purpose to further increase the information density: by
using a contrary coding of size and opacity, it was possible
to reduce the overlapping problem even more and increase
visual clarity (bigger objects are less opaque).

3. Prototype
2.6. Contrary coding
One very important issue is finding the right values for
the visual variables (like size, opacity, color value, shape,
orientation,...) to achieve the maximal coherence and
expressiveness of the visual representation ([4] Bertin,
1983). To examine this subject, we built a prototype which
allowed us to freely set every single one of those
correlations and compare the expressivity and the
perceptibility of a combination of several visual parameters
used simultaneously.

The first Mobile Liquid Scatter Space prototypes were
implemented in Macromedia Flash, Java and ObjectiveC
(macOSX). Most of what you can see in the movie is
based on a Flash application that reads an XML database
of the 250 most popular movies of the world [12].
You can find this movie at:
http://www.infoverse.org/ispace/ispace_movie.htm
A flash prototype can also be experienced at:
http://www.infoverse.org/ispace/ispace_flash.htm

The Mobile Liquid 2D Scatter Space version you see
in the movie is optimized for fast devices with pressure
sensitive screens (something like a tablet PC today). We
also have a version for HP ipaq (Flash), but it is very slow
and pressure sensitivity and rollover functionality are
missing. We believe there will be small, fast and pressuresensitive handhelds in the future and want to focus on
those kinds of devices. Most of the prototypes are tested
and presented on a fast computer with a Wacom Cintiq
(Interactive Pen Display).

Figure 11: no size and opacity coding (left) vs.
size and opacity contra-coding (right);

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

4. Conclusion and Future Work
This paper has introduced liquid browsing as an interaction method to solve the overlapping problem of
interactive 2D scatter plots. Optimizing visual interactive
details is crucial, especially for the mobile domain. Though
empirical studies still have to be done, we believe that
ML2DSS can be very useful as a versatile and very flexible
ispace in a wide range of applications (file systems, media
libraries, map browsing, email,...). It’s ability to effortlessly
adapt to different screen sizes and allowing very high
information densities makes it especially interesting for
mobile applications.
ML2DSS is a part of the “iworld” project, which is
about a versatile multiple view information browser with
a special focus on semantic web browsing.

4. Acknowledgments
Thank you to Daniel Hess, Dieter Schuster, Karsten
Ploesser, Matthias Grimm and Saied Tazari. Without them
the prototypes would not exist in that quality at this point
of time. Many thanks also to Joseph Avakian (vijual) and
Dana Ellis for helping me with the english language and
to Apple Computer for inviting me over to WWDC 2003
to present some of the ispace ideas and get to know some
very interesting people.

5. References
[1] Ahlberg, Christopher and Shneiderman, Ben (1994):
Visual Information Seeking: Tight Coupling of Dynamic
Query Filters with Star field Displays. Proc. of CHI 1994.
ACM, New York, pp 313-317.
[2] Ahlberg, Christopher and Shneiderman, Ben (1994):
The AlphaSlider: A Compact and Rapid Selector. Proc.
of CHI 1994. ACM, New York, pp 365-372.
[3] Bederson, Benjamin and Hollan, James (1994): Pad++:
A Zooming Graphical Interface for Exploring Alternate
Interface Physics. Proc. of UIST 1994, ACM, New York.

[6] Buxton, W., et al. (1985). Issues and techniques in
touch sensitive tablet input. Proc. of SIGGRAPH 1985,
ACM, pp 215-224.
[7] Davidson, Neil and Dunlop, Mark D (2000): Visual
information seeking on palmtop devices. Proc. of HCI
2000.
[8] Harrison, B.L., Kurtenbach, G., and Vicente, K.J.
(1995): An Experimental Evaluation of Transparent User
Interface Tools and Information Content. Proc. of UIST
1995, ACM, pp 81–90
[9] Harrison, B. L., Ishii, H., Vicente, K. J., Buxton, B.
(1994): Transparent Layered User Interfaces: An
Evaluation of a Display Design Space to Enhance Focused
and Divided Attention. Proc. of CHI 1995, Denver,
Colorado, pp 317-324.
[10] Sarkar, Manojit and Brown, Marc. Graphical Fisheye
Views of Graphs. Proc. of CHI 1992, ACM, New York,
pp 83-91.

[11] Macromedia Flash:
http://www.macromedia.com/software/flash/
[12] Internet Movie Database: http://www.imdb.com

Contact Information:
Carsten Waldeck
ZGDV - Computer Graphics Center
Dept. Z3, MIV (Mobile Information Visualization)
Fraunhofer Str. 5
64283 Darmstadt, Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)6151-155-623
http://www.zgdv.de
http://www.infoverse.org
carsten@infoverse.org

[4] Bertin, Jacques. Semiology of Graphics. The University
of Wisconsin Press, 1983.
[5] Bovey, J., Rodgers P. and Benoy, F. (2003): Movement
as an Aid to Understanding Graphs. Proc. of IV 2003,
IEEE, London.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

