Image segmentation search engine applied to a distributed archiving architecture for
content retrieval system to educational products
Sam H. Minelli, Andrea de Polo
Fratelli Alinari Photo Archives,
Largo Alinari 15, 50123 Florence, Italy
{sam@alinari.it; andrea@alinari.it}

Abstract
The advanced access to different databases by means of
one single interface has become a critical and important
requirement for most archives and content providers. This
paper will describe an application case for a system
architecture capable of retrieving large and diversified
contents by means of innovative networking and search
engines based on the Qimera platform. The system is
supposed to automatically select contents from different
repositories, and making them available trough an interface
which has editing tools for direct usage of the contents. The
application is studied to be integrated into educational
products delivering dynamic composite content by means of a
simple and transparent user interface1.

Keywords — distributed database, IPR management,
content management, digital image archiving, image
segmentation, Qimera, JPEG 2000.

1. Introduction
Image archives and generally speaking, digital content
providers, have created their web sites getting in contact with
new market segments both for business and for educational
purposes. At this time an aggregation process has been
revealed: small and medium sized content providers are going
to create partnerships and share knowledge and market. A netarchive can be seen somehow as a big store where the
customer can find lots of different products in the same place.
In this sense the customer will be able to find both a fashion
image or a movie. We refer to the cultural heritage domain,
where the end user can search for an image of the royal
Habsburg family both inside Alinari’s archive and inside the
Austrian National Library’s using the same interface and even
not knowing to access different databases. This involves the
developing of distributed processes not only for the delivery

but also for the content management, from the image
generating to the cataloguing or information adding. One of
the most important consequences of this net-partnership is the
creation of new IPR management and content protection
procedures, such as the creation of trusted networks or trusted
nodes. This paper describes a possible implementation where
the content providers are at the center of the architecture and
can modify and personalize the access to their data, enhancing
the services by means of advanced search engines (such as
image segmentation engines) that could be integrated into
educational products.

2. From local to distributed
The actual state of the art, in the domain of content
providers (mainly archives and cultural institutions), express
the flourishing of distributed configurations of contents and
services. Networks of contents seem to be able substituting the
centralized configurations. The idea of a commune interface to
retrieve information from different sources is not new (some
research project with this goal have been explored by the
REGNET European project [8] and TNT EDC-33015
TNT/27966), but in most cases the end nodes are expected to
have commune databases structure and protocols with same
services while the manager-node is not the content provider
itself with the generation of conflicts.
The main reasons that support the distributed archiving
are:

1

This work was supported in part by the IST programme of the European
Community in the SCHEMA project ( IST-2001-32795) ; by the e-Content
programme TNT (EDC-33015 TNT/27966); by the e-TEN programme
ORPHEUS project (e-TEN: C27983).
Sam Habibi Minelli is with the Electrical Engineering R&D Unit, Alinari (email: sam@alinari.it).
Andrea de Polo, is with the European Project,
Alinari (e-mail:
andrea@alinari.it).
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

x
x

x
x
x
x

Scalability: nodes can be added or removed without
reconfiguring the architecture.
Lower costs for later starts up: after the base system
has been realized, any new add of a node has lower
costs for the start up.
Robustness : if any node fails, the network will
supply the node that is missing.
Speed: a distributed network of nodes guarantees
quick connections.
Security: the data are stored locally by the owners
(the central repository is virtual).
IPR distributed management.

3. Form service-centres to content-centres

all the Content Providers are cut off from the
network.

During the last few years many content providers
(museums, archives, libraries) have started their business
giving access trough internet to their contents. The content
providers could be divided referring their size of data,
contents etc., but a great difference for the access to internet
trading is the budget and the technical infrastructure they
have. There are a lot of CPs (Content Providers) operating in
very specific domains without any internal IT department
(knowledge referring to thesauri, data bases, internet services).
Moreover, these content owners wont even have locally all the
content required by the market (images, metadata, music, text,
footage).
The external portals offer good services but CPs hardly
let out their contents on remote servers and the lifetime of
contents is very different from the lifetime of technology used
(usually the second is much shorter). As soon as more
efficient DB and new search functionalities are requested by
the market, they should migrate from one technology to
another.
Lastly, the CPs usually would be able to become more
independent personalizing their contents, the tools and
functionalities, and the services.
Following the previous general requirements the
architecture lets the possibility to isolate a cell if out of order
without compromising the correct functioning of all the netarchive.
An example of image retrieval and payment: the user
searches in the DA (Distributed Archive) the images of an
actor or personage. The system automatically (and
transparently) searches inside Alinari’s, inside Austrian
National Library’s, Italian Catalogue Institute’s, etc. and
shows the results in one commune page to the user. When the
user selects 3 images and asks for the rate, the DA system
queries in the local servers and shows the results. Then if the
user asks to pay, the DA system connects the user to the DABank-server which provides the distributions of benefits to the
content owners.

Figure 2 : Distributed configuration topology. In this
configuration at any time one DA-server fails,
another DA-server will still work and can supply the
services or contents of the broken node.

4. Qimera
Before describing the application to the educational
domain, few words must be said on the Qimera platform.
The Qimera software uses a graphical user interface that
is platform independent and through the communication
interface lets the user activate different engines. The image
analyser engines have been developed by the SCHEMA
project technical partners who have realized different
operative modules. The analysis techniques that are under
testing, use two approaches to the segmentation: the regionbased segmentation and the object-based segmentation.
The region-based segmentation module can activate the
following algorithms:
x

Recursive Shortest Spanning Tree (RSST) algorithm.

x

K-Means-with-connectivity-constraint (KMCC).

x

EM-based segmentation in 6D colour/texture space.

x

Pseudo Flat Zone Loop Algorithm .

The object-based segmentation module can activate the
following algorithms:

Figure 1: Partially distributed configuration
topology. Notice that if the main DA-server web fails,

x

Semi-automatic segmentation via modified RSST.

x

Level-set based snake segmentation .

Distributing and aggregating is a process that needs
protocols and standardizations. Lots of small/medium content
repositories have been stored using different data bases and
different procedures (i.e. universities, archives, hospitals,
museums, etc.) and the aggregating process involves digital

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

content owners, trying to make available different contents
such as: audio, video, image and text format.
The DA provides a proper XSLT style-sheet if the new
partner’s database can be interfaced by XML data, otherwise
it provides a specific layer to adapt and reach the local data to
the commune outcome.
The search engines can be then integrated with the
traditional searching modes (by keyword; advanced; by list
from some thesauri, etc.) and with the new one Qimera that
could also allow the search in the contents that have not been
catalogued yet with metadata.
The semi-automatic object segmentation offered by
Qimera, allows the interaction by the user who initially
defines what objects to be segmented on the input image. The
user selection will be then processed and eventually again
refined interactively. The semi-automatic segmentation feature
will have important application as up to now, all the users that
were interviewed, showed real needs for interaction and
refinement of their searches.

Figure 3: Query workflow with evidence on the
Qimera process.

5. The application to the educational domain
The distributed architecture is under development in order
to aggregate image archives; libraries; hospital repositories;
educational institute repositories. Innovative educational
products will be then implemented. A researcher could need
to study the human body images (retrieved from the hospital
archive) and the drawings taken from an old manuscript
(retrieved from the National Library’s database). The user
could also require advanced image analysis and delivery tools:
the student visiting a town navigates the map using a palm
device, the map is retrieved from the geographical archive and
could have links to cultural services such as guided tours
(retrieved from the museum network). In some cases the
segmentation engine is the only way to retrieve data (typically
when the image repository has not cataloguing metadata at
all).
An integrated educational application for both
universities and high schools is expected to allow the
professors and teachers to create specific course modules and
tests for examining the students.
Three examples:
xHistory domain application: the professor requires the
students to find images referring historical personages
and reporting on the places, events, chronicle.
xArt domain application: the professor requires the
students to analyse a painting reproduction and to find
similarities and correspondences with similar artists.
xScience domain application: the student preparing an
exam on astronomy needs images on eclipses and planets
from an image database that has not been catalogued by
keywords (rough image database).

Figure 4: Query workflow with evidence on the
archive data base interface block diagram.
Recent market analysis have shown the interest from the
university decision makers to acquire tools that integrate
general functionalities (i.e. mailing, organizing, institution
calendar and deadlines, courses,…) with course tailored
features. An advanced search engine that could combine
images, text, and other multimedia contents trough one
educational interface which manages the IPR references can
answer to the need of accessing contents and use them
immediately and directly inside the same framework.
The image segmentation software has the capability to
generate information from a set of images, this information
could constitute a new vocabulary that can be interfaced with
the text database. The distributed image-archive will need a
specific search agent able to “retrieve images by images”. This
means that a customer could be interested to find all the
images that are someway similar to one specific image he

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

chooses (i.e. a personage photo). Then the search result can
be edited by means of the same interface and enriched with
comments and other information and lastly sent to the students
(or any other user).

providers. In fact, some content providers use to change their
copyright requirements frequently and a centralized
management would not allow to contemplate all the different
domain needs.

6. Integration of new technologies

8. Conclusions

Lots of digital archives already offer their services trough
the Web, the mobile technologies have been explored (as
example, image archives providing Multimedia Messaging
Service contents: images with simple text messages and
jingles) but the possibility to access the content is still
considered by the users mainly as opening the browser and
searching images or musical excerpts trough some search
engine (and the search engines usually give no added value
nor stimulate to interaction).
As long as innovative channels are going to be accessible,
the digital archives need to integrate new technologies and
services for digital image processing and delivery.
The demand for services generates also new problems to
be solved as security, migration from previous file formats
and closed architectures, and integration into new systems.
The possibility to search images in a fast way and to be
able to use content retrieved inside an interactive architecture,
transparently, seems to be an important challenge. The market
demand pushes towards products that can be easily searched
and immediately integrated in other products and services.
New file formats such as JPEG 2000, has been tested
for its interesting features even if the Qimera segmentation
platform does not at this time support the JP2 file format. The
JPEG 2000 standard will include most of the features required
by image archives (JPWL for wireless; JPSEC for security
and access control; JPIP for interactivity and interoperability;
JP3D for volumetric and 3D imaging) and could be
considered also for performance improvement of Qimera as
the JP2 file contains metadata.

7. Distributed intellectual property right
management
When considering contents such as images or music
excerpts or texts, there must be a strong IPR management
system. In the case of a number of content providers the IPR
management must adapt to each single content owner
requirements and be compliant to the local IPR legislation.
For the first prototype, encryption and security techniques
have been implemented and tested (such as MD5 digital
signature; JPEG 2000 Part 4 Registration process; Key
generation and management; Secured DES encrypted archive
[6]).
The Digital Right Manager System is expected to let on
line registration and delivery of a License Plate as unique
identifier; the creation of an archive containing digital
signatures of registered contents; to document encryption for
undisclosed content archiving and to create multiple versions
of a same document with the same identifier. The DRMS must
be distributed allowing personalization by the content

The image segmentation search engine called Qimera, can be
integrated into a distributed archiving architecture for content
retrieval system to realize educational products and support
the teaching workflow. Both teachers and students could
access much higher volume of digital contents (images, text,
video) with the possibility to interact inside a commune
platform. The distributed architecture guarantees IPR
management and reduces the general costs.

9. References
[1]

Suhayl Masud – Building a real-world web service- RosettaNet-XML
Journal, volume 4, issue2, pages10-15, February 2003.
[2] Greg Colyer, James Holwell - Elysium Ltd (UK) WG 1 N2665, 11 July
2002.
[3] C. Serrão , J.M. Salles Dias, J. Messens, JM. Boucqueau, ISO/IEC JTC
1/SC 29/WG 1- ITU-SG8- Coding of Still Pictures WG1N2824 -Use
case - remote sensing.
[4] N. O’Connor, S. Sav, T. Adamek, V. Mezaris, I. Kompatsiaris, T. Y.
Lui, E. Izquierdo, C. F. Bennström, J. R Casas, “Region and object
segmentation algorithms in the QIMERA segmentation platform.” Paper
to appear in CBMI 2003.
[5] S. H. Minelli, “Applicazione della Tecnologia MMS: Archivio Digitale
Alinari.” Alinari’s document, November 2002.
[6] Jean Barda -CAVEAT:” Controlling Authenticity and Versioning of an
Electronic document by Accessing a Trusted third party”, Netimage,
October 2003.
[7] JPIP Editors, “ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 1 - (ITU-T SG16) Coding of
Still Pictures”.
[8] S. H. Minelli- Content Databases Management and System Standards for
a Digital Image Archive - EC Project IST-2000-26336 REGNET:
Regional Networks of Culture Heritage – Proceedings. Institute of
Computer and Communication Systems, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences-Sofia BULGARIA-(Nov. 2002).
[9] E. Tuncel, L. Onural, “Utilization of the recursive shortest spanning tree
algorithm for video-object segmentation by 2-D affine motion
modelling”, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology, vol. 10, no.5, August 2000
[10] I. Kompatsiaris and M. G. Strintzis, “Spatiotemporal Segmentation and
Tracking of Objects for Visualization of Videoconference Image
Sequences”, IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology, vol. 10, no. 8, Dec. 2000.
[11] N. O’Connor, T. Adamek, S. Sav, N. Murphy, S. Marlow, “Qimera: a
software platform for video object segmentation and tracking”, to appear
in Proc. WIAMIS 2003.
Sam H. Minelli received his M.S. degree in Electronic Engineering from the
University of Padua (Italy). His research interests include segmentation and
compression algorithms and quality assessments. He is currently involved
with the testing group for the JPEG2000 compression algorithms and webarchives at the R&D Lab at Alinari photo archive in Florence (Italy).
Andrea de Polo is senior project manager at the Alinari company in Florence
(Italy). His research interests include intellectual property rights and
watermarking. He is an I3A member since 2002, member of The Photo
Marketing Association (PMA). This author became a Member (grade A) of
IEEE in 2003. He is currently involved with the art-on-demand and
educational projects.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

