Using MoneyTree To Represent Financial Data
Xiaobin Shen, Peter Eades
The University of Sydney
Madsen Building, F09. University of Sydney NSW 2006
National ICT Australia
{xshen@cs.usyd.edu.au, peter.eades@nicta.com.au}

Abstract
Ambient information visualization normally
does not reside on the screen of a desktop computer,
but exists in the general environment, in the
periphery of the user’s attention. The aim is not
only to provide useful information, but also to blend
in with the surroundings and to be appealing to the
eye.
In this paper we use ambient visualization to
represent financial data.
Financial visualization is the practice of
making large financial datasets into images. In
comparison to the bland financial data, the
visualization is easier for people to understand,
especially as the image changes.
In this paper we describe a research project
that uses different images of trees to represent the
real-time changes in stock prices and volume.

Keywords: Ambient information visualization,
financial data, tree
1.Introduction
With continual development in display
technologies, scientists, artists, and graphic
designers have begun to break free from the
limitation of traditional desktop computer screens.
When walls and tables become screens [Li et al.
2000], methods for presenting suitable information
on such surfaces raise new problems. Human focus
of visual attention is quite narrow in comparison to
current large screens, and it is clear that some of the
large screen space must be in the periphery of the
user’s attention. Ambient displays, as “decoration of

the architectural space” rather than the central focus
of a user’s attention, have been investigated as
background media [Wisneski et al. 1998].
In our project, we use different tree images to
represent dynamic stock price and volume data, and
allow people to get price change information
visually. Our aim is twofold:
x Provide a pleasant visual decoration that
shows stock price and volume data.
x Inform the user of changes in this data.

1.1. Ambient Information Visualization
Information visualization is commonly defined
as “the use of computer-supported, interactive,
visual representations of abstract data to amplify
cognition” [Card et al. 1997]. Ambient information
visualization is “the use of aesthetically pleasing
displays of information which sit on the periphery
of a user’s attention” [Manko et al. 2003].
These days, ambient visualization involves
real-time, real-world information to deliver better
quality information about financial, physical, and
other critical data. On the other side, people need
better ways to interpret and understand this everincreasing amount data. This information can be
delivered to people when and where they can
benefit from it, using new kinds of display devices.
A variety of ambient information displays have
recently been investigated. A common approach
seems to take traditional wall-hung art to inform the
design and use of these displays. Digital family
portraits use a picture frame to place updated
information about the health of an elderly family
member in the border of the photo [Mynatt et al.
2001].
InfoCanvas consists of specialized
computer displays that provide awareness of some
source of information using images, creating a form
of “virtual paintings” [Miller and Stasko 2002] (see
Figure 1). BusTraffic, inspired by Mondrian, creates

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

an informative art installation to represent the realtime local bus traffic conditions [Tobias et al. 2003]
(see Figure 2).

Figure 3. 2D chart

1.3. Why Use MoneyTree
Figure 1. InfoCanvas as a painting hung on the wall
(Courtesy of Tomiller)

Figure 2. Ambient visualization in BusTraffic
(Courtesy of Tobias)

1.2. Financial Data Visualization

Our MoneyTree visualization provides a
number of advantages over traditional financial
visualizations of the type shown in Figure 3.
Firstly, Moneytree can represent information about
multiple stocks in one frame. In one frame, we
represent a number of stocks and in each stock, we
represent the stock volume and stock price
information. So in total, we represent different
dimensions of information in a single frame in a
manner that is much less intimidating than
traditional chart visualizations.
Secondly,
Moneytree
places
important
information into people’s everyday environment.
Using the “ambient visualization as wall hung art”
paradigm, we cover the border of a monitor with an
old-fashioned picture frame (see Figure 4). People
can then hang this picture frame on the wall to
decorate their house. Meanwhile, they can track
their favorite stock from home, without opening
web pages.

In this project, we focus on representing
financial data of stock information.
There are some important terms in stock
trading such as “bid price”, “ask price” and
“volume”. "Bid price" is the price that somebody
will pay for a stock at a given moment, while "ask
price" is the price at which someone is willing to
sell a stock. Bid/ask prices are always posted
together with the number of shares offered, often
called “volume”. Normally, people will use 2D
charts to see the trend and make a decision (see
Figure 3).
In this paper, we use 3D tree image to represent
the real-time stock information.
Figure 4. MoneyTree frame
Thirdly, from aesthetic view, our aim is to let
people feel that MoneyTree is an artwork. It’s

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

different from most artwork, but still plays the same
function of decorating the wall as most paintings.

2. MoneyTree
In this section, we review the MoneyTree
system,.
The trunk of the tree represents trade volume
and tree leaves represent the trade price. In Figure 4,
the trees from left to right represent trades for AMP,
NCPDP, and VCR at 10:50 on August 28, 2003.
AMP has a larger tree than NCPDP; this means that
it so far on August 28, AMP has traded more
volume than NCPDP. Further, the AMP tree has
more leaves (it looks healthier); this means that its
price has been firmer so far on August 28.
The state of these three stocks at 11:50 and
12:20 on the same day is represented in Figures 5
and 6.
If you consider these three images together,
you will find the stock volume increases
continuously with time and stock price changes
randomly. It is hard to predict what the price is
even for the next minute.
We assume that the price change rate is within
negative 10% to positive 10%. If the stock price
change rate is outside this range, we will regard it
as 10%.
The trees change just once every minute.
Because the stock price normally does not change
much in one minute, a finer granularity is not
needed.
Although the stock data is from a real-time feed,
there is a one or two minutes delay before changes
appear in the trees. This is to allow for some
computation.

Figure 6.11:50 on 28/8/2003 the state of stock price

Figure 7.12:20 on 28/8/2003 the state of stock price

2.1. The data
Figure 7 shows some sample source data. The
first step is to extract necessary data from the
source, including date, time, stock name, stock
volume, and stock price.

Figure 8. ASX stock data information

Figure 5.10:50 on 28/8/2003 the state of stock price

The second step is to calculate the average
stock price and compare with the beginning stock
price to calculate this price change rate. Further, we
must sum the stock volume within one minute and
add to the total stock volume for the day.
The final step is to map this data into a tree
model.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

2.2. The tree models

3. Future Work

To create models of trees with a variety of size
and leaf characteristics we use XFrog, a rule based
tree model generation system with techniques such
as free form deformation and global and local
constraints.
A database of tree models was created with
XFrog, and Java3D is then used to load trees with
appropriate parameters each minute.
A smooth graphical transition from one tree to
the next is achieved by image morphing, illustrated
in figure 8. The transition takes 1 second. During
this time, the old image fades out and the new one
fades in.

As this study is still in progress, there is still
much to be done.

3.1 Evaluation
There have been many studies in ambient
visualization but few focus on evaluation. This can
be time consuming, labor intensive and often
inconclusive.
3.1.1General
Ambient information visualization has different
goals to normal information visualization, so we
cannot use normal visualization criteria to measure
it. Some ambient studies do perform evaluation but
it is a time-consuming and expensive task. That’s
why most ambient displays have not been evaluated
at all [Manko, et al. 2003]. Manko et al.[Manko, et
al.2003] performed an ambient visualization
evaluation by using heuristic technology.
3.1.2. What we do

Ļ

Ļ

Figure 9: Image Morphing

Our evaluation will involve placing the
MoneyTree picture frame unobtrusively in the
entrance foyer of a busy office.
We will record the interaction of passersby with two cameras concealed near the MoneyTree
display. One camera will be used to track the
position of people standing inside a two-meter area
around the display. The second camera will allow
us to determine whether people are facing the
display. If a person stands inside the two-meter area
and his body is facing the frame, the camera will
automatically turn on and record the activity.
Eventually, we hope to generate reports such as: the
number of people who visit the display, what is
their facial expression while watching it, and how
long they stay in front of the display.
Additionally, we will ask people for some
qualitative feedback, such as:
x Does the display look like an artwork? –
An important goal of ambient visualization
is to be as unobtrusive as possible, and our
intention is to achieve this by concealing
the information display as art.
x Did they learn something from watching
the display? – In addition to being
decorative we hope to convey real
financial data.
x Do you think that the display fits the
environment? – Again, in order to be

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

unobtrusive,
an
effective
ambient
visualization should fit in well with the
everyday environment.

[4]

Miller, T. and Stasko, J.2002. Artistically
Conveying Peripheral Information with the
InfoCancas, In: Proceedings of the
Working Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces (AVI 002). pp.43-50.

[5]

Mynatt, E.D., Rowan, J., Craighill, S. and
Jacobs, A. 2001. Digital family portraits:
supporting peace of mind for extended for
extended family members. In: Proceedings
of CHI 2001, ACM SIGGHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Addison Wesley/ ACM Press, New York,
pp.333-340.

[6]

Sekuler, R. and Blake, R. 1994. Perception.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., Toronto, Ontario.

[7]

Tobias Skog, Sara Ljungblad and Lars
Erik Holmquist, Between Aesthetics and
Utility: Designing Ambient Information
Visualizations. IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization 2003. pp.239240.

[8]

Wisneski, G., Ishii, H., Dahley, A., Gorbet,
M., Brave, S., Ullmer, B. and Yarin,
P.Ambient Display: Turning Architectural
Spache into an Interface between People
and Digital Information. In Proceedings of
the First International Workshop on
Cooperative
Buildings
(CoBuild'98),
Darmstadt, Germany, February 1998;
Springer-Verlag Heidelberg, pp. 22-32.

3.2. User Customization
As we believe that future ambient visualization
will benefit from user customization. Different
people get different flavors, so we can design
different displays to meet individual requirements
and suit different environments. For our MoneyTree,
some people will probably like to choose their
favorite plants instead of our given trees. Similarly,
rather than see three stocks at one time, some
people will want to see more.
This kind of customization will require us to
make the system more modularization and flexible.

4. Conclusion
In ambient information visualization, aesthetic
considerations are a primary property, both in the
design and during use [Tobias, et al. 2003]. For
instance, our project is not entirely consistent in its
coding, since trees have many different styles and
different shapes but in our project it is only 3 types.
The most important thing for our model is that it
should fit the art requirement and local environment.

References
[1]

Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D. and
Shneiderman, B. 1999. Information
Visualization. In Readings in Information
Visualization: Using Vision to Think.
Morgan Kaufman, pp.1-34.

[2]

Jennifer Manko, Anind K. Dey, Gary
Hsieh, Julie Kientz, Scott Lederer, Morgan
Ames. Heuristic Evaluation of Ambient
Displays. April 5-10, 2003

[3]

Li, Han Chen, Yuqun Chen, Douglas W.
Clark, Perry Cook, Stefanos Damianakis,
Georg Essl, Adam Finkelstein, Thomas
Funkhouser, Timothy Housel, Allison
Klein, Zhiyan Liu, Emil Praun, Rudrajit
Samanta, Ben Shedd, Jaswinder Pal Singh,
George Tzanetakis, & Jiannan Zheng,
Building and Using A Scalable Display
Wall System. Princeton University. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications.
July/August 2000.
IEEE Computer
Society.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

