Learning from Architects: The Difference between
Knowledge Visualization and Information Visualization
Remo A. Burkhard
University of St. Gallen
Remo.Burkhard@unisg.ch
Abstract
This paper focuses on an aspect which has been
neglected, but which is decisive: The transfer of
knowledge to different stakeholders; especially the
transfer of insights derived from information
visualization tools. In knowledge management the
transfer of knowledge is a core process, which can be
improved by using our innate abilities to process visual
representations. The potential of visualizations are
manifold. But business managers miss a holistic
framework on the use of visualization methods for
information exploration and communication tasks. This
paper analyzes how architects use visualizations to
amplify cognition and to transfer knowledge. It
introduces a mediating framework that brings together
isolated research directions and defines the new
research focus knowledge visualization. Knowledge
visualization examines the use of visualizations for the
transfer of knowledge between at least two peoples. We
found that the new focus is decisive and has implications
for researchers in information visualization and
knowledge management.
Keywords: knowledge visualization, information
visualization,
knowledge
transfer,
knowledge
management.

1. Introduction: The Need for Knowledge
Visualization
The transfer of knowledge is a core process and
difficult to manage [1]. For the transfer of knowledge the
following difficulties need to be solved:
x Information depth: Trade off between an overview and
details that need to be communicated.
x Limited time: Limited time, attention and capacity of
the recipients.
x Different
background:
Different
cognitive
backgrounds and difficulties of decision makers to
understand the novel information visualization tools.
x Relevance: Providing the relevant information to
different stakeholders.

Today managers only use few visualization types,
i.e. PowerPoint presentations, diagrams or clip arts for
information exploration and for the transfer of
knowledge. Result: The need for information
visualization.
The last twenty years various information
visualization methods were invented. However it has
been neglected to link these methods to the background
of managers and to the knowledge management life
cycle. As a result managers have difficulties to adapt
these new methods. What is missing, is a mediating
framework for the use of visualization methods for
different tasks that concern managers; starting from
information exploration and ending with the transfer of
knowledge. The methods should be customized to the
recipients' cognitive background and information need.
This missing framework would help managers to find the
most promising visualization method for the individual
task. Result: The need for knowledge visualization.
Knowledge visualization examines methods to
reduce the predominant problems of managers:
x Information overload: Decision Makers cannot
identify the relevant information.
x Misinterpretation:
Decision
makers
cannot
understand, evaluate and interpret the information.
x Misuse: Decision makers cannot use or misuse the
information for decision making.
Information visualization scientists can learn from
architects: Architects as generalists are experts in the
transfer of knowledge between specialists from different
fields (engineers, workers, lawyers, customers). In an
analysis on the way how architects use visual
representation for the transfer of knowledge we found a
simple but important insight: Architects combine
different visualization types that complement one
another to illustrate different levels of details. Combining
traditional visualizations with novel information
visualizations is a promising approach that increases the
knowledge transfer quality (effectiveness, motivation)
and the attention of recipients, reduces the information
overload and as a consequence improves decision
making.
A holistic view and a mediating framework on the
use of visualizations for information exploration and for
the transfer of knowledge is decisive. Today it is

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

missing. Therefore this paper presents an approach for
the missing framework that integrates results from the
research areas information visualization [2-6], cognitive
art [7], communication science [8], information
architecture [9] and knowledge management [10].
Further this paper clarifies the difference of the
research areas information visualization and knowledge
visualization.
The new research focus knowledge visualization
and the new framework are promising and have
implications for researchers in information visualization,
knowledge management and communication studies.

2. The Potential of Visualizations
This section presents an overview of visualization
research for an understanding of our innate abilities to
process visualizations, which can be exploited to
improve the transfer of knowledge or insights derived
from information visualization tools.

2.1. General Advantages of Visual
Representations
A majority of our brain’s activity deals with
processing and analyzing visual images. Images are preattentive and processed before text. In comparison to
text, visual images need less energy to be consumed.
Alesandrini [11] presents five advantages of abstract
images: They are instant, memorable, automatic, global
and energizing. Several empirical studies show that
visual representations are superior to verbal-sequential
representations in different tasks, i.e. to illustrate
relations, to identify patterns, to present both an
overview and details, to support problem solving and to
communicate different knowledge types [12-14].
The use of visual metaphors is effective for the
transfer of knowledge [15]. Eppler [16] describes six
advantages: (1) to motivate people, (2) to present new
perspectives, (3) to increase remembrance, (4) to support
the process of learning, (5) to focus the attention of the
viewer and (6) to structure and coordinate
communication.

2.2. Visual Cognition and Perception Research
Miller [17] reports that a human’s input channel
capacity is greater when visual abilities are used. Our
brain has a strong ability to identify patterns, which is
examined in Gestalt psychology [18]. Visual imagery
[19, 20] suggest that visual recall seems to be better than
verbal recall. It is not clear how images are stored and
recalled, but it is clear that humans have a natural ability
to use images. Instructional psychology and media
didactics investigate the learning outcomes of text-alone
versus text-picture: [21] present different results in
knowledge acquisition from text and pictures.
Weidenmann [22] explores aspects of illustrations in the
learning process. Cognitive neuroscience discusses the

underlying cognitive components of picture processing
[23].
This section presented an overview on the potential
of visualizations and visualization research.

3. The Difference between Knowledge
Visualization and Information Visualization
This section presents the theoretical background for
the definition and distinction of the research areas
knowledge visualization and information visualization.
Towards a definition of knowledge: Today there is
no consensus on the definition of knowledge. Many
writers distinguish between data, information, knowledge
and wisdom [24, 25]. But on the distinction between
information and knowledge there is no consensus either.
Schreyögg [26] presents an overview on this discourse.
Information visualization is a rapidly advancing
field of study [2-6]. Card et al. [2] define it, as "... the use
of
computer-supported,
interactive,
visual
representations of abstract data to amplify cognition".
This definition is well established, and as a result
mainly information scientists are engaged in the research
community focusing in information exploration. What is
missing, is a systematic discourse on the potential of
visualizations as a medium for the transfer of knowledge
and the integration of non-computer based visualization
methods, as architects, artists, designers use them.
Because the research area information visualization is
well established and clear defined, a new research area
with the above focus is necessary. We call this research
area knowledge visualization.
We define knowledge visualization as: Knowledge
visualization examines the use of visual representations
to improve the transfer of knowledge between at least
two persons or group of persons.
To illustrate the difference between information
visualization and knowledge visualization we refer to
Eppler [16] “Apart from facts (to answer questions as
what? who? when? how many?) knowledge
communication needs to further transfer insights (to
answer questions as why? and how?), experiences,
attitudes, values, premonitions, perspectives, opinions
and predictions, in a way that the recipient can reconstruct similar knowledge, as the sender intended” 1.
Information visualization and knowledge visualization
are both exploiting our innate abilities to effectively
process visual representations. But the way of using
these abilities differs: Information visualization aims to
explore abstract data and to create new insights.
Knowledge visualization in contrast aims to improve the
transfer of knowledge between at least two persons or
groups of persons.
The next section describes how architects use
different visual representations to transfer knowledge.

1

Translated by the author

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

4. Learning from Architects: The
Visualization Type Perspective
Today happens what Peter Drucker described: ”The
operating organization tends to become an organization
of specialists of all kinds” [27]. Architects are experts in
communicating with specialists of different fields.
Business professionals and information visualization
scientists can learn from architects by adapting their
approach to use different visualization types
complementary. The five main visualization types they
use are: Sketch, Diagram, Image, Object, Interactive
Visualization. In the following section we introduce each
type:

Diagrams as seen in Figure 2 are abstract, schematic
representations used to explore structural relationships
among parts. Unlike maps, diagrams are usually not to
scale, nor need to be true to shape. Architects use
diagrams to explain concepts and to reduce complexity.

4.1 Sketch

Figure 2: This Diagram represents the construction of the
Golden Section.

For the transfer of knowledge in organizations
diagrams help to reduce complexity and amplify
cognition. Visualizing a complex situation with boxes
and arrows, helps in understanding causal relationships.
Diagrams help to categorize and structure information to
improve decision making. In contrast to sketches they are
precise and determined.
Figure 1: The Sketch by Le Corbusier outlines the concept of a
new building. 2

A sketch is defined as: “Traditionally a rough
drawing or painting in which an artist notes down his
preliminary ideas for a work that will eventually be
realized with greater precision and detail.”3
A sketch as seen in Figure 2 outlines a first rough or
incomplete draught or plan. It represents the main idea
and key features of a preliminary study. Sketches are
atmospheric, fast and universally accessible. Sketches
help to quickly visualize an idea with the flexibility to
handle any shape one imagines.
For the transfer of knowledge in organizations
sketches are a versatile and always accessible
visualization method, i.e. for meetings or presentations.
The use of a pen on a flipchart attracts the attention and
supports reasoning and arguing. Sketches allow room for
own interpretations and foster creativity.

4.3 Image
Kemp defines an image (Figure 3) as: “Images are
representations which are primarily concerned with
impression, expression, or realism.” [29]. An image can
among others be a rendering, a photograph or a painting.
Doelker [30] distinguishes different functions of images.
They can be “registrative, mimetic, simulative,
explicative, diegetic, appellative, decorative, phatic,
ontic or energetic”4. Architects can visualize their spatial
intuitions through perspectival images.

4.2 Diagram
Garland defines a diagram as a “visual language
sign having the primary purpose of denoting function
and/or relationship” [28].

Figure 3: An atmospheric Image of the "blur building"
addresses emotions.5.

2

Retrieved August 4, 2003,
http://www.strath.ac.uk/Students/Architecture/ciam/ciam1.html
3 Sketch. Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved August 4, 2003,
from Encyclopædia Britannica Premium Service.
http://www.britannica.com/eb/article?eu=69864

4 Translated by the author.
5 Retrieved August 4, 2003,
http://www.designboom.com/eng/funclub/dillerscofidio.html

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

For the transfer of knowledge in organizations
images help to get attention, inspire recipients, to anchor
a message through addressing emotions, to improve
recall or to provoke discussions.

4.4 Object

Figure 4: A physical Model by Frank Gehry helps to show
relationships among parts. 6

Physical objects or architectural models bring
together plans and sections, help to imagine a spatial
composition and enables to see a project from different
viewpoints. They can be abstract or realistic. Physical
objects are haptic and allow to experience materials.
Architectural models allow to control difficult details. In
Figure 4 the architectural model helps to imagine and
control the design of a very complex building project
with curved surfaces.
For the transfer of knowledge in organizations
objects help to get the attention, to initiate discussions,
present different views, to improve learning through
constant presence or to integrate digital interfaces.

4.5 Interactive Visualization

Interactive visualizations are computer-based
electronic visualizations that allows the user to control,
combine, and manipulate different types of information
or media. Interactive visualizations enable new methods
to design, to explore and to communicate. Interactive
visualizations offer architects new visualization methods
to improve their tasks. Figure 5 illustrates a three
dimensional interactive interface that visualizes the data
of the New York Stock Exchange. This is an example
how architects exploited the potential of new
visualization technologies to create new value for the
customer.
For the transfer of knowledge in organizations
interactive visualizations help for example to fascinate
recipients, to enable interactive collaboration, to reveal
unforeseen relationships and to present complex data.
This section introduced a visualization type
taxonomy, which is deduced from the way architects use
different complementary visualization types to transfer
knowledge. The next section introduces the yet missing
framework that is derived from this taxonomy.

5. Towards a Framework for Knowledge
Visualization
This section introduces the knowledge visualization
framework, which helps (1) to systemize visualization
methods, (2) to identify missing research areas and (3) to
mediate between different research areas.

5.1. Classifications of Visual Representations
Bertin [5] created a semiology of graphic
representation methods. Lohse et al. [31] report a
structural classification of visual representations. It
focuses on the classification of visual representations
into hierarchically structured categories. Six groups were
introduced: graphs, tables, maps, diagrams, networks and
icons. Shneiderman [32] proposes a type by task
taxonomy of information visualization where he sorts out
the design prototypes to guide researchers to new
visualization approaches. Several researchers offer
design guidance by discussing examples: [33-36].

5.2. The Need for a Knowledge Visualization
Framework

Figure 5: An Interactive Visualization helps to supervise the
New York Stock Exchange. 7

6 Retrieved August 4, 2003,
http://www.thecityreview.com/gehry.html

A new framework is necessary, because of three
reasons:
First, visualization research is not integrated into the
context of communication science [8]. The role of the
recipient is not studied enough. However in the transfer
of knowledge, the recipient plays the major role and
needs therefore major attention. Successful visualizations
need to be customized to the cognitive background of the
recipient so that the recipient can reconstruct own
knowledge as intended by the sender.
7 Retrieved August 4, 2003, http://www.asymptote.net

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Second, visualization research is not integrated into
knowledge management research [10]. Knowledge
management research distinguishes different knowledge
types. Today's visualization research focuses primarily
on one knowledge type (information, facts).
Third, visualization research needs a general
framework to mediate between the different isolated
research areas in the field of knowledge visualization.
These are information visualization [2-6, 33, 34],
cognitive art [7], knowledge management [10],
communication science [8], information architecture [9],
learning psychology [21, 22], cognitive psychology [23]
or cognitive art [7].

5.3. The Knowledge Visualization Framework
For an effective transfer of knowledge three
perspectives are important: a Knowledge Type
Perspective, a Recipient Type Perspective and a
Visualization Type Perspective.
The Knowledge Type Perspective aims to identify
the type of knowledge that needs to be transferred.
Different types of knowledge are described in knowledge
management literature. For our framework we
distinguish five types of knowledge: Declarative
knowledge (Know-what), procedural knowledge (Knowhow),
experimental
knowledge
(Know-why),
orientational knowledge (Know-where), individual
knowledge (Know-who). Today no classification exist,
that links visualization types and knowledge types.
The Recipient Type Perspective aims to identify
the target group and the context of the recipient. The
recipient can be an individual, a team, a whole
organization or a network of persons. Knowing the
context and the cognitive background of the recipient is
essential for finding the right visualization method for

the transfer of knowledge. Today graphic design and
information visualization [5, 33, 34] do not focus on this
perspective.
The Visualization Type Perspective aims to
establish a simple taxonomy that is able to structure the
existing visualization methods. Today a simple
taxonomy that can mediate between different areas (as
between planners and decision makers) is missing.
The three perspectives are summarized in Table 1:
Knowledge Type
(What?)
Know-what
Know-how
Know-why
Know-where
Know-who

Recipient Type
(Whom?)
Individual
Team
Organization

Visualization
Type (How?)
Sketch
Diagram
Image
Object
Interactive Visualization

Table 1: Three different perspectives of the knowledge
visualization framework

The Knowledge Visualization Framework
combines the three perspectives to a three dimensional
matrix as seen in Figure 6. As a conceptual framework it
helps to structure thinking. In our interactive Knowledge
Visualization Cube each visualization method can be
linked to one or more suitable coordinates in this
framework. Practitioners can use the cube to structure
and find the most promising visualization methods by
clicking on the slices and individual cubes. Each
Knowledge Visualization Cube is context specific and
can be filled with different visualizations.
This section presented the missing Framework,
which is being refined in our current work.

Figure 6: The Knowledge Visualization Cube integrates the three important perspectives to be considered when choosing a visualization
method. Slices can be selected which then allow a single cube to be selected. Selecting a link in the appearing view loads detailed
information in an additional window. The cube is implemented in VRML.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

6. Summary
This paper defined knowledge visualization and
explained the difference between the research areas
knowledge visualization and information visualization.
In contrast to information visualization, which exploits
our innate abilities to effectively process visual
representation to explore information, knowledge
visualization uses these abilities to improve the transfer
of knowledge between at least two persons or group of
persons. To mediate between different research areas this
paper
introduced
a
knowledge
visualization
framework. This framework aims to systemize research,
to identify research gaps and to mediate between
researchers from different fields.
The framework is based on three perspectives: A
Knowledge Type, a Recipient Type and a Visualization
Type Perspective. While the first two taxonomies are
established, the visualization type perspective is new. We
deduced this taxonomy by analyzing how architects use
different complementary visualization types to transfer
knowledge. This taxonomy is promising both for
researchers and practitioners.
We are currently refining and integrating examples
into our framework.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

G. Probst, S. Raub, et al. Wissen managen, Wie
Unternehmen ihre wertvollste Ressource optimal nutzen.
Wiesbaden, Gabler/FAZ. 1997.
S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, et al. Readings in
Information Visualization; Using Vision to think. Los
Altos, CA, Morgan Kaufmann. 1999.
C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for
Design. San Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann. 2000.
C. Chen. Information Visualisation and Virtual
Environments. London, Springer. 1999.
J. Bertin. Graphische Semiologie. Diagramme, Netze,
Karten. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter. 1974.
B. Spence. Information Visualization, ACM Press. 2000.
R. Horn. Visual Language: Global Communication for
the 21. Century. Brainbridge Island, WA, MacroVU.
1998.
J. Fiske. Communication theory. In Introduction to
Communication Studies, John Fiske, Ed. London/New
York, Methuen, 1982, pp. 6-24.
R. S. Wurman. Information Architects. Zurich, Graphis
Press Corp. 1996.
M. Alavi, D. Leidner. Knowledge Management and
Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual
Foundations and Research Issues. In MIS Quarterly, 25
(1), pp. 107-136. 2001.
K. Alesandrini. Survive Information Overload: The 7
best ways to manage your workload by seeing the big
picture. Homewood, IL, Business One Irwin. 1992.
J. Larkin, H. Simon. Why a Diagram is (Sometimes)
Worth Ten Thousand Words. In Cognitive Science, 11,
pp. 65-99. 1987.
A. Glenberg, M. Langston. Comprehension of Illustrated
Text: Pictures Help to Build Mental Models. In Journal
of Memory and Language, 31 (2), pp. 129-151. 1992.

[14] M. Bauer, P. Johnson-Laird. How diagrams can improve
reasoning. In Psychological Science, 4 (6), pp. 372-378.
1993.
[15] I. Nonaka. The Knowledge-Creating Company. In
Harvard Business Review, 69 (6), pp. 96-104. 1991.
[16] M. J. Eppler. Visuelle Wissenskommunikation - Der
Einsatz von graphischen Metaphern zur Optimierung des
Wissenstransfers. In Wissenskommunikation in
Organisationen, R. Reinhardt and Martin J. Eppler, Eds.,
Springer, 2004.
[17] G. A. Miller. The magical number seven, plus or minus
two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information. In Psychological Review, 63, pp. 81-97.
1956.
[18] K. Koffka. The Principles of Gestalt Psychology. New
York, Harcourt Brace. 1935.
[19] S. M. Kosslyn. Images and Mind. Cambridge, MA,
Harvard University Press. 1980.
[20] R. N. Shepard, L. A. Cooper. Mental Images and Their
Transformations. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 1982.
[21] H. Mandl, J. R. Levin. Knowledge Acquisition from Text
and Pictures. Amsterdam, North-Holland. 1989.
[22] B. Weidenmann. When Good Pictures Fail: An
Information-Processing Approach to the Effect of
Illustrations. In Knowledge Acquisition from Text and
Pictures, Heinz Mandl and Joel R. Levin, Eds.
Amsterdam, North-Holland, 1989.
[23] M. J. Farah. The cognitive neuroscience of vision.
Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Publishers. 2000.
[24] V. Allee. The Knowledge Evolution: Expanding
Organizational Intelligence. Boston, MA, ButterworthHeinemann. 1997.
[25] J. Rehäuser, H. Krcmar. Wissensmanagement im
Unternehmen. In Wissensmanagement, Georg Schreyögg
and Peter Conrad, Eds. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter, 1996.
[26] G. Schreyögg. Wenn alles Wissen ist, ist Wissen am
Ende nichts?! In DBW, 63 (1), pp. 7-22. 2003.
[27] P. F. Drucker. The coming of the New Organization. vol.
January-February. 1988.
[28] K. Garland. Some General Characteristics Present in
Diagrams Denoting Activity, Event and Relationship. In
Information Design Journal, 1 (1), pp. 15-22. 1979.
[29] M. Kemp. Visualizations. The Nature Book of Art and
Science. Berkeley & Los Angeles, University of
California Press. 2000.
[30] C. Doelker. Ein Bild ist mehr als ein Bild. Visuelle
Kompetenz in der Multimedia-Gesellschaft. Stuttgart,
Klett-Cotta. 1997.
[31] G. Lohse, K. Biolsi, et al. A Classification of Visual
Representations. In Communications of the ACM, 37
(12), pp. 36-49. 1994.
[32] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: a task by data type
taxonomy for information visualizations. In Proceedings
of 1996 IEEE Visual Languages, Boulder (CO), pp. 336343. 1996.
[33] E. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, Graphics
Press. 1990.
[34] E. Tufte. Visual Explanations. Cheshire, Graphics Press.
1997.
[35] P. Keller, Keller, M. Visual Cues. Practical Data
Visualization. Los Alamitos, IEEE Computer Society
Press. 1993.
[36] W. J. Bowman. Graphic communication. New York,
Wiley. 1968.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

