An Intelligent Framework for User-Oriented Information Visualization in the
Production Automation Area
Juri Schädlich1 and Kizito Mukasa2
1
Computer Science Department,
2
Center for Human-Machine-Interaction,
Kaiserslautern University of Technology,
D-67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
schaedli@rhrk.uni-kl.de, mukasa@mv.uni-kl.de
Abstract
This paper proposes a user-oriented approach as a
basis for proper information visualization in the
production automation area. A total consideration of the
user consists of analyzing his tasks, context and profile.
In order to implement this in the visualization process,
an intelligent framework that is based on a multi agent
system is developed. The advantage is that the tasks can
be distributed to several small and manageable agents.
The long term objective is to develop a working platform
for the user-oriented information visualization.
Keywords--- Information Visualization System,
Human Machine Interface, Multi Agent Technology

1. Introduction
Due to technological advancements, machines have
become complex and execute many functions that where
not possible before [1]. This has brought improvement in
the construction and application of machine tools. The
machines have more functionality, they work faster and
longer. PCs have found their way into the production
automation area long ago. This means that more
information can be produced at a higher rate. On the
other hand, machine users have remained the same; slow,
inaccurate and error prone. Though automation has taken
over some of the tasks that were used to be done
manually, completely replacing human beings through
machines has proven to be counter productive. Critical
tasks like controlling the production process as well as
the quality of the products are examples of user tasks.
This can be monitoring machine and product parameters,
handling of failures, reading user manuals etc.
The continuously increasing volume of the
information that the computer can process and present to
the user on a relatively small display results into a
bottleneck at the human-machine interface. To solve this
problem, an optimized information organization is
required, since human abilities of information perception
and processing are limited [2]. This limit can be easily
exceeded by an inappropriate application of visualization

techniques, which can lead to wrong operation due to the
user being overstrained. In contrast to the operating on a
PC in office areas, wrong operation of the machine due
to wrong information interpretation can cause irreparable
damages to the machine, the product or even to the
machine user in the industrial area. This applies
particularly in emergency and danger situations, where
fast and goal-oriented actions must be performed. In
order to make the right action in this situation, the user
requires comprehensive information about the machine
status within a very short time. Since almost 80% of the
information is perceived visually [3], this information is
visualized.
Information visualization is the static or dynamic
presentation of information for the human visual system.
In production automation area, visualization is done on
the human-machine interface, which is a bridge between
the user and the machine. Due to reasons mentioned
above, visualizing information on machines differs from
that in normal office surroundings. Despite this
difference, less research has been done in the production
automation area regarding the adaptation of information
visualization techniques. There exist a large number of
information visualization techniques [4, 5]. The
application of these techniques in the production
automation area has revealed that they do not provide
proper support to the machine user. This is probably due
to insufficient user consideration during the selection of
visualization techniques. Moreover the visualization
should be adapted to the limited hardware available in
the production automation area.
Proper application of visualization techniques means
creating the equilibrium between information
visualization and user needs as well as process and
machine requirements. Thus, the selection of a
visualization technique and the right form for the
information presentation during the development of
human machine interface is a challenging issue and
requires a systematic approach.
This paper introduces an approach for user
orientation and a corresponding implementation
framework for information visualization.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

2. User orientation in the information
visualization
Most visualization systems available on the market
focus on the data to be visualized. Though these systems
allow the user to interact and view information, the
aspect of considering the user remains more or less
unattended. The goal has been to provide tools and
information, without considering whether the user can
utilize them or not. It remains for the user to decide
whether to apply the visualization in the “hard way” or
leave it. The second option is particularly true for
machine users. To make the visualization attractive to the
users, their tasks, contexts and profiles must be
considered (see figure 1).
Profile
- Mental model
- Education and Experience
- Cognition
Context
- Environment
- Time constraints
- Hardware/Software
- Psychology

User

Schneiderman [8] abstracts user tasks with respect to
visualization into five basic interactions; overview,
zooming, filtering, detail-on-demand, relate, history and
extract. These tasks can be reduced to single step actions,
hence the name “interactions”. With this classification it
is possible to map interactions onto visualization
techniques. Still yet, this mapping answers the question
of “which technology supports which interaction” and
not “with which visualization technology can the user
perform which interaction best”. In other words, it is
technology oriented instead of being user oriented. It
should be pointed out that in the production automation
area, most of the interactions mentioned above occur
during the execution of other tasks. Should ergonomics
be an issue, then the visualization should focus on the
overall user tasks.

2.2. User context

Tasks
- Goals
- Methods
- Operators/Tools

Figure 1. Aspects of user orientation

2.1. User tasks
According to the GOMS model [6] user tasks consist
of goals, methods, and operators, and if necessary the
selection rules. Goals define the aim of performing a
task, operators are the means to use in order to reach the
goal and methods defined the flow of steps to follow
during the execution of the task. Should there be more
than one possible method, then selection rules are used to
resolve the conflict. By using this model, user tasks can
be described in a program like manner. Though there
exist several GOMS analysis techniques [7], they have a
shortcoming of being platform dependent. They describe
the tasks accomplished on a specific platform and with
specific devices. Thus, the user is not the center of task
description. By applying this model, it is possible to
evaluate different methods of performing the task with
the available tools and then select the suitable one. This
is what the selection rules do. In most cases, these rules
are based on the method execution time, though user’s
personal experience can be considered in the
background. In this way, the description is optimized to
the platform and not the user. A platform independent
and user-centered description of user tasks could shift the
concentration to the user. The visualization can then
extract relevant data from this description and make
them available when appropriate.

User tasks are performed in different contexts. There
has been no standard for the usage of the word “context”.
In this paper, every thing that surrounds the user either
physically or mentally is part of his context. This
includes the environment, time limits, hardware and
software as well as psychological issues.
The environment in which the task is being
performed may contribute to the success or failure of the
performance. For example, if there is not enough light,
then it will difficult to see. Or if the surrounding is noisy,
hearing will a problem. Especially light contrast has a
major influence on the readability of information on the
display.
The time required for the performance of the task
also influences the user’s interaction. If the user has
enough time, then this can be spent in interpreting and
understanding the presented information. Should time be
limited, the user will tend to get an overview and ignore
any detailed information. In this case, reduced and
relevant information have to be presented.
Visualization hardware and software, especially the
display, have much impact on the quality of the
presentation. For example, it is easier to present more
information on a large display than on a small one.
Moreover the psychology of the user can change the
way of working and interpreting the whole context. For
instance, if a user is tired or overworked, there is not
enough time to spend on reading details. All he wants to
do is to accomplish the required task. Sometimes the
result may be irrelevant, thus, in such situations, it is
better that the visualization supports him to focus on
important issues rather than presenting him detailed
information. More details can be viewed on demand.

2.3. User profile
Considering the user as an individual with specific
characteristics is the aim of this aspect. Important issues

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

here are the user mental model, user education, user
experience and disabilities.
The mental model defines the user vision regarding
the information displayed. It is important to know how
the user sees and interprets information; does he see it as
a cluster or separate parts? Is the information related or
not?
User education and experience influence the way of
interpreting information. Machine users in the production
automation area can roughly be divided into three groups
according to their qualifications. The first is of operators,
who are normally less educated. Though operators
possess knowledge about their task and how to perform
them, their knowledge regarding technical aspects is very
limited. As a result they have less access right and need
very intuitive visualization. Following the operators is
the group of supervisors. They have more technical
knowledge and can do more than the operators. For
example they can solve simple problems that occur
during machine operations or perform diagnostics. But
they are not always on the machine and in most cases
have many machines to take care of. Due to their
qualifications, they are capable of interpreting complex
visualization. The third group is that of experts. They are
highly educated and have the highest technical
knowledge about the machine and process. Experts are
mostly needed when large problems occur or during the
installation phase. In this case they mostly need to see an
overview of configuration parameters.
User cognitive abilities, in particular visual
perception, must be included in the user profile. A small
number of people have a color-vision deficiency,
sometimes referred to as color blindness. This affects
8-10% of males, and 0.5% females. People with color
deficiencies confuse colors, regardless of whether they
are displayed on paper or on a screen, and regardless of
age. If the visualization will use colors to differentiate
parameters and their values, the same color could be
interpreted differently by different users. Thus, one needs
to pay attention that the user gets the right color. As a
solution one can apply some principles of color use or
avoid using color.
Considering all the aspects mentioned above
requires an intelligent visualization framework that is
introduced in the following section.

3. The intelligent visualization framework
The visualization framework introduced here uses a
multi agent system. The use of a multi agent system
during the visualization process represents a new class of
intelligent visualization tools. The agents can be trained
in order to achieve the best appropriate visualization
results for a user of a specific profile, in a specific
context and during performing a specific task.

The here proposed framework, extended with a
collection of scalable visualization techniques, is a basis
for the creation of visualization applications especially
for production automation area.

3.1. Agents in the visualization control
The monitoring and tuning of a visualization
application is a complex problem. In [9] agents are used
in order to react quickly on continually changing
conditions and variety of parameters in a visualization
system. An agent is a piece of software that detects and
reacts on changes in its environment. A multi agent
system is a software system built by a number of agents
which communicate in order to solve more complex
problems.
The main advantage of applying a multi agent
system over a single agent system is the splitting of tasks
into subtasks, which then can be easily handled by small
agents. In [10] two different types of agents are used for
the visualization control: reactive agents and deliberative
agents. A reactive agent fulfils a restricted controlling
task which only requires limited knowledge about the
context and can be easily integrated into dynamic
environments. Thus, a reactive agent is always assigned
either to a module or a group of modules and it controls
the module’s parameters on demand. A deliberative
agent has knowledge about a superior context and
therefore has the ability to handle more complex
problems. The in [10] described visualization system had
only one deliberative agent that controls several reactive
agents.

3.2. System architecture
Figure 2 shows the architecture of the proposed
information visualization framework that uses several
deliberative agents. It is based on the standard
information visualization pipeline consisting of three
components: filtering, mapping and rendering. All
visualization components are controlled by a reactive
agent, except the mapping component. Due to the
complex nature of the mapping process, a deliberative
agent is applied. This agent uses specified rules to
perform the selection of suitable visualization techniques
for the current user. As mentioned previously, these rules
are based on the profile, the task and the context of the
user. All this required information is obtained from the
user knowledge base. Based on this information, the
mapping agent can select a suitable visualization
technique for the required data. In order to create an
optimum visualization and save reaction time, the agents
have to cooperate by combining their knowledge and
specialized skills. For cooperation, a specialized agent
communication language is required.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Visualization process

Data

Filtering

Mapping

Rendering

Filtering
Agent

Mapping
Agent

Rendering
Agent

x1

x2

x3

GUI
Controlling
Agent

Visualization
Controlling Unit

Visualization
Techniques

User Knowledge Base
- Tasks
- Context
- Profile

Figure 2. The agent controlled visualization framework
Moreover the agents are responsible for the
realization of the interaction tasks like zooming in the
visualization system.
Compared to most information visualization systems
available on the market, this framework focuses on the
user instead of data. If the user logs in into the system,
his profile will be loaded by agents. Moreover, the agents
obtain information about the visualization environment
(hardware, operation system etc.). After login, the user
continues to perform his task. If this task requires
information to visualize, the system will optimize the
presentation according to the parameters above. In the
production automation area, the information can be
related to the process, the machine or the product. All
this can be requested by the user and have to be
presented to him appropriately.
An operation scenario for this framework can be as
follows. The user communicates with the visualization
system via the graphical user interface (GUI). When the
controlling agent receives a command from the user, for
example zooming, it first fetches information from the
user knowledge base and then distributes them together
with the command to other agents that control the
visualization process. The visualization process starts
when the filtering agent requests data to be processed.
The filtering agent is a reactive agent and controls only
the filtering operation. During this process, the data
values are treated with filtering criteria. For example,
they may be minimized or combined. When the filtering
process is completed, the agent notifies the controlling
agent. This reacts by sending a request to the mapping
agent, and asking it to choose an appropriate

visualization technique. The mapping agent uses its
visualization technique knowledge base and defined
selection rules to accomplish this request. It then controls
the mapping component that creates the geometrical data
representation. The mapping process is the critical and
challenging part of the visualization process and has a
major influence on the final visual data representation
(on its expressivity and its efficiency). When this agent is
done with mapping, it notifies the controlling agent
again. This then orders the rendering agent to perform
rendering. The result of this operation is a visual
presentation of the selected data in the form of images
(abstract, realistic or mental) or animations adapted to
the current hardware environment.
This multi agent system ensures an efficient
cooperation
of
the
visualization
components.
Furthermore, the agents can memorize the interactions
that the user activated. In this way, a faster retrieval of
the data representation can be achieved, the next time
when the user repeats the interaction. Thus, using a multi
agent system as a visualization controlling unit is very
beneficial.

3.3. Visualization scenarios
To elaborate the applicability of this framework,
representative scenarios from the production automation
area will now be described.
Figure 3 shows a tree of several possible scenarios
that can be managed with the proposed framework. This
example is restricted to one special task “show

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

statistics”, where the statistics of given data have to be
monitored. Recall that the framework is based on the
user profile, the user context and finally the user tasks.
Task

Profile

Context

Result

User A

Show statistics

+
User B
+

consideration. Considering all these aspects requires an
intelligent visualization system. A framework for such a
system that is based on a multi agent system has been
described. This has the advantage that the tasks can be
distributed to several small and manageable agents. The
proposed framework will also be beneficial for
researchers working on analyzing the product automation
data, in that it can improve their understanding of the
problem domain.
The next step will be to develop a system prototype
for the evaluation. It will be implemented by using Java
technology. Further, the communication language for the
cooperation of agents will need to be defined. Also
several generalized visualization techniques are being
adapted and selection rules are being improved.

References
[1]

D. Zühlke, L. Krauss, “Human-Machine-Interaction in
the year 2010”, IUI - International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces 2002. ACM, January 2002.

[2]

D. Carr, “Guidelines for Designing Information
Visualization Applications”, Proceedings of the 1999
Ericsson Conference on Usability Engineering,
Stockholm, Sweden, 1999.

[3]

Card, S.K., T.P. Moran., and A. Newell, The psychology
of human-computer interaction, Hillsdale, 1983.

[4]

D. A. Keim, “Information Visualization and Visual Data
Mining”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (TVCG), Vol. 8, 2002.

[5]

Schumann, H., Müller, W., Visualisierung: Grundlagen
und allgemeine Methoden, Springer, 2000.

[6]

D. Kieras, “A Guide to GOMS task analysis”, University
of Michigan Technical Report. Spring, 1994.

[7]

B.E. John, and D.E. Kieras, “The GOMS Family of User
Interface Analysis Techniques: Comparison and
Contrast”, ACM ToCHI., 1996.

[8]

B. Schneiderman, “The eyes have it: a task by data type
taxonomy for information visualization”, Proceedings of
IEEE Visual Languages, 1996.

[9]

H. Hagen, H. Barthel, A. Ebert, A. Divivier, M. Bender,
“A Component- and Multi Agent-based Visualization
System Architecture”, IMC 2000, Rostock, 2000.

Figure 3. Representative visualization scenarios
Assume that user A, for example the supervisor, has
logged into the system on a laptop. His profile will now
be loaded by the controlling agent and hardware
constraints, e.g., performance, display size, will be
registered. Now, if the user wants to view statistics, bar
charts will be presented. Should this same user log in at a
Pocket-PC with limited resolution, small display, limited
hardware performance, and poor color depth only curves
will be shown.
Now assume that user B, an operator, logs in on a
Touchpad at the beginning of his shift (8 pm). The
system knows that this user has time to read details and it
selects the pie chart. Now, for example, the same user
wants to perform the same task near the end of his shift
(3 am). According to its experience, the system now
knows that the user could be tired. In this situation, the
user could not be able to process detailed information. A
presentation form with reduced details should be
appropriate. The mapping agent therefore selects the
Chernoff-faces as a proper presentation of this
information at this time.
In this way, it’s always possible to do the right
selection of the visualization technique. Of course it
should also be possible for the user to choose the
technique for the visualization manually.

Conclusions and future work
In this paper, a user-oriented approach for
information visualization for the production automation
area has been proposed. The approach is based on
considering user tasks, user context and user profile.
These three aspects are enough for a total user

[10] A. Ebert, M. Bender, H. Barthel, A. Divivier, “Tuning a
Component-based Visualization System Architecture by
Agents”, International Symposium on Smart Graphics,
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Hawthorne, New
York, USA, 2001.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

