Plato’s Cave: an Image Stream Installation within an Office Setting
Suzanne M. Marchese
suzannemarchese@yahoo.com

Abstract
Many people work in windowless offices where
they are deprived of the sight of their outside environment. With this in mind we created a piece where
a view of the surrounding neighborhood is streamed
from a camera, through a network, and projected as
an ambient display on a blank wall in a hallway of
the School of Computer Science and Information Systems (CSIS) at Pace University. We discuss the simile
of Plato’s cave with relationship to our viewers, and
comment on the artistic influences of Claude Monet
and Camille Pissarro.
Keywords -- ambient display, Plato’s cave, realtime systems, art.

1. The Concept
Influenced by the idea of a camera obscura, we
strove to bring the immediate cityscape outside an
office building into a windowless hallway dotted with
cubicles. A camera obscura, first developed millennia
ago, focuses light reflecting off objects through a pinhole, and projects it as an inverted image onto a flat
surface [1]. Pinholes cannot be punched into the edifice of an office building. Hence we turned to another
method of obtaining a view of the outside by harnessing a security camera to transmit a real time image
stream of the streetscape adjacent to a building. This
camera, placed in the window of a second floor corner
office, relays an image stream through a network to
another point within the second floor, where it is projected onto a blank wall. This ambient display appears
on the wall as an active cityscape painting of a part of
the local neighborhood.

Francis T. Marchese
Department of Computer Science
Pace University
New York, NY 10038
fmarchese@pace.edu
2. The Subject
The building used in this study is situated in lower
Manhattan at the intersection of Ann and William
Streets, approximately 200 yards south of the Brooklyn Bridge and 500 yards east of the World Trade
Center site. Downtown Manhattan streets are narrow,
having been laid out during its early days as a colony.
Indeed, Ann Street is one of the narrowest streets in
Manhattan, barely wide enough to accommodate two
car widths. Although the buildings bounding this intersection are not tall by Manhattan standards, they
limit the light reaching the street to a few scattered
minutes per day. Despite an overall gray pall, the
street is active with pedestrians, street vendors, homeless people, construction work, automobiles, and delivery trucks. And, as the sun travels across the sky
during the course of the day, the street lighting
changes perceptibly, punctuated by moments of brilliance and cast shadow.
The web camera was installed to transmit this
street activity. It is oriented to encompass a view of
sidewalks at the intersection of these two streets, including the corner street sign (Figure 1). One intersection is at the lowermost part of the image frame.
Here roofs of vehicles cut across the bottom of the
picture as they turn from Ann Street onto William.
The intersection of Fulton and William Streets is visible at a distance. Fulton runs parallel to the lower
intersection and is seen half way up the image frame.
There is a time related increase and decrease in the
flow of foot traffic as the day passes from morning
commute, to lunch time, and finally through the evening rush hour.

3. The Setting of the Installation
The video is projected onto the wall of an equally
busy intersection in the School of Computer Science
and Information Systems (CSIS). The wall is located

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

supports dual displays. Microsoft Windows 2000 Professional is the operating system. A Sony VPL-CS3
LCD SVGA Projector (700 ANSI lumens), connected
to a client computer, projects the contents of the Windows desktop onto the wall.
The client and server communicate via TCP over
the 100 Mbps network that supports the daily activities of the CSIS faculty, staff, and students.

5. The Image Stream

Figure 1. Placement of the webcam in a
corner office facing William Street.
at a nexus of hallways running from the entrance to
the offices of faculty, administrators, and staff. This
intersection encompasses a large photocopy machine,
fax machine, and laser printers; and a point of access
to the hallway leading toward the main restrooms.
Virtually all of the people who spend their days in
these offices are within sight of the artwork at some
time of the day.

4. The Technology
Manufactured by Veo (Veo Observer), the video
camera has a built-in web server that can transmit a
VGA (640 x 480) MJPEG stream at a maximum rate
of 7 fps, approximately 2 Mbps. The Observer has a
fixed focus lens, the pan-and-tilt of which can be controlled by means of a web interface. The camera unit
is connected directly to a network through a RJ-45
jack. It is accessed by a client computer running Microsoft Internet Explorer (IE) by typing the camera’s
IP address into IE’s address field. Only one client has
access to it at a time.
The client computer is based on an Intel 2.4GHz
Pentium 4 processor with 512 MB of RAM and an
Nvidia GeForce video card with 64 MB of RAM that

The live image stream is projected as a horizontal
rectangle (27”high x 35”wide) directly onto the light
gray cement surface without any screen or other aid to
set it off from the rest of the wall (Figure 2). Given
that the video stream runs at the rate of five frames
per second, figures and objects move surprisingly
smoothly, albeit more slowly than actual speed. One
can see figures clearly, although their facial features
are not revealed. The image resolution permits the
reading of text on storefronts and passing commercial
vehicles. No part of the sky is visible. Sudden changes
of light on streets and sidewalks outside result in
dramatic color changes to the projection. Sometimes
pedestrians are backlit and appear as silhouettes, almost in black and white. At other times, under more
diffuse light, colors are more intense. The view is
shown without any indication of the room or windowsill that exists in the corner office (Figure 3).

6. Viewers’ Responses
Viewers respond to all facets of the piece. People
who meet in the hallway within sight of the work tend
to face towards the piece while talking to each other.
There are comments about changing activity on the
street, including the appearance and disappearance of
familiar objects such as delivery trucks. Some workers, upon their arrival in the office, have asked
whether they were recognized as they walked along
the street. A few, aware of the location of the camera
pointing down from the window, said that they have
waved at the camera. Although faces are not distinguishable, observers tend to recognize their colleagues’ familiar motions and silhouettes. Occasionally, questions have arisen as to whether the projector
has been adjusted as people have been startled by
dramatic changes in the color of the imagery as outside lighting has changed. There are times during the
day when the reflected light on the office window
causes the view to be disturbed by the reflection from
within the office where the camera is located. At

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 2. Photograph showing the artwork installed within the office setting.
those times, dust on the window, and reflections of
the furniture in the windowed office become part of
the projected stream (Figure 3, upper-right). All of
these changes to the artwork have evoked comment.
During the initial process of running the installation
we had to turn off the system for several days. Some
individuals in the office area expressed happiness
when the system was turned on again. On the other
hand, one person expressed a lack of understanding of
the purpose of the art. There have been a few wishes
for a more escapist view.

7. Issues Raised by the Installation
The quality of the work is better than the average
surveillance video and better than the average webcam. However, the lens of the camera, not seeing the
view with the same lens as the human eye, relays a
mere impression of the scene.

7.1 Plato’s cave
The relationship between the space outside, the
view from the window, and the video has caused us to
contemplate the concept of Plato’s cave. In Part VII of
The Republic [2], Plato discusses the prisoners in a

cave who are imprisoned in such a way that they can
only see the shadows cast by real figures and objects
just outside the opening to the cave. Prisoners accept
the shadows as their reality, and must adjust, upon
their release, to the objects and light that cast the images. Plato goes on to comment that if a prisoner
leaves the cave he will learn about the reality that lies
outside the cave, passing by the objects and the fire,
until he finally perceives the sun. Upon returning to
the cave the former prisoner will have to convince
other prisoners to leave the known quantity of the
cave and move toward the unknown.
Like philosophers, we viewers enter every day
from outside to the hallway, where we experience the
image stream as a simulacrum of the streets. The image stream is twice removed from the streets by being
a view of the view out the window. People think about
the projected image stream as they approach the office, just like the freed prisoner thought about the
prisoners left behind with the shadows in the cave.
Aware when watching the image stream that we have
traversed the streets outside the building, we are all
like the philosophers who know what the shadows
represent. Deprived of real streets and even of the
cropped view from the corner office, people are aware
of the unreality of the image stream yet dependent

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 3. Images from the webcam sampled throughout the day.
upon it for their sense of space. We suspend our
knowledge of the outside to some extent while watching the image stream. In the end we know that this is
just a semblance. One viewer commented at the end
of the day that now she was going outside to the real
thing.
Yet, the superficial likeness of this neighborhood
projected on the wall does allow for some revelations.
The image stream has caused all of us viewers to notice things about light and color that we wouldn’t
otherwise. On one occasion for example, we the installers visited the office where we had placed the
camera because we thought that the camera had been
moved. Instead we found that the light outside had
changed in a way that had a startling effect on light
and color in the image stream.

7.2 We recognize some artistic influences
We the installers, in reaction to the work we just
completed, have begun to discuss the influences upon

us of other artists’ work. Immediately, the changing
light of the our image stream reminded us of many
landscape paintings by Claude Monet. Monet frequently focused on a single motif, making many
paintings of it at different times of day. Two paintings
of poplar trees on the Epte River can be seen in the
permanent collection of the National Gallery in London: Poplars, and Poplars on the Epte. We mention
these in particular for conference attendees who may
have time to examine these works in the National
Gallery. Others please look at them on the National
Gallery web site [3]. These two examples show the
dramatic differences that changes of light have on the
same scene. The sky of Poplars on the Epte is bright
blue with a few white clouds. Trees are backlit, appearing as black silhouettes. Poplars depicts a more
evenly cloudy day with correlating greater detail in
the trees looping across the canvas. So too does the
image stream landscape reflect on a continual basis
the differences in lighting: where intense light results
in silhouetted figures moving along the sidewalks;

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

more frequently a gray sky allows for the perception
of greater detail.
Another painter of the late nineteenth century we
admire, Camille Pissarro, painted a number of French
cityscapes, including many of Paris. A particularly
striking painting can be seen at the National Gallery
in London entitled Boulevard Montmartre: Night,
1897. The night view of Boulevard Montmartre is a
nearly abstract painting that, while it still preserves
the sharp perspective of the motif, barely represents
the architecture or the carriages. Instead, the darkness
is punctuated by the glow of lights from shop windows. This can be contrasted with Boulevard Montmartre: Winter Morning, 1897, at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in New York City. This winter morning painting of the same view displays much greater
detail. Under a gray sky that casts little dramatic
lighting or shadows, the windows, bare trees, figures,
and carriages are quite visible. Reproductions of these
and other paintings by Pissarro of Boulevard Montmartre can be found in the book The Impressionist
and the City: Pissarro’s Series Paintings [4].
Like Monet, Pissaro studied the appearance of a
motif as it was affected by light at different times of
day and different seasons. In his urban paintings Pissaro focused on the action of contemporary nineteenth
century life, framing it within buildings, sidewalks
and streets. Carriages and horses fill the streets,
workers portage things, while men and women traverse the pavement. Pissaro rented a series of hotel
rooms and apartments, where he painted these street
scenes. We viewers are not given any insight into
Pissaro’s personal surroundings, where he painted, or
any indication of his own presence. His view is a romantic one that focuses on the view to the exclusion
of all else.
The image stream technology allows us to study
the street of the twenty-first century; continuous motion of vehicles is seen on a real time basis. We avoid
portraying any part of the windowsill or corner office
room. Our subject is not the reality of the setting of
the camera, not anything of ourselves. We preserve
the romantic view. Motion and change are our subjects. Monet and Pissaro document changing light one
painting at a time. Pissaro shows the life of the streets
one canvas at a time. Our ambient display streams
image upon image without pause, remaining eternally
in the present.

art pieces. We contemplate fulfilling our viewers’
requests for more exotic live streams by installing
cameras in other campus office windows. In the midst
of this discourse we are reminded of our true purpose
by one person who confided that she checks the image
stream to see whether she needs her umbrella when
traveling between campus buildings. How concisely
this viewer demonstrates the sentiments of Samuel
Johnson who said [5]: “by the common sense of readers uncorrupted with literary prejudices, after all the
refinements of subtlety and the dogmatism of learning, must be finally decided all claim to poetical honours.” In the beginning we thought of this as a viewer
oriented piece, and in the end this is its strength.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Pace University’s
Center for Advanced Media. We would like to thank
Susan Merritt, Dean of the School of Computer Science and Information Systems, for her continued support.

References
[1] J. Wilgus and B. Wilgus. The Magic Mirror of Life:
An Appreciation of The Camera Obscura. url:
http://brightbytes.com/cosite/what.html
[2] Plato. The Simile of the Cave. Part VII, section 7. The
Republic. Penquin Books Ltd, Baltimore, 1955, p.278.
[3] The National Gallery, London. url:
http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/
[4] R.R. Brettell and J. Pissarro. The Impressionist and
the City: Pissarro’s Series Paintings, M. Stevens (ed).
Yale University Press, New Haven and London, 1992.
[5] S. Johnson. Selected Writings, P. Cruttwell (ed). Penguin Books, London and New York, 1968, p. 480.

8. Conclusion
We discuss this piece as a philosophical cave of illusions, and as an artistic creation connected to other

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

