The Use of VRML in Assessing Colour
in Soft Drink Packaging Design
Manling Tan 1 and Xin Zeng 2
School of Art and Design, University of Wolverhampton
2
School of Computing and IT, University of Wolverhampton
x.zeng@wlv.ac.uk
1

Abstract
There is now a growing awareness of the application
of Virtual Reality Modeling Language) VRML technology
in the domain of information visualization and
computational simulation. As VR has matured, it is
evident that this development of new interactive
technologies
has
impacted
significantly
on
multidisciplinary areas such as science, education, art and
entertainment. In this paper, we present an experimental
project to assist designers in the assessment of the colour
of packaging design by using VRML technology. We
include demonstrations of both the possibilities and
limitations of such an approach in the design process.

1. Introduction
Effective packaging design is a most important aspect
of product merchandising. Persuading consumers to select
a particular brand of product depends not only on quality
and price, but also on the packaging design. In particular,
choice of suitable colour combinations is usually more
important in packaging design than for other decorative
applications of colour [5]. However, colour research in
packaging design has only a short history. In practice the
art of selecting appropriate colours for packaging produce
has developed little from its pre-packed heyday in the
1960s [4]. At present there is no general method available
to packaging designers to assess colour and its
psychophysical function. For assessment of the colour of
the package, the conventional methods have consisted of
nothing but producing some different real packages or
photographs together and asking observers to select. But
studies of this kind are a time-consuming process, limited
by region, and require considerable funds for the research
to be globally representative. Since colour is becoming a
crucial commercial aspect of packaging design, there is a
need to develop a new way that can be used by designers
to assess or evaluate the colour of the packaging design.
Along with the development of information technology,
computer based simulation technology has a profound

effect on this process. Manipulation and simulation are the
graphic computer’s two most spectacular functions [2].
The technology is especially useful when trying to
integrate a number of different elements and analyse the
different visual options possible. The designer can
simulate multiples of a package and construct an on-shelf
simulation to compare different solutions or to see how a
design looks against competitive products.
Recently there has been considerable increased
interested in research in virtual reality. This paper reports
on an experimental project based on using VRML
technology to create an effective and interactive virtual
environment to assist packaging designers to evaluate the
colour of packaging, particularly focussing on soft drinks.
There are two main objectives in this project. One is to
demonstrate the possibilities of such an approach in
visualising and evaluating the colour of the packaging
designs. The other is to analyse and discuss whether such
approach could provide a new way to help packaging
designers to define the colour during their practice
process. The paper is organized as follows: after a brief
review of colour in packaging design in section 2, section
3 introduces VR and the structure of VRML graphics.
Section 4 presents the proposed methodology of the
approach and focuses on the implementation of VRML to
generate a virtual supermarket. The results of the
experiments are outlined and discussed in section 5.
Finally, we draw conclusions and mention future work in
section 6.

2. The importance of colour in packaging
design
Peoples colour preferences are very subjective. Our
surroundings, our experiences, and even our memories
influence the associations we have with colours and affect
our predispositions and the choices we make [6]. People
have certain associations when confronted with different
colours. For example, the colour red, yellow and all the
blends of these are considered Āwarmā colours because

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

of our associations with them: fire and sun. Blues and
greens are colour generally associated with the natural
world: the sky, sea, and the wilderness. They are referred
to as Ācoolā colours. In a supermarket, for example,
there are so many similar kinds of goods on the shelves
that the quantity of visual information is very large, but the
time which a customer can spend scanning them and
making a selection is very limited, typically only a few
seconds. One of the key factors that influences a customer
to reach out and choose a specific product from the shelf is
its packaging colour, which advertises the product by both
attracting attention and conveying something of the
intrinsic values of the product such as strength, purity, etc.
As [3] and claimed, colour sells your packaging. At the
moment that you buy it þwith your eyesÿ, the sales
decision depends on the visual power of the package.
Colour acts as anþemotional signalÿ for a brand it gives
it much more visibility and can be the dominant element of
a brand identity in its sales environment. It is well known
that the colour of packaging has a significant influence on
sales of consumer goods, particularly for food and soft
drinks. Colour optimisation for the packaging of
stimulants which may cause addiction and damage to
health is sadly not rare [10]. The colour associations and
conceptions exist in the memory and affect how people
make choices. Successful colour combinations are more
attractive to more customers, enabling higher sales figures
to be achieved.

3. Overview of the VR and VRML
VRML is a specification based on an extended subset
of the Silicon Graphics Inc. OpenInventor scene
description language [8] [9]. VRML97 was released by the
VRML Consortium in December 1997 and was approved
as the International Standard (ISO/IEC 14772) file format
for describing interactive 3D multimedia on the Internet.
VRML is comparable to using computer-generated images
and audio etc. to represent an artificial reality and it has
been widely adapted in a variety of areas (e.g. from the
military and the realm of scientific visualization to more
multidisciplinary areas, such as education, art and
entertainment etc.) One aim of VRML is to make it easy to
incorporate 3D models into virtual environments and can
be displayed on the Internet by using a VRML browser,
which is embedded in a 2D browser. Another is to provide
interfaces and enable more natural and obvious modes of
interaction. We use Cortona from ParallelGraphics, Inc as
our VRML browser [7]. VRML is scene graph and its text
based file format constructed by a group of organized data
in a hierarchical structure of loot-leaf related nodes
describing 3D objects and virtual worlds. The structure of
VRML is as shown in Figure 1.

Group node provides basic node grouping feature to
specify a list of the branches. The field values of these
branches include different objects and they are built with
their own attributes. Shape node is essential to construct an
object. Basically, Shape node includes Appearance node
Virtual Environment

Group node

Viewpoint
Object1

Object2

Shape

Geometry

Appearance

Material

Texture

Figure 1. VRML scene graph Structure
and Geometry node. The value of appearance field
specifies a node defining the appearance shape, including
its colour and surface texture. Material and Texture nodes
are each used as values in field of Appearance node to
define the appearance of the shape. Material node can
specify the colour (i.e. RGB), shininess or transparency
etc. attributes of the object. Texture node can wrap 2D
images over and around an arbitrary object, which is very
time-saving. Geometry nodes are the most basic VRML
objects and are staple graphics primitives, which provide
basic building blocks (e.g. Cone, Cylinder, Box and
Sphere) due to their ease to assemble complicated objects.
Viewpoint nodes allow the user complete control of the
viewing position and orientation of the VE. They also
provide dramatic camera effects as in movies as the
camera can skip to other scenes to encourage easy user
navigation. The major advantage of the navigation in
VRML is the paths are not pre-defined and the 3D scenes
are rendered in real-time.

4. Use of VRML to presenting products in VE
In this experimental project, we concentrated on
packaging for one product category: soft drinks. It
involved 10 similar products but with different packaging.
We first scanned or took photos of some popular brands
shown in Figure 2. Then these photos were processed in
Adobe Photoshop and exported as JPEG or GIF format
and used as textures to render realistic products in a virtual

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

rotation and scale field of Transform node. By
incorporating these two nodes, the size of the file can
be reduced without loss of detail. This technique is
extremely useful to align objects, such as those
presented in Figure 3.
xTexture Mapping. We can use texture mapping
to make 3D objects look more realistic and speed up
the loading time instead of calculating the 3D models
at every step. However, to keep the size of the texture
file small is essential.
xLevel of Detail (LOD). LOD is a technique to
provide different versions of a shape based on the
distance of the viewers to maintain both adequate
realism and the interactivity of the virtual world. The
more close the more detail; each of the detailed
versions of a shape is placed within a range of the field
of LOD node and this enables the user to switch
between differently detailed versions of the same shape
according the viewer’s proximity.

Figure 2. The original packaging of 10 soft drinks
environment. 3d Max was used to model the aisles,
shelves and product displays in a ‘virtual shop’. The uvcoordinates and textures of the objects were added then
converted into VRML format files through the VRML
plug-in. A model of the product from the main viewing
angle was mapped with texture and is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 4. Outline of the supermarket

Figure 3. Products display on the shelve
Since VRML
ML worlds are delivered across the Internet,
it means the more detail you add to the world, the more
time you need to wait for the VRML browser to build.
This dilemma is unavoidable, i.e. lots of detail for
maximum realism means slow drawing or quick drawing
(less realism) for maximum interactivity [1]. However, in
order to achieve high realism and high speed of display,
there are several methods which can be employed to
optimise performance of virtual world:
xInline Node & Transform Node. Inline node is
a world-construction technique that allows the user to
assemble each of the pieces of your VRML worlds in
separate, smaller files to avoid VRML files getting
larger and harder to manager. Transform node enable
users to create a new coordinate system relative to its
parent’s coordinate system. The new coordinate system
can be moved, rotated and scaled relative to the
parent’s coordinate system by using the translation,

Figure 5. Inside of the supermarket
Another efficient way is to use GZIP to compress the
VRML file and then rename the file name .gz back into
.wrl. In this way the size of the file can be reduced 10
times compared with the original one. This technique can
massively decrease the download time of the VRML files

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

without any loss of realistic detail. In the final stage of the
project, we created large scale VRML files to simulate a
virtual supermarket, as shown in Figures 4 and 5.

5. Result and Discussion
In the first stage, 6 British and 6 Chinese (aged
between 25-35) experimental subjects were asked to take
part in the research. Their selections were recorded and
analysed for statistical significance. The questionnaire was
simple and aimed to analyse whether VR technology could
be used in the colour assessment of packaging design by
comparing the results from traditional methods; whether
the application of the VR technology could be a good way
to assist designers to define the colour of the packaging
(question 3).
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Most
Attractive
Least
Attractive
a b c d e f g h I j

Figure 6-1. British selections
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Most
Attractive
Least
Attractive
a b c d e f g h I

j

Figure 6-2. Chinese selections
In the experiment (compare Figures 6-1, 6-2), British
“customers” thought product (c) lacking in colour and too
bland. Colours which were dark, muddy, or similar to grey
they to some extent associated with feeling dirty and upset.
The Chinese tended to regard blue and white as attractive
and associated this with feeling cool and fresh. They also
found these colours easy identify. Another finding was
that half the Chinese thought product (g) least attractive
because it had too many colours and was not easily
identifiable. However, over half the British thought (g) the
most attractive because the colour combination
represented feeling fresh, pure and attractive. The result
conforms to the theory from [3] and [11] that people who
come from different cultural backgrounds have different
feeling and associations with regard to colour. Of interest

is that 11 of the 12 of participants thought the application
of VR would definitely provide designers a way to define
the colour of the packaging design in different situations.
However, some of them complained that the navigation of
the environment was not easy to control and this is a
common drawback of the current VE systems.

6. Conclusion
This paper has proposed a methodology to help
designers assess the colour of packaging design by using
VRML technology. We also presented some experimental
results obtained with the implementation of the methods
proposed in a simple packaging category. We believe that
VRML technology provides a powerful solution for the
colour evaluation in the packaging design process. In
contrast with conventional methods, VR technology
enables designers to create a realistic impression of
products during the design process instead of making real
physical models; it provides a powerful visualization tool
for evaluation and promotion of the products during the
early stages of packaging design; 3D VRML worlds are
accessible via the Internet, and therefore broaden the scope
of the investigation, which means designers will be able to
get more quantitative and accurate information feedback
without the need for a physical survey, thus shortening the
time of the whole development process. This kind of study
will help the packaging designers to define the colour
according to different situations. For example, if a
company wants to export products to foreign market, what
kind of colour of package should be adopted to satisfy the
market? Future work will focus on improving two aspects,
namely generating more detailed and realistic
environments and integrating more natural user
interactions.

References:
[1] Ames, A., Nadeau, D and Moreland, J. (1997) VRML 2.0
Sourcebook. 2nd eds. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Canada.
[2] Behaeghel, J. (1991) Brand Packaging. Architecture Design
and Technology Press, London.
[3] Favre, J. P. (1969) Colour Sells Your Packaging. Edition
ABC, Zurich.
[4] Milton, H. (1991) Packaging Design. The Design Council,
London.
[5] Sonsino, S. (1990) Packaging Design. Thames and Hudson,
London.
[6] Toor, M, L. (1998) Graphic Design on the Desktop. John
Wiley&Sons, INC, Canada.
[7] http://www.parallelgraphics.com
[8] http://www.vrml.org
[9] The Web3D Consortium. http://www.web3d.org
[10] Zollinger, H (1999) Colour—A Multidisciplinary
Approach. VHCA, Zurich.
[11] Holtzschue, L. (1995) Understanding Colour. A Division of
International Thomson Publishing Inc, New York.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

