Visualising Web Visitations: A Probabilistic Approach
Geoff Ellis
Huddersfield University
g.p.ellis@hud.ac.uk

Alan Dix
Lancaster University
alan@hcibook.com

http://www.hcibook.com/alan/papers/iv04-web/

Abstract
This paper presents a technique, the Quantum Web
Field, designed to give an ambient visualisation of the
current activity on a web site. It uses the paths of past
visitors to the site and a self-organising map to build a
diffuse 'probabilistic' mapping of pages to cells in a 2D
matrix, where highly traversed page-links tend to be
closer to each other. The paths of current visitors appear
as intelligible trails giving a sense of purposeful human
activity rather than offering detailed analysis. The
visualisation is not constrained by either the complexity or
the number of pages in the site.

1. Introduction
Visualising aspects of the web is a major strand of
research in both web and visualisation communities and it
is also a practical concern for those designing and
maintaining sites. Whereas the general focus of web
visualisation is concerned with direct examination and
analysis of a web site or the links between sites, our
interest lies in visualisations that give one a sense of the
activity of people visiting the site – humanity active in the
electronic environment. We wish to emulate to some
degree that hubbub of voices heard outside the window, or
the 'at a glance' sense of activity of the shopping mall.
In this paper, we present a visualisation technique, the
Quantum Web Field, which utilises the paths of visitors to
the web site to create a two dimensional representation of
past activity on the web site. It uses a self-organising map
to build a diffuse 'probabilistic' mapping of pages to cells
in a matrix – pages which are more likely to be followed
tend to be closer to each other.
Superimposed on this virtual landscape are the paths of
current web visitors like footsteps on a checkerboard. Just
as footsteps leave their mark in the real world, our
visualisation is designed to leave the trail of a web visitor
through the site.
We are focusing on a system for providing background
awareness of web activity rather than offering detailed
analysis. Background or peripheral awareness has been
shown to be vital for supporting people involved in

several tasks at the same time as it exploits our ability to
process information at the periphery of our attention, with
very low overhead [13]. As such, the visualisation could
be installed as a screen saver, displayed in a small window
on the desktop, or projected in a public space.
In the next section, we will review work in related
areas of web visualisation and awareness. In section 3, we
will illustrate the use of Quantum Web Fields and users
session paths. In section 4, we will describe the algorithm
used to implement the visualisation, focusing on the more
novel aspects. Finally, in section 5, we will highlight some
of the issues faced in developing the visualisation and
identify further work in this area.

2. Web visualisation
There are numerous visualisation tools for studying the
structure and usage of the web sites. Static features of the
web itself for example, link structure, word co-occurrence
are utilised [5, 10, 19] in addition to dynamic access data
such as, how often pages are visited, how often links are
traversed and how often paths are taken through a site [4,
7]. These visualisations help to uncover possible
navigation problems experienced by users, categorise
users in e-commerce applications, predict site usage and
provide users with intelligible site map, so they can see
where others have been (e.g. personal browsing history) or
even meet others in a virtual environment.
Many visualisation techniques rely on the data being
structured in a hierarchical fashion. However, most web
sites tend to be in non-linear forms, often adhoc [21]. In
addition, the sheer size of many web sites and the
multitude of links exacerbate the problem. Approaches
such as cyclic graphs, cone trees and 2D and 3D
hyperbolic arrangement cannot effectively represent this
type and volume of data [21]. Many 3D visualisations are
rendered incomprehensible [2] although clustering has
been used effectively in Narcissus [11] to deal with the
occlusion problems generated by numerous nodes and
edges.
In order to reduce the complexity of viewing paths
through a site, Chi et al. [5] have adopted a Usage Based
Layout together with a Dome Tree visualisation technique
which utilises the LSR (Longest Repeating Sequences)

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

method [14] to extract paths that are likely to re-occur
while reducing noise in the original usage data. Pitkow
[15] also advocates the use of sampling to reduce the
amount of data to be processed.
The need for awareness as a means of promoting
successful collaboration is widely recognised in CSCW
(Computer Supported Cooperative Work) and it has been
implemented in various web collaborative systems [3, 6,
8]. In Awareness Maps [9], up-to-date awareness
information about members of the shared workspaces is
provided as an array of pictures of active users fading over
time.
Furthermore, ambient displays have been effectively
used to present information in the environment or in the
periphery of the user's attention, thus reducing the
problem of information overload often generated by the
delivery of awareness information at each user's desktop.
For example, the TOWER environment [16] creates a
'theatre of work' as a multi user 3D environment on
ambient displays. Avatars of users working in the same
context appear spatially close [17] and although they may
be physically remote they can interact directly with each
other by touching on the avatars on the display.
Whilst the above systems focus on making group
members aware of each other’s activities at a particular
instance, we are more interested in the paths that strangers
take. The Footprints system [20] is also inspired by three
real-world forms of navigation: maps, trails and signposts.
It captures paths that users have taken from web server
logs and displays the information as self-organising
graphs.
Like Footprints and other systems [4, 19], we are also
using collaborative or social filtering which makes use of
the paths of a large number of past visitors. However, we
use this information to generate a probability matrix based
on the co-occurrence of highly used page links to display
the trails of current visitors to a particular web site, rather
than displaying the actual pages and links individually.

places, with a given probability of being at any particular
location. Likewise, in the Quantum Web Field, each page
is given a probability of being found at each square. These
probabilities are arranged so that pages that tend to appear
next to one another in session paths have high
probabilities on adjacent squares.

Web fields
Figure 1 represents the web fields for 4 pages from the
Hcibook web site [www.hcibook.com/e3] . The darker
squares are those where the page has a higher probability
of being placed. The algorithm has a ‘crowding factor’
which makes pages spread out over the network of
squares, but it does not force each page to occupy a single
square. In fact, by adjusting parameters during the
procedure that generates the web field, it would be
possible to make the algorithm ‘cool’ into a state where
there was a single page per square. However, by allowing
each page to have a more diffuse mapping to the web field
the Quantum Web Field can visualise sites where there are
many links from a page and also cater for large sites
without changing the number of squares. In addition, the
many–to–many relationship between squares and pages
allows some freedom when plotting footsteps through the
site, thus giving more human-like paths.

(a) home (1015 visits)

(b) hci/search.html (444 visits)

(c) hci/ex/chapt7.html (251 visits)

(d) hci/ex/chapt16.html (87 visits)

3. Visualising visitations
We will now describe the Quantum Web Field for web
visitation awareness to show the ‘footsteps’ of visitors as
they navigate from page to page. An important design
criteria was that the footsteps appear ‘intelligible’; not that
one can necessarily say “ah yes someone is visiting page
X”, but more that the paths appear ‘human’. As an
arbitrary mapping of pages into 2D space would lead to
apparently random movements across the space, the
visualisation adjusts its algorithm to produce intelligible
paths. This does not mean that there are no ‘jumps’ –
sometimes users will take unusual paths through the site.
However, we would like common paths to give rise to
more gradual movements, just like physical footsteps.
The Quantum Web Field shows a checkerboard of
coloured squares. In the world of large-scale phenomena
each object has a unique location in space. However, in
the quantum world each particle can exist in different

Figure 1. Web fields for sample pages

Looking more closely at the web fields in Figure 1, we
can see that both (a) which is the home page and (b) the
search page, have their highest probability associated with
same square (5 up, 2 in from the lower right corner). The
data confirms this by showing many visitors following the
links between these pages. Also, note that the layout of (b)
is more compact than the other grids, thus suggesting that

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

the search facility is not generally available across the site.
Finally, note that (c) has a bimodal nature showing that
visitors often link to/from the chapter 7 exercises from
the search or home pages as well as some of the other
exercise pages, such as (d).

Session paths
In the quantum world, particles only get a single
location when they are observed. Similarly, when a
session visits a page, a single square is coloured as the
‘wave function’ collapses. The location for the page is
chosen in a random, yet proportionate manner, based on
the probabilities in the page’s web field. The location of
subsequent pages in the session also depends on their web
field, biased by the distance from the last visited page.
The overall effect is that a session path visits a series of
squares that tend to be close to one another, but have the
occasional jump across the web field. Identical paths do
not necessarily hit the same squares, although they will
tend to follow similar paths across the web field. This
leads to a visualisation that has enigmatic quality, giving a
sense of purposeful activity and human-like variety, but
defying a simple explanation.
Figure 3 shows four paths across the web field. These
have been taken from a set of 320 possible paths of
suitable length. To ease interpretation, the squares are
numbered in the order they are visited and the trail also
fades with time, with the most recent pages visited
appearing darker.

started at the table of contents page (square 1) and
browsed well-used pages such as the early chapters of the
book, overviews and resources. Path (b) shows a longer
session where 23 pages have been visited. As with the
previous example, the web site user has confined their
browsing activity to more commonly visited pages. Note
that the path layout algorithm cannot choose an occupied
position in the web field, therefore the path will spread out
even if activity is in one area of the web field. A possible
solution being considered is curtailing the length of a trail
so that earlier pages visited will fade completely and
hence could be 'stepped upon' again.

(a) path 74

(b) path 257

(c) path 150

(d) path 254

Figure 3. Paths through the web field

Figure 2. Overall field density

To put the paths into context, the overall probability
field density (Figure 2) is shown in the background of all
the grids in Figure 3. The overall field density is not
uniform for two reasons. First, although the crowding
factor built into the algorithm adds a ‘pressure’ towards
uniformity, the natural clustering of parts of the site
counteracts this. Second, some pages are visited less often
than others and so some parts of the map correspond to
less frequently visited pages. Consequently, some parts of
the space get highlighted more than others, rather like
seeing car lights in a town. The lights are more likely to
be in the populous areas.
On examining the paths (Figure 3) in more detail, (a)
shows a fairly compact trail, pages which are commonly
browsed. In fact, the log data confirms that the visitor has

Furthermore, some of session paths in this particular
web log exhibit pogo-like activity, with the visitor
hopping, rather than strolling around the site - path (c). On
examining the data, this path is a sequential pass through
most of the chapter pages. The visitor may be an actual
person, but a sequential pass is characteristic of a web
crawler. Although the web logs are already filtered to
remove ‘honest’ crawlers, the visualisation may have
revealed a web crawler that masquerades as a normal
browser. Note that if this was a common web browsing
pattern, the visualisation algorithm would have taken this
into account and clustered the pages together.
Path (d) in Figure 3 shows that the visitor has
alternated between the home page (circled) and other
pages. Unlike a ball-and-spring type visualisation of the
same path (Figure 4) where each page is indeed one point
in space, the Quantum Web Field visualisation displays
this browsing pattern as a intelligible trail through the site.
This demonstrates that the probability of moving to the

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

home page is distributed across the site and not just
encapsulated in a single square.

simple record of all requests including HTML pages,
graphics, PDF documents, etc. Successive requests may
come from different sources, but in the standard extended
web log format, the IP address of the requesting client is
given. This can be used to create paths as a sequence of
requests coming from a single client IP address. Problems
associated with obtaining reliable usage data are well
documented [15, 21]. These include:
(i)
pages may be cached so revisits to the same page
may be missed
(ii) several visitors may be coming through the same
proxy and be treated as one

Figure 4. Site structure diagram (path 254)

The Quantum Web Field algorithm is not constrained
by the site structure or the number of pages. Figure 5
illustrates 2 long paths though web fields. The grid on the
left shows a visitor browsing well-used links between
popular pages and then branching out into a less used part
of the site. The grid on the right instead, shows a visitor
alternating between two parts of the site, each of which
has commonly visited pages.

Figure 6. Stages of visitation visualisation

Figure 5. Higher resolution paths

4. Mechanisms
Figure 6 shows the Quantum Web Field algorithmic
architecture.
(a) web logs are pre-processed to extract sessions
and create co-visitation statistics
(b) the comes-next matrix is used to produce a 2D
visualisation space
(c) live web visits are sampled
(d) the sampled sessions are drawn into the 2D
visualisation space
Steps (a) and (b) are part of a pre-processing stage and
steps (c) and (d) are carried out in real time to give the
actual visualisation.

Web log processing
Standard web logs are analysed to extract the paths that
visitors take through the site. The web log itself is a

We intend to install the system on a site that is
generated entirely by PHP scripts and so can be specially
instrumented to give more exact sessions. However, it is
important to have the ability to deal with standard web
logs to make the system more easily deployed.
After session extraction several further filtering is
performed to:
• remove image files, document downloads etc.
• match up aliases to the same page (e.g. /fred/ and
/fred/index.html)
• remove web crawler paths
• remove sessions visiting just one page
• give each page a unique id
Example data:
Original web log (IP address has been changed
from the original)
192.184.30.18 - - [06/Nov/2003:12:20:24 -0600]
"GET /hci/resources/ HTTP/1.0" 200 7869
"http://www.hcibook.com/hci/" "Mozilla/4.0
(compatible; MSIE 6.0; Windows NT 5.1; .NET CLR
1.0.3705; .NET CLR 1.1.4322)"
192.184.30.18 - - [06/Nov/2003:12:20:30 -0600]
"GET /hci/chapters/intro/ HTTP/1.0" 200 7839
"http://www.hcibook.com/hci/resources/"
"Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE 6.0; Windows NT
5.1; .NET CLR 1.0.3705; .NET CLR 1.1.4322)"
Session data (formatted)

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

** visitorIP 192.184.30.18 **
visited, 2 sessions)
hci
06 Nov 12:20
hci/resources

06 Nov 12:20 (10s)

hci/chapters/intro

Let v = the vector at location x,y (that is vx,y )

(46 pages

06 Nov 12:20 (6s)

and so on ....

closeness(x,y) =

∑

q ∈ pages

this says how much page p would like to be next to
location x,y
wantsToBeAt(x,y) =

Page id and the number of visits (529 individual
pages)
88,hci/resources,147
86,hci/chapters/intro,231
99,hci/chaps/ch7,34
IsNextTo data showing page id and frequency
(2085 in total)
88,86,39
86,99,4

Figure 7. Statistics and example data from preprocessing the web log

The resulting sessions are then used to create the
following matrices:
comesNext(from,to) {number of times page 'to'
follows page 'from' in the sessions}
isNextTo(p,q) = comesNext(p,q) + comesNext(q,p)
{number of times page p is next to page q}
The isNextTo matrix fulfils a role rather like the
similarity matrix used in many visualisations, clustering
algorithms or statistical techniques such as multidimensional scaling. However, similarity matrices usually
have a dominant diagonal, that is:
∀ i, j: mi,j ≤ mi,i
If the matrix we were using was "number of common
sessions" then this would satisfy the above property,
however the isNextTo matrix has a zero diagonal as a
page self-links have been removed during pre-processing.
Original web log: 64110 visits
Pre-processed log: 11992 visits
Number of individual visitor IP addresses: 1266
(ignoring 1 access-only addresses)

Creating the visualisation space
The Quantum Web Field is inspired by Kohonen selforganising maps [12], although due to the different nature
of the web data, our algorithm is radically different.
Each of the WxH cells of the web field has an
x,y
associated vector, v with one entry per page. The entries
can be interpreted as densities or un-normalised
probabilities of finding the relevant page at that square.
Initially these are set to random positive values. The pages
are then presented one by one in proportion to their
relative occurrence and placed in the web field.
To choose where to place page p, the following values
are calculated for each field location x,y.

isNextTo(p,q) x v(q)

closeness(x',y')

(∑

x',y' ∈ neighbours of x,y

) × crowdingFactor(x,y)

The wantsToBeAt value is treated as a probability
distribution and the page is placed using this. That is the
probability of choosing location x,y is proportionate to
wantsToBeAt(x,y). By 'placed at' we mean that a small
value δ is added to the p-th value in the field vector at x,y.
Notice that the wantsToBeAt value is a combination of
a measure of how strongly page p would like to lie next to
the pages neighbouring this location, but multiplied by a
‘crowding factor’. The latter is designed to ensure that
pages tend to spread themselves all over the map, rather
than many pages occupying the same square. Currently
this factor is:
crowdingFactor(x,y) = ((δ + v(p))/(δ + ∑q ∈ pages – {p} v(q))) α
The parameter α is tuned to give a good distribution.

visualising paths
The placement in the Quantum Web Field is more
complex than say following paths in a site structured map.
The web field does not uniquely map a page to a square,
but instead gives each page a probability or propensity to
be in a particular location. Each session is allocated a
colour. The first page of a session is placed randomly on
the web field where the probability of placing it at
x,y
x,y
location x,y is proportionate to the v (p) (recall v is the
map vector at location x,y).
Subsequent pages in the same session are placed at a
location that tend to be next to one another by biasing the
natural probability above by the distance from the last
page location. So if the last page in the session is placed at
x’,y’ and the current page is p, the probability of drawing
it at location x,y is proportionate to:
x,y
v (p) / dist( (x’,y’), (x,y) )β
Adjusting β makes the pages more or less likely to be
placed next to one another, where a large value
corresponds to a high likelihood of adjacent placements.
Recall also that the web field itself is organising itself so
that pages that often lie next to one another in paths are
placed near one another.

5. Conclusion and future work
We have presented an algorithm for the ambient
visualisation of visitors’ current activity. Whilst there are
many web visualisations aimed at aiding the analysis of
web sites and web log data, we have focused on a
visualisation that gives a sense of the current human

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

presence on a web site. The objective is background
awareness rather than precise knowledge.
The Quantum Web Field involved extensive algorithm
design as a simple use of a self-organising Kohonen net
would have ended up with close pages clustered in a
single cell – visitors would pogo rather than walk! Our
initial algorithm design had to be refined to make layouts
that had desirable properties. In particular, we had not
realised that we would need to ‘force’ pages to spread
themselves over the web field.
The Quantum Web Field is rather enigmatic, a form of
‘informative art’ rather like the Mondrian-like bus time
display [18]. The layout is designed more to give a ’feel’
of intelligible human presence than to be actually
comprehensible, although from our initial work it does
seem that certain types of web browsing activity manifest
themselves as recognisable paths. For instance, the visitor
having general look at the site (well-used pages) which
contrasts with the 'pogo' path, which may well be a nonhuman presence in the site.
We intend to install these visualisations on the
www.hcibook.com web site shortly so they can become
part of the experience of ordinary visitors. The
visualisation will be updated on a regular basis to reflect
the visitors activities and hence is expected to gradually
change over time, in a similar way to the Stock market
planetarium [1], but without the 'artificial life' creatures!
Whilst the initial designs are aimed at showing all or a
selection of visitors on one display, we are considering
using the Quantum Web Field as a visualisation of the
users own path through the site. Future work will also
investigate different ways of visualising the actual paths,
perhaps using footprints, multiple paths and even the
depiction of the web field as a landscape.

References
[1] Autogena, L. and Portway, J. (2001). Stock Market
Planetarium. Art installation currently in Copenhagen, Denmark
http://www.blackshoals.net/ (accessed 20/3/04).
[2] Benford, S., Taylor, I., Brailsford D., Koleva, B., Craven,
M., Fraser, M., Reynard, G. and Greenhalgh, C. (1999). Three
Dimensional Visualization of the World Wide Web. ACM
Computing Surveys 31(4), December 1999
[3] Budzik, J., Bradshaw, S., Fu, X. and Hammond, K.J.
(2002). Supporting on-line resource discovery in the context of
ongoing tasks with proactive software assistants, Intl Journal on
Human-Computer Studies (IJHCS), Jan 2002, Elsevier Press,
56(1), pp. 47-74
[4] Chalmers, M., Rodden, K. and Brodbeck, D. (1998). The
Order of Things: Activity-Centred Information Access. Proc. 7th
Intl. Conf. on the World Wide Web, Brisbane, April 1998, pp.
359-367.
[5] Chi, E., Pirolli, P., Pitkow, J. (2000). The Scent of a Site:
A System for Analyzing and Predicting Information Scent,
Usage, and Usability of a Web Site, Proc. of ACM CHI 2000
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM
Press, pp. 161-168.

[6] Cohen, D., Jacovi, M., Maarek, Y.S. and Saroka, V.
(2002). Livemaps for collection awareness, Intl Journal on
Human-Computer Studies (IJHCS), Jan 2002, Elsevier Press,
56(1), pp. 7-23
[7] Cugini, J. and Scholtz, J. (1999). VISVIP: 3D Visualization
of Paths through Web Sites. Intl Workshop on Web-Based
Information Visualization, WebVis'99. Florence, Italy, IEEE.
[8] Gellersen, H.W and Schmidt, A. (2002). Look Who's
Visiting: Supporting Awareness for Visitors in the Web. Intl
Journal on Human-Computer Studies (IJHCS), Jan 2002,
Elsevier Press, 56(1), pp. 25-46.
[9] Gross, T., Wirsam, W. and Graether, W. (2003).
AwarenessMaps: Visualising Awareness in Shared Workspaces.
Extended Abstracts of the Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - CHI 2003 (Apr. 5-10, Fort Lauderdale,
Florida). ACM Press, pp. 784-785
[10] Heer, J. and Chi, E.H. (2002). Separating the Swarm:
Categorization Methods for User Sessions on the Web. Proc.
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2002,
Minneapolis, USA. ACM Press. pp. 243-250
[11] Hendley, R.J., Drew, N.S., Wood, A. and Beale, R. (1995).
Narcissus: Visualizing Information. Proc. of 1995 Information
Visualization Symposium, Atlanta, GA, pp. 90-96
[12] Kohonen, T. (2001). Self-Organizing Maps. Springer
Series in Information Sciences, Vol. 30, Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York, 1995, 1997, 2001. 3rd Extended Edition
[13] Liechti, O. and Sumi, Y. (2002). Awareness and the
WWW. Intl Journal on Human-Computer Studies (IJHCS), Jan
2002, Elsevier Press, 56(1), pp. 1-5
[14] Pitkow, J. E. and Pirolli, P. (1999). Mining Longest
Repeated Subsequences to Predict World Wide Web Surfing.
Second USENIX Symposium on Internet Technologies and
Systems, UITS, Boulder CO.
[15] Pitkow, J. (1997). In search of reliable usage data on the
WWW. Proc. of Sixth International World Wide Web
Conference, Santa Clara, California, April 7-11.
[16] Prinz, W. (2001) Awareness of Cooperative Activities in
Mixed Realities. Proc. of the Conference on artistic, cultural
and scientific aspects of experimental media spaces (September
21-22, 2001, Schloss Birlinghoven. Sankt Augustin), pp. 231234
[17] Prinz, W. and Gross, T. (2001). Ubiquitous Awareness of
Cooperative Activities in a Theatre of Work. Proc. of
Fachtagung Arbeitsplatzcomputer: Pervasive Ubiquitous
Computing (Oct. 10-12, Munich, Germany) Bode, A. and Karl
W., eds VDE Publisher, Berlin, Germany, pp. 135-144
[18] Skog, T., Ljungblad, S. and Holmquist, L.E. (2003)
Between aesthetics and utility: designing ambient information
visualizations, Proc. InfoVis 2003, IEEE Symposium on
Information Vizualisation (Oct. 20-21, Seattle, Washington)
[19] Wasfi, A. (1999). Collecting User Access Patterns for
Building User Profiles and Collaborative Filtering. Proc. of the
4th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces. LA,
California, ACM Press, pp. 57 - 64
[20] Wexelblat, A. and Maes, P. (1997). Footprints: History-rich
web browsing. Proc. Conf. Computer-Assisted Information
Retrieval (RIAO), pp.75–84
[21] Wong, B. and Marsden, G. (2001). Effectively Exploiting
Server Log Information for Large Scale Web Sites. Short Paper,
Proc. SAICSIT 2001, Pretoria, South Africa, p. 223

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

