Integrated Visualization Schemes for an Information and Communication Web
Log Based Management System
Óscar Mealha, Beatriz Sousa Santos*, José Nunes, Florin Zamfir*
Dep. of Communication and Art, *IEETA – Dep. of Electronics and Telecommunications,
University of Aveiro, {oem@ca.ua.pt, bss@ieeta.pt, jnunes@ca.ua.pt, florin@ieeta.pt}

Abstract
This paper presents a set of visualization methods
incorporated in a system for internal technologically
mediated communication and information management.
This system, which assumes an organizational context and
an intranet built on World Wide Web technologies and
services, was developed in order to allow a manager to
evaluate the efficiency, effectiveness and adequacy of the
intranet to the organization’s mission.
The visualization methods and the raw information
that is gathered are explained. Some examples are shown
and discussed alongside some preliminary research
results. The system user interface, including visually
correlated visualization strategies, is also briefly
presented.
Keywords- information visualization, information
and communication management, web logs.

1. Introduction
Many of nowadays organizations use an internal
technologically mediated information and communication
system, usually called intranet.
Considering that
organizations can be understood as an organic system
composed of people, processes and procedures, the
intranets are incorporated in organizations to support the
organization’s mission and guarantee effective process
delivery within an efficient framework.
These
technological platforms also provide internal synchronous
and asynchronous communication services that help in
process development and also contribute for a more
efficient outcome on overall mission results.
At the present stage of the proposed visualization
based management system it is assumed that the
organization’s internal information and communication

systems are built on internet and World Wide Web (www)
technologies and services. The current version considers
that some usage problems may occur due to inadequate
site organization, others are related to inefficient interface
design.
As a consequence, users can experience
difficulties in accessing specific information or on-line
services. Interface design may also host ambiguous or
non-coherent solutions, so the visual front-end
communication management concerns must also take this
into account.
This visualization based management system is
intended to be user goal oriented in order to identify usage
problems.
Usability guidelines as proposed by
Shneiderman [1], Nielsen et al. [6] and norms ISO 9241
[4] have proven to be a fundamental instrument to
organize the conceptual background of our system model.
Some of the representations proposed in this work also
took into consideration hypermedia properties of the web
as mentioned by Bieber et al. [10]. Visualisation
functions and the associated interactive procedures kept in
mind the characterisation of interactive externalization
proposed by Tweedie [9].
The visual context of interpretation is constructed
with an articulated strategy of simultaneous qualitative
and quantitative visual analysis instruments.
Analysis can go from a holistic, global usage
overview and then drill down to filtered usage patterns
showing their specific relations and corresponding user
front-end information, intranet service pages and
interaction hot-spots/pages.
In essence, our work has similar concerns to the work
reported by Eick [13]. One of the major differences is
that our raw information universe is gathered inside an
organisation and used for information and communication
management purposes alongside a user goals
specification.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

2. System Model
The system model is organized to achieve two main
goals focused on intranet usage. One is related to the site
structure, the other to the interface design (visual
workspace) organization. It must provide solutions that
detect structural problems revealed by visual inspection of
usage patterns with the possibility of having
simultaneously, qualitative and quantitative visual
inspection methods. Another vital area where severe
system problems occur is at interface level. The visual
workspace where the user takes her/his navigational
decisions is another concern and the usage pattern at this
level is also represented and analyzed.
The global system architecture, as represented in
Figure 1, is user goal oriented and gathers raw
information from system log files and from pages loaded
from the server and presented to the user. The system
conceptualization exercise and internal information
structure, complies with other raw information sources
such as eye movement tracking technologies for a
possible future system version.
A more detailed system explanation can be obtained
in [5] described by Nunes et al.
Referential
Digital Atlas

subsections present the visualization methods and some
related application examples.
Visualization functions can be subdivided according
to three main concerns, at this stage of conceptualization
and development:
1) Visual inspection of intranet structure and efficiency;
2) Visual inspection of interface design coherence,
specifically, for Hot-spot and usage path overlapped
representation;
3) Representation of tree-structured information
traversing in time.
The last subsection deals with visual correlation
strategies and presents an example of the unified interface
with articulated and tightly coupled complementary
visualization methods. The multiple simultaneous views
are triggered and redrawn by the same set of events. One
of them is related to the specification of a possible user
goal. A starting page (default is home page) and the final
page where the user specified goal is located. Another
possible event is related to the session filter specification
while accessing the source log file information.
An intranet page is registered internally in the
referential digital atlas and presented visually, with the
information it hosted when it was recalled from the server
and shown to the user. The page can be re-drawn in
various sizes and spatial resolutions throughout the
system depending of the visualization context.

Goals
WEB
Raw Data

Metrics
Parser

Representation

Analysis and
exploration
schemes

Visualization

Screen

Figure 2 – Colour scale
Figure 1 – System Model
The model and a prototype currently under
development have a conceptual conformance with “Visual
Information-Seeking Mantra” proposed by Shneiderman
[2]. The data type taxonomy included in this author’s
work clearly inspired the conceptualization and
development of the visualization schemes presented in the
next section. This taxonomy was particularly helpful to:
i) characterize and organize the information space;
ii) its various manipulation and visualization functions
features; and
iii) their articulation strategy.

3. Visualization Schemes
This section describes the visualization methods used
in our web log based management system. The first
subsection describes the main attributes of the raw
information that is gathered and used. The following

Statistical and usage information are represented in
some situations with colour. The mapping function uses
the colour scale of Figure 2. Due to the nature of the
statistical information related to intranet usage, some of
the visualization schemes use a linear mapping function
others a logarithmic function.
The screenshots in the following sections show some
preliminary results corresponding to information gathered
from an e-learning community intranet related to the
Human-Computer Interaction course offered at the
Electronics and
Telecommunication
Department,
University of Aveiro – Portugal.

3.1. Information Attributes and Visualization
Methods
Using Healey’s [3] approach and definitions as a
reference: an intranet site has a set of pages
P {P1,..., Pt} where t number of site pages; each page
Pt {ht ,1,..., ht , n} , contains n hot-spots; each hot-spot,

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

ht , n , of any specific page has at least m ! 1 attributes,
A { A1,..., Am} . Visualization is achieved with function

M (V , I ) that transforms raw-information into a
visualization feature Vj on the visual workspace.
V {V 1,...,Vr} represents the visual features that are used
to display the attribute(s) Aj.Ij : Aj o Vj , in other words,
maps the Aj domain into the viewable feature domain Vj .

In conformance with the work presented in this paper,
an intranet site has a set of pages P {P1,..., Pt} where
t number of site pages. Each page Pt {h1,..., hn} ,
contains n hot-spots; each hot-spot, hn , of any specific
page has at least 7 attributes, A { A1,..., Am} , m 7 :

constituted by hot-spot – referenced page. These schemes
normally use rollover hypermedia tools to give feedback
about the quantitative information associated to the node
or connection attributes. Qualitative information is coded
through colour on the node and on the connecting lines.
In some situations line thickness can also depict
qualitative information.
The visual inspection methods that fit into this
section may use a subset or complete set of visual
elements defined by M 1(V 1, I 1) to map raw network type
information into a visual feature. The 4 visual elements
V 1 {V 1,1,V 1, 2,V 1,3,V 1, 4} can be described as:
x

x
x

A1 URL of the page it belongs to;
A2 image of the page it belongs to (that was
presented to the user);
x
A3 position and size of the hot-spot in the page;
x
A4 number of times this hot-spot was used;
x
A5 URL of the page that is referenced;
A6 image of the page that is referenced as it was
x
presented to the user;
x
A7 time to go from one page to another using this
hot-spot.
These attributes are visually represented as needed.
They are not necessarily used simultaneously on one
visualization scheme but are useful for a tightly coupled
representation and interpretation between different
visualization schemes.
>M 1(V 1, I 1) M 2(V 2, I 2) ... Mf (Vf , If )@ represents a vector
of functions that transform raw information into visual
features and in our particular case f 3 , one for each of
the proposed visualization methods.
The following sections, 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.1.3,
describe each Mf (Vf ,If ) and the purposes of their visual
context of use. The fourth and last visualization method
proposed in section 3.1.4 uses a different representation
approach; it is based on time and page position in tree
structured hierarchy.

3.1.1. Visual inspection of structure and efficiency
Some of the proposed visualization schemes in this
section have the purpose of presenting a holistic view of
the information structure or an overview of sub-structures
extracted in conformance with inspection goals. This raw
information can be considered as network data, however
in particular situations it has sub-structures that can be
considered tree-structured data.
Their visual
representations are related to traffic or statistical
information coded according to the relation between any
pair of network nodes, in this situation, between any pair

x

x

x

V 1,1 representation of a page as a network or tree
node with image thumbnail or symbol;
I 1,1 : representation of a page as a network or tree
node with page image thumbnail obtained from A2
attribute information or as/(or on) a basic 2D/3D
geometric symbol (colour circle or square);
V 1, 2 connecting line between pages or nodes;
I 1, 2 : uses A1 and A5 attribute information to
represent and connect nodes, uses A4 to calculate
line thickness and statistical connectivity;
V 1,3 connectivity info (statistical, URLs, etc);
I 1,3 : driven by a roll-over event on the connecting
line, this visual feature feedbacks a pop up window
with statistical information, URLs, etc. related to the
nodes or to their inter-connectivity;
V 1, 4 an image thumbnail; I 1, 4 : driven by a roll-over
event, it draws a thumbnail with the contents of the
page represented by the network or tree node with a
semi-transparent factor. It is always visually linked
or related to the node.

Holistic 3D view
One of the most popular inspection methods for an
entire overview of intranet structure and/or global usage
patterns uses a 3D holistic view of relational intranet
pages according to a predefined session filter and gives
structural/organizational qualitative information, Figure
3. This scheme is not different, in essence, from some of
the proposals represented in [7] by Keim and [15] by
Benford et al., and depicts intranet complexity, number of
page clusters, their density and depth.
One very
promising scheme for these purposes is proposed by
Hendley, as exemplified in the Narcissus case study [12].
Relational representation of intranet pages
This scheme is appropriate for network type or treestructured data with parent (referred) and child
(referenced) pages represented at each “node” or intranet
page. It is normally used to indicate the “goal path”, as

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

shown in Figure 4, top left quadrant, with initial page in
green and final page in red. Any other inter page
relational path can also be analyzed here, with home page
as the default first page if no other is chosen as starting
point.

x

x

usage statistics with a linear or logarithmic function
into a colour for the rectangular area;
V 2, 2 connecting line between hi and its referenced
page (chosen hot-spot), I 2, 2 : draws a line connecting
two hi using two pre-defined colours (referrer and
referred), one for each end of the line. Line thickness
depends on the attribute A4 ;
V 2,3 image thumbnail I 2 , 3 : driven by a roll-over
event, it draws a thumbnail with the contents of the
page the hot-spot belongs to using a semitransparency factor. It is always visually linked or
related to the hot-spot.

Overlapped representation of hot-spot and usage path

Figure 3 – 3D site map
Representation of path to goal
Our first criteria for efficiency classification to
achieve a goal is related to the minimum “goal path”
between an initial (green) and end (red) page, the second
is related to the amount of time taken to go from one page
to another using a specific hot-spot as represented by
attribute A7 . Visual inspection of these parameters can
be done as shown in Figure 4, bottom right quadrant,
where alternative paths to goal page are shown with rollover functionalities to obtain statistical inter page
information.
3.1.2. Visual Inspection of interface design (visual
workspace) coherence
The visualization methods that use attribute mapping
on the original 2D visual workspace, where pages were
viewed, need hi as a visual element represented as its real
rectangular active area on the 2D visual workspace,
overlapping each other if needed.
In this case,
information is presented to the viewer after being
transformed with “raw information ĺ visual feature”
function M 2(V 2, I 2) . This visualization scheme can be
decomposed
in
3
basic
visual
elements
V 2 {V 2,1,V 2, 2,V 2,3} with:

x

V 2,1 rectangular area that varies in colour according
to “hot-spot usage” in the range that goes from
min(usage) to a max(usage) according to the predefined colour scale, with I 2,1 : that transforms the

Path representation considering hot-spots as network
nodes also uses hypermedia properties as mentioned in
[10]. Inter node connections are represented using one
colour for a line arriving at a node (referenced) and
another colour for a line leaving a node (referred).
This visualization method still has an optional
possibility of using an overlapped rectangular
representation of the hot-spots that where used with a
network data representation scheme, Figure 4, top left
quadrant, similar to some of the proposals presented in
[16] by Card et al., specifically, Becker et al. 0.
For example, an interface design analyst can
understand from Figure 4, bottom left quadrant, that the
usage pattern on the visual workspace’s right side clearly
depicts some interface design ambiguity which should be
revised and thrives for consistency with a main interface
(page centred) design strategy. The left, and some bottom
low usage hot-spots are related to an intranet module
rarely used and that is not in conformance with the overall
interface design strategy.
3.1.3. Visualization of page hypermedia connections
and statistics
M 3(V 3, I 3) is used to visually inspect a page’s hotspots, hypermedia connections and statistical information.
Five visual elements V 3 {V 3,1,V 3, 2,V 3,3,V 3, 4,V 3,5} are
used for this purpose and can be described as follows:

x

x

x

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

V 3,1 representation of an intranet page Pt ,
I 3,1 : represents all the information of a page as seen
by the user, obtained from attribute A2 ;
V 3, 2 representation of all the page hot-spot, hn ,
areas with their original information, I 3, 2 : uses A3
attribute information to delineate the hot-spot outline
on the page information;
V 3,3 representation of all the page thumbnails
referenced by each hot-spot, I 3,3 : draw all thumbnail

Figure 4 – Unified interface with tightly coupled visual inspection methods

x

x

images of the pages referenced by the hot-spots with
information obtained from A6 . Multiple referenced
pages are represented only once;
V 3, 4 connecting line between hot-spot and
referenced page thumbnail, I 3, 4 : uses A3 attribute
information and corresponding thumbnail position to
represent connecting line, uses A4 to calculate line
thickness and statistical connectivity;
V 3,5 connectivity info (statistical, URLs, etc),
I 3,5 : driven by a roll-over event on the connecting
line, this visual feature constructs a pop up window
with statistical information, URLs, etc. related to the
nodes or to their inter-connectivity obtained from A1 ,
A4 , A5 and A7 attributes.

Hot-spot location on the selected page and related
hypermedia information
Whenever a page thumbnail is chosen in any other
scheme, the complementary window shown in Figure 4,

top right quadrant, is updated to highlight the page
relational hypermedia properties and usage statistics in
context.
3.1.4. Representation of tree-structured information
traversing in time
The usage activity representation shown in Figure 5 may
lead to a discrete function, considering time on one axis
and tree level on the other. The green square symbol
represents the starting page and the red one the last page
where the usage session ended. The various pages that
are visited are represented chronologically according to:
1. elapsed time 't (between page views) and
2. their position in the tree structure constructed
with a breadth first algorithm.
It seams a promising representation if analyzed
according to the function’s first derivative in time where
abrupt changes may lead to jumps between pages
depicting problems in information structure or on the

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

interface. These are clearly preliminary research tests and
speculations; they still need further theoretical research
and empirical validation.

Figure 5 – Session usage (time line vs. page position in
tree)

3.2. Visual Correlation Strategies
Our system uses a user interface strategy that
integrates various visualization schemes, dialogues and
feedback information units into one unified interface, as
shown in Figure 4. In some occasions the interface
depicts simultaneous visualization schemes with different
but complementary information inspection methods.
Some retrieve qualitative visual information and others
quantitative statistical and structural information.
Andrews [8] presents a case study using a tightly coupled
multiple window visualization inspection method with 2D
and 3D representation schemes. The tightly coupled
multiple view windows are fundamental for a coherent
inspection of the information but context is lost in some
situations with the inter view window jump. Interface
design strategies in this situation should guarantee a
coherent context with all relevant multiple views present
at one time. This proposal delivers an articulated and
contextualized visual inspection method sustained on
simultaneously present views. The visual correlation of
qualitative and quantitative network information
properties is considered.
An inspection exercise starts with the specification of
a goal that can consider as starting page the site home
page or some other and ends with the specification of a
final page where the information or communication
service entry is located and is specified as a usability
evaluation goal. An articulated and tightly coupled set of
views are generated for deeper inspection analysis of
inter-page related statistics and interface design
parameters. All these schemes are triggered and redrawn
by the same event and use the same raw information
space to represent their visual features.

4. Conclusions
The unified interface, presented in this paper,
includes a multiple view option for each of its analysis
areas/schemes resulting in a coherent and synchronized
visualization solution that offers a simultaneous
information inspection set of tools. The visualization
schemes described represent some of the solutions for
these inspection tools. Some are preliminary schemes
undergoing test, integration and optimization procedures
such as the hot-spot usage representation with path
representation of usage pattern in Figure 4, bottom left
quadrant, and the discrete function obtained from treestructured information traversing in time Figure 5.
Hot-spot and usage path overlapped representation
can be pointed out for specific future work. It needs
dynamic inspection tools such as a visualization slider to
segment the low usage representations to a certain level.
This will help the inspection of the most used paths and
most possibly will reveal interface design ambiguity or
mismatch with design goals. Some inspiring proposals
are presented by Eick [14]. This interface design
inspection scheme will also include, in a near future,
distance between starting page and goal page. This
information can be helpful to understand effort and
efficiency or to point out optimization work.
The tree-structured information traversing in time
scheme seams a promising approach and will be
maintained in our research agenda for the prospective
analysis of usage behaviour during tree-structured
information traversing.

5. References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Shneiderman, B, Designing the User Interface: Strategies
for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, AddisonWesley Pub Co; 3rd edition, July 1997.
B. Shneiderman, “The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy
for
Information Visualizations”,
In
Proceedings of Visual Languages, (Boulder, CO, Sept, 36), IEEE Computer Science Press, Los Alamitos, CA,
336-343, 1996.
C.G. Healey, R.St. Amant, and J. Chang, "Assisted
Visualization of E-commerce Auction Agent", presented
at Graphics Interface 2001 – Canadian Human-Computer
Communications Society, pp. 201-208, 7-9 June 2001.
ISO 9241 url:
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/ISOOnline.frontpage [looked up
on: 28 Feb 2004]
J. Nunes, F. Zamfir, Ó. Mealha and B. Sousa-Santos,
“Web LogVisualizer: A Tool for Communication and
Information Management”, In Proceedings of the 10th
International
Conference
on
Human-Computer
Interaction – HCI International 2003, Heraklion – Crete –
Greece, Vol. 3 (Human-Centred Computing: Cognitive,

Social and Ergonomics Aspects), pp. 824-828, 22-27 June
2003.
[6] Nielsen, J. and Mack, R. L. Usability inspection methods,
New York:John Wiley, 1994
[7] D.A. Keim, “Visual Exploration of Large Data Sets”,
Communications of the ACM, pp 39-44, Vol. 44, No. 8,
August 2001.
[8] K. Andrews, “Visualising Cyberspace: Information
Visualisation in the Harmony Internet Browser”, In
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think, (editors) Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay and
Ben Shneiderman. San Diego, CA, Morgan Kaufman, pp
493-502, 1999.
[9] L. Tweedie, “Characterizing Interactive Externalizations”,
In Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think, (editors) Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay and
Ben Shneiderman. San Diego, CA, Morgan Kaufman, pp
616-623, 1999.
[10] M. Bieber, F. Vitali, H. Ashman, V. Balasubramanian and
H. Oinas-Kukkonen, “Fourth generation hypermedia:
some missing links for the World Wide Web”, in
International Journal Human-Computer Studies, Nº47, pp
31-65,
1997
[on-line]
at:
http://ijhcs.open.ac.uk/bieber/bieber.pdf [looked up on: 28
Feb 2004]

[11] R.A. Becker, S.G. Eick and Allan R. Wilks, “Visualizing
Network Data”, In Readings in Information Visualization:
Using Vision to Think, (editors) Stuart K. Card, Jock D.
Mackinlay and Ben Shneiderman. San Diego, CA,
Morgan Kaufman, pp 215-230, 1999.
[12] R. J. Hendley, N. S. Drew, A. M. Wood and R. Beale,
“Narcissus: Visualising Information”, In Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think,
(editors) Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay and Ben
Shneiderman. San Diego, CA, Morgan Kaufman, pp 503511, 1999.
[13] S.G. Eick, “Visualizing Online Activity”, in
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 44, No. 8, pp 45-50,
August 2001.
[14] S.G. Eick, “Data Visualization Sliders”, In Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think,
(editors) Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay and Ben
Shneiderman., San Diego, CA, Morgan Kaufman, pp 251252, 1999.
[15] S. Benford, I. Taylor, D. Brailsford, B. Koleva, M.
Craven, M. Fraser, G. Reynard and C. Greenhalgh, “Three
Dimensional Visualization of the World Wide Web”, In
ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 31, No. 4, December 1999
[16] Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay and Ben Shneiderman,
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think, San Diego, CA, Morgan Kaufman, 1999.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

