The Synchronous Mapping Discussions: The Effects of Floor Control in TurnTaking and Choice of Argumentative Representations
Dr. Amnon Glassner
Department of Education
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
aglazner@bgumail.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Empirical findings on CSCL (Computer Support
Collaborative Learning) indicate that argumentative
activity and argumentative maps are essential tools in
order to foster construction of knowledge and
evaluation of information. The current study examined
effects of an innovative web tool that provides a
graphical representation of synchronous discussion.
54 Grade 7 students from two classes participated in
the study. The study tested the effects of: (a) the use of
shapes (mapping) representing argumentative
functions of the participants' utterances in discussions
(e.g. claim, explanation and information) and the use
of arrows that represent the connections between
utterances; (b) turn taking within the discussion. We
tested these effects on the number of relevant claims
and arguments expressed, and on the number of chat
expressions (e.g. such as nicknames and curses). The
results indicate that even without any previous
familiarization with tool, the combination of the use of
shapes and arrows and of the control over turn taking
invites students to express more relevant claims and
arguments, and less chat expressions. However, the
effect of the use of shapes and arrows was found more
dominant.

1. Introduction

Prof. Baruch B. Schwarz
School of Education
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
msschwar@mscc.huji.ac.il

argumentative effects of a specific computerized
discussion tool (Digalo) that integrates representations
of argumentative discussion and of the arguments
elaborated at the same time.

2. Digalo – The mapping discussion tool
Digalo is a computerize web tool which enables
synchronous mapping discussion in order to support
argumentative learning processes. It is a central
component
of
the
DUNES
system
(www.tessera.gr/dunes/index.).
When using Digalo the facilitator of the discussion
(either a teacher or a student) prepares the discussion
by presenting a blank map, by allocating students to
the map, and by deciding on the appropriate ontology.

2.1 Ontology
The ontology – represented in Digalo by shapes and
arrows – is aimed at facilitating the acquiring of
argumentative skills. Each shape represents a specific
discussion role of each participant utterance and each
arrow represents who refers to a particular utterance
and how.
The facilitator can choose which shapes would
appear in each map s/he creates by opting for
possibilities in the following default list:

Representations of the argumentative discussion
(e.g. Resnick et al., 1993; Pontecorvo & Girardet,
1993; Kuhn, 2001) and of arguments elaborated (e.g.
Schwarz et al., 2003) were found as essential tools for
constructing knowledge and evaluating information.
Recently, much effort has been invested in order to
design computerize tools for fostering collaborative
learning through argumentation (e.g. Schwarz &
Glassner, 2003). The current study tested some

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

The names of shapes and arrows can be modified,
as well as the terminology used for the ontology. Only
the facilitator can undertake such changes.

This area presents each
shape details presents each
shape details

2.2 Floor Control (FC)

2.3 The study goals and questions

Digalo has a special feature of “Floor Control”
(FC). This feature has two modes:
* FC Activated: only one person can work on the
board (add shapes and edit the text in a shape). The
first to request FC will receive it immediately, and
others will enter a line for receiving FC. The facilitator
can decide whether one student will receive FC before
others or vice versa or take the FC from a student if
s/he thinks this is necessary.
* FC Deactivated: all participants can work
simultaneously, without taking turns.
The facilitator can choose the mode of FC before or
during the session.
When beginning a discussion, each participant is
required to identify him/herself.
When the FC is activated the student cannot operate
within the board (i.e. add or edit shapes). In order to
receive FC the student needs to request FC by clicking
on the “Request floor” button. His/her name then
appears in the list on this section.
If the student is the first to request FC – then s/he
gets the FC immediately. When a student finishes
writing his/her contribution – s/he has to release the
FC (by clicking on the “Release floor” button) in order
to allow other students, who requested FC, to add
contributions.

In the present paper we focused on two aspects of
Digalo: the role of the argumentative ontology and the
role of floor-control in turn taking for synchronous
discussions. The general research question was: to
what extent floor control of turn taking and the use of
argumentative ontology are beneficial to the
construction of relevant claims and arguments
(relevant to the issue at stake in the discussion). In
order to test this question we compared the number of
relevant claims and relevant arguments in the different
groups. An additional question concerned the
characteristics of the discussions in relation to the
constraints under which they develop (namely, turn
taking and ontology). We asked what extent
participants adopt a chat style.

Building a map
Each participant adds one shape (or more) and
arrows/links to the shapes built by others to articulate
his claims, arguments, questions, etc. Each participant
chooses a distinctive color and an icon that help
identifying his/her contributions on the board.

3. Method
3.1 Participants
54 Grade 7 students from two classes participated in
the study. The teachers organized students in 12
heterogeneous discussion groups (i.e. heterogeneous
according to their verbal ability). Each group included
3 to 6 students.

3.2 Independent variables
The first independent variable was the representation
system
(uni-representational
vs.
multirepresentational). The ontology for multiple
representations of discussions included the following
argumentative components: “claim”, “information”,
“explanation”, “question”, and “other”. These
categories were embodied in different shapes. In

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

addition, two sorts of arrows were available, arrows
that expressed a support and arrows that expressed
opposition. In the case of uni-representation, students
had boxes at disposal in which they entered text for
each of their interventions.
The second independent variable concerned the floorcontrol (FC) system in synchronous discussions (with
or without turn taking). In the turn taking option, the
order of turns was automatically determined by the
order of requests for turn.

3.3 Dependent variables

settings (i.e. inserted the names of the participants, and
defined the representation shapes and arrows and the
turns option for each group setting).
At the second stage, all participants were instructed
to initiate the discussion about the uniform issue by
presenting each of the personal opinions before any
reaction was allowed. Then, they were instructed to
continue the discussion and were enabled to react to
each other. The time for discussions was limited to
twenty minutes.
We hypothesized that the combination of the use of
multiple argumentative representations and the control
of turn taking would yield the most argumentative
discussions: participants were expected to write more
relevant claims and arguments and less chat
expressions than participants in the other groups.

As for the utterances of the participants, the
dependent variables were: (a) the number of relevant
claims (conclusions, opinions, viewpoint concerning
the controversial issue), (b) the number of relevant
arguments (i.e. reasoned claims; claims with
information or explanation that support it), and (c) the
number of chat-style expressions (e.g. using of
nicknames, curses and elaboration of personal
characters). We did not refer to the representations
used but to the utterances themselves, since we did not
test whether the shapes used reflected their function in
discussions.

During the coding procedure of the number of
relevant claims and arguments and the number of chat
expressions, we conducted a reliability test among
three experts who tested five different group maps
until full agreement reached. One judge coded the
remaining maps.

3.4 Task and Procedure

3.6 Results

The 12 discussion groups were randomly divided
according to the four different experimental
conditions. 3 groups used uni-representations without
control of turn taking, 3 groups used unirepresentations with control on turn taking, 3 groups
used multi-representations without control of turn
taking, and 3 groups used multi-representation with
control of turn taking.
We split the experiment in two different sessions. In
each session, six different groups managed their
discussions at the same computer laboratory. Each
group was instructed to discuss the controversial issue
"whether or not the wearing of school uniforms at the
school is binding", by using Digalo interface. At the
time of the experiment, this issue was an actual
dilemma and the principal board was interested to
know about the students' views.
At a first stage, in order to become familiar with the
Digalo interface, each of the participants was provided
with written technical instructions. Then, each
participant in his/her group was invited to start using
Digalo by writing about himself/herself using the
Digalo. In each group the constraints were
implemented in the tool: the experimenter and the
teachers prepared in advance the different discussion

Median nonparametric statistical test was
undertaken in order to test differences between
samples.
In accordance with our hypothesis, the number of
relevant claims and arguments was found higher
among participants who used multi-representations
while controlling the turn taking than among
participants in the other groups. Most of the students in
this group were above the median (see Table 1).
Significant differences were found among the different
condition groups for relevant claims (Ȥ² = 16.1, p =
.001), and for relevant arguments (Ȥ² = 8.98, p = .030).
In accordance with our hypothesis, participants who
used multi-representations while controlling turn
taking produced less chat expressions than participants
from the other groups. In contrast, participants who
used uni-representations without control on turn taking
in their synchronous writing produced more chat
expressions than participants from the other groups
(see Table 1). Significant differences were found
among the different condition groups (Ȥ² = 14.43, p =
.002).
Table 1. Median test between groups (1.00- unirepresentation, without turns; 2.00- uni-representation,

3.5 Coding

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

with turns; 3.00-multi-representations, without turns;
4.00- multi-representations, with turns)

uniform issue. Rather, the (rare) face-to-face
interactions that took place were about the technical
functioning of Digalo.

Frequencies

1.00
CLAIM
ARGUMENT
CHAT

> Median
<= Median
> Median
<= Median
> Median
<= Median

5
11
5
11
14
2

The groups condition
2.00
3.00
3
9
11
4
4
5
10
8
6
5
8
8

Discussion
4.00
10
1
9
2
2
9

Table 1
A univariate test was taken in order to test separately
the effects of the ontology (uni/ multi-representation)
and the effects of FC (with/without turn taking).

3.7 Effects of ontology
The average number of relevant claims among the
participants who used the multi-representational
system
was
found
significantly
higher
(M=3.51;SD=.41 ) than the average number of relevant
claims among those who used the uni-representational
system(M = 2.21; SD = .36), (F(1, 50) = 5.69; p =
.021, Ș² = .102). The same tendency was found for the
relevant arguments but without significant effect (M =
2.17; SD = .31), (M = 1.40; SD = .28), (F(1, 50) =
5.69; p = .069, Ș² = .065). The average number of chat
expressions among the participants who used the
multi-representational system was found significantly
lower (M = .60; SD = .29) than the average of chat
expressions among those who used the unirepresentational system (M = 1.61; SD = .25), (F(1, 50
= 6.99; p = .011; Ș² = .123).

3.8 Effects of turn taking
The average number of chat expressions among
participants for which turn-taking was not controlled
was found significantly higher (M = 1.68; SD = .26)
than the average number of chat expressions among
those whose turn-taking was controlled (M = .53; SD =
.28) (F(1, 50)=9.01; p= .004, Ș² = .153). No
significance effects were found concerning the
construction of relevant claims and arguments.
As mentioned above, each session included six groups
that undertook six simultaneous discussions in the
same computer laboratory. Students were then free to
accompany their electronic discussions orally.
However, it is interesting to note that the face-to-face
interactions among participants did not concern the

It seems that even in the first experience students had
with Digalo, the combination between the use of
argumentative ontology and the floor control for taking
turns invites them to express more relevant claims and
arguments and less chat expressions, although, the use
of argumentative ontology is the dominant factor. It
seems that the use of shapes and arrows creates
ecological conditions that afford focus on the issue at
stake. These quantitative findings fit some qualitative
findings concerning the ontology effects (Schwarz &
Glassner, in press). Generally, the findings suggest the
high potential in the use of Digalo to improve the level
of discussion. Such an improvement is a necessary
condition for more appropriate construction of
knowledge and for more appropriate evaluation of
information through argumentation.

10. References
[1] Kuhn, D. (2001). “How do people know?” Psychological
Science, 12(1), 1-8.
[2] Pontecorvo, C. & Girardet, H., (1993). “Arguing and
reasoning in understanding historical topics” Cognition and
Instruction, 11(3&4), 365-395).
[3]Resnick, L. B., Salmon, M., Zeitz, C. M., Wathen, S. H.
& Holowchak M. (1993) “Reasoning in conversation.
Cognition and Instruction, 11(3 & 4), 347-364.
[4]Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y. & Gil, J., & Ilya, M. (2003).
“Construction of collective and individual knowledge in
argumentative activity: An empirical study.” The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 12(2), 221-258.
[5]Schwarz, B. B., & Glassner, A. (2003). “The blind and the
paralytic: fostering argumentation in everyday and scientific
issues.” In J. Andriessen, M. Baker, and D. Suthers (Eds.)
Arguing to Learn: Confronting Cognitions in ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning environments. Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
[6]Schwarz, B.B. & Glassner, A. (in press) “Designing
CSCL argumentative environments for broadening and
deepening understanding of the space of debate” In R. Salgo
(Ed.). Information and Communication Technology and the
Transformation of Learning Practices. Kluwer Academic
Publishers.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

