Visualizing Abstract Data on Maps
G. Fuchs, H. Schumann
University of Rostock
Institute for Computer Sciences
A.-Einstein-Str. 21, 18059 Rostock, Germany
georg.fuchs@informatik.uni-rostock.de, schumann@informatik.uni-rostock.de
Abstract
The effective visual exploration of large and complexly
structured, abstract data requires sophisticated and interactive visualization techniques. Development of these techniques is the major discipline in information visualization.
On the other hand, visualization of geospatial data is an
important topic in cartography. The necessity to combine
expertise from both ﬁelds has long been commonly recognized. In this paper, some considerations on the combination of arbitrary multivariate data visualizations, focus &
context interaction techniques and thematic map displays
are discussed that will allow the efﬁcient combination of
established techniques from both information visualization
and cartography.

1. Introduction
The amount of data containing potentially useful information is growing rapidly with every day. For example, surveys, simulations, ﬁnancial transaction logs and scientiﬁc
measurements are some of the many sources. Much of these
data are of multivariate nature, featuring anywhere from two
to hundreds of values per data entry. Complex relationships
and hierarchical structures within the data make the task of
visualizing these data in order to extract useful information
from it even more demanding.
In recent years, a wealth of methods for the efﬁcient
and comprehensive visualization of complex and heterogeneous information spaces has been developed. However,
most of these approaches assume the data is of abstract nature that does not have any spatial dependencies. Applications such as multispectral satellite sensor images and
healthcare statistics, however, work with georeferenced,
multivariate information. Here, it is important that this geographic frame of reference is visualized alongside the abstract information. Therefore, more current approaches like
e.g. [17] or [19] combine information visualizations with

thematic maps. However, ways to facilitate advanced cartographic expertise in information visualization are necessary,
and have been examined e.g. by Skupin [22].
Cartography deals with the task to effectively present
large amounts of geospatial data with different granularity
on task-speciﬁc thematic maps. Over the years, tried and
proven methods and concepts have been developed for the
production of high-quality maps. With the advent of GIS,
these have been augmented with automated methods to aid
the interactive creation of on-screen maps. Also, cartographers have long since adapted knowledge from the domain
of information visualization, coining the term geographic
visualization, or geovisualization [16].
Following Shneiderman’s visualization mantra ”Overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details on demand” [21],
visually exploring information spaces is not a static process
and requires a high degree of interactivity. These requirements can either be met by employing multiple representations for each phase, i.e. overview & detail concepts, or by
seamlessly integrating multiple levels of detail within the
same representation, i.e. focus & context concepts with interactive repositioning of focus areas as examined by Keahey [11] or van Wijk [23]. This, of course, also holds true
for combined map/information representations.
However, surprisingly few approaches take a truly holistic view of the problem, many still seeing it mostly from
either community’s viewpoint [22]. For example, in information visualization picture annotation (label placement)
is generally inferior to labeling methods used in cartography (if it is done at all). Likewise, most works in geographic visualization focus on speciﬁc aspects, either multivariate data visualization, interaction [1], or lens techniques
to control information density [2, 18]. Moreover, many approaches do not, aside from rather simple bar and pie charts
[1], directly integrate more complex visualizations (e.g. for
large hierarchies or time series) into the map. Instead, two or
more separate pictures are juxtaposed, connecting the contents of the different views by means of linking and brushing techniques. Examples are map/dataplot matrices in Geo-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

VISTA [7] and Keim’s Geo Pixel Bar Charts [8]. However,
the ﬁrst variant is more desirable since presenting information in a single picture is less cognitive effort for the user
than mentally linking multiple views [2].
Therefore the aim of this paper is not to propose new
techniques. Instead, we will discuss general strategies for
the direct integration of (complex) visualization techniques
using adapted labeling strategies into maps that feature focus & context interaction techniques. This can be seen as
a further step that make full use of the combined expertise
from both the visualization and cartographic communities.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
section 2, a motivating real-world scenario as well as the
general requirements for both data representation and the
map are introduced. Then in section 3 an extended focus &
context concept is described that considers the special conditions present when dealing with combined abstract and
geographic spaces of reference. In section 4, the problem of
adequately placing data representations on the map is discussed. Section 5 concludes with a summary.

2. Motivation and preliminaries
Figure 1 shows a screenshot from the TeCoMed visualization system for healthcare data. It shows a map divided
into areas correlating to the administrative districts on various levels (federal states, districts, ZIP code areas). These
subdivisions are hierarchically organized, e.g. a state consist of several districts. Shown on the map are ThemeRiver
[9] icons that encode the number of incidents of different
diseases over time in the width of the ’rivers’ along the horizontal time axis. Note that other visualization techniques
are also possible depending on the task at hand (cf. ﬁgure 2).

Figure 1. TeCoMed screenshot
A typical scenario is that a doctor wants to ﬁnd out if a
certain disease (e.g. the ﬂu) exhibits an unusually high number of incidences, yielding the possibility of an epidemic

and thus making preemptive inoculation advisable. To the
doctor, for example, only a selected area (e.g. the ZIP code
area she practices in), and some neighboring areas where
some of her patients come from, are of interest. Thus, simply displaying information for all map areas would not only
lead to an overloaded representation that is no longer expressive, they also provide information which a user is not
interested in.
We therefore assume that the user has a certain area of interest, for which information must be displayed with maximum detail. Areas with a certain relation to this area of interest should also display information, albeit with reduced
detail, for orientation purposes. All other map areas do not
show information, as these are only relevant in a problemspeciﬁc context. To support an interactive exploration of the
data with these premises, we propose an extended focus &
context concept in section 3.
To further improve the representation, the placement of
the data representations on the map should be optimized. As
can be seen in ﬁgure 1, placing icons for clusters of small
map areas causes overlaps and thus, loss of information.
One possibility to avoid overlaps would be the generation of
cartograms where small areas are enlarged, e.g. with the VisualPoints method [12]. However, cartogram construction
is controlled by a single selected data parameter, and cartograms by their very nature distort the map globally. In
our explorative scenario, both the set of map areas that display information (and thus may need resizing), and the selection of visualized parameters are variable, prompting for
the recreation of the cartogram each time. Therefore, we
discuss strategies for optimized information representation
placement on an undistorted map in section 4 instead.
The concepts introduced in the following sections are not
conﬁned to the scenario depicted above. Therefore, some
general preliminaries are established ﬁrst.
The abstract, non-geographic data to be visualized can
take a multitude of forms, each calling for a different suitable visualization technique. Multivariate data sets, for example, can be represented by one of the many icon techniques. In the scope of this paper we assume that the visual
representations of the abstract data were generated by appropriate techniques, and scaled in such a way that they ﬁt
to the associated map areas. By doing so, we use the concept of Information Murals [10]. In the following, these appropriately scaled representations are collectively referred
to as visugrams (We chose a new term visugram to stress it
applies to visual representations in general, whereas established terms like e.g. glyph or icon are commonly associated with a speciﬁc semantic).
Generally, maps are structured hierarchically according
to geographic and administrative actualities. When visualizing abstract data on maps it is important that each visugram
is associated with its correct map area, either by position-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

ing them on the map accordingly (i.e., within the area’s borders), or by graphical means such as coloring or connecting
lines.
A problem arises if information are not available in correspondence to the given map hierarchy. In this case, the
granularities of the information space and the map must
be adjusted to match. Splitting up data sets or map areas
is always ambiguous. Therefore, only aggregations are performed. This either means aggregating data sets to match
the (coarser) map structure, or merging map areas if only a
single data set is available for a larger map region.

3. Extended focus & context
As said before, only a subset of all map areas are of interest to the user at a given time. The amount of information displayed for each map area must be adjusted according to this area of interest. This can be achieved by focus
& context techniques, which display a certain region of interest with a high degree of detail, while simplifying other
areas.
Most often, a binary decision - within or outside the focus area - is made, and a uniform representation of elements is chosen for the focus and the context area, respectively. Keahey introduced a generalized approach for Detailin-Context presentations in [11]. This approach uses the notion of a detail axis to measure the amount of information
and its presentation style in different areas of a picture. A
popular example for focus & context techniques in information visualization are the graphical ﬁsheye views by Sakar
and Brown [20]. An overview can be found in [15]. Also
employed in cartography, two examples are Rase’s cartographic lens [18] and Pliable Display Techniques [2].
However, current approaches work on the base of one
unique space of reference and hence often deﬁne both focus
and context in display space. When working with a combination of maps with visugrams, this concept has to be extended.
In our case, we have two spaces of reference. The georeference in the data spans up the geographic space represented by the map, while the non-geographic part of the
data deﬁnes the abstract information space represented by
the visugrams. Consequently, there are now two focus areas. First, there is the map focus that corresponds to the current geographic region of interest. Second, there is the information focus that encompasses the abstract, non-spatial information associated with that region of interest. These focus regions are mutually dependant. Selecting a map focus
deﬁnes the information focus, and vice versa.
Since the focus only displays a small portion of the information in full detail, it must be possible to adjust focus areas. With maps, an intuitive way of navigating through the
display space is the selection of map areas. Therefore in our

case, ﬁrst the map focus is selected, from which the corresponding information focus is then derived by searching
the information space for data associated with the map focus. This might require special operations if the granularity of the map areas does not match that of the information
space.
After both foci have been selected, their representation
style must be speciﬁed. For the map focus this means the
sufﬁcient accentuation of the focus area, e.g. by drawing
stronger border lines and choosing a different, more saturated ﬁll color. For the information focus, a suitable visualization technique must be selected and the resulting visugram is positioned within the map focus area. In ﬁgure 2,
the focus areas are those with dark shade (fully saturated
color on screen) and thick borderlines.
Since we have two focus regions, we consequently consider not one but at least two contexts: one for the information space and the other for the map. The information
context includes all information of interest outside the information focus. However as explained in section 2, not for
every map area abstract information must displayed. Therefore we want to introduce two different context regions for
the map. We assume that some map areas below a certain
degree of interest do not have a visugram placed. They are
retained to maintain map coherence for better user orientation and are referred to as map context (light grey areas in
ﬁgure 2).

Figure 2. Example of an extended focus &
context display
The remaining map areas that are neither part of the map
focus nor the map context constitute the so-called spatial
context. An visugram is positioned over each of these areas. The map areas contained in the spatial context can be
derived from the map focus by several means, including interactive selection by the user, based on map area neigh-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

borhood relationships, or calculations in information space,
e.g. proximity values between data records (as in ﬁgure 2).
A more detailed discussion of selection strategies is given
in [14].
After the context regions have been deﬁned, their representation style must be determined. For the map areas of the
spatial context the visual attributes are chosen so that these
are less prominent than the map focus. Figure 2 shows an
example where size and opacity of the visugrams in the spatial context are reduced.
For the information context, the general goal is the abstraction of representations to mitigate the problems of
overloading the picture. This abstraction can be done in two
principal ways:
• the information is ﬁltered, yielding a smaller and less
complex visugram, or
• the same visualization technique is used, but the visugram is graphically simpliﬁed.
When performing graphical simpliﬁcation on visugrams,
great care must be taken not to violate the expressiveness
of the visualization. E.g. if an icon technique encodes information in size and areas, a size reduction of icon representations is not allowed. It must be communicated to the user
if a visugram has information removed from its representation, e.g. by reducing saturation and opacity of the representation (ﬁgure 2). The more simpliﬁed the visugram, the
stronger its visual demotion should be.
The extended focus & context concept can support multiple map foci by simply selecting more than one disjunctive
map areas as focal regions, and it can be combined with traditional techniques like the cartographic lens [18] that distorts the map representation.
The success of the extended focus & context concept depends on adequate representation of the different focus and
context regions. One concept to aid this task are visual hierarchies, where the geometric and visual parameters of a visugram (size, brightness, saturation, opacity etc.) are chosen
in a way that conveys that visugram’s importance (degree of
interest). Another useful concept is the cartographic generalization, where map objects are simpliﬁed (either graphically or semantically) so that they can be downsized or aggregated while still showing the relevant information. This
concept can principally be applied to visugrams as well.

4. Visugram placement
Even when employing the extended focus & context
technique that ﬁlters less important information from the
representation in the map context, there can be regions in
the spatial context where comparatively many visugrams
are displayed. Especially if visugrams must be placed in
densely clustered, small map areas, this can quickly result

in an overloaded representation and overlaps of visugrams,
causing loss of information. In these cases, the visugram positions on the map must be optimized to reduce information
loss as much as possible.
Problems with visugram placements are not unique to
representations involving maps. For example, the visugram
positions might be used to implicitly visualize hierarchies.
Ward [24] gives an excellent taxonomy on the different
glyph placement strategies used in such scenarios. However,
having a map partitioned into areas in which to place visugrams adds even more complexity to the task, as opposed to
placing them on a blank display area.
The map areas on a typical map vary strongly in both
shape and size, making the task of positioning the visugrams a non-trivial one. The following problems can be
identiﬁed:
• the mutual overlap of visugrams (conﬂicts),
• the occlusion of information on the map background,
and
• ambiguities in the association of individual visugrams
with their correct map area.
One way to resolve spatial conﬂicts is to displace overlapping map objects (like visugrams) within certain bounds.
The automation of this process is topic of e.g. [25].
Another option to remedy these problems is to treat the
visugrams as map annotations (labels). The number of cartographic work on automated label placement that could be
adopted for this task are legion, ranging from rule-based expert systems [3] to stochastic methods such as Simulated
Annealing [13]. There are also algorithms like excentric labeling [5] that label only points in certain regions of interest and thus are principally conformable with focus & context concepts.
It should be noted that there are important differences between label and visugram placement, though. Labels can be
abbreviated, rotated and distorted to ﬁt them in the map, or
even left out from the picture altogether if they cannot be
placed without overlap. In information visualization, completeness of the representations is stipulated, and distortions
of visugrams are critical if these encode information e.g. in
line lengths or area sizes.
In the following, a generic approach for the optimized
placement of visugrams with respect to map areas is discussed. It is an amalgamation of several ideas from both automated labeling and object displacement. References to related work are made were appropriate.

4.1. Basics
For placing an visugram on a map area, two parameters
are of interest: its position and the amount of display space it
occupies in the presentation. The visugram position is given

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

by a reference point in the map coordinate system. An visugram is positioned on the map by translating its local center
point into its reference point on the map.
To assess the amount of display space a visugram consumes on the map, the contour is used which describes the
boundary of the visugram’s area, akin to so-called labelboxes used in labeling [3]. It is not necessary that it accurately matches the form of the visugram. For positioning on
maps an enclosing (adequately minimal) approximation is
sufﬁcient. Which contour shape is best suited depends on
the visualization technique used to created the visugrams.
The axis-aligned bounding box usually works well for rectangular visugrams, while the bounding circle is much better
when using e.g. pie charts.
In order to ensure a visugram is always associated with
the correct map area, constraints must be fulﬁlled by the reference point position. For example, the reference point must
always lie within the polygon deﬁning that area’s boundaries, or the intersection area size of the contour with the
map area must be at least some percentage of the total contour area size.

4.2. Visugram positioning
Optimization of the visugram positions is done in two
phases. The visugram are ﬁrst positioned on the map with
respect to initial reference points. These initial positions are
found under consideration of cartographic design rules for
map labels, but without considering conﬂicts between visugrams at this stage.
When all visugrams have been placed on the map, the optimization phase begins. All occurred conﬂicts are successively resolved in the neighborhood of individual visugrams
by repositioning them. The sum of all conﬂicts is taken as
the value of an objective function. The cycle of conﬂict detection and resolving is repeated iteratively until either a
conﬂict-free solution or a minimum of the objective function was found, or other termination criteria hold.
Finding initial positions. Map areas can be irregularly
shaped, or even be comprised of spatially disjunctive subareas. Therefore ﬁnding good initial reference points is not
trivial. In automatic labeling, strategies include the creation
of several (random or regularly distributed) potential label
positions within the area polygon [3, 4], or selecting position candidates on the medial axis (skeleton). Position candidates are then evaluated to select the best suited initial label position. This evaluation considers the principal (cartographic) quality as well as potential occlusion of other map
features (border lines, symbols, etc.).
Initial visugram reference points can likewise be obtained by such strategies. However, in our scenario interactivity is a premise, and the maps used are void of other features than area boundaries (cf. ﬁgures 1,2). Therefore eval-

uation of map feature occlusion can be kept simple (if performed at all).
A special problem arises if map areas are comprised of
several disjunctive sub-areas. In these cases the initial reference point is chosen inside the largest of the sub-areas. The
relation of the sub-areas must then be established by virtue
of coloring or connecting lines.
Repositioning of visugrams. When all visugram have
been placed in their initial reference points, the overlaps, or
conﬂicts, between visugrams are detected. The more pronounced an overlap, the more information from the affected
visugrams are lost, i.e. that conﬂict is more sever. The severity of conﬂicts can be expressed by assigning a conﬂict
weight, which is e.g. the size of the intersection area of both
contours. It is the goal of repositioning to minimize the sum
of all conﬂict weights as the objective function. There are
two principal strategies for conﬂict resolution.
The ﬁrst approach compares to the majority of automatic
label placement strategies, e.g. [4], and some displacement
operators [25]. Overlaps are resolved by repositioning one
visugram at a time to one of its alternate reference points
(calculated during the initialization phase), if there is one
with less overlap. Since the search space is usually very
large (k n combinations for n visugrams with k reference
point candidates each), complete searches are impractical
in interactive environments. Therefore, simple gradient decent algorithms choose the ﬁrst improvement found, and
steepest gradient decent displaces the visugram that offers
the largest improvement for the current iteration. However,
since only immediate improvements are accepted, both algorithms are prone to fall into local minima of the objective function. To avoid this, methods such as Simulated Annealing [13] also allow local degradation to possibly reach
a better overall solution. The algorithm terminates if no further improvement in the objective function can be achieved
(optimally, no conﬂicts remain), or a given number of iterations has been performed.
Using a ﬁxed, precalculated set of reference point candidates for each visugram means a discrete approximation
to the continuous map space. Therefore better results can
be expected if visugrams are instead displaced away from
each other to resolve conﬂicts. Therefore, we propose to deﬁne a set of allowed displacement directions (e.g. the principal compass headings N, NE, E,...) and a global displacement distance rmax [6]. Thus for each iteration, the set of
alternate reference points for each visugram depends on its
current position and rmax . By decreasing rmax after a certain number of displacements, akin to the temperature adjustment in Simulated Annealing [13], a gradual shift from
coarse global visugram positioning to minute improvements
in the neighborhood of visugrams can be achieved. The actual selection of alternate positions is done by either a gradient decent or Simulated Annealing algorithm, as described

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

above. By deﬁning ﬁxed directions, the number of candidate points to calculate and evaluate is reduced. Our approach offers a tradeoff between the limitations imposed by
discretization of the map space and the computational complexity of continuous position models.

5. Conclusions
For the visualization of abstract data with geographic references, combinations of a map with visugrams can be used.
To avoid overloading images, in this paper an extended focus & context approach was presented to ﬁlter information
according to this area of interest. Also proposed was a strategy for iterative visugram position optimization to further
improve the representations.
Initial user studies with a prototype implementation have
shown that the concept of the extended focus & context,
with the selection of a map area of interest and automatic
derivation of the different focus and context regions, is quite
intuitive. Employing the position optimization in combination with Rase’s distorting lens [18] has shown to improve
readability of visugrams substantially.
Currently, the focus and context regions are derived by
the user selecting a map area of interest. Future work will
therefore examine methods for selecting these regions in abstract information space, e.g. as the result of user-deﬁned
data mining operations. Also planned are further user studies on this topic. Finally, using continuous visugram positions during optimization will be examined. It is envisioned
to employ a model based on magnetic (repelling) forces to
resolve visugram overlaps.

References
[1] G. L. Andrienko and N. V. Andrienko. Interactive maps for
visual data exploration. International Journal for Geographical Information Science, 13(4):355–374, 1999.
[2] M. S. T. Carpendale, D. J. Cowperthwaite, and F. D. Fracchia. 3-Dimensional Pliable Surfaces: For the Effective Presentation of Visual Information. In ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, pages 217–226, 1995.
[3] A. C. Cook. Automated cartographic name placement using
rule-based systems. PhD thesis, Polytechnic of Wales, 1988.
[4] S. Edmondson, J. Christensen, J. Marks, and S. Shieber. A
General Cartographic Labeling Algorithm. Manuscript, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1996.
[5] J.-D. Fekete and C. Plaisant. Excentric Labeling: Dynamic
Neighborhood Labeling for Data Visualization. HCIL Technical Report 99-09, pages 512–519, May 15-20 1999.
[6] G. Fuchs and H. Schumann. Intelligent Icon Positioning for
Interactive Map-based Information Systems. In Proceedings
of the 15th Annual IRMA International Conference, 2004.
[7] M. Gahegan, M. Takatsuka, M. Wheeler, and F. Hardisty.
GeoVISTA Studio: a geocomputational workbench. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 26:267–292, 2002.

[8] M. C. Hao, D. A. Keim, U. Dayal, J. Schneidewind, and
P. Wright. Geo Pixel Bar Charts. In Proceedings ot the 14th
IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS’03), 2003.
[9] S. Havre, B. Hetzler, and L. Nowell. ThemeRiver: Visualizing theme changes over time. In Proceedings of InfoVis
2000, pages 115–123, 2000.
[10] D. F. Jerding and J. T. Stasko. The Information Mural: A
Technique for Displaying and Navigating Large Information
Spaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 4(3):257–271, July-September 1998.
[11] T. A. Keahey. The Generalized Detail-in-Context Problem.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, IEEE Visualization, October 1998.
[12] D. A. Keim, S. C. North, C. Panse, and J. Schneidewind.
Visualizing geographic information: VisualPoints vs CartoDraw. Information Visualization, 2:58–67, 2003.
[13] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt Jr., and M. P. Vecchi. Optimization by Simulated Annealing. Science, 220(4598):671–680,
May 1983.
[14] L. Kornelsen. Informationsvisualisierung mit geographischem Bezug. MSc thesis, University of Rostock, 2002.
[15] Y. K. Leung and M. D. Apperley. A Review and Taxonomy of Distortion-Oriented Presentation Techniques. ACM
Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, 1(2):126–
160, June 1994.
[16] A. M. MacEachren and M. J. Kraak. Research challenges in
geovisualization. Cartography and Geographic Information
Systems, 28:3–12, 2001.
[17] T. J. Overbye and J. D. Weber. New Methods for the Visualization of Electric Power System Information. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis’00), 2000.
[18] W.-D. Rase. Fischauge-Projektionen als kartographische Lupen. Salzburger Geographische Materialien, Angewandte
Geographische Informationsverarbeitung, IX(26), 1997.
[19] J. K. Rayson. Aggregate Towers: Scale Sensitive Visualization and Decluttering of Geospatial Data. In IEEE Information Visualization, 1999.
[20] M. Sakar and M. Brown. Graphical ﬁsheye views of graphs.
ACM Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction (HCI),
pages 83–91, 1992.
[21] B. Shneiderman. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for Information Visualization. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, 1996.
[22] A. Skupin. From Metaphor to Method: Cartographic Perspectives on Information Visualization. In IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization, pages 91–97, 2000.
[23] J. van Wijk and W. Nuij. Smooth and efﬁcient zooming and
panning. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis’03), 2003.
[24] M. O. Ward. A taxonomy of glyph placement strategies for
multidimensional data visualization. Information Visualization, 1:194–210, 2002.
[25] J. M. Ware and C. B. Jones. Conﬂict Reduction in Map Generalization Using Iterative Improvement. GeoInformatica,
2(4):383–407, 1998.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

