Impact of Group Size on Spatial Structure Understanding Tasks
1

2

1

Taylor Sando , Melanie Tory , and Pourang Irani
1

2

University of Manitoba, University of Victoria

Figure 1. Example display and experimental setup used in our construction task (Experiment 3). When a visual representation must be related
to the physical world, multiple 2D views of the same 3D structure can facilitate a group understanding of the 3D spatial structure. Group
size affects the performance of the collective unit for two different presentation styles.

ABSTRACT

1

Co-located collaborative tasks allow teams to leverage the skills
of each individual member. While numerous guidelines exist to
develop visualizations for individuals working on desktops, very
little is known about how groups of individuals interpret and
comprehend diverse types of visual constructs on larger displays.
To study whether group size impacts the collective understanding
of relationships in three-dimensional (3D) spatial structures when
using different types of presentation, we carried out three
experiments. We compared individual performance at structure
understanding tasks to performance of groups containing two or
four members. We consider two alternate visualization techniques
for extracting 3D structure information: a 3D view with animated
rotations and a combination of one static 3D plus three static twodimensional (2D) projection views. In general our studies suggest
that as group size increases, so does accuracy but with a cost in
efficiency. Our results also suggest that beyond a threshold limit
in group size, performance on certain tasks begins to degrade.
Regardless of group size, participants performed better when the
display was presented in the animation condition instead of the
multiple static views, except when large groups needed to relate
the visualization to a physical counterpart. We summarize our
results in terms of Steiner’s model for explaining the effects of
group size and task characteristics on group performance.

Do four eyes see better than two? Mark et al. [12][13]
demonstrated that yes, two users can produce more accurate
results than one user at both focused and open-ended visualization
tasks involving tabular data. But do these results extend to other
types of visualizations, such as 3D spatial structures?
Visually comprehending and assessing relationships in 3D
spatial structures is critical for tasks such as scanning medical
images for anomalies, inspecting drawings of buildings or visually
exploring scientific visualizations. Various interaction and
visualization techniques (e.g., animated rotations or multiple 2D
perspective views) assist in carrying out such tasks, but have
generally been designed for a single user. In reality, 3D spatial
structures are often examined by multiple users simultaneously.
For example, a team of surgeons may need to inspect tumour
growth and discuss surgical plans, architects and designers
brainstorm novel features with 3D mock-ups, and scientists with
diverse skill sets may investigate the causes of natural disasters
presented visually.
Although perception of 3D spatial visualizations has been
studied extensively, it has examined only single users. When
groups of users perform 3D spatial tasks, performance may be
affected by factors such as team dynamics, the amount of
discussion that takes place and the skills each bring to the group.
Little is known about how such elements affect performance,
particularly when it concerns discerning structures from 3D
spatial representations. We therefore designed three studies to
examine group ability to understand 3D structures. These studies
focus on the primary experimental factor of group size, which has
been found to influence group performance in other applications
and might therefore play a significant role. We focus on groups
working together around a horizontal display, since it is well
established that large screen displays support collaborative work.
Horizontal displays in particular are thought to facilitate
collaboration and discussion among small teams by encouraging
face-to-face contact and equitable interaction with the software.
This paper makes two key contributions. First, it examines how
having more than one person working cooperatively on common
3D spatial tasks affects accuracy and efficiency. Based on
previous analyses of group work (e.g., [8][12][13]), we
hypothesized that groups would take longer, but would have a

KEYWORDS: group size, collaboration, spatial structure, 2D and
3D views, animation, rotation, horizontal display.
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: screen design, evaluation
/methodology; H.5.3 [Group and Organization Interfaces]:
computer-supported cooperative work.

Email: taylor.sando@gmail.com, mtory@cs.uvic.ca,
irani@cs.umanitoba.ca

IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2011
1 - 4 March, Hong Kong, China
978-1-61284-934-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

INTRODUCTION

107

higher success rate than individuals. Second, we investigate
whether earlier results supporting the benefits of animated
displays for 3D structure understanding [17] still hold in
collaborative work scenarios. We also hypothesized that there
could be an interaction between visualization type and group size,
as found previously [13]. For example, it was possible that
animation would be better than static views with two people, but
not with four. In summary, our goals were to determine if there
are benefits to additional people, whether there are limits to those
benefits (e.g., hindered performance because of coordination
overhead among participants), and how the effects of group size
might vary depending on the visual representation.
Results of our first two experiments generally suggest that
regardless of group size, participants are more accurate and
efficient with the animated 3D display for making relative
distance judgments and finding differences in 3D structures.
Interestingly, we also find threshold limits depending on the type
of task. For making judgments on distances, groups of two were
more accurate than either one individual alone or groups of four.
However for a more complex task, four participants were more
accurate than two or just one alone. Surprisingly, in a final
experiment that involved physical construction of a 3D object,
groups of four were more efficient with a combination of static
views than with the animated 3D view. We hypothesize some
potential reasons for this finding in the discussion.
2

RELATED WORK

2.1
Visualization for Collaborative Use
Collaborative visualization has recently engaged a great deal of
research interest. We focus on co-located collaboration, where
users work together in the same place at the same time. Much of
the work so far in this domain has developed interfaces and
interaction techniques to enable smooth mechanics of
collaborative work. Particular focus has been placed on large
interactive surfaces such as wall and tabletop displays since they
are known to facilitate effective collaboration. Example
visualization tools designed for interactive surfaces include [7]
and [21]. An analysis of requirements for collaborative
visualization may be found in [5].
A few previous studies have compared group and individual
performance at visualization tasks, typically finding that groups
obtain more accurate results than individuals. For example, [12],
[13], and [8] reported that groups were more accurate than
individuals in studies involving questions about tabular data, but
were often slower [12]. Additionally, these studies identified a set
of activities involved in the collaborative analysis process.
Similarly, [1] found that groups committed fewer errors than
individuals for a security screening visual search task, but were
slower under some conditions. One possible explanation for this
trend is that groups spend longer validating their findings than
individuals [8]. The finding that groups outperform individuals is
also consistent with studies of computer-based tasks beyond the
field of visualization (e.g., [6][16]).
Our own experiments are most similar to [1] since they involve
spatial data. We extend the previous work by examining a
different type of task (understanding relative positioning of
objects) and exploring 3D data rather than 2D. We also examine
whether the effect of group size is consistent across visualizations
that are known to require different levels of cognitive effort.
2.2
Effect of Group Size on Performance
Psychologists have investigated the influence of group size on
group dynamics and task performance for over a century (e.g.,
[18]). While the classic finding is that larger groups produce

108

better results, this view is simplistic; in reality, group performance
depends on a variety of factors. A detailed review of this literature
is beyond the scope of this paper; however, a widely-cited
theoretical model is Steiner’s model of group productivity [20]. It
describes a group’s actual productivity as its potential productivity
minus losses due to coordination overhead and decreased
motivation. Both potential productivity and process losses tend to
increase with increasing group size.
Potential productivity depends on the nature of the task.
Steiner’s model predicts that productivity for additive tasks (in
which individual contributions can be summed to make a group
output, such as picking up litter) should increase linearly with
group size. By contrast, productivity at disjunctive tasks (which
require the group to select one solution among alternatives)
should increase due to more alternative suggestions, but with
diminishing returns for larger and larger groups. This was verified
experimentally [11]. Furthermore, if a task is disjunctive and there
are high coordination costs, performance should increase with
group size up to some optimum, but then decrease for larger
groups due to coordination challenges. This was found to be true
if one considered functional group size rather than actual group
size [11] , where functional group size was defined as the number
of members who actively coordinated with others.
2.3
3D Structure Visualization
We focus on visualizations of 3D structures. Previous work in 3D
structure visualization has examined factors contributing to
effective perception of depth and shape, and benefits of 2D and
3D views as well as their combination. In contrast, our study
focuses on comparing group versus individual performance.
Numerous studies have compared 2D to 3D views of 3D scenes
as well as their combination. For some tasks, particularly those
requiring precise relative positioning, combinations of 2D
projections or slices and 3D views have been shown to benefit
performance compared to static 3D views alone (e.g., [24]).
Understanding the relationships between the various views is
easier when mental rotation is not required to align them [22];
hence, the ExoVis [23] technique (where 2D projections are
shown at an angle) was chosen in our experiments over standard
multi-view projections (where 2D projections are shown flat on
the screen). It is also known that a user’s ability to understand 2D
views of a 3D scene depends on spatial ability [10][25],
suggesting that combined 2D/3D views may not be suitable for all
users. Moreover, [17] revealed that a rotatable 3D scene could
enable precise positioning faster and with equal or greater
accuracy than a combination of static 2D and 3D scenes. User
control over the rotation was unimportant; both fixed rotation and
user-controlled rotation were effective, echoing earlier results
[9][26]. It seems that having the appropriate view for a task is
more important than physically interacting with the scene [9].
The knowledge that rotation facilitates 3D structure
understanding is not new. A variety of experiments have
compared various 3D cues such as shading, binocular disparity
(from stereo vision), and motion cues to determine their relative
importance in understanding 3D scenes. Typically, these studies
have found that both motion and stereo cues are very helpful for
conveying 3D structure, but motion contributes more than stereo
[19][27][28]. Results tend to be similar whether the object is
rotated (causing the kinetic depth effect) or the user’s head moves
(causing motion parallax). Perceptual constancy, a phenomenon
originally defined by [15], explains that the identity of an object is
preserved during rotation as well as following other view changes
such as perspective, distance, or lighting.

Our own experiments included both a 3D animated view as well
as a combination of static 2D and 3D views. The static
combination was included to examine how group performance is
affected by a cognitively demanding representation.
2.4

Considerations
for 3D
Visualizations
on
Horizontal Displays
Wigdor et al. [29] have shown that comparison of some graphical
primitives can be less accurate on horizontal displays compared to
vertical displays. In addition, researchers have recently taken
interest in studying the readability of different projections of a 3D
model on a 2D surface [3][14][29]. Hancock et al. [3] proposed
various alternatives to represent 3D models on a horizontal
surface to minimize some of the distortion effects that result from
the projection. A more user-centric approach was proposed to
correct perspective of the display by tracking the user’s viewpoint
and position around the shared surface [14]. Hancock et al.
recently showed that errors in judging object orientation increased
as the center of projection diverged from the observer’s viewpoint
and were considerably lower when the center of projection was
directly above the table [4]. For this reason, we used a center of
projection directly above the table in our experiments. A review
and taxonomy of 3D representations on tabletop displays is
provided by Grossman and Wigdor [2].
3

OVERVIEW OF EXPERIMENTS

Our goal was to examine the effects of group size, and secondarily
presentation style, on 3D spatial understanding tasks. In the first
experiment, participants made a judgment of the relative distances
between objects in 3D. Distance judgment is a common task that
underlies 3D structure understanding and is necessary for many
applications (e.g. to understand whether there is sufficient space
between a planned surgical intervention and a brain structure
responsible for critical functionality such as speech). In a second
experiment, users were required to find differences between two
3D structures. This is common in medical applications, for
instance where physicians have to find changes between images
taken at different times, or in architectural applications where a
user might need to determine whether a colleague has made
changes to the positions of doors, closets, or other features.
Finally, in the third experiment, the team needed to build a 3D
spatial structure with MegaBloks. This required participants to
relate their perspectives of the 3D scene to an equivalent object in
the real world, to see if they could translate their understanding of
a virtual object to a physical reality.
All experiments required participants to coordinate their efforts
to provide a response. Our hypotheses are summarized as follows:
H1: responses would be significantly slower as group size
increases, consistent with previous studies in other areas [1][12].
H2: teams would be significantly more accurate with a larger
number of members, consistent with previous studies in other
areas [1][6][8][12][13][16].
H3: group size and display type would interact. Performance
with the two display types (animation and static views) would not
change in the same way as group size was increased.
3.1
Details Common to all Experiments
We used a large horizontal display measuring 1.8m in width,
1m in height, and 1.3m in length using a projector suspended from
the ceiling directly above the table, as shown in Figure 1. The
surface did not support touch interaction; however, user
interactions were limited to a simple response so this was
unnecessary. All scenes used a perspective camera with the center
of projection directly above the center of the table. Participants
stood around the table and were allowed to move freely.

Different participants took part in each experiment, with 55-56
people in each. Since groups were assigned, group members
generally did not know each other. Participants were volunteers
from a university student population, mostly aged 18-24, and
approximately 60% male and 40% female (exact numbers
unavailable). No participants reported difficulty with the tasks due
to color vision deficiencies.
Groups had 1, 2, or 4 participants. Due to difficulty in recruiting
participants at the same time, we did not include group size 3, and
had slightly fewer of the larger group sizes. ANOVA results were
calculated using Type III Sum of Squares, which is designed to
handle unequal sample sizes.
Participants were instructed to complete the tasks as quickly
and accurately as possible. Most experimental sessions lasted 5-10
minutes. We did not analyze learning effects as the designs were
all counter-balanced for interface order.
4

EXPERIMENT 1 - RELATIVE JUDGMENT OF DISTANCE

Our previous research [17] examined users’ ability to judge
relative distances between objects using two representations: an
animated 3D view and ExoVis (EV) [23]. The task was generally
done quicker and more accurately with animation than with EV on
a desktop display. We extend these results by examining how
people fared on a large horizontal surface, and how results varied
when people completed the task in groups.
4.1
Task
As shown in Figure 2, three spherical balls of equal size were
presented on the computer screen. Each ball had a center point
defined in three dimensions and a diameter of approximately 1.5-2
cm in each condition. The exact size of the ball on the screen
varied because the camera was set to a perspective projection. The
red ball represented the target. The participants’ task was to
identify which ball was closer to the target ball: the yellow ball or
the blue ball. The distance between the target ball and the other
two balls was between 1 and 3 cm. The distance to the yellow and
blue balls was always unequal, so that there was always exactly
one correct answer. Each was closer in exactly half the trials.

Figure 2. Spatial judgment task. Animation (left) and EV (right).
Participants determined which ball was closer to the red ball.

4.2
Design and Procedure
We used a 2x3x3 factorial design. The first factor was
presentation: ExoVis (EV) or animation. In the animation
condition, a single 3D view of the scene was rendered and the
camera rotated at a fixed angle around the vertical axis at a rate of
5 degrees every 55 milliseconds. In all conditions, participants
attempted to select the closest ball using a keypad.
The second factor was difficulty level, defined as the distance
between the closest ball and the distractor. There were three levels
of difficulty: easy (1.5 cm), medium (0.75 cm), and hard (0.5cm),
as in [17] . A total of 32 ball configurations were used, with 8 for

109

each difficulty level. Configurations were presented in random
order until all 32 had been shown for each presentation condition.
The third factor was the group size. Participants completed the
task either alone (N=9), in pairs (N=9), or in a group of four (N =
7). Order of presentation condition was counterbalanced.
Each participant used a keypad to indicate his or her answer.
When participants were in pairs or a group of four, they were
allowed to converse, and were required to agree before moving on
to the next trial. Participants were informed whether they were
correct or not. If they were correct, the screen flashed green. If
they were incorrect, the screen flashed red.
4.3
Measures
We measured success rate (percent of correct responses) and time
to complete the trial. Trial time started when participants were
shown a scene and ended when they came to a consensus.
4.4
Results
For success rate (which we could not assume to follow a normal
distribution), Pearson Chi-square tests were used to assess
whether there were any differences between the presentation
conditions and the number of people per group, and between
difficulty level and the number of people per group. For elapsed
time, the data was log transformed to satisfy the normality
assumption. Separate two-way ANOVAs were used to assess
whether there was an interaction effect between the presentation
condition and the number of people per group, and between
difficulty level and the number of people per group. P values less
than 0.05 were considered significant. We did not analyze
interactions between difficulty and interface since those were
already assessed in our previous research [17] (hence the two-way
ANOVAs instead of one 3-way). Because success rate was not
normally distributed, we could not use multivariate ANOVA.
4.4.1
Success Rate
There was no interaction between the presentation condition and
the number of people on the success rate. Figure 3 shows that
animation was significantly more accurate than EV overall, χ2(2,
23) = 10.162, p < .01. As shown in Figure 4, the number of people
in a group significantly effected the rate of success, 2 (2, 23) =
9.958, p < .01. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc tests were used to
assess individual differences between group sizes. We found that
two people were significantly more accurate than either one
person or four people. A group of four was not significantly
different than a single person. There was also an interaction
between the number of people and the difficulty level, 2 (3, 15) =
10.281, p < 0.01. A pair of people performed significantly better
than either an individual or a group of four only at the hardest
difficulty level. Other differences were not significant.

Figure 4. Success rate for each group condition and difficulty
condition. Error bars show +/- 2 SE.

4.4.2
Elapsed Time
As shown in Figure 5, there was a significant difference in time
between groups of different sizes, F (2, 23) = 21.293, p < 0.001.
A Bonferroni-corrected post hoc test showed that groups of two
and four took significantly longer to complete the task than an
individual. Animation was significantly faster than EV, F (1, 23)
= 57.261, p < 0.001. There was also an interaction between
difficulty and group size, F (2, 23) = 2.332, p < 0.05, as shown in
Figure 6. Differences between easy, medium, and hard trials were
more pronounced for groups than for an individual.

Figure 5. Elapsed time for each group and presentation condition.
Error bars show +/- 2 SE.

Figure 6. Elapsed time for each group and difficulty condition. Error
bars show +/- 2 SE.

Figure 3. Success rate for each presentation condition. Error bars
show +/- 2 SE.

110

4.5
Summary and Analysis
Overall, animation had a higher success rate than EV. This
contrasted with an earlier experiment that found no significant
difference [17]. Possible explanations for the difference from

earlier work are the display method, i.e. larger horizontal display
versus a computer monitor, group dynamics, or that the earlier
study had insufficient power to show the difference. Consistent
with the earlier work [17], animation was faster than EV.
Two people had a higher success rate than both an individual
and a group of four. When 1 or 4 people completed the task, there
was a clear drop in performance as difficulty increased that was
not found in a group of two. More people also led to an increase
in completion time. These results together suggest that when
accuracy is important, two people may be optimal, especially for
difficult spatial judgments.
5

EXPERIMENT 2 – CONTRAST JUDGMENT

Comparing two models is a common task. For example, medical
professionals compare images in cancer patients looking for
differences in the size of tumors, perhaps before and after
treatment. In this experiment we examine people’s ability to
identify differences between two similar 3D models using the two
presentation conditions, animation and EV.
5.1
Task
Participants were presented with two different 3D block
configurations, and asked to identify the number of differences
between them. Each configuration was made up of 10 randomly
assembled blocks. Blocks varied in both their size and their color
(red, blue and yellow). Both configurations were presented
simultaneously with the same display type: EV or animation. The
left side acted as the source, while the right side acted as the
target. There were two sources of differences between the two
configurations: a target block could have a different position or a
different color from the source. Figure 7 shows an example of
both the animation condition (top) and the EV condition (bottom).
The target configuration either had 0, 1, 2, or 3 differences
when compared to the source. Zero differences meant that the
target and source configurations were actually the same. In the
animation condition, both models rotated automatically at the
same degree, at the same rate as in Experiment 1.

completed the task either alone (N=7), in pairs (N=9) or in a
group of four (N=8). Order of presentation condition was
counterbalanced; within these blocks, trial order was randomized.
Each participant used their own keypad and selected one button
to indicate their answer to each trial. Participants who worked in
pairs or in a group were required to come to a consensus before
being allowed to continue. When participants had all selected the
same answer, they were informed of the result via a green flash to
indicate success, or a red flash to indicate failure.
5.3
Measures
We measured elapsed time and accuracy. Time was measured
from the beginning of a trial to the time when all participant(s)
had agreed on the same answer. Accuracy was marked on a
success or failure criterion.
5.4
Results
For success rate, Pearson Chi-square tests were used to assess
whether there were any differences between the presentation
conditions and the number of people per group. For elapsed time,
the data was log transformed to satisfy the normality assumption.
A two-way ANOVA was used to assess whether there was an
interaction effect between the presentation condition and the
number of people per group. P values less than 0.05 were
considered significant. In preliminary analysis, the number of
differences between target and source did significantly influence
time or success rate; it was therefore not analyzed further.
5.4.1
Success Rate
Figure 8 shows that the number of people significantly effected
the success rate, 2 (2, 23) = 17.815, p < 0.001. Bonferronicorrected post hoc tests showed that a group of four people was
significantly more accurate than either one or two people. An
individual and a pair of people were not significantly different.
Presentation condition had no observable effect: animation and
EV were not significantly different. There was also no interaction
between presentation condition and group size.
5.4.2
Elapsed Time
As shown in Figure 9, increasing the number of people
significantly increased the time to complete the task, F(2, 23) =
7.954, p < 0.001. Bonferroni-corrected post hoc comparisons
showed that groups of four or two were significantly slower than
an individual. In addition, animation was significantly faster than
EV, F(1,23) = 52.21, p < 0.001. There was no evidence of an
interaction between presentation and group size.

Figure 7. Contrast task. Animation is shown at the top, EV at the
bottom. Top has two differences: red block at the left has
moved forward and a yellow block at the right has turned blue.
Bottom: the yellow block at the top has moved to the left.

5.2
Design and Procedure
Participants had 16 trials for each presentation condition: 4 trials
where the target and the source were the same, 4 trials in which
they differed in one way, 4 trials in which they differed in two
ways and 4 trials in which they differed in three ways. Participants

Figure 8. Success rate for the number of people and presentation
condition. Error bars show +/- 2 SE.

111

Figure 9. Elapsed time for each group and presentation condition.
Error bars show +/- 2 SE.

5.5
Summary and Analysis
Consistent with earlier work [17], animation was faster than
EV. The success rate showed no difference between EV and
animation. Group size effected both accuracy and elapsed time.
A group of four was found to be more accurate than both one or
two people, but groups were slower than individuals. The results
suggest that when accuracy is more important than completion
time, a group of four performs the best at contrast judgment.
6

EXPERIMENT 3 - CONSTRUCTION

Experiments 1 and 2 evaluated the ability to understand a virtual
representation. In contrast, for Experiment 3 we examined
people's ability to translate the understanding of a 3D model to the
real world. Figure 10 shows an example trial. Participants built a
physical model that matched an on-screen visual model (i.e. the
visual model served as the instructions). Unless otherwise
specified, the experimental setup was the same as for the other
two experiments.
6.1
Task
Participants were presented with a configuration of blocks on the
display. The configuration acted as the instructions for assembling
blocks in the real world. Participants were provided with exactly
the ten necessary MegaBloks to recreate the visual
configuration on the table.

6.2
Design and Procedures
The experiment was a 3x2 factorial design. The first factor was
the number of people in the group. Participants completed the
task either alone (N=8), in pairs (N=8) or in a group of four
(N=8). The second factor was the presentation condition, which
was either EV or animation. Each group assembled three
configurations for EV and three for animation. Order of the
presentation conditions was counterbalanced.
When participants were ready to begin the trial, they selected an
on-screen start button. They were then presented with the block
configuration on the screen. Participants then began assembling
the blocks. When they had completed the assembly to their
satisfaction, they signaled the experimenter and the trial was
paused. If the configuration was correct, the trial was finished. If
the configuration was not correct, the timer was continued and the
participants were told to keep working on the configuration. When
a trial was finished, the blocks were disassembled and the next
trial started when signaled by the participants.
6.3
Measures
Participants were measured on a single variable, which was the
time to complete the block assembly task.
6.4
Results
Elapsed time was log transformed to satisfy the normality
assumption. A two-way ANOVA was used to assess whether
there was an interaction effect between the presentation condition
and the number of people per group. P values less than 0.05 were
considered significant.
6.4.1
Elapsed Time
Unlike the other two experiments, there was a significant
interaction between presentation condition and group size, F(5,21)
= 6.137, p < 0.01, as shown in Figure 11. EV showed a downward
trend in elapsed time as the number of people increased.
Animation, on the other hand, showed a dip in elapsed time with
two people compared to one or four people. Overall, the number
of people in a group significantly effected elapsed time, F (2,21) =
4.673, p < 0.05. A Bonferroni-corrected post hoc test showed that
a group of two was significantly faster than one person. EV was
not significantly different than animation when group size was
ignored.

Figure 11. Elapsed Time for each group and presentation condition.
Error bars show +/- 2 SE.
Figure 10. Example model and display for Experiment 3. Left: EV,
top right: animation, bottom right: physical blocks.

112

Details of the interaction effect were analyzed using
Bonferroni-corrected post hoc tests. They showed that a group of
two people using animation was significantly faster than both an
individual and a group of four also using animation. For EV, a
group of four was significantly faster than an individual. When

considering a group of two people, animation was significantly
faster than EV consistent with the other experiments. However,
when considering a group of four, the opposite was true: EV was
significantly faster than animation.
7

RELATIONSHIP
PRODUCTIVITY

TO

STEINER’S

MODEL

OF

GROUP

Steiner's model [20] (presented in section 2.2) suggests that actual
team productivity is the result of its potential productivity minus
any faulty group interaction processes. Based on this definition,
we can assume more participants will increase the likelihood of
sub-optimal group interaction. When we analyze our results from
this perspective, the distance judgment task is easily explained.
This task was largely disjunctive: it required a group to choose
one best answer from all the alternatives the group could generate.
For this type of task, Steiner’s model predicts an improvement in
accuracy with increasing group size, but with diminishing returns.
In cases where coordination cost is high, an inverted U shape is
expected; accuracy should improve with larger groups up to some
maximum, but then decrease with more people due to
coordination. Note that “productivity” is typically measured
simply as accuracy, as compared to accuracy per unit time.
An inverted U can be clearly seen in the success rate results for
distance judgment. Note that the inverted U only occurred on
difficult problems. For easy problems, participants likely all
identified the correct answer so that adding more participants
added little benefit, but also very little coordination was needed.
For the contrast task, groups also had an improved success rate
compared to individuals, with groups of size four performing
better. This task is only partially disjunctive: more eyes are likely
to see the differences, which can then be easily verified by others.
It remains to be seen exactly how additional group members
would influence accuracy on this task; however, we might expect
accuracy to quickly plateau and then fall off due to process losses.
Interpreting results of the block assembly task is more
challenging. This task has the potential to be partially additive;
additional hands could assemble the blocks more quickly, up to
the point where there is insufficient room for more hands in the
workspace. However, we observed that groups tended to complete
the task in a highly coupled manner, with one person doing most
of the assembly and others providing advice. Simultaneous
building by more than one person was observed, but was neither
common nor continuous. Thus the additive effect is likely rather
small. Since participants were required to assemble each structure
perfectly, there was no possible time-accuracy trade-off in this
task and time is the only measure of effectiveness. Time for the
animation condition followed a U shape (in this case not inverted
because better performance has a lower value in comparison to
accuracy where a higher value is better). This suggests an effect
where there is an optimal group size of two and process losses for
larger groups. Interestingly, EV did not follow this same trend,
becoming in fact more effective than animation for groups of size
four. A similar U shaped curve might be seen for EV but with a
larger optimal group size. This of course could only be verified by
repeating the experiment with larger groups.
8

DISCUSSION

An interesting finding for the first two experiments is that the
choice of visualization technique did not interact with the group
size. Animation was clearly the better technique, being
consistently faster (in both tasks) and more accurate (in the
distance judgment task), consistent with earlier results [17]. This
could either be because the animated view is easier to understand,
or because the back of the object was not visible with EV.
Regardless, group size appeared to effect these easy and hard-touse interfaces equally, suggesting that the choice of presentation

technique had minimal impact on group coordination. If true, this
is helpful for design; a representation that works well for an
individual also works well for a group. Thus our results generally
support earlier findings that a rotatable 3D view is best for many
3D spatial tasks, even when the tasks are performed by groups.
However, the story is not quite as simple when we consider
experiment 3. Here there was a clear interaction, and surprisingly,
EV actually outperformed animation in some circumstances,
specifically for groups of four. We pose two possible hypotheses
to explain this result. The first is that having a static view made
coordination easier: it could be potentially difficult to discuss a
moving model. However, this would not explain why a similar
effect was not seen for the other two tasks. The second hypothesis
is that the multiple views provided by EV may have better
mapped to individuals’ different perspectives on the physical
blocks. The physical blocks in this task forced individuals to take
different perspective views (since they cannot all stand in the
same direction relative to the structure), and there are more
different viewpoints as the number of people increases. In this
case, multiple static viewpoints may provide each individual with
their own optimal view as well as provide an understanding of the
viewpoint of others. We observed some evidence that perspectives
on the physical blocks may have been important. In particular,
participants tended to align the physical structure with the static
3D view in EV, and group together around the physical structure.
Future experiments could further investigate these hypotheses by
constraining participant movement to control or experimentally
manipulate the points of view.
We also observed that groups generally achieved better results
than individuals. In cases where accuracy at 3D spatial tasks is
more important than time, our results imply that it is worth having
two or more users work together. Spatial tasks depend on spatial
ability and can be highly challenging for some individuals [10].
Presumably, working together allows users to identify and correct
each other’s interpretation mistakes. Including more users also
increases the likelihood that one member of the group will have a
high spatial ability and therefore perform better, influencing the
entire group. At the same time, there is a maximum group size
beyond which performance will begin to decrease due to
coordination overhead. There are also obvious resource
considerations when multiple users are assigned to a task that
could potentially be performed by one user, although these are
likely less important when decisions are expensive or safety
critical (e.g., surgery planning). From a practical standpoint, a
group of two may be a good choice in many cases, though we did
sometimes observe higher accuracy with four users.
9

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

To provide sufficient control, our experiment only considered
subtasks that are commonly carried out within a larger task set.
However, viewers are more often concerned with a larger
problem, and subtasks could be distributed among team members.
Additional investigation is required to examine the effect of
higher-level tasks, role divisions, and loosely coupled work styles
on effectiveness of different visual representations. It would be
particularly interesting to examine tasks that are very difficult to
solve, to see what impact this would have on group dynamics and
whether Steiner’s law extends to these situations.
In considering each group as a unit whole, we did not explicitly
look at the spatial ability or experience of individuals. We believe
our overall results are valid because spatial ability differences
should average out due to random assignment of people to
conditions. However, further investigation of the relationship
between individual spatial abilities and group performance is
warranted and will likely lead to a richer understanding. One
benefit of working in a group is that users ideally build upon each

113

others’ skill sets. Thus, the overall accuracy of the group may
reflect the performance of the member with the highest spatial
ability. Simultaneously, the time to perform tasks in Experiments
1 and 2 could have been dominated by the person with the lowest
spatial ability since all individuals were required to answer.
Finally, user expertise in a specific domain could impact the
understandability of 3D representations. We did not control for
this factor since our representations were very general. However,
different presentation styles may be more or less effective
depending on the experience and skills of the group members.
We plan to examine the interactive features necessary for
individual and collective control of a 3D visualization. One
extension could investigate private and shared views dedicated to
various forms of investigations. Also, our studies suggest that if a
representation works well for an individual it will probably work
well for a group, but this should be further investigated with other
visualizations and tasks. More generally, further investigation of
collaborative visualization combined with sociological theories
may be worthwhile, especially to examine factors such as group
dynamics, strategy, and individual influence.
10

CONCLUSION

We explored effects of group size on comprehension of 3D spatial
visualizations with two competing presentation styles: animated
rotations and multiple static 3D and 2D views. Our results
generally suggest that users are more effective with animated
rotations than with multiple static views. They also suggest that as
group size increases, so does accuracy, but with a tradeoff in task
completion time. In more complex tasks, larger group sizes can
facilitate more accurate judgments in 3D environments. However,
this improvement in accuracy can peak with a relatively small
group size; adding additional group members then negatively
impacts performance, presumably due to the cost of coordinating
individuals’ actions and understanding. Results of our third
experiment reveal that multiple perspectives may improve 3D
spatial comprehension in group settings where each individual
user maintains their own perspective of a physical 3D object.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

114

C. Forlines, C. Shen, D. Wigdor, and R. Balakrishnan. “Exploring
the effects of group size and display configuration on visual search,”
Proc. ACM Conf. CSCW, pp. 11-20, 2006.
T. Grossman and D. Wigdor. “Going deeper: a taxonomy of 3D on
the tabletop,” Proc. IEEE Tabletop, pp. 137-144, 2007.
M. Hancock and S. Carpendale. “Supporting multiple off-axis
viewpoints at a tabletop display,” Proc. IEEE Tabletop, pp 171–178,
2007.
M. Hancock, S. Carpendale, and A. Cockburn. “Shallow-depth 3D
interaction: design and evaluation of one-, two- and three-touch
techniques,” Proc. ACM CHI, pp. 1147–1156, 2007.
J. Heer, F. van Ham, S. Carpendale, C. Weaver, and P. Isenberg.
“Creation and collaboration: engaging new audiences for
information visualization,” In A. Kerren et al. (eds), Information
Visualization, LNCS 4950, pp. 92-133, 2008.
I. Heldal, M. Spante, and M. Connell. “Are two heads better than
one? Object-focused work in physical and in virtual environments,”
ACM Symp. VRST, pp. 287-296, 2006.
P. Isenberg and D. Fisher. “Collaborative brushing and linking for
co-located visual analytics of document collections,” Computer
Graphics Forum (Proc. EuroVis), vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1031–1038,
June 2009.
P. Isenberg, A. Tang, and S. Carpendale. “An exploratory study of
visual information analysis,” Proc. ACM CHI, pp. 1217-1226 2008.
M. Keehner, M. Hegarty, C. Cohen, P. Khooshabeh, and D.R.
Montello. “Spatial reasoning with external visualizations: What

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

matters is what you see, not whether you interact,” Cognitive
Sciences, vol. 32, pp. 1099–1132, 2008.
M. Keehner, P. Khooshabeh, and M. Hegarty. “Individual
differences among users: implications for the design of 3D medical
visualizations,” User Centered Design for Medical Visualization, F.
Dong et al. (Eds), Information Science Reference, Hershey, PA,
USA, 2008.
G.E. Littlepage. “Effects of group size and task characteristics on
group performance: a test of Steiner’s model,” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 449-456, 1991.
G. Mark and A. Kobsa. “The effects of collaboration and system
transparency on CIVE usage: an empirical study and model,”
Presence, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 60–80, 2005.
G. Mark, A. Kobsa, and V. Gonzalez. “Do four eyes see better than
two? Collaborative versus individual discovery in data visualization
systems,” Proc. Intl Conf. InfoVis, pp. 249-255, 2002.
M.A Nacenta, S. Sakurai, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Miki, Y. Itoh, Y.
Kitamura, S. Subramanian, and C. Gutwin. “E-conic: a perspectiveaware interface for multi-display environments,” Proc. ACM UIST,
pp. 279–288, 2007.
G.G. Robertson, S.K. Card, and J.D. Mackinlay. “Information
visualization using 3D interactive animation,” Communications of
the ACM, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 56–71, 1993.
K. Ryall, C. Forlines, C. Shen, and M. Ringel Morris. “Exploring the
effects of group size and table size on interactions with tabletop
shared-display groupware,” Proc. ACM CSCW, pp. 284-293, 2004.
T. Sando, M. Tory, and P. Irani. “Effects of animation, usercontrolled interactions, and multiple static views in understanding
3D structures,” Proc.
Applied Perception in Graphics and
Visualization, 2009.
G. Simmel. “The number of members as determining the
sociological form of the group,” Am. J. Sociology, vol. 8, pp. 1-46
and 158-196, 1902.
R.L. Sollenberger and P. Milgram. “The effects of stereoscopic and
rotational displays in a three-dimensional path-tracing task,” Human
Factors, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 483–500, 1993.
I.D. Steiner. Group Process and Productivity. Academic Press,
1972.
M. Tobiasz, P. Isenberg, and S. Carpendale. “Lark: coordinating colocated collaboration with information visualization,” IEEE Trans.
Visualization and Computer Graphics (Proc. InfoVis), vol. 15, no. 6,
pp. 1065–1072, 2009.
M. Tory, “Mental Registration of 2D and 3D Visualizations (An
Empirical Study)”, Proc. IEEE Visualization, pp. 371-378, 2003.
M. Tory and C. Swindells. “Comparing exovis, orientation icon, and
in-place 3D visualization techniques,” Proc. Graphics Interface, pp.
57–64, 2003.
M. Tory, A.E. Kirkpatrick, M.S. Atkins, and T. Möller.
“Visualization task performance with 2D, 3D, and combination
displays,” IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol.
12, no. 1, pp. 2–13, 2006.
M. Velez, D. Silver, and M. Tremaine. “Understanding visualization
through spatial ability differences,” Proc. IEEE Visualization, pp.
511-518, 2005.
C. Ware and G. Franck. “Evaluating stereo and motion cues for
visualizing information nets in three dimensions,” ACM Trans.
Graphics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 121–140, 1996.
C. Ware, K. Arthur, and K.S. Booth. “Fish tank virtual reality,”
Proc. ACM INTERACT’93 and CHI’93, pp. 37–42, 1993.
C. Ware. “3D contour perception for flow visualization,” Proc.
Applied Perception in Graphics and Visualization, pp. 101–106,
2006.
D. Wigdor., C. Shen, C. Forlines, and R. Balakrishnan. “Perception
of elementary graphical elements in tabletop and multi-surface
environments,” Proc. ACM CHI, 473–482, 2007.

