Edge Maps: Representing Flow with Bounded Error
+DUVK %KDWLD∗

6KUHHUDM -DGKDY∗

3HHU7LPR %UHPHU†

*XRQLQJ &KHQ∗

6&, ,QVWLWXWH 8QLY RI 8WDK

6&, ,QVWLWXWH 8QLY RI 8WDK

/DZUHQFH /LYHUPRUH 1DWLRQDO /DE

6&, ,QVWLWXWH 8QLY RI 8WDK

-RVKXD $ /HYLQH∗
6&, ,QVWLWXWH 8QLY RI 8WDK

/XLV *XVWDYR 1RQDWR‡
× 3DXOR %UD]LO
8QLYHUVLGDGH GH 6DR

9DOHULR 3DVFXFFL∗
6&, ,QVWLWXWH 8QLY RI 8WDK

)LJXUH  (GJH PDSV HQDEOH QHZ YLHZV RI YHFWRU ¿HOG VWDELOLW\ LOOXVWUDWHG ZLWK D YHFWRU ¿HOG RQ WKLV ZDY\ VXUIDFH 7RS URZ PLGGOH ULJKW $
YLVXDOL]DWLRQ RI VRPH FRORUHG UHJLRQV ZKHUH ÀRZ VKDUHV WKH VDPH VRXUFH JUHHQ VSKHUHV DQG VLQN UHG VSKHUHV LV DXJPHQWHG WR VKRZ KRZ
WKHVH UHJLRQV RYHUODS ZKHQ HUURU LV LQWURGXFHG %RWWRP URZ PLGGOH ULJKW 6WUHDPZDYHV FRORUHG JUHHQ WR UHG DV WKH\ JURZ VKRZ WKH DGYHFWLRQ
RI D VLQJOH SDUWLFOH ,Q WKH SUHVHQFH RI HUURU ZDYHV FDQ ZLGHQ DQG QDUURZ DQG ELIXUFDWH RU PHUJH

A BSTRACT
Robust analysis of vector fields has been established as an important tool for deriving insights from the complex systems these
fields model. Many analysis techniques rely on computing streamlines, a task often hampered by numerical instabilities. Approaches
that ignore the resulting errors can lead to inconsistencies that may
produce unreliable visualizations and ultimately prevent in-depth
analysis. We propose a new representation for vector fields on surfaces that replaces numerical integration through triangles with linear maps defined on its boundary. This representation, called edge
maps, is equivalent to computing all possible streamlines at a user
defined error threshold. In spite of this error, all the streamlines
computed using edge maps will be pairwise disjoint. Furthermore,
our representation stores the error explicitly, and thus can be used to
produce more informative visualizations. Given a piecewise-linear
interpolated vector field, a recent result [15] shows that there are
only 23 possible map classes for a triangle, permitting a concise
description of flow behaviors. This work describes the details of
computing edge maps, provides techniques to quantify and refine
edge map error, and gives qualitative and visual comparisons to
more traditional techniques.
Keywords: Vector Fields, Error Quantification, Edge Maps.
Index Terms:

I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]:

∗ emails:

Picture/Image

{hbhatia, jadhav, chengu, jlevine, pascucci}@sci.utah.edu
bremer5@llnl.gov
‡ email: gnonato@icmc.usp.br
† email:

IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2011
1 - 4 March, Hong Kong, China
978-1-61284-934-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

Generation—Line and curve generation; I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques—Graphics data structures
and data types; G.1.2 [Numerical Analysis]: Approximation—
Approximation of surfaces and contours
1 M OTIVATIONS
Vector fields are a common form of simulation data appearing in a
wide variety of applications ranging from computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and weather prediction to engineering design. Visualizing and analyzing the flow behavior of these fields can help
to provide critical insights into simulated physical processes. However, achieving a consistent and rigorous interpretation of vector
fields is difficult, in part because traditional numerical techniques
for integration do not preserve the expected invariants of vector
fields.
To better understand this inherent issue of traditional numerical
techniques, we start with a description of a common way to store
vector fields. Both a discretization of the domain of the field (often
in the form of a triangulated mesh) as well as a set of sample vectors (defined at the vertices of the mesh) are required. The vector
field on the interior of a triangle is approximated by interpolating
vector values from the samples at the triangle’s corners. Computing
properties that then require integrating these vector values presents
a significant computational challenge. For example, consider computing the flow paths (streamlines) of massless particles that travel
using the instantaneous velocity defined by the field. Na¨ıve integration techniques may violate the property that every two of these
paths are expected to be pairwise disjoint (i.e. the uniqueness of the
solution of an ordinary differential equation). Figure 2 gives one
such example, where a fourth-order Runge-Kutta integration technique creates two crossing streamlines.
Despite these problems, many of the standard techniques used

75

Contributions
This paper describes a new data structure for storing the flow behavior of a vector field that does not rely on numerical integration. This
structure is complementary to the traditional way of storing vector
fields as piecewise linear interpolations over a mesh. Each triangle
stores a map which encodes the inflow/outflow behavior over the
boundary of the triangle. This allows us to replace the notion of integration with a different primitive: map lookup. Our contributions
include:
• The definition of edge maps for triangulated 2D vector fields,
and an algorithm to compute the approximate edge maps;
• Quantification of error bounds with this approximation;
• A refinement procedure for reducing mapping error; and
)LJXUH  /HIW 7ZR VWUHDPOLQHV DUH VHHGHG WUDYHOLQJ FORFNZLVH
DURXQG WKLV VLQN LQ D GRPDLQ [−1, 1] × [−1, 1] %RWWRP ,QLWLDOO\ WKH
PDJHQWD VWUHDPOLQH LV VHHGHG RXWVLGH RI WKH EOXH VWUHDPOLQH 7RS
$IWHU LQWHJUDWLRQ ZLWK D VWHS VL]H RI 0.025 WKH VWUHDPOLQHV FURVV QRZ
WKH PDJHQWD VWUHDPOLQH LV LQVLGH WKH EOXH VWUHDPOLQH

for vector fields rely on variants of Runge-Kutta methods. Consequently, robustly computing flow becomes a formidable task. Integration is confounded by numerical errors at each step, in particular
near unstable regions where the flow bifurcates or spirals slowly.
These errors can compound quickly to produce inconsistent views
of the vector field. The resulting visualizations and analysis can
cause inaccurate interpretations of the field.
Apart from the obvious problem of potentially including an unknown structural error in the analysis, traditional techniques can
cause a more subtle yet equally important problem. By hiding the
errors inherent in the numerical integration these techniques create
the perception of certainty. The user is presented with crisp lines
and clean segmentations which imply a false level of accuracy. Instead, a more nuanced approach that clearly indicates which information is known and where possible instabilities might arise would
provide a more candid view of the data.
Considering these motivations, we propose a new data structure
to represent vector fields called edge maps. Edge maps provide an
explicit representation of flow by mapping entry and exit points of
flow paths on the edges of the triangle. Thus, they encode the property most often needed by common analysis tools to compute visualizations and topological decompositions. We show how to compute many of the same primitives robustly and directly on the edge
maps themselves. Moreover, the edge map data structure encodes
numerical error, allowing the presentation of a more complete view
of the data illuminating the major features that demonstrate where
numerically unstable regions exist. By quantifying this error, we
can refine the maps to bound the amount of error incurred by this
representation.
While a method is required to compute the initial flow within
each triangle, any subsequent computation assumes the edge map
to be ground truth. Such a strategy is akin to recent techniques that
robustly compute scalar field topology. Gyulassy et al. [10], for
example, convert a scalar field into a discrete gradient from which
global properties such as the topology can be extracted consistently.
In both scalar and vector fields the initial conversion can create discretization artifacts. However, the net gain is significant. Using
edge maps, we can carry the error through while performing computation. Where discretization artifacts have occurred, we show
these unavoidable errors explicitly to the user. Consequently, instead of providing a black box representation of the data that ignores the impact of discretization, we can provide analysts a visualization of the data that accounts for these artifacts and indicates
how errors may have affected the apparent flow behavior.

76

• New visualizations of flow instabilities using edge maps.
A more detailed discussion on the mathematical properties of
edge maps and the possible configurations of flow within each triangle appeared in a recent technical report [15].
2 R ELATED W ORK
Since vector-valued data is a natural way to represent fluid flow
in simulations as well as other dynamical systems [13], analyzing vector fields has received a significant amount of attention in
the visualization community. In addition, computer graphics researchers have used vector fields for applications ranging from texture synthesis and non-photorealistic rendering [5, 32] to mesh generation [1, 22]. Regardless of the application, there is a universal
need to represent large, complex fields concisely. A reliable visualization must encode the important features of the field and ensure
that the methods used do not create contradictory views.
Kipfer et al. [17], following the lead of Nielson and Jung [21],
proposed a local exact method (LEM) to trace a particle on linearly interpolated vector fields defined on unstructured grids. LEM
solves an ODE representing the position of the particle as a function
of time, starting at a given position. Consequently, it removes the
need to perform step-wise numerical integration, and hence is free
from the cumulative integration error and is as accurate as numerical precision. Given an entry point of a particle to a simplex, LEM
gives its exit point from the simplex. We use this exact method
during the construction of edge maps, which removes the need for
on-the-fly numerical integration.
Consistency is particularly desirable when computing structural
properties of vector fields. Helman and Hesselink [12] compute a
vector field’s topological skeleton by segmenting the domain of the
field using streamlines traced from each saddle of the field along its
eigenvector directions. The nodes of the skeleton are critical points
of the vector field and streamlines that connect them are called separatrices. Subsequently, the skeleton extraction has been extended
to include periodic orbits [31]. Three dimensional variants of the
topological skeleton have also been proposed [9, 16, 28, 30]. The
readers should refer to [8, 19, 27] for more detailed surveys.
However, it is well known that computing the topological skeleton can be numerically unstable due to errors inherent in the integration of separatrices and inconsistencies among neighboring triangles [3, 7, 14, 21, 25, 28]. As a result, some of the fundamental topological invariants of a vector field may not be preserved,
such as, the Poincare-Hopf formula or the fact that streamlines are
pair-wise disjoint. Consequently, computing the topological skeleton numerically is adequate for visualizing the resulting structures
but less suitable for further analysis. A number of techniques have
been proposed to extract the topological skeleton in a stable and
efficient manner. Chen et al. [2] introduce the ECG (Entity Connection Graph) as a more complete topological representation of
vector fields on piece wise linear manifolds. By detecting closed
streamlines, Wischgoll and Scheuermann [31] propose a technique

to detect limit cycles in planar vector fields. Scheuermann et al. [26]
look for the areas of non-linear behavior in the field, and use higher
order methods so that the features are not destroyed under linear
assumption.
Recent work of Reininghaus and Hotz [23] construct a combinatorial vector field based on Forman’s discrete Morse theory [6]. Using combinatorial fields allows the extraction of a consistent topological structure. However, combinatorial vector fields were limited
by their high complexity, leading to later improvements to the algorithm [24]. While provably consistent, it is unclear how close
the combinatorial field is to the original field. By comparison, this
work proposes an integration technique that is both consistent and
has error bounded with respect to the LEM.
3

which also adjacent. This merging helps approximate the pointto-point mapping as a mapping between connected subsets of the
boundary of a triangle, called intervals. The interval obtained after
merging adjacent origin points is called the origin interval, while
the interval obtained by merging their respective destination points
is called the destination interval. Pairing up of an origin and its corresponding destination interval forms a link. A link is an intervalinterval map, representing a region of unidirectional flow. Figure 3(b) depicts the results of this merging process.

E DGE M APS

To address the issues of inconsistency, we propose an alternate representation called edge maps. In the following, we define edge
maps and describe the elements that go into their construction.
3.1 Foundations
Let V : M → R2 be a 2-dimensional vector field defined on a manifold M . V is represented as the set of vector values sampled at the
vertices of a triangulation of M . Specifically, each vertex pi has
the vector value V (pi ) associated with it. The vector values on the
interior of each triangle Δ with vertices {pi , p j , pk } in the triangulation are interpolated linearly using V (pi ), V (p j ), V (pk ). Figure 3(a)
depicts the field defined in this way for a single triangle.
Given a vector field V , we can define the flow x(t) of V . Treating
V as a velocity field, the flow describes the parametric path that
a massless particle travels according to the instantaneous velocity
defined by V . x(t) can be defined as the solution of the differential
equation:
dx(t)
= V (x(t)).
dt
The path x(t) with x(0) = x0 is called the streamline starting at x0 .
Since the analytic form of the vector field is unavailable, solving
this differential equation for a single streamline is typically accomplished using numerical integration such as Euler or Runge-Kutta
methods.
For a piecewise linear vector field defined by the three vector
samples at the vertices of a triangle, we begin with assuming that:
(1) the vectors at all the vertices of the triangle are non-zero, (2) the
vectors at any two vertices sharing an edge are not antiparallel, and
(3) the vectors at two vertices on an edge e are not both parallel to e.
Any such configuration violating one of these conditions is unstable, and can be avoided by a slight perturbation. This perturbation
ensures that no critical point lies on the boundary of the triangle,
which significantly simplifies the analysis of edge maps.
3.2 Definition
Let Δ be a triangle with boundary ∂ Δ. To understand and represent
the flow behavior through Δ, we first summarize the formal definitions given in [15]. An origin-destination (o-d) pair is a pair of
points (p, q), where both p and q lie on ∂ Δ and there exists a streamline between them which lies entirely in the interior of Δ. We call p
an origin point and q a destination point. Let P be the set of all the
origin points on ∂ Δ, and Q be the set of all the destination points on
∂ Δ. The edge map of Δ, ξ : P → Q, is defined as the point-to-point
mapping between the boundary of the triangle, such that ξ (p) = q
if (p, q) is an o-d pair. q is called the image of p under ξ . If there
exists a critical point on the interior of the triangle, some points on
∂ Δ will not be a part of any o-d pair, since they flow to or emerge
from the critical point.
Edge maps provide a point-to-point mapping of endpoints of
streamlines through a triangle. To efficiently represent the edge
maps, we merge adjacent origin points that have destination points

(a)

(b)

(c)

)LJXUH  (GJH PDS IRU D WULDQJOH D :LWKLQ D WULDQJOH WKH YHFWRU
LV UHSUHVHQWHG E\ LQWHUSRODWLQJ WKUHH YHFWRUV DW LWV YHUWLFHV E 2XU
UHSUHVHQWDWLRQ VXEGLYLGHV WKH ERXQGDU\ LQWR D VHW RI LQWHUYDOV ZKLFK
PDS LQÀRZ WR RXWÀRZ IRU D WULDQJOH F *LYHQ DQ HQWU\ SRLQW WR D
WULDQJOH LWV FRUUHVSRQGLQJ H[LW SRLQW FDQ EH REWDLQHG E\ DSSUR[LPDW
LQJ WKH PDS OLQHDUO\ WKXV UHSODFLQJ VWUHDPOLQH LQWHJUDWLRQ ZLWK D VWHS
DFURVV WKH WULDQJOH

3.3 Edge Map Generation
For practical purposes, we extend the definition of an edge map,
to include critical points in the map. Such an extension facilitates
streamline integration using edge maps, as discussed later. We define a (forward) edge map ξ + : P → Δ such that given a point p
where a streamline enters the triangle, the map gives us the unique
point where it exits the triangle. If a critical point exists within the
triangle, the flow may never exit, hence the range of ξ + can include
the interior of the triangle. On the points on the boundary, where
flow does not enter the triangle, but instead, exits it, we define a
backward edge map ξ − : Q → Δ. For a point q on the boundary of
Δ, ξ − (q) describes the unique point where flow entered the triangle
on its path to q.
We note that the edge map ξ as defined in [15] is a bijection and
its inverse ξ −1 represents the edge map of inverted flow. However,
according to the definition presented here, ξ + (or ξ − ) is a bijection
only if there is no critical point present in the triangle. For such triangles, ξ − = (ξ + )−1 , since for points p, q ∈ ∂ Δ, ξ + (p) = q if and
only if ξ − (q) = p. As for triangles with critical point, this inverse
relationship does not hold because ξ + (or ξ − ) is no more a oneto-one map. In either case, for a triangle Δ, ξ + and ξ − completely
describe the behavior of the flow through Δ.
An edge map (forward and backward) can be encoded concisely
as a collection of links of a triangle, such that the intervals are nonintersecting other than at their end points, and covers the entire
boundary of the triangle (see Figure 3(c)). If there is a critical point
present in the triangle, some links may include the critical point as
a source or destination interval. Thus, to store the edge map for a
triangle, we only need to encode a collection of pairs of intervals.
As discussed in Section 3.2, intervals are constructed by merging
adjacent origin points whose destinations are also adjacent. At the
maximum level of merging, the intervals are bounded by either: (i)
vertices of the triangle; (ii) images of vertices (Figure 4(a)); (iii)
transition points: points where the flow changes between inflow
and outflow (Figure 4(b)); (iv) images of transition points and (v)
sepx points, where the separatrices of a saddle exit or enter (Figure
4(c)).
Figure 6 gives the algorithm for computing the edge map for
a triangle without a critical point. The advection of vertices and
transition points are done using LEM [21]. When the triangle has a

77

)LJXUH  7KH  HTXLYDOHQFH FODVVHV RI HGJH PDSV IRU SLHFHZLVH OLQHDU ÀRZ7KH\ DUH RUGHUHG OHIWWRULJKW WRSWRERWWRP E\ WKH QXPEHU RI OLQNV
WKDW H[LVW LQ HDFK HGJH PDS (DFK OLQN LV DVVLJQHG D GLIIHUHQW FRORU

(a)

(b)

(c)

)LJXUH  6SOLWWLQJ RI WKH ERXQGDU\ LQWR LQWHUYDOV D $ WULDQJOH ZLWK D
IRUZDUG YHUWH[ LPDJH JUH\ GRW RI WKH ORZHU ULJKW YHUWH[ E $ WULDQJOH
ZLWK D VLQJOH WUDQVLWLRQ SRLQW ZKLWH FLUFOH IURP LQWHUQDO ÀRZ DQG LWV
IRUZDUG DQG EDFNZDUG LPDJH JUH\ GRWV F $ WULDQJOH ZLWK D VDGGOH
SRLQW EODFN GRW LWV IRXU VHS[ SRLQWV JUH\ GRWV DQG D WUDQVLWLRQ SRLQW
IURP H[WHUQDO ÀRZ ZKLWH VTXDUH 1RWH WKDW LQ PRVW FDVH YHUWLFHV
DOVR DFW DV H[WHUQDO WUDQVLWLRQ SRLQWV

critical point (detected using [20]), the algorithm is similar except
that there can be additional cuts (from separatrices) and the critical
point itself can act as an interval.

3.4 Streamline Integration using Edge Maps
The encoding of flow as edge maps ultimately allows us to determine structural properties of the flow through the triangle in a fast
manner. Consequently, this leads to computing flow-based properties efficiently. For example, we can query the edge maps to determine destinations of points under the flow by trivially performing
lookup and composition on the maps. At each lookup, we have
preserved the property that origin intervals are going to the same
destination intervals they would have in the original piecewise linear flow.
In particular, particle trajectories can be approximated on a perlink level by linearly interpolating between the source and destination intervals. As a result, this approach gives a method to approximate streamlines. As Figure 3(c) shows, for a point on any source
interval, we can approximate the path to its destination by linearly
interpolating where it lies in the origin interval and projecting that
point to the same coordinate in the destination interval.
Using the precomputed edge maps, any numerical integration to
calculate the streamlines or particle propagation (such as the simplest Euler integration) given by
xn+1 = xn + (tn+1 − tn ) · V (xn )

ConstructEdgeMap(Δ):
1. Identify the transition points on ∂ Δ. If necessary advect it forward and backward to find its images.
(There can be at most 6 transition points in a triangle:
1 per edge and 1 per vertex. [15])
2. Advect any vertices of Δ that are not transition points
forward (resp. backward) to find their images.
(The transitions points, vertices, and their images cut
∂ Δ into intervals of unidirectional flow.)
3. Using the direction (inflow/outflow), and connectivity
implied by advecting, pair intervals to form links.
(Collection of these links compose the edge map.)

)LJXUH  $OJRULWKP IRU FUHDWLQJ WKH HGJH PDS IRU D WULDQJOH

78

can be replaced by a simple lookup
xn+1 = ξ + (xn )
Hence, edge maps are faster, and as discussed in Section 4.1, have
a bounded error that can be explicitly computed.
3.5 Equivalence Classes of Edge Maps
In a companion report [15], we show that there exist 23 equivalent
classes of edge maps for linearly varying flow, see Figure 5. Here,
equivalence is defined as invariance under rotation of triangle and
inversion of flow. Exploiting the fact that piecewise linear flow can
switch between inflow and outflow only once per edge, one can
show that the boundary of a triangle can be broken up into at most
eleven intervals, with a potential critical point acting as a twelfth
interval. To understand topological equivalence, splits caused by
vertices and their images (see Figure 4(a)) are discounted. The linearity of the flow implies that these intervals may connect themselves into, only in a limited number of ways to create a valid edge
map. For a more descriptive discussion on equivalence, and to understand the rules for validating edge maps based on the properties
of linear vector fields, the reader is encouraged to refer to [15].

Since the number of classes is limited, the overhead for storing
the edge maps of a single triangle is both bounded and relatively
low. We observe that only four of the classes do not contain a critical point. Therefore, the vast majority of triangles in our experiments could be classified as one of these four types.
4

E RROR P ROPAGATION U SING E DGE M APS

The most common approach for tracing streamlines is numerical
integration. From a given starting point these techniques repeatedly take small steps to approximate the next position in the path.
The resulting error is controlled only indirectly by choosing a step
size [11]. Since typically the true streamline is not known, this error cannot be quantified explicitly. While some schemes are more
accurate than others and highly sophisticated techniques exist to locally adapt the step size, the indirect control over an unknown error
represents a fundamental restriction. On the contrary, edge maps
represent and control the error explicitly and do not require setting
a step size.
Furthermore, integrating streamlines numerically can also lead
to inconsistencies, such as intersecting streamlines and significant
differences between forward and backward traced lines. Edge maps
replace the integration with a one dimensional barycentric mapping that guarantees non-intersecting streamlines and consistency
between forward and backward traces up to the floating point precision of the linear interpolation.
4.1 Mapping Error
As explained in Section 3.3, the vertices, saddle separatrices, and
transition points are advected to split the triangle perimeter into intervals. Since we use the LEM for this advection, the end-points
of the intervals are accurate up to the floating point precision of the
system. These intervals are paired into links to construct the edge
map. Since the edge map approximates the true exit point q of a
point p by linearly interpolating within the link as q , it incurs some
error. This error can be calculated as the deviation of the exit point
given by the map, from that given by the exact method ( q − q ).
We have derived the expression for this mapping error in a link,


Hλ






Hλ 






(a)




α







(b)

)LJXUH  $Q H[DPSOH RI D PDS ZLWK ELPRGDO HUURU LQ JUHHQ OLQN
1RWH WKDW WKH [D[LV KDV EHHQ VFDOHG WR UDQJH 1.4 ≤ α ≤ 2.0 WR LOOXV
WUDWH WKH PDSSLQJ HUURU )RU RWKHU YDOXHV RI α  WKH HUURU LV ]HUR VLQFH
WKRVH VHJPHQWV DUH GHVWLQDWLRQV

In our experiments, we found that typically the error is unimodal
in a link. However, the error can also be bimodal, as shown in Figure 8. Unsurprisingly, the mapping error is zero in the absence of
divergence, since there is no linear expansion of flow, in the direction orthogonal to the flow. Figure 10 corroborates this intuition by
testing the edge map propagation in a purely rotational flow. Hence,
in the absence of mapping error, the propagation using edge maps
is as accurate as the underlying method for advection used for map
generation.
4.2 Expansion of Exit Points
We have been using the forward (ξ + )
and backward (ξ − ) edge maps as
tools to look up the streamline of individual particles. However, we can
also represent the mapping error explicitly by redefining the edge maps
as a one-to-many map.

ξ + (p, ω ) = Q




(a)




α















(b)













α

(c)







Hλ

e(λ ), shown as Equation 1 in Appendix A (as a function of the arc
length parameter of the link, λ ).
Figure 7 shows one such graph of the mapping error as a function of the arc-length parameter of the triangle, α . We use the maximum error value of error in a link as the mapping error of the link,
ε . An upper limit to this mapping error can be imposed by a user
parameter, δ . If for a link, ε > δ , we split the link to improve the
accuracy of the map. We call this process refinement of edge maps.
Figure 7(c) shows refined map of the flow in Figure 7(a) flow with
δ = 0.0025.

(d)

)LJXUH  0DSSLQJ HUURU LQ HGJH PDSV 7KH UHG DQG JUHHQ HUURU
FXUYHV LQ E VKRZ WKH PDSSLQJ HUURU LQ UHG DQG JUHHQ OLQNV RI WKH
WULDQJOH LQ D 7KH PDSSLQJ HUURU LV GUDZQ DV D IXQFWLRQ RI DUFOHQJWK
SDUDPHWHU RI WKH WULDQJOH α  FRXQWHUFORFNZLVH IURP WKH ERWWRP OHIW
YHUWH[ )RU 2.0 < α < 3.0 WKHUH LV QR PDSSLQJ HUURU VLQFH WKLV VHJ
PHQW RI WKH WULDQJOH LV DFWLQJ DV D GHVWLQDWLRQ 7KH DYHUDJH HGJH
OHQJWK RI WKH WULDQJOH LQ FRQVLGHUDWLRQ LV 0.025 $ UH¿QHG PDS F
FRQWDLQV PXFK VPDOOHU PDSSLQJ HUURU G ZKHQ UH¿QHG WR δ = 0.0025
DV FRPSDUHG WR WKH EDVLF PDS 'XULQJ UH¿QHPHQW ERWK OLQNV LQ D
JHW VSOLW LQWR WZR OLQNV HDFK

where, for an entry point p, instead
)LJXUH  ([SDQVLRQ
of a single exit point q the map gives
RI H[LW SRLQWV UHSUHVHQWV
a range of possible exit points, a segHUURU DV D UDQJH RI SRV
ment Q, under the expansion factor
VLEOH GHVWLQDWLRQV
ω . This is illustrated in Figure 9. The
length of the segment Q is directly proportional to the expansion
factor. Thus, we call Q the expansion of the exit point q.
The mapping error ε for p encodes the deviation of its exit point
q˜ defined by the edge map from the true exit point q. Therefore, the
expansion of the exit point Q calculated using ω = ε provides an
upper bound on the possible exit points of p. Furthermore, since the
streamlines at the endpoints of the links are accurate, the expansion
can not span across links and thus is truncated at the endpoints of
the link containing both p and q.
4.3 Streamwaves
Under the consideration of mapping error, edge maps no longer
describe a one-to-one, but a one-to-many mapping. We define a
streamwave as set of possible destinations that a massless particle
may reach at least once when accounting for possible errors. Alternatively, a streamwave can be seen as the expansion of a streamline due to mapping uncertainties. In the current work, we quantify

79

)LJXUH  &RPSDULVRQ EHWZHHQ SURSDJDWLRQ XVLQJ 5. EOXH
DQG HGJH PDSV PDJHQWD RQ D YHFWRU ¿HOG GH¿QHG E\ D FRXQWHU
FORFNZLVH RUELW VHHGHG DW WKH VDPH SRLQW \HOORZ 7KH PDJHQWD DQG
EOXH OLQHV RYHUODS LQ WKH EHJLQQLQJ EXW D VXEVWDQWLDO GHYLDWLRQ LQ 5.
VWUHDPOLQH LV REVHUYHG DIWHU RQO\ RQH UHYROXWLRQ DURXQG WKH FULWLFDO
SRLQW SXUSOH ,Q WKH DEVHQFH RI PDSSLQJ HUURU WKH PDSSHG OLQHV
DUH DFFXUDWH WR ÀRDWLQJSRLQW SUHFLVLRQ

and visualize the mapping error as streamwaves propagate. However, any other kind of error can be modeled as the expansion ω for
streamwaves.
Using the edge maps, we can compute the streamwaves as follows
Xn+1 = ξ + (Xn , ω )
where X0 = {xo } represents the seed point of the wave and Xn the
set of points currently at the front of the wave. Note that, in this
form the speed of the wave is determined by the number of triangles that are processed rather than the velocity of the flow. Using traditional techniques to compute streamwaves as a collection
of streamlines can become computationally expensive and requires
delicate processing in regions of high divergence. Using edge maps,
however, propagating a wave is only as expensive as the number of
triangles currently at the front and independent of the flow complexity within each triangle.
Furthermore, if there exist no bifurcations in a triangle, then only
extremes of the range of exit points Xn+1 are of interest, and all
the intermediate points are handled implicitly. For triangles with
bifurcation, a streamwave may split into two streamwaves, each of
which can be propagated independently.
As shown in Figure 11, a streamwave is the superset of a single
streamline, so analyzing only the streamline in the presence of error
is an incomplete analysis. Since expansion of a streamwave in the
presence of error may cause it to revisit a certain region, we truncate the streamwave so as to avoid going into infinite flow loops.
This is consistent with our definition of streamwave since we only
want to visualize the region that can be visited (at least once) by the
streamwave. The color of the streamwave progresses from green to
red as it propagates forward in time, as an indication of the speed
of the streamwave.
Streamwaves also present a method to visually show error
bounds of other integration techniques. For example, Figure 12
shows the integration of a streamline connecting a source to a sink
using three different techniques. By showing a streamwave, whose
expansion is set larger than the maximum error for Euler integration, we can visually show a comparison between Euler integration,
fourth-order Runge-Kutta, and the local exact method.
5

V ISUALIZATION OF F UZZY TOPOLOGY

Topological structures in vector fields, such as their topological
skeleton [12], are one of the key features used to analyze vector
field data. Traditionally, the skeleton is computed by tracing four
separatrices out of each saddle (two forward and two backward)
by computing streamlines starting in the directions of the eigen-

80

)LJXUH  9LVXDOL]DWLRQV RI VWUHDPZDYHV 7RS OHIW RULJLQDO YHFWRU
¿HOG YLVXDOL]HG ZLWK ,%)9 >@ 7RS ULJKW WZR VWUHDPOLQHV RQH QHDU
D VDGGOH¶V VHSDUDWUL[ %RWWRP 7ZR LPDJHV VKRZ VWUHDPZDYHV DW GLI
IHUHQW OHYHOV RI HUURU 6WUHDPZDYHV DUH FRORUHG IURP JUHHQ WR UHG
VKRZLQJ GLVWDQFH WKH ÀRZ KDV SURSDJDWHG DV D PHDVXUH RI WKH QXP
EHU RI PDSV WKH VWUHDPZDYH KDV WUDYHOOHG WKURXJK 1RWH WKDW WKH
HUURU OHYHOV KDYH EHHQ H[DJJHUDWHG WR LOOXVWUDWH H[SDQVLRQ DQG ELIXU
FDWLRQ RI VWUHDPZDYHV

vectors of all the saddles. These separatrices terminate when they
arrive at another critical point or leave the boundary of the domain.
However, this approach faces challenges since compound integration error can cause the trace to end at an incorrect critical point.
In particular, unstable topologies, such as when a pair of saddles is
connected by a separatrix, suffer from this form of inconsistency.
We can use the streamwave construction to study the robustness
of topological representations. By growing a streamwave in the
forward direction from all sources and in the reverse direction from
all sinks we can perform a partial topological decomposition of a
vector field that is analogous to stable and unstable manifolds in
scalar field topology [4]. These streamwaves are initiated from the
boundary of the triangles containing the critical points. While we
cannot yet account for centers, streamwaves can provide important
information about the structure of the flow. In particular, in the
absence of closed orbits, the union of the forward and backward
streamwaves creates a covering of domain similar to the segmentation induced by traditional vector field topology. However, in
our construction each point in the domain may be part of several
streamwaves creating a notion of fuzzy topology as shown in Figure 1. Figure 13 shows an additional example of fuzzy topology
computed on a diesel engine dataset, indicating the swirling structure around its surface. This provides important information about
any potential instabilities in the topological segmentation. In particular it provides users with an intuitive measure of how certain a
given structure is.
To illustrate the new concept of fuzzy topology we compare
streamwaves with traditional scalar field techniques, see Figure 14.
Laney et al. [18] use topological analysis on the interface surfaces
between heavy and light fluids in a Rayleigh-Taylor instability. In
particular, the unstable manifolds of the height function segment
the surfaces into bubbles, the primary feature of interest. Similarly,
we can compute the gradient field of the same dataset, and construct
the manifolds using streamwaves. Both techniques provide a similar view of the data but our representation is richer by also showing
the inevitable inconsistencies at the boundaries of the bubbles.

)LJXUH  $ VWUHDPOLQH XVLQJ 5. EODFN GDVKHG XVLQJ VWHSVL]H
Δt = 0.005 (XOHU EODFN GRWWHG XVLQJ VWHSVL]H Δt = 0.005 DQG ORFDO
H[DFW PHWKRG /(0 ZKLWH VROLG DQG D VWUHDPZDYH XVLQJ HGJH
PDSV ZLWK δ = 0.0001 ZHUH VHHGHG DW WKH VDPH SRLQW &RQVLGHU
LQJ WKH ORFDO H[DFW PHWKRG WR EH WKH JURXQG WUXWK VRPH GHYLDWLRQ LV
REVHUYHG LQ (XOHU DQG 5. VWUHDPOLQHV ,W LV DOVR REVHUYHG WKDW WKH
VWUHDPZDYH FHQWHUHG DURXQG WKH /(0 VWUHDPOLQH ERXQGV WKH WZR
HUURQHRXV VWUHDPOLQHV DW DOO WKH WLPHV

)LJXUH  7RSRORJ\ RI WKH GLHVHO HQJLQH GDWDVHW 7RS URZ $Q ,%)9
UHQGHULQJ RI WKH ÀRZ OHIW DQG YLVXDOL]DWLRQ RI WKH WRSRORJ\ ULJKW
%RWWRP URZ WKH VWDEOH DQG XQVWDEOH PDQLIROGV

6

D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Edge maps establish a novel way to represent and analyze sampled
vector fields. Compared to traditional interpolation schemes they
have several attractive properties: (1) numerical integration (and
thus all error accumulation) is confined to the map construction; (2)
unavoidable errors accumulated during integration or inherent in
the representation can be explicitly encoded; and (3) flow information extracted from the maps is guaranteed to be consistent. These
advantages translate into a number of useful visualization and analysis tools such as streamwaves and the notion of fuzzy topology.
The edge map representation can also reproduce published results
(using integration schemes), as well as provide richer interpretations that are not possible using existing techniques.
Nevertheless, edge maps have some disadvantages, most notably
the storage overhead per triangle. Furthermore, applying texturebased flow visualization techniques for edge maps, such as IBFV,
requires some additional effort. Extending the edge map construc-

)LJXUH  9LVXDOL]DWLRQV RI D 5D\OHLJK7D\ORU LQVWDELOLW\ 7RS URZ :H
UHSURGXFH WKH UHVXOWV IURP /DQH\ HW DO >@ OHIW VLGHE\VLGH ZLWK RXU
HGJH PDS FRPSXWDWLRQ RI WKH XQVWDEOH PDQLIROGV ULJKW %RWWRP URZ
ZKHQ WKH HUURU IDFWRU LV LQFUHDVHG OHIW ZH FDQ REVHUYH WKH HPHUJLQJ
RYHUODSV ULJKW

tion to volumetric domains could pose a significant challenge given
the number of potential map classes per tetrahedral element.
In this work, we have presented edge maps for triangulated domains, however, as a general concept, the idea of edge maps is applicable to other kinds of surface domains as well. For example,
for structured grids and unstructured quadrilaterals edge maps can
be created between the boundaries of the cells. In these domains,
different interpolations of the interior of cells will be required and
the types of flow behaviors shown in [15] will need to be redefined. However, on a conceptual level of replacing integration with
a boundary mapping, the idea of edge maps is both extendible as
well as applicable to different discretizations of domain.
There exist some interesting opportunities to exploit the consistency and discrete nature of edge maps. One such potential application of edge maps is in vector field simplification. Because the
flow can be represented discretely and error can be encoded explicitly, we can merge edge maps to reduce the complexity of the flow
fields, or to perform domain simplification keeping the error in the
flow bounded.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation awards IIS-1045032, OCI-0904631, OCI-0906379 and CCF0702817, and by King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) Award No. KUS-C1-016-04. This work was
also performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by the University of Utah under contracts DE-SC0001922,
DE-AC52-07NA27344, and DE-FC02-06ER25781, and Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) under contract DE-AC5207NA27344. We are grateful to Jackie Chen for the dataset from
Figure 11, Robert S. Laramee for the diesel engine dataset from
Figure 13, and Paul Miller, William Cabot, and Andrew Cook for
the bubbles dataset from Figure 14. Attila Gyulassy and Philippe
P. Pebay provided many useful comments and discussions. LLNLPROC-463631.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. Bommes, H. Zimmer, and L. Kobbelt. Mixed-integer quadrangulation. ACM Trans. Graph., 28(3):77, 2009.

81

[2] G. Chen, K. Mischaikow, R. S. Laramee, P. Pilarczyk, and E. Zhang.
Vector field editing and periodic orbit extraction using morse decomposition. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 13(4):769–785, 2007.
[3] G. Chen, K. Mischaikow, R. S. Laramee, and E. Zhang. Efficient
Morse decompositions of vector fields. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graph., 14(4):848–862, 2008.
[4] H. Edelsbrunner, J. Harer, and A. Zomorodian. Hierarchical MorseSmale complexes for piecewise linear 2-manifolds. Discrete and Computational Geometry, 30(1):87–107, 2003.
[5] M. Fisher, P. Schr¨oder, M. Desbrun, and H. Hoppe. Design of tangent
vector fields. ACM Trans. Graph., 26(3):56, 2007.
[6] R. Forman. A user’s guide to discrete morse theory. In Proc. of the
2001 Internat. Conf. on Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics, page 48, 2001.
[7] C. Garth, H. Krishnan, X. Tricoche, T. Tricoche, and K. I. Joy. Generation of accurate integral surfaces in time-dependent vector fields.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 14(6):1404–1411, 2008.
[8] C. Garth and X. Tricoche. Topology- and feature-based flow visualization: Methods and applications. In SIAM Geom. Des. & Comp.,
2005.
[9] A. Globus, C. Levit, and T. Lasinski. A tool for visualizing the topology of three-dimensional vector fields. In IEEE Visualization, pages
33–41, 1991.
[10] A. Gyulassy, V. Natarajan, V. Pascucci, and B. Hamann. Efficient
computation of morse-smale complexes for three-dimensional scalar
functions. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 13(6):1440–1447, 2007.
[11] E. Hairer, S. P. Norsett, and G. Wanner. Solving Ordinary Differential Equations I: Nonstiff Problems. Springer Series in Computational
Mathematics, 1993.
[12] J. Helman and L. Hesselink. Representation and display of vector field
topology in fluid flow data sets. IEEE Computer, 22(8):27–36, 1989.
[13] M. W. Hirsch, S. Smale, and R. L. Devaney. Differential Equations,
Dynamical Systems, and An Introduction To Chaos. Elsevier Academic Press, 2nd edition, 2004.
[14] J. P. Hultquist. Constructing stream surfaces in steady 3d vector fields.
In Proc. of IEEE Vis. ’92, pages 171–178, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
1992. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[15] S. Jadhav, H. Bhatia, P.-T. Bremer, J. A. Levine, L. G. Nonato, and
V. Pascucci. Consistent approximation of local flow behavior for 2d
vector fields using edge maps. Technical Report UUSCI-2010-004,
Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, December 2010.
[16] K. M. Janine, J. Bennett, G. Scheuermann, B. Hamann, and K. I. Joy.
Topological segmentation in three-dimensional vector fields. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 10:198–205, 2004.
[17] P. Kipfer, F. Reck, and G. Greiner. G.: Local exact particle tracing on
unstructured grids. Computer Graphics Forum, 22:133–142, 2003.
[18] D. E. Laney, P.-T. Bremer, A. Mascarenhas, P. Miller, and V. Pascucci.
Understanding the structure of the turbulent mixing layer in hydrodynamic instabilities. IEEE TVCG., 12(5):1053–1060, 2006.
[19] R. S. Laramee, H. Hauser, L. Zhao, and F. H. Post. Topology Based
Flow Visualization: The State of the Art. In Topology-Based Methods
in Vis., Mathematics and Visualization, pages 1–19. Springer, 2007.
[20] Y. Lavin, R. Batra, and L. Hesselink. Feature comparisons of vector
fields using earth mover’s distance. In Proc. of IEEE/ACM Visualization ’98, pages 103 –109, Oct. 1998.
[21] G. Nielson and I.-H. Jung. Tools for computing tangent curves for
linearly varying vector fields over tetrahedral domains. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 5(4):360 –372, oct. 1999.
[22] N. Ray, B. Vallet, W.-C. Li, and B. L´evy. N-symmetry direction field
design. ACM Trans. Graph., 27(2):10, 2008.
[23] J. Reininghaus and I. Hotz. Combinatorial 2d vector field topology extraction and simplification. In Topological Methods in Data Analysis
and Visualization., 2009.
[24] J. Reininghaus, C. L¨owen, and I. Hotz. Fast combinatorial vector field
topology. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 99, 2010.
[25] G. Scheuermann, T. Bobach, H. Hagen, K. Mahrous, B. Hamann, K. I.
Joy, and W. Kollmann. A tetrahedra-based stream surface algorithm.
In VIS ’01: Proceedings of the conference on Visualization ’01, pages
151–158, Washington, DC, USA, 2001. IEEE Computer Society.
[26] G. Scheuermann, H. Kr¨uger, M. Menzel, and A. P. Rockwood. Visualizing nonlinear vector field topology. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 4(2):109–116, 1998.

82

[27] G. Scheuermann and X. Tricoche. Topological methods in flow visualization. In C. Hansen and C. Johnson, editors, In Visualization
Handbook, pages 341–356. Elsevier, 2004.
[28] H. Theisel, T. Weinkauf, H.-C. Hege, and H.-P. Seidel. Saddle connectors - an approach to visualizing the topological skeleton of complex
3d vector fields. In IEEE Visualization, pages 225–232, 2003.
[29] J. J. van Wijk. Image based flow visualization. ACM Trans. Graph.,
21(3):754–754, 2002.
[30] T. Weinkauf, H. Theisel, K. Shi, H.-C. Hege, and H.-P. Seidel. Extracting higher order critical points and topological simplification of
3d vector fields. In IEEE Visualization, pages 559–566, 2005.
[31] T. Wischgoll and G. Scheuermann. Detection and visualization of
closed streamlines in planar flows. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 7(2):165–172, 2001.
[32] E. Zhang, K. Mischaikow, and G. Turk. Vector field design on surfaces. ACM Trans. Graph., 25(4):1294–1326, 2006.

A PPENDIX
A M APPING E RROR
In [17], the motion of a particle under a linear vector field V (x) =
Ax + o is defined as
x(t) = e(t−t0 )A x0 + (e(t−t0 )A − Id)A−1 o
where, x0 ,t0 give the particle’s initial position and time, and x(t)
gives the position after time t. A is a 2×2 matrix, o is the translation
vector, and Id is the identity matrix.
Consider a link, in which origin interval (a, b) flows to destination interval (c, d). Point a flows to point c in time t(a). Similarly,
point d is calculated as the true destination of point b, reached in
time t(d).
c(a,t(a)) = et(a)A a + (et(a)A − Id)A−1 o
d(b,t(b)) = et(b)A b + (et(b)A − Id)A−1 o
Now, consider a point x on the src interval, whose true destination
is given by y.
y(x,t(x)) = et(x)A x + (et(x)A − Id)A−1 o
Suppose, x = λ a + (1 − λ )b. We can interchangebly use y(x) and
y(λ ), and t(x) and t(λ ).
The map gives x s destination as y , and the mapping error is
calculated as e(λ ) = y (λ ) − y(λ ). The map interpolates the destination interval to approximate the destination of x.
y (λ )

=

λ c + (1 − λ )d

=

λ et(a)A (a + A−1 o) + (1 − λ )et(b)A (b + A−1 o) − Id A−1 o

Calculating the deviation between the two,
e(λ )

=

y (λ ) − y(λ )

=

λ et(a)A (a + A−1 o) + (1 − λ )et(b)A (b + A−1 o) − Id A−1 o
− {et(x)A x + (et(x)A − Id)A−1 o}

=

λ et(a)A (a + A−1 o) + (1 − λ )et(b)A (b + A−1 o)
−et(x)A (x + A−1 o)

=

λ et(a)A (a + A−1 o) + (1 − λ )et(b)A (b + A−1 o)
− et(λ )A (λ a + (1 − λ )b + A−1 o)

(1)

The maximum length of this deviation of e(λ ) over every link is
assigned as the mapping error of the link

ε = max0≤λ ≤1 ||e(λ )||2

