A Graph Reading Behavior: Geodesic-Path Tendency
Weidong Huang∗

Peter Eades†

Seok-Hee Hong‡

Australian Council for Educational Research

University of Sydney

University of Sydney

A BSTRACT
The end result of graph visualization is that people read the graph
and understand the data. To make this effective, it is essential to
construct visualizations based on how people read graphs. Despite
the popularity and importance of graph usage in a variety of application domains, little is known about how people read graphs.
The lack of this knowledge has severely limited the effectiveness of
graph visualizations.
In attempts to understand how people read graphs, we previously
observed that people have geodesic-path tendency based on subjective eye tracking data. This paper presents two controlled experiments. One is to approve the existence of the geodesic-path tendency. The other is to examine the effects of this tendency on people
in reading graphs. The results show that in performing path search
tasks, when eyes encounter a node that has more than one link, links
that go toward the target node are more likely to be searched first.
The results also indicate that when graphs are drawn with branch
links on the path leading away from the target node, graph reading
performance can be significantly improved.
Keywords: Graph visualization, graph reading, aesthetic criteria,
geodesic-path tendency, evaluation.
Index Terms: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human Factors; H.5.0 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces—Evaluation/Methodology
1

I NTRODUCTION

Graph drawing research [2] aims to design algorithms according to
some predefined criteria, so that graphs can be visualized reasonably fast (efficiency), and at the same time, the resulting pictures
are easy to read, easy to understand, and easy to remember (effectiveness). In the past three decades, a large number of algorithms
for automatic graph drawing have been developed [4]. The criteria
used in developing those algorithms are generally different combinations of the drawing conventions, aesthetics and constraints [2].
However, the main focus has been on improving computational efficiency, while relatively little attention has been given to effectiveness [4, 9].
As shown in Figure 1(a), in the 1980’s, criteria used to determine graph layout were based on the intuition of the designer, such
as minimizing the number of link crossings; therefore the effectiveness in relation to graph reading performance of the end user
cannot be guaranteed. In the 1990’s (see Figure 1(b)), criteria were
proposed mainly based on theories and principles from general psychology, such as the Gestalt laws. After the visualization had been
produced, human tests were performed to confirm its effectiveness.
Then, based on the evaluation results, the visualization could be either discarded or accepted (possibly with minor adjustments). This
approach took the end user into account and was more successful
∗ e-mail:

huang@acer.edu.au
peter@it.usyd.edu.au
‡ e-mail: seokhee.hong@usyd.edu.au
† e-mail:

IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium 2009
April 20 - 23, Beijing, China
978-1-4244-4404-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

Figure 1: Approaches used to develop algorithms for graph visualization

in ensuring effectiveness than previous attempts. However, this approach still has its limits. First, the theories and principles from
general psychology are not specifically developed for graphs; they
may not reflect features of graphs that distinguish them from other
types of diagrams, thus do not always apply [11]. Secondly, it is
very slow and costly to do evaluations after visualizations have been
developed. A visualization system is usually difficult to adjust after
it has taken shape.
So far criteria used to draw graphs have not been specifically
related to human graph reading behavior. The end result of graph
visualization is that people read the graph and understand the data.
To make this effective, it is essential to construct the visualization
based on how people read graphs [12, 15]. An ideal approach for
graph drawing research might be as shown in Figure 1(c); specific
criteria are derived from theories of how people read graphs. This
ideal approach is very ambitious and, in the short to medium term,
some testing may still be necessary. However, research aiming
to develop theories of how people read graphs and derive criteria
based on those theories, will help to move Graph Drawing toward
the ideal approach.

1.1

Geodesic-Path Tendency

Despite the increasing popularity and importance of graph usage
in a variety of application domains, relatively little is known about
how people extract and process information from graphs. In attempts to gain more knowledge on this, two exploratory studies
have been conducted [7, 8]. In those studies, it is observed that
people have geodesic-path tendency. To be more specific, in performing path search tasks, people tend to follow links first that lead
toward the target node, as illustrated in Figure 2. For more details,
see [6].
However, the observation is mainly based on eye tracking videos,
thus subjective. In this paper, two controlled experiments are presented. The first one is to approve the existence of the tendency.
The second one is to examine its effects on people in reading
graphs.

137

Figure 2: Illustration of geodesic-path tendency. Note that the
dashed line is not part of the graph. To find the path between nodes
1 and 2, if search always starts from node 1, people tend to follow the
path 1-7-5-6 first, then the path 1-3-5-6, and finally the path 1-3-4-2.

the geodesic path of the two nodes, and the other is not. The eye
tracker outputs videos of drawings overlaid with a small red circle
indicating how the eye moves.
The task was to determine the length of the shortest path between
the two nodes. Subjects were asked to perform the task as quickly
and as accurately as possible and there were no time limits. During
the analysis, the videos for each subject were replayed. We only
checked which path that the subject was following: the one close
to the geodesic path or the other. The response time and accuracy
were not analyzed. However, subjects were not made aware of these
analysis details.
An online system was used to display pictures one by one. Since
the same one question was used, subjects were asked to remember
it before the start of the experiment. The question was not shown
on the screen. The two prespecified nodes in each drawing were
highlighted as red. To make sure that all the subjects started path
search from the same node for the same drawing, the following
method was used: one of the highlighted nodes was shown first; the
subject was required to look at the node and press the space key to
display the whole picture, then start the path search from this node.
Subjects answered the question by clicking one of the buttons above
the drawing; each button showed one possible answer.
3.2

Pilot studies

Figure 3: Path continuity suggests that the path from node a to node
b is easier to detect than that from a to c.

2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Path-Continuity Tendency
According to Ware et al. [14], the Gestalt principle of good continuation suggests that the viewer sees smooth, continued lines more
easily than zigzags. As illustrated in Figure 3, the path from node
a to b should be easier to detect than the path from a to c. In terms
of human graph reading behavior, this may be interpreted as pathcontinuity tendency.
Research has found that the path-continuity tendency affects path
search tasks significantly [14]. To minimize potential confounding
effects, this type of tendency is therefore controlled in designing
our experiments.
2.2 Task Identification
Ghoniem et al. [3] describe seven generic tasks for understanding
graph theoretic structures. One of them is “findpath”: finding a path
between two nodes. Ware [13] also mentions that finding a path between two nodes is a typical activity in graph reading and therefore
an ideal task to be used. “This task is good, because perceiving
links between nodes is likely to be important for almost all of the
great variety of node-link diagrams that exist.” [13]
In our experiments, the task of finding a shortest path between
two nodes is adopted.
3

E XPERIMENT
DENCY

1: E XISTENCE

OF

G EODESIC -PATH T EN -

Geodesic-path tendency indicates that in performing path search
tasks, when eyes encounter the node that has more than one link, the
link that goes toward the target node is more likely to be searched
first.
3.1 Design
To test the existence of the tendency, eye tracking was used to
record eye movements of subjects during task performance with
a set of drawings. In each drawing, there were two possible paths
to be searched between two specified nodes: one path is close to

138

Figure 4: Stimuli examples in Pilot 1

In Pilot 1, nine drawings were given, such as those in Figure 4.
Four subjects participated in the experiment. However, the video
data showed that the eye movements of the subjects were around
the middle area of the drawing, and not on either path. Most of the
scanpaths ran only one way for example, from left to right, suggesting that either only one of the two paths was searched, or the two
paths were searched at the same time. This might be because the
size of the drawing was too small; the subjects were able to determine the answer without having to look at the paths separately.
To keep the eye on the path, the path length in Pilot 2 was increased. Nine drawings were given, such as those in Figure 5. Four
subjects participated in the experiment. The video data showed that
the eyes of the subjects followed the path closely. This is normal
since it was difficult to count the number of links without actually
following the path. However, the path which was followed first was
totally independent of the geodesic path. It depended on the habit
of the subject; a particular subject consistently searched, for example, the upper path across the drawings. In this pilot, it is clear that
only one path was searched for each drawing, before the answer
was determined.
Although these pilot studies failed to validate geodesic-path
tendency, they demonstrated that peripheral vision of the viewer
played an important role in path search, particularly when graphs

fore, each group contained 20 drawings, including 12 experimental
and 8 distracting drawings.
The order of groups was counterbalanced and the order of drawings in each group was randomized. To increase the power of the
data analysis, the groups were presented twice. Therefore the whole
experiment included four sessions; each session was for one group.
This yielded 80 trials per subject.
The experiment used the same eye tracking system as previously
used in [7, 8], and was conducted on an individual basis. Before
starting the experiment, the subject signed the consent form, read
written materials, practiced and asked questions. Once ready to
start, the subject was seated on an adjustable chair, in front of the
subject laptop PC, with the left hand on the keyboard to press the
space key, and the right hand on the mouse to click the answer button on the screen. After a short calibration, the subject started to run
the online system and answer questions. The calibration was conducted before each session and small recalibrations (drift correction) could be conducted during the session when necessary. After online tasks, the subject was debriefed about the experiment,
thanked and paid. The whole experiment took about 70 minutes on
average.
3.6
Figure 5: Stimuli examples in Pilot 2

are simple. Peripheral vision may be called covert attention in psychological terms [1]. Covert attention allows the viewer to see the
surrounding environment, without making actual eye movements.
The subjects commented that there was no need to follow the second path because they still could see it when searching on the first
path.
3.3

Stimuli

We drew 24 pictures, such as those in Table 1. In each drawing,
the two highlighted nodes each had two incident links. There were
two paths between the two nodes, and no branches on each path.
This was to avoid possible confounding effects of path continuity.
For example, if a path divides into two branches at an intermediate
node, which branch to be followed first also depends on whether
the branch forms a smoother path.
The locations of highlighted nodes were systematically changed
across the drawings and the starting node for each drawing (to
be displayed by the online system before the whole drawing was
shown) was carefully selected. That is, there was an equal chance
that the starting node appeared in the left, right, top and bottom.
This was to counterbalance possible effects of the tendency of people to search from left to right and from top to bottom.
To constrain the interference of peripheral vision, except for two
paths between the highlighted nodes, extra nodes and links were
added.
3.4

Subjects

Thirteen subjects who all had normal vision participated in the experiment. Six of them were Computer Science students and were
familiar with node-link diagrams and the task, while the remaining
seven subjects were from non-Computer Science background and
their graph reading experience was limited. They were paid $15
each for their participation.
3.5

Procedure

The 24 drawings were randomly divided into two groups. Another
16 distracting drawings (which were used for Experiment 2, see
Section 4.5), were also divided and added into each group. There-

Results and Discussion

The video data of 48 trials for the experimental drawings produced
from each subject were analyzed; 48×13=624 trials in total. The
number of times that the link close to the geodesic path was followed for each drawing was counted.
The results showed that on average, out of 48 incidences, each
subject started a path search from the close-to-geodesic-path link 37
times. That is, only on 11 occasions was the link further away from
the geodesic path searched first. The sign test [5] was used to test
the tendency and it was revealed that this difference was significant
(p < 0.001).
The null hypothesis that the two links of the starting node had an
equal chance of being searched first was rejected. Therefore, which
link the subject followed first in performing the path search task
was not random. Rather, the subject tended to follow the link (or
path) first that was close to the geodesic path between the starting
node and the target node.
It is worth noting that in this experiment, the geodesic-path tendency was tested right at the start of the search. This was to avoid
the possible confounding effects caused by path continuity, as mentioned in Section 3.3. During path search, however, similar behavior should be expected when a node having more than one incident
link is encountered; observations of the video (in Experiment 2 and
in previous eye tracking experiments [7, 8]) were consistent with
this expectation.
4

E XPERIMENT
DENCY

2:

E FFECTS

OF

G EODESIC -PATH T EN -

Given the existence of the geodesic-path tendency, its effects were
further tested in another controlled experiment, which is presented
in this section.
4.1

Design

A set of graphs with predefined constraints were generated. Each
graph involved two specified nodes between which there was only
one shortest path. There were branches on the path. In drawing the
graphs, the layout of branches on the shortest path were changed to
create two conditions: in one condition, all branches lead towards
the target node, while in another, branches lead further away from
the target node.
The task for the experiment was to find the shortest path between two highlighted nodes. Effects of geodesic-path tendency

139

Table 1: Stimuli examples in Experiment 1

were measured in terms of task response time and accuracy. We expected that when branches were leaving the target node, task performance was significantly better than that when branches were going
toward the target node.
4.2 Stimuli
Examples of the stimuli drawings used can be seen in Table 2. We
randomly generated 20 simple and 20 complex graphs with the following constraints:
1. No node had more than five incident links.
2. Two nodes were preselected and there was only one shortest
path between the two nodes.
3. The length of the shortest path ranged from 4 to 7.
4. Each graph was symmetrical (in the sense explained below).
5. For simple graphs, there was only one path between two selected nodes. Complex graphs may have more than one path
between the two nodes.
6. For simple graphs, the length of branches on the shortest
path was only 1. For complex graphs, the length of branches
ranged from 1 to 4.
7. On average, each simple graph contained 15 nodes and 14
links, while each complex graph contained 22 nodes and 23
links.
Each graph was drawn in two different ways: one way was to lay
out branches on the shortest path toward the target nodes (Difficult
drawing), and the other way was to put branches further away from

140

the target nodes (Easy drawing). The layout of the target shortest path was the same for the same graph, but was different across
graphs. Therefore, 80 drawings in total were obtained: 20 pairs
of Easy and Difficult drawings for complex graphs and 20 pairs of
Easy and Difficult drawings for simple graphs.
In making the drawings, special attention was paid to avoid possible effects of path continuity. The graphs were drawn so that for
the Easy and Difficult drawings of each pair, there was an approximately equal chance of being affected by path continuity. Similarly, for each drawing, no matter from which node the path search
was started, there was an approximately equal chance of being affected by path continuity (this was why the symmetrical graphs
were used). In addition, the possible effects of link crossings were
also controlled; both the total number of crossings in the drawing
and the number of crossings on the target path (if any) were the
same between the Easy and Difficult drawings of each pair [10, 14].
4.3

Subjects

Thirty-three subjects participated in the experiment. These subjects had normal or correct-to-normal vision. They were Computer
Science students from the School of Information Technologies at
the University of Sydney; either fourth-year honor students, or research/coursework postgraduate students. The subjects were all familiar with node-link diagrams and the task. They were paid $15
each for their participation.
4.4

Online System

The drawings were displayed by an online system. The system was
designed to highlight the two specified nodes as red and display
the drawing in the center of the screen. When it was started, the
system displayed one of the highlighted nodes first. The subject was
asked to look at the node and press the space key on the keyboard

Difficult

Easy

Simple

Complex
Table 2: Stimuli examples in Experiment 2

to show the whole drawing. This was to make sure that the eye
was at the same position of the drawing across the subjects when it
was completely visible. However, the subject was free to start path
searching from either of the highlighted nodes. Once the answer
was determined, the space key was pressed; the picture disappeared
and an answer screen appeared. On the right side of the answer
screen, there were six boxes with each representing one possible
answer. The subject was asked to click on one of the boxes. Once
the answer box was clicked, the new node of another drawing was
displayed, and so on.
Each response and the corresponding time for each subject were
recorded in real time by the system. The time started when the
drawing was completely shown and ended when the space key was
pressed.
4.5 Procedure
There were two blocks of drawings. One block consisted of 20
Easy drawings of the simple graphs and 20 Difficult drawings of the
complex graphs. The other block consisted of 20 Difficult drawings
of the simple graphs and 20 Easy drawings of the complex graphs.
There were two sessions with each session including the two
blocks. That is, each drawing was viewed twice. The order of
the two blocks was counterbalanced for each subject and across the
subjects. The order of drawings in each block was random. In each
block, each time the subject gave a wrong answer, the corresponding drawing was put at the end of the block until a correct answer
was given.
The experiment employed a 2 Difficulty (Easy drawings and Difficult drawings) × 2 Complexity (simple and complex graphs) ×
2 Session (session 1 and session 2) factorial design with repeated

measures. Independent variables included Difficulty, Complexity
and Session. Dependant variables included response time and error
rate.
The experiment was conducted on either individual or small
groups of at most four bases in a quiet computer laboratory room.
After reading instructions, practicing the system, asking questions
and signing the consent form, the subject started to perform tasks
online. The subject was required to have a break between blocks
and between sessions. The pace of each session was controlled by
the subject. For example, a rest could be taken when the answer
screen appeared if the subject’s eyes were tired. After online tasks,
a short questionnaire was given asking whether there were specific
layout features helpful or not helpful for task performance and how.
All subjects needed to complete two sessions for their tasks.
They were instructed to use their eyes only to find the target path,
without using a mouse to help. There were no time limits. The
subjects were asked to work fast without making any errors. The
whole experiment took about 40 minutes on average.
Sixteen of the stimuli drawings were selected and viewed by the
thirteen subjects from Experiment 1. The subjects performed the
same task as that in Experiment 1 and their eye movements were
video recorded.
4.6 Hypotheses
According to geodesic-path tendency, with branches on the shortest
path going toward the target nodes, people are more likely to follow
those branches searching for the target path. This causes delay in
response time. In addition, when graphs are more complex (in this
experiment, that means when branches have more than one link),
peripheral vision will be limited. That is, it will be harder for the

141

subject to realize that a wrong path is being searched. Therefore, a
slower response time can be expected. Further, since each session
contained 80 drawings, after the first session, the subject should
become more experienced in performing tasks and more confident
in determining answers, resulting in a shorter response time in the
second session. Based on these considerations, it is hypothesized
that:
1. Easy drawings result in significantly faster responses and
lower error rates than Difficult drawings.
2. Simple graphs result in significantly faster responses and
lower error rates than complex graphs.
3. Responses in session 2 are significantly faster and more accurate than those in session 1.
Figure 6: Means of median times (sec.)

4. Effects of geodesic-path tendency are larger for complex
graphs than for simple graphs. In other words, differences
between Easy and Difficult drawings of complex graphs in response time and error rate are significantly larger than those
of simple graphs.
4.7 Results
There were eight conditions with each including 20 drawings. Error rate for each subject in a condition was coded as the ratio of the
number of times a wrong answer was given to the total number of
attempts to answer questions. For example, if a subject attempted
23 times in a condition, which means that there were 3 incorrect responses being made, the error rate would be 3/23×100%=13.04%.
However, only times of correct responses were analyzed. The time
analysis was based on medians. For each subject, the median time
in a condition was calculated. These individual medians across the
subjects were averaged as the mean time that the subjects spent in
that condition. This method eliminates the effects of possible outliers, and was also used by Korner et al. [10].
The mean median times for all conditions were summarized in
Table 3, and the mean error rates were summarized in Table 4.

Easy
Difficult

Session 1
Simple
Complex
3.55
5.73
4.58
11.68

Session 2
Simple
Complex
2.90
4.42
3.78
8.92

Table 3: Means of median times (sec.) for all conditions

Easy
Difficult

Session 1
Simple
Complex
1.67
2.76
0.98
10.40

Session 2
Simple
Complex
2.10
2.41
1.39
6.37

Table 4: Means of error rates (%) for all conditions

A 2×2×2 factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated
measures was conducted on response time and another ANOVA
with repeated measures was conducted on error rate. The results
were summarized in Table 5.
4.7.1 Response Time
Overall, as shown in Figure 6, when graphs were drawn with
branches going toward the target nodes, the subjects took 7.24 seconds on average. That was 3.09 seconds slower than when graphs
were drawn with branches leaving from the target node (4.15 seconds). This difference was significant, F(1, 32) = 178.13, p <
0.001, η 2 = 0.85 (η 2 : partial eta squared, a measure of effect size).

142

Figure 7: Means of median times (sec.) for complex and simple
graphs

For complex graphs, the subjects took 7.69 seconds on average.
That was 3.98 seconds slower than that for simple graphs (3.71
seconds). This difference was significant, F(1, 32) = 225.02, p <
0.001, η 2 = 0.88.
In session 1, the subjects took 6.39 seconds on average. That
was 1.38 seconds slower than in session 2 (5.01 seconds). This
difference was significant, F(1, 32) = 57.51, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.64.
As shown in Figure 7, for complex graphs, the difference in response time between Easy and Difficult was larger than that for
simple graphs. This interaction between Difficulty and Complexity
was significant, F(1, 32) = 92.00, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.74.
4.7.2

Error Rate

As shown in Figure 8, when graphs were drawn with branches going toward the target nodes, the error rate that the subjects produced
was 4.79% on average. That was 2.55% higher than when graphs
were drawn with branches leaving from the target node (2.24%).
This difference was significant, F(1, 32) = 15.55, p < 0.001, η 2 =
0.33.
For complex graphs, the error rate that the subjects produced
was 5.49% on average. That was 3.95% higher than that for simple graphs (1.54%). This difference was significant, F(1, 32) =
27.96, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.47.
In session 1, the error rate that the subjects produced was 3.95%
on average. That was 0.88% higher than in session 2 (3.07%).
However, this difference was not significant, F(1, 32) = 2.95, p >
0.05, η 2 = 0.08.

Time
Error Rate
Source
df
F
η2
F
η2
Difficulty (D)
1
178.13***
0.85
15.55***
0.33
Error (D)
32
(3.53)
(27.65)
Complexity (C)
1
225.02***
0.88
27.96***
0.47
Error (C)
32
(4.65)
(36.84)
Session (S)
1
57.51***
0.64
2.95
0.08
Error (S)
32
(2.18)
(17.41)
D×C
1
92.00***
0.74
32.39***
0.50
Error (D×C)
32
(3.27)
(21.50)
D×S
1
10.28**
0.24
2.41
0.07
Error (D×S)
32
(1.02)
(23.48)
C×S
1
26.24***
0.45
6.55*
0.17
Error (C×S)
32
(1.07)
(17.11)
D×C×S
1
5.93*
0.16
2.64
0.08
Error (D×C×S)
32
(1.16)
(20.85)
Notes: Numbers enclosed in parentheses represent mean square errors.
*: p < .05; **: p < .01; ***: p < .001
Table 5: ANOVA with repeated measures on response time and error rate

Figure 8: Means of error rates (%)

As shown in Figure 9, for complex graphs, the difference in error rate between Easy and Difficult was larger than that for simple
graphs. This interaction between Difficulty and Complexity was
significant, F(1, 32) = 32.39, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.50.
4.8

Eye Movement Data and Discussion

The eye movement data support our expectations on eye movement
behavior of the subjects. It is clear that for the Difficult drawings
of complex graphs, the eyes of the subjects had been on the branch
path toward the target node before they realized that there was a
dead end. For other drawings, branches were either ignored or
searched normally after the target path, probably for the purpose
of confirmation.
The quantitative results also support all of our hypotheses, with
one exception. The hypothesis that responses in session 2 were significantly more accurate than those in session 1 was not supported
in this experiment. This may be because the subjects focused more
on accuracy throughout, or perhaps because the subjects were experienced enough relative to the drawings used; learning effects were
too small to be detected in error rate.
In addition, although overall, the Easy drawings led to a lower
error rate than the Difficult drawings, from Table 6, it can be seen
that this was not the case for simple graphs. For the Difficult drawings, the error rate was 1.19%, while for the Easy drawings, it was
1.88% (although the difference was not significant). Based on the

Figure 9: Means of error rates (%) for complex and simple graphs
Difficult
Mean
Time (sec.)
4.18
Error Rate (%)
1.19
Notes: ***: p < .001

Easy
Mean
3.23
1.88

F(1,32)
49.56***
2.40

η2
0.61
0.07

Table 6: Means of time (sec.) and error rates (%) for simple graphs and the
results of ANOVA with repeated measures

comments of the subjects from previous experiments, the higher
error rate for the Easy condition might be because the Easy drawings were too simple, and the subjects lost concentration resulting
in more errors.
Effects of geodesic-path tendency on performance of shortest
path search tasks were significant. These effects interacted with
the level of graph complexity. When there were more links on
branches, the effects became larger. Given these overall effect patterns, we had a further look at the simple graphs alone. As can be
seen from Table 6, the response time was significantly affected by
the tendency, F(1, 32) = 49.56, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.61. This was surprising since in these graphs, there was only one path between two
selected nodes, and the shortest path had only one-link branches.
It was expected that the effects might be too small to be detected.
Most of the subjects also commented that there was not much difference between the Easy and Difficult drawings of simple graphs.

143

Based on the eye movement video, one possible explanation is that
when working with the Difficult drawings, the subject can tell with
peripheral vision that branches were not part of the target path.
However, geodesic-path tendency had to be resisted, consciously
or unconsciously, to keep the eye on the target path. This may slow
the eye movement and cause delay, resulting in the significantly
slower time for the Difficult drawings.
These were examples of comments from the subjects on their
path search behavior: It is difficult “when paths point to destination, but ends in a dead end”. “I try to go to paths in the direction
of destination.” It is “confusing when links go out in one direction (from the source), but suddenly, it is a dead end, must then
go back to look for a branch somewhere before. If it fails, look
at the other end point and do the same thing and see where they
meet.” “The diagrams which have a jagged shape, do not lead the
eye onto smooth paths, but instead require quick jerky movements,
back and forth, are hardest. Long targets, incorrect dead ends are
confusing because they cannot be instantly dismissed but instead
have to be followed to see if they lead to the solution.”
It is easier to find the answer “when there is an open space because I can ignore the furthest paths”. “It is easier when the route is
spread out with the dead ends only pointing a short distance away.
Also easier when actual path consists of longer segments. Your eyes
are able to follow them and ignore the distractions more easily.” It
is easier when there were “less crossings”, “less sharp turns”, and
when “the correct path is more direct”.
5

G ENERAL D ISCUSSION

AND

C ONCLUSION

Geodesic-path tendency has been validated in Experiment 1. In validating this tendency, the target node was predetermined, and the
shortest path task was used. In performing this task, the eye movement behavior of the viewer may be affected by the general knowledge that “the shortest distance between two points is a straight
line”. It is not clear whether this tendency still applies when general path search tasks are used. For example, finding a path between
two nodes.
Considering path-continuity tendency, its effects were controlled
in designing our experiments. It is unclear at this stage how
geodesic-path tendency interacts with path-continuity tendency.
That is, in what situation, which tendency has priority over the other
needs further investigation. Take the drawing in Figure 3 as an example, to find the path from a to c, we expect that the geodesic-path
tendency has priority. That is, only the path from a to c will be
searched, but with a slower speed at the intermediate node due to
the path-continuity tendency.
In Experiment 2, it was found when graphs are drawn with
branch links on the path leading away from the target node, graph
reading performance can be significantly improved. Given a graph
drawing, in searching paths between two nodes, confusion can be
expected if those paths are not well arranged. Due to the geodesicpath tendency, human eyes can easily slip into links that go toward
the target node but not part of the target path, causing time delay
and errors. We believe that the finding of geodesic-path tendency
helps enrich our knowledge of how people read graphs. Its implications are twofold: 1) graph drawing algorithms or systems need to
consider to lay out paths between important nodes or nodes of interests close to the geodesic paths, and to put those irrelevant branches
or paths further away. 2) based on knowledge of how people read
graphs, such as path-continuity and geodesic-path tendencies, we
are able to better evaluate visualizations and predict graph reading
performance.
R EFERENCES
[1] Carrasco, M. and McElree, B. (2001) Covert Attention Accelerates the
Rate of Visual Information Processing. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 98(9): 5363-5367.

144

[2] Di Battista, G., Eades, P., Tamassia, R. and Tollis, I. (1998) Graph
Drawing: Algorithms for the Visualization of Graphs, Prentice Hall.
[3] Ghoniem, M., Fekete, J.-D. and Castagliola, P. (2004) A Comparison of the Readability of Graphs Using Node-Link and Matrix-Based
Representations. In Proc. the 10th IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis’04), 17-24.
[4] Herman, I., Melancon, G. and Marshall, M. (2000) Graph Visualization and Navigation in Information Visualization: A Survey. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6(1): 24-43.
[5] Howell, D. (2006) Statistical Methods for Psychology. Wadsworth
Publishing; 6th edition.
[6] Huang, W. (2007) Beyond Time and Error: A Cognitive Approach
to the Evaluation of Graph Visualizations. PhD Thesis, University of Sydney. http://www.it.usyd.edu.au/˜whua5569/
papers/TonyThesis.pdf
[7] Huang, W. (2007) Using Eye Tracking to Investigate Graph Layout Effects. In Proc. Asia Pacific Symposium on Visualization
(APVIS2007), IEEE, 97-100.
[8] Huang, W. and Eades, P. (2005) How People Read Graphs: An Eye
Tracking Study. In Proc. Asia Pacific Symposium on Information Visualization (APVIS2005), CRPIT, 45, ACS, 51-58.
[9] Kerren, A., Ebert, A. and Meyer, J. (Eds.) (2006) Human-Centered
Visualization Environments. GI-Dagstuhl Research Seminar, Dagstuhl
Castle, Germany. LNCS 4417, Springer-Verlag.
[10] Korner, C. and Albert, D. (2002) Speed of comprehension of visualized ordered sets. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8:
57-71.
[11] Ratwani, R.M., Trafton, J.G. and Boehm-Davis, D.A. (2003) Thinking
Graphically: Extracting Local and Global Information. In Proc. the
Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
[12] Scaife, M. and Rogers, Y. (1996) External Cognition: How do
Graphical Representations Work? International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 45:185-213.
[13] Ware, C. (2004) Information Visualization: Perception for Design.
Morgan Kaufman.
[14] Ware, C., Purchase, H., Colpoys, L. and McGill, M. (2002) Cognitive
Measurements of Graph Aesthetics. Information Visualization, 1(2):
103-110.
[15] Zhang, J., Johnson, K.A., Malin, J. and Smith, J.W. (2002) HumanCentered Information Visualization. International Workshop on Dynamic Visualization and Learning, Tubingen, Germany, July 18-19.

