Digitally Manipulated Images and Painting
Wade S. Thompson
Assistant Department Head and Professor
Department of Art and Design
Southwest Missouri State University
Springfield, Missouri
USA
of the entire process involved in creating the
final paintings from the initial photographs,
digitalization and the final, physical act of
painting on canvas. The use of traditional
materials within art making and the relationship
of new technologies within that process is an
important underlying issue within the
presentation.

Abstract
This paper/presentation submitted for the
IV2001 Conference will include a discussion of
this artist’s use of digitar‘lymanipulated images
sourced from photographic studies from nature
and used a visual resource for canvas painting.
Traditional approaches t(ocanvas painting have
included various paths of image preparation
prior to the actual applicution ofpaint to canvas.
Preliminary drawings and studies, photographs
and graphing techniques have all been common
approaches used for developing concepts for the
final canvas painting. Many contemporary
painters do not utilize preliminary concept
studies for paintings at all, since the physical
process, itself; can be a self-developing and selfrevealing means to an end. This presentation will
reveal this artist’s approach to utilizing digital
technology as a means for exploring ideas
related to formal consid<erationsof composition
and color through image manipulation within
Photoshop. Images that originate as original
photographic studies from nature (most often in
the form of landscape) are manipulated, printed
as hard copy and used as source for the final
paintings on canvas. Thcse canvas paintings are
large in scale, measuring 60” x 72” as an
average, and are executed within the synthetic
acrylic medium. Occasionally, the hard-copy
images are re-manipuluted as collage pieces
andor re-scanned and reprocessed through the
software. The final paintings, however, are not
totally predetermined by the digitized images.
Alterations are made throughout the process of
creating the paintings. Considerations of actual
surjiace texture, color transparency, and
numerous other characteristics not available for
manipulation through image digitalization all
partake and influence rhe final outcome. This
presentation will include a slide representation

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.000 2001 IEEE

New technologies and the fine arts
A major transformation has occurred over recent
years that has created a huge impact on the
number of options available to the artist for
creating visual works. New technologies have
increased the tools available to the visual artist
from initial conceptualization to the creation of
the final art object. The term “digital art”
includes
an
unprecedented number of
possibilities within graphic art production,
electronic media, film and traditional media such
painting, drawing and sculpture. It is not
uncommon for digital manipulation to occur at
some point within image creation across the
whole spectrum of creative activity. Digital
language is becoming as natural as the process of
using a pencil to make marks on a piece of paper.
New art forms have emerged within virtual
spaces embedded within the internet. Visual arts
programs within all levels of education have
adopted digital technology as a means for
teaching and creating.

Traditional approaches to art making:
painting and digitized images
The marriage of artworks that rely on traditional
media with new digital technology can, in some
instances, seem incongruous. Much of the
traditional media used by artists is applied
through an approach that relies heavily on the

241

physicality of the material. The physical nature
of the material is often an important expressive
component within the overall visual character of
the work. Additionally, there are those artists
using traditional media that have not yet
recognized the possibilities of digital technology
as a valuable tool or who have chosen not to
explore the possibilities based on subjective bias.

details. The overriding concern within the
images taken at this stage are the fundamental
characteristics related to variations of movement,
direction, space, texture and color. The images
have a “landscape” quality to them, although
many of them have already taken on an abstract
quality
due
to
specific
compositional
manipulation.

Some of the remaining traces of fear or
apprehension associated with the use of digital
technology within the fine arts relate to
preconceived notions that technology in art is
most appropriate to commercial applications or,
more specifically, graphic design. The hard-core
traditionalists connect new technology with the
commercial marketplace.

11. Photographic images digitized
Traditional prints are made from the 35” film
that become the source for the digitizing process.
Selections are made from a number of initial
prints. The selected prints are scanned and
digitized for the computer.

111. Digitized images manipulated
within Adobe Photoshop

The process of applying digital image
manipulation to fine arts painting within this
discussion is based the personal creative work of
the author, who has been a professional painter
for almost three decades. The creative work to be
discussed involves a process of manipulating
photographic images digitally that are used as
visual sources for large acrylic paintings on
canvas.

Adobe Photoshop is the software used to
manipulate the scanned images. This initial stage
of manipulation relies most intensely on
compositional manipulation. Cropping tools are
used for focusing in on particular areas of the
scanned images that might serve as a possible
source for the final composition. Variations of
scale often create problems with image
resolution and care must be taken not to “over
enlarge” selections.

The process
The process used in developing the large acrylic
canvases involves the following:
I.

11.
111.

IV.
V.
VI.

In

addition

to

compositional selection

and

manipulation, other various tools are used for
altering visual characteristics of the image.
Major sources at this point of manipulation are
tools that alter the fundamental components of
colour: hue, value and saturation. Numerous
alterations of these colour characteristics are
made within each selection, and are applied
without preconceptions as to the final outcome.
The organization of colour relationships at this
point within the manipulative process is linked to
establishing an overall expressive thrust that is
linked to the characteristics of the visual forms
inherent within the initial composition. This
stage of the process is a very playful one, where
trial and error and numerous revisions occur
within the quest for a final image that may
become the springboard for a final painting.
Once an image is arrived at that has potential for
further development, a file is created for it’s
future use. The manipulation of these very
fundamental aspects of image making are similar
to the numerous color sketches which painters
often make on paper or small pieces of canvas

Photographic images taken from
nature.
Photographic images digitized.
Digitized images manipulated in
Adobe Photoshop.
Hardcopy images collaged and/or
redigitized.
Final digitized hardcopy used as a
visual resource for canvas painting.
Continued revisions of image
within physical manipulation of
painting.

I. Photographic images taken from
nature
A series of color images using a 35“
format
are taken based on locations in natural settings.
Organic forms from nature are the essential
subject matter used, with a special concern for
strong variations of light that help transcend
specific identification or delineation of irrelevant

242

prior to the execution of the final canvas. There
are, however, fundamental differences that the
artist must become accustomed to when using
the computer as an imaging tool.

are used to assemble a totally new image, usually
glued to a new support. These sections can be
torn or cut or both. They are also occasionally rescanned and re-manipulated within the software
and re-printed. Therefore, the process can be on
going and continual with each new step,
presenting new alterations and variations
resulting from an on-going exploration. These
more expansive experiments with digitally
generated hardcopy images that are combined
with traditional media processes such as collage
and assemblage take on more of an independent
stature as works of art themselves. They begin to
transcend the position of functioning solely as
‘‘preparatory sketches for paintings” and develop
more of a richness that allows possibilities for
further development.

The loss of “tactile resjponse” when sacrificing
traditional media (at any stage) for the computer
keyboard and mouse can be a frustrating and
alienating experience. Tactile response is a
natural human response and an important aspect
(as mentioned earlier) of many artists’ working
aesthetic. The computer display can be a
mesmerizing entity in itself, but provides a
limited range of possibilities that are not nearly
as delicate as the human eye that is fed by all the
necessary subjective nuances necessary to fuel
the creative process. Digitizing mechanisms are
not forgiving, whereas, natural materials are.
“Painting by numbers” allows a multitude of
imaging possibilities, yet still exists within a
realm dictated by quantitative logic, which is
often considered the antithesis of the true
creative process. Softw,are tools, which attempt
to duplicate the physical act of brushwork,
erasures, pencil marks, ;and so forth, are avoided
within this digitizing process and left to the final
and actual process of manipulating paint on
actual canvas.

V. Final digitized hardcopy resource
for canvas painting
The selected digitized hardcopy images that are
to be used as a visual resource for the canvas
paintings represent the last step within the
process. These relatively small studies are
brought to the painting studio and positioned
next to the large, primed canvases which are
cotton duck stretched over traditional wooden
stretcher frames. The average size of these
canvases is 60’ x 72”.

IV. Hardcopy images
Numerous hardcopy images are printed from the
display image through the Photoshop software.
The printouts are colour images averaging 5” x
7” in scale. Variations of colour organization are
often applied to one compositional solution
which results in multiple prints. Problems of
colour constancy (color management) can
surface at this step of image production. The
image generated on the computer display is
rarely reproduced faithfully by the printer. This
is not always a major issue, unless the image has
been altered significantly. If this is the case,
remanipulations or corrections are processed,
again, through the software program. Most often,
the discrepancy lies within altered or reduced
levels of colour saturation and/or contrast. Of
course, the quality of the paper used during the
printing process can significantly alter overall
levels of colour brilliance.

The scale change from a small 5” x 7” digitally
generated image to a large scale 60” x 72”
canvas represents an important transition within
the entire process of the painting’s evolution.
The limitations of the digitized image are quickly
recognized. Fundamental information relative to
the initial stages of the canvas are provided by
the hardcopy image, yet considerations of
surface (texture), colour quantity relationships,
pigment opacity and transparency all enter in to
the development of the final painting.
At this stage, the digitized image is used as a
reference, much in the same way a still life or a
model might be within more traditional
approaches to working from observation. Once
the basic composition is “blocked in” with
generalized colour washes, a process of
colour/pigment layering begins which continues
until the final stages of the painting. Synthetic
acrylic is the medium used because it dries
quickly and allows for the layering of colour
through transparent glazes. Initial notations of
colour generally are keyed to the digitized

These initial paper printouts are not necessarily
the final step within the hardcopy process.
Occasionally, the printouts are actually used
within a collage proce:;s where components or
sections from different compositional printouts

243

image, but as the painting progresses, alterations
are made which reflect the on-going evolution of
the image which is not dictated by the original
digital study.

the digitized compositions continues within the
development of the canvases. The final canvas
contains the total history of the creative process.

Conclusion

VI. Continued revisions of image

Computers are tools. They tend to do what they
are told to do. People are human beings. They do
not always do what they are told to do.

Process and evolution is an important aspect of
how the final canvas paintings are developed. It
is an attitude directly related to expressionist
strategies, particularly those of the Abstract
Expressionist movement. Preconceived notions
of what the final image might be are not
generally considered. The paintings are allowed
to evolve within the original, basic structure
established by the digitized images. The final
paintings are generally abstract in nature and
thick with layers of translucent pigment and
variations of paint application. The original
photographs taken from nature have little to do
with the final canvas, except for some references
to basic organic structures. The process of
evolution necessary within the development of

The human spirit thrives when it has options and
paths for growth and discovery. The artist thrives
within a realm of risk-taking and undiscovered
possibilities. New technology has provided the
creative
practitioner
tools
that
have
revolutionized the manner in which art forms are
being created. The relationship of traditional art
forms and new digitally based art forms will
continue to provide a dynamic interface that will,
hopefully, allow artists to work within an
environment of unequaled possibilities.

244

