4D Visualization of Construction Site Management*
ZHANG J. P.
Associate Professor, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
MA Z.Y.
Master Student, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Cheng Pu,
Ph.D. Student, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Abstract

two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D)
approaches [l]. A kind of layout design system, called
SEED-Layout is extended to support Construction Site
Layout (CSL) problems. Temporary facilities range from
material storage such as long-term lay-down areas to
building structures such as temporary offices can be
dimensioned and located with SEED-Layout [2].
MovePlan is a program developed specifically to support
dynamic layout planning (Tommelein and Zouein 1993). It
must be provided with a schedule of activities and their
resources, as well as the space needed to accommodate
these resources. Then users can select a time interval for
which to create a two-dimensional layout that illustrates
the use of space during that time [3]. Zouein (1995)
developed MoveSchedule, an extension to MovePlan,
which alleviates space conflicts by adjusting the
construction schedule [4]. 4D-Planner is a powerful
visualization, simulation, and communication tool that
provides simultaneous access to design and schedule data.
It provides a graphical simulation of the work plan that
allows early problem identification, including interference
detection, and supports scenario analysis. 4D-Planner
facilitates interdisciplinary construct ability reviews, and
provides a means to graphically represent the results of the
planning process, thus helps all project participants make
faster and better informed planning decisions [ 5 ] .
In recent years, various artificial intelligence
techniques have been applied to site layout. Mathematical
modeling and expert systems have been used to solve some
equipment-placement planning problems by seeking
optimal solutions based on predefined criteria and
constraints such as time, cost, and coverage [ 6 ] .
Knowledge-based systems have been developed to provide
users with problem-specific heuristic knowledge in
allocating facilities (Rad and James 1983, Tommelein et al.
1991). Yeh (1995) applied annealed neural networks to
solve construction site-level facility layout problems [7]. Li
and Love (1998) used the genetic algorithms technique to
solve the layout-improvement problem.
Our project team has been dedicated to the study of
site layout visualization, and developed GCPSU (Jianping

Construction site management mainly involves rational
layout of site facilities, optimum usage of space and
dynamic management of plants. It directly influences
security, machine running, material supply, power
distribution as well as construction progress and cost.
Applying computers to make visual site layout has become
a hot spot attracting many researchers. This paper presents
an interactive 4 0 Construction Site Management System
(CSMS). In CSMS, a 4 0 site management model (4DSMM)
has been generated, which links a 3 0 model of
construction project with a project activity schedule, each
activity suitably annotated with its resource requirements
including material, plant and work space. The system
provides a 4 0 visualization capability for construction
facilities layout, the use of site space,, and intelligent
decisions based on a knowledge base. The application of
4 0 intelligent site management is seen to have
considerable potential.

I. Introduction
Construction space is an important part of
construction resource, the same as time, labor, material,
plants and cost. Unfortunately, construction site can only
be arranged with project manager’s own experience. Thus
incorrect decision or operation will be made when project
managers use their experience inappropriately or are lack
of enough experience. This traditional layout method is too
limited to meet the need of large-scale modern construction
site management. Visual and intelligent management of the
construction site has become an urgent need. Consequently,
the research in this area becomes a hot spot.
At present, some development has been made in this
field. The interactive Critical Operations Planning
Environment (COPE) (Kuo-LiangLin) is an interactive
plan management software, used for planning critical
construction operations involving large semi-stationary
equipment such as cranes, concrete pumps, manipulators
and so on. It combines the advantages of both

* This research is supported by Natural Science Foundation of China. (Approved No. 59778055)

382
0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

Zhang 1991), 4D-GCPSU(2000) successively. A main
function of GCPSU is to vividly simulate the site design
and arrangement of different construction floors. It
supplies an interactive auxiliary management tool for
rational utilization, planning and control of construction
space. At the same time it works over corresponding
knowledge databases, and attempts to make decisions for
construction layout. 4D-GCPSU, which combines 3D
geometrical building model and schedule information
together, realizes 4D simulation of construction process

Through linking the 3D model with a construction
activity schedule, the 4D site management model for a
project can be automatically generated. At any construction
period, the building construction at the activity level and
site space utilization can be displayed forward or backward
in time. The site managers can dynamically plan temporary
facilities layout and control the use of site space according
to construction schedules or real construction progress and
relevant resource requirement. Through a visual simulation,
even non-professionals may have a clear understand for
site management process.

PI.
All the systems mentioned above realized
computer-aided management of construction site to some
degree. But they all have limitations and cannot help
decision making sufficiently. For the above reason, a new
Construction Site Management System (CSMS) is
developed here. Integrating 4D model with compound
intelligent technology CSMS realizes 4D dynamic
management and visual simulation of construction site.

2.3 Bi-directional linkage between 3D model and
schedule system
The CSMS have a bi-directional links capability
between the 3D model of the project and the schedule
system. This linkage involves complex dependencies
among various site facilities, and the relativity between site
facility and construction schedules. Finally the
“time-space-quantity” relationship of construction site is
created based on some linking rules. This kind of
mechanism implements data exchange between 4D site
management model and schedule system, thus consistency
between site layout and construction progress is assured.
When construction progress changes, CSMS can
automatically adjust working procedure, recalculate
quantities of materials and work space state. So
information provided for site layout is always accurate.

2. 4D intelligent site management model
The concept of 4-dimensional model that incorporates
the time dimension into the concept of 3D visualization has
become the focus of much research work by others in order
to develop current planning techniques. The 4D site
management model links a 3D model of construction
project with a project activity schedule, each activity
suitably annotated with its resource requirements including
material, plant and work space. In 4DSMM, the 4D
visualization and making intelligent decision achieve the
aim of dynamic management and optimized layout of
construction sites. It not only realizes 3D visualization of
construction sites and construction process for multistory
building, but also automatically optimizes and controls the
whole construction planning, and helps project managers
lay out plants, storage areas ,and other facilities in the
construction site. Generally this model has the following
main features.

2.1

2.4 Intelligent aided decision
A knowledge-base and intelligent system are
constructed to monitor site-layout progress and supply
rational layout approaches. In a non-intelligent system, site
layout is simply a kind of dragging and arranging, the site
manager usually relies on his judgment and experience to
determine whether the layout meets the need of
construction and in line with construction rules. The 4D
site management model contains abundant original site
information and the knowledge-base stores a lot of rules,
experiences and principles. Based on this information,
CSMS uses artificial neural network and expert system
methods to evaluate users’ manual layout and sometimes
provide more rational results.
In a word, 4D intelligent site management model
involves 3D site model, time schedule, knowledge rules
and the logical relationships between them, as shown in
figure 1.

3D visualization

Through analysis of construction site, key attributes
that can represent spatial geometrical characteristics are
abstracted. CSMS can generate easily the 3D model of the
project from the input of these geometrical attributes via
the graphical user interface (CUI) and visualize any 3D
model components from any position or angle. Each 3D
entity not only has such geometrical characteristics as
position and shape, but also maintains a data structure of
attributes specific to construction site, such as plant model,
site carrying-capacity, mixture productivity and so on.

2.2

4D dynamic management
383

I
I

4D Intelligent Management

I
I

Figure 1 Organization of 4D Intelligent Site Management Model

3. Development of CSMS system

stages, lays out temporary cranes, mixers and those
facilities specific to each stage. The timely dynamic layout
involves daily disposal and the facilities includes material
storage areas on finished floors, access space around the
work platform, work space for machining steel, formwork
and falsework, and for equipment maneuvering etc. SKMS
system makes aided decision for site layout in an
interactive way. SLMS system sends request to SKMS
system, then SKMS makes an intelligent analysis on these
requests, and responses with rational results.
SKMS system is CSMS's intelligent center with
responsibility for analyzing input information and
supplying aided decision.
The hybrid intelligence
technology in combination with Expert System (ES) and
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) was applied in SKMS.
Depending on different requests from SLMS system,
SKMS distills information from the knowledge-based and
4D site information database, and then by analyzing,
calculating and judging, finally acquires a series of results
and responses them back to SLMS system. Thus rational
layout approaches can be supplied, and wrong decisions
can be alerted and remedied. A specific management
interface maintains the knowledge-based so as to add,
delete and modify expert experiences, domain knowledge

3.1 System structure
CSMS was developed on a PC with 586 processing
and 128MB memory. AutoCAD was chosen as the
graphics system and both Visual C++ 6.08 and AutoCAD
ObjectARXO languages were used to develop the
programs of the CSMS. Microsoft Project as a construction
scheduling system was linked to the CSMS. The Visual
C++ and ObjectARX provide an object-oriented
programming environment. The CSMS system consists of
four main sections, Site Layout Management System
(SLMS), Site Knowledge Management System (SKMS),
4 D site information database and schedule information
database.
SLMS system is a 4D visual site layout system, as
shown in figure 2. The original site information includes
temporary wall, existing road, existing buildings, existing
pipes, available sites and so on. The general site layout
arranges the temporary facilities that have fixed positions
and exist during whole construction process, such as cranes,
offices, and material machining factories. In the stage
layout, SLMS meets the need of different construction

384

and technical rules.
4 D site information database stores the position and
lifetime of various facilities in construction site, and also
includes material storage and usage amount and model of
various construction devices. 11 is a full reflection of real
4 D construction site. SLMS inducts 3 D information and

management system (acronym 4D-GCPSU). Through
linking 3D building model with construction schedule,
4D-GCPSU can provide a 4 D graphical visualization
capability for construction planning purposes, and
embraces other aspects of site management containing the
construction schedule with time and labor allocated, plant

-b

Control flow
both

L

----- +Data

A

flow in one

direction
and material requirements.
construction schedule of working buildings from a
schedule information database of a construction schedule
Figure 2 Logical Structure of CSMS

designed according to a particular set of rules.
There are many plants in a construction site, such as
cranes, mixers and concrete pumps, which have their own
specific attributes. For example, crane attribute includes
model, height, arm length, position and so on. Through
abstracting them as classes, and using data members to
identify their attributes, module dependencies are
decreased a lot. This advantage is enhanced when
ObjectARX is used to develop software. Because each
entity class can be encapsulated in a DBX file, thus each
construction site entity has a corresponding DBX file
(DataBase extension). Each DBX file is generated with an
absolute Visual C++ project; there are almost no
dependencies between different modules.

3.2 Data structure
3.2.1 Site entity classes
Object oriented software engineering is a newly
arisen design method. Its main idea is that all external
entities can be abstracted as objccts. Complicated object is
made up of simple objects in soine way. When performing
an object-oriented programming, a programmer specifies
on what to do with an object rather than focuses on the
conventional procedural aspects of how something gets
done. Simply stated, object-oriented programming deals
with the manipulation of objects. In essence, an object
comprises the data elements or the data structure needed to
describe the object, together with the set of permissible
operations on the data. This description bears remarkable
similarity to the one we gave far an abstract data type. In
fact, we will see that an object is nothing more than a
particular instance of an abstract data type that we have

3.2.2 The database
Developing programs to communicate with databases
through some specific interface is a complicated work.
Database client technology supplies a convenient approach

385

layout information system converts the graphics into 2D
site database. The figure 3 shows the graphics converted
back from the 2D site database. Thus other systems can
access 2D database directly to acquire site information
without communicating with AutoCAD graphics and more
efficient codes can be developed.
4D-GCPSU mainly manages 4 D information of
construction project. Firstly schedule information is input
through a GUI interface that interacts with Microsoft
Project. Then structure component information is input
through AutoCAD. Finally the system links component
information with schedule and constructs 4D model of
construction site. 4D-GCPSU is very convenient to use.
For examples, it supplies powerful axis drawing module.
The copy function between floors and in the same floor
saves a lot of time. A 4 D visualization of the site layout for
a sample project is shown in figure 4.

that is much simpler than database operations. Database
client interfaces is a powerful tools, thus simple program
can be written to drive a lot of complicated codes resident
in database and perform very complex tasks. Recently
some companies have developed several database
interfaces. On windows platform, common interfaces
include ODBC (Open DataBase Connectivity), MFC
ODBC classes, DAO (Data Access Object), RDO (Remote
Data Object), OLE DB (Object Linking and Embedding
DataBase) and ADO (ActiveX Data Object).
CSMS system contains several databases, with which
each subsystem need to exchange information frequently.
So it’s very important to adopt consistent database client
technology. ADO enables developers to write an
application to access and manipulate data in a database
server through an OLE DB provider. ADO’S primary
benefits are high speed, ease of use, low memory overhead,
and a small disk footprint. It supports for stored procedures
with i d o u t parameters and return values, limits on number
of returned rows, other query goals for performance tuning,
and multiple record sets returned from stored procedures or
batch statements. Further more it has different cursor types,
including the potential for support of back-end-specific
cursors. CSMS
used this kind of database client
technology.
CSMS’s databases include 4 D site information
database, 4D-GCPSU database and a knowledge-base. 4 D
site information database stores 4 D information of
buildings, plants, roads, pipes and various storage areas. It
also contains a site schedule database, which stores time
information of facilities in construction site. 4 D component
information of work buildings is stored in 4D-GCPSU
database such as beams, floor, columns, walls, windows
and doors. The knowledge-base includes five
sub-databases. Standard device database stores models,
properties, prices of various devices. Standard material
database stores those of materials. Standard component
database contains prefabricated components, prices and
properties of standard doors and windows. And the final
two sub-databases store a number of construction criterions,
experiences and rules.

5. Conclusion
The CSMS links a 3D model of construction project
with scheduling information to overcome the shortcoming
of traditional site layout method and achieves 4 D
visualization of site management and intelligent aided
decision. This new approach will improve both the quality
of site space utilization and ease the site management
process itself. CSMS is technically workable and is
suitable for the needs of site managers. Through the use of
the CSMS, site managers have a tool that is technically
correct and efficient in practice.

References
[ 11. Kuo-Liang Lin, An Interactive Planning Environment for

Critical Operations, Journal of Construction Engineering and
Management, 1996. P.212-222.
[2]. Bongjin Choi, Adaptation of a Layout Design System to a
New Domain: Construction Site Layouts,
Journal of
Computer in Civil Engineering, 1996 p 711-717
[3]. David R.Riley, Tommelein. Ins D, Space Planning Tools for
Multi-story Construction,. Joumal of Computing in Civil
Engineering. 1996, P718-724.
[4]. David R.Riley, Space Planning Method for Multistory
Building Construction, Journal of Construction Engineering
and Management, 1997. P 171-180.
[5]. Mike Williams, Graphical Simulation for Project Planning:
4D-Planner,. Joumal of Computing in Civil Engineering.
1996.,P404-409
[6]. Kuo-Liang Lin, An interactive Planning Environment for
Critical Operations.
[7]. Heng Li., Site-Level Facilities Layout Using Genetic
Algorighms, Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering,
Oct.1998, P227-231.
[8]. Jian-Ping Zhang, A New 4D Management Approach To
Construction Planning and Site Space Utilization,
Computing in Civil and building Engineering. 2000, P15-22.

4. Practical application
2D site layout information is input to AutoCAD
graphics and then converted into 2 D site information
database by CSMS. The information in the database is so
consistent with AutoCAD graphics that if database
information is converted back to a new blank DWG file
(DWG is a kind of AutoCAD graphics file format), same
graphics will be generated. These graphics contains the
original site layout information such as existing buildings,
roads, storage areas and cranes in construction site. 2D site

386

Entrance

\

Buildings that already exists
Temp buildings for construction
Buildings to be constructed
j._._._._l Areas with notice boards and grass
Areas for steel process
Formwork storing areas
Areas for woodworking
Areas to store materials
=Repairing
areas

11-

Figure 3 The Graphics Converted from Database

Figure 4

4D Visualization of The Site Layout for A Sample Project

387

