Computer Visualisation as a Communication Tool in the Construction Industry
A. Ganah*, Prof. C. J. Anumba, Dr. N. M. Bouchlaghem
Civil & Building Engineering Department,
Loughborough University, Loughborough LE 1 1 3TU

Abstract

thousand words”. CAD has already revolutionised design
representation and in some instances, design too.

Coinpiiter visualisation tools offer good visiialisation
capabilities that cannot be achieved rising traditional
methods, such as 2 - 0 drawings. Design details are not
always simple arid easy to understand. Builders may spend
considerable time on interpreting diflciilt or complex
details in a drawing; this could result in buildability
problems. Computer visualisai’ion tools have considerable
potential to improve this aspect of construction. However,
their use is still at present limited and not filly understood.
This paper presents an ongoing research project
demonstrating the possible rise of computer visualisation as
a conimunication tool for desig,? itlforniation and to support
collaboration between construction participants (designers
and contractors). An industn. survey hus been conducted to
investigate the ciirrent use of c<sniputervisualisation in the
construction industry. A sunininn of the survey results is
presented in this paper orid the outline features of a new
visualisation tool is presented.

During the construction process, builders face several
problems. One of these problems is the interpretation of
design details, which can be complicated and difficult to
understand and build. They spend too much time and effort
trying to understand the design intentions and making them
work. This might mean that they have to wait for the site
management team to explain how it could be done [3]. The
site management team may need to contact the designer to
clarify these details and to ask how they can be
implemented. This may require the presentation of drawings
to carry out this process which is not possible using
conventional communication media. It is estimated that
nearly 45% of all quality problems, which occur on
construction sites, are due to unclear project information [4].
This paper presents an on-going research project that
investigates the potential use of computer visualisation tools
to communicate design information to site personnel. It
presents a brief review of visualisation tools, which have the
potential for use in the construction industry. A summary of
the results of an industry survey on the uptake of these tools
is also presented. The outline features of a visualisation
system that has been developed to improve the
communication of buildability information is also presented
and a number of conclusions drawn.

Keywords: Computer Visualisation, Communication,
Design information, Buildability.

1

Introduction

Project information visualisation is not only important
at the design stage but is also becoming increasingly
important at the construction stage. It can be a valuable tool
for enhancing current systems with respect to construction
sequence, equipment access, work accomplished and
problem areas [ I ] . In addition to that, visualisation with
communication tools could create the necessary links
between site and design teams to collaborate in solving
buildability problems that may arise during construction [ 2 ] .

2

Project information can be classified into technical,
commercial, or control information [2, 51:
Technical Information: is information that describes the
geometry of a building and its technical evaluation. This
type of information can be divided into the main
categories of graphical and non-graphical information.

Visualisation is the display of information to maximise
comprehension and a way of making the most effective use
of data. It can assist in understanding concepts, interpreting
data and also communicating them. “A picture paints a

Commercial information: is information that establishes
the responsibilities of each project participant in the

-

* e-mail: a.a.m.ganah@Iboro.ac.uk.

679
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

Information types

facsimile, e-mail and mobile phones has improved
communication in respect of speed but it has not influenced
the efficiency of the construction process nor the quality of
information exchange [ 11.

delivery of the final product. It includes delivery
schedules, costs, payment schedules, as well as terms and
conditions of the contract.
Management and control information: includes all
information required for controlling a project, or to
generate reports, etc.

3

5

An industry survey has been conducted to establish
current practice on the use of visualisation tools within the
construction industry. A four-page questionnaire was sent to
100 organisations randomly selected from the top IO0 UK
construction consultants and contractors based on turnover
(New Civil Engineer 1999). The survey questionnaire was
designed to investigate the use of computer communication
and visualisation during the construction stage of medium to
high-rise buildings. It focused on the use of these
technologies within the organisation and when
communicating with other participants in the design and
construction of buildings. The other purpose was to
investigate buildability problems that might arise during
construction. An analysis of the results was carried out and
can be seen in (Ganah et al [5]& [ 121).

Computer Visualisation

Visualisation can be in several forms. A simple line
drawing can be regarded as sufficient for a specific
application whereas, rendered images may be needed for
other applications. Visualisation offers a method for seeing
the unseen. In design, visualisation is the overall imagining
and visual-thinking process involved in conceiving,
developing, modelling, simulating, testing, documenting,
and marketing a device or a structure [ 6 ] .Representation of
structural and building design has developed gradually in
thinking and technology from perspectives to virtual reality
in recent years [7].
Designers rely on architectural documentation to
communicate their design to a construction team. In
building
design, computer
visualisation
allows
investigations to iron out difficulties that may occur before
construction commences on site [8]. As is generally known,
the spatial relationships between elements in design can be
observed and judged by the eye. Hand and eye coordination when placing objects in the right places in space
is crucial. Computer visualisation, as with physical models,
combines hand and motion with visual feedback on
relationships between objects located in space.

4

Construction Industry Views and
Perspectives

The analysis of the results shows that the use of
computer visualisation and communication is very low. The
most common methods and tools used for communication
bctween design and site teams were traditional methods and
tools such as 2-D drawings, face to face meetings, written
statements, telephone and fax. They were accustomed to
these methods and tools and found them easy to use. These
methods and tools are not adequate and fast enough in
communicating requests for information. The respondents
thought that delays and lack of adequate information during
the construction process might contribute up to 30% of the
total delay in a project.

Team communication in the construction
industry

The most common use of computer communication is email especially by site teams to communicate with their head
office, subcontractors, and members of supply chain. The
most common communication medium for designers was
electronic data transfer. The use of other communication
tools, such as virtual reality, Internet, and Intranet, was very
low.

Fragmentation in design and construction is largely due
to technical, environmental and financial complexity of the
built environment that requires increased professional
functional specialisation of each discipline [IO]. Since
World War 11, the design and construction process of
building has become increasingly more difficult due to the
growing complexity of the buildings themselves. This
complexity has led to difficulties in the design, construction
and management of these buildings. These difficulties arise
from the steady expansion of theoretical, technological and
organisational knowledge and practices used by different
participants in the design, construction and use of the
building [ 1 I].

Clarification of information regarding buildability
problems was carried out using 2-D drawings, written
statements and face to face meetings. There was a very low
usage of physical and 3-D models for this by respondents.
Other methods such as rendered images, video animation,
VR, VRML, etc. were not used at all.

As stated above construction projects usually require
the involvement of a number of participants from different
disciplines. Communication between the site team and other
participants in construction projects is still performed using
traditional methods (i.e. paper based drawings, schedules,
written statements etc). The construction industry is used to
communicating through these methods and is reluctant to
change. The use of telecommunication facilities such as

Buildability problems, interfaces between components
and difficult assembly, had been widely experienced among
the respondents, especially with cladding, services, roof, and
stairs. Construction team experience was widely used to
solve design problems when they occurred.
The contractor and consultant respondents, who had
used any form of visualisation, realised the benefits that

680

more 3-D modelling techniques.
A prototype system for using visualisation to
communicate design information related to buildability has
been developed at Loughborough University. The prototype
system is Web-based to facilitate use by geographically
distributed project. This enables all the participants in
design and construction of a project to access the project
drawings, illustrations and documents from anywhere inside
the office or on site. The 3-D capabilities provided by
AutoCAD, 3-D studio and VRML have been crucial to the
development of the prototype system. Auto-CAD has been
used to build the 3-D models and to create the 2-D drawing
containing the necessary links to VRML, 3-D animation or
any other visualisation system. The user can manipulate and
display any design or graphical information. The user can
display the information in any form from any location with
access to the Internet.

could be gained from its use in construction. Therefore they
were of the view that the use of visualisation would improve
communication in construction.
i

6

Towards Visualisation Support for SiteLevel Operations

In order to develop appropriate visualisation tools for
the construction industry, a pragmatic approach has been
taken toward the system development. This involved
exploring the capabilities of the available visualisation tools
and the possible use of thest: tools in the construction
industry for communicating design information related to
buildability .
It was also necessary to understand what the available
CAD software can provide (i.e what are the capabilities of
CAD software in building 3-D models, which is the basis for
most computer visualisations). Building 3-D models is not
as easy to do as 2-D drawings 01- physical models. There are
several ways of building 3-D models and each method has
its characteristics, ,advantages and disadvantages. It is
necessary to identify at the outset the best method for
creating a 3-D model for a specific component or the whole
3-D model. Each 3-D object can be created using one or

As the visualisation and information of the design of
specific part of a project is created in the system, it should be
linked to the main drawing as illustrated in Figure 1. Threedimensional models have been developed for design details
that have been regarded as problematic areas by the
respondents to the industry survey. These models were
exported to rendering software in order to get more accurate

Figurel: 2-D Drawing with Links to walkthrough animation and VRML.

681

install CAD software on the computer on the construction
site to view the CAD drawings. This allows site teams to
contribute to design decisions such that amendments can be
carried out at an early stage without causing any delays to
the construction process.

images, to create animations or to be translated into the
Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML). These
animations and VRML models were linked to a 2-D plan
(Figure 2) for a proposed building using hyperlinks and
DWF file format (Figures 2 8 ~ 3 ) . This means that the
drawings can be viewed from anywhere without the need to

Figure 2: VRML Model of Column/Beam Joint

Figure 3: Walkthrough animation for the staircase of a building

682

References

Conclusions and Future work

[ l ] Alshawi, M. And Underwood, J., 1999, The Application of

This paper has explored the potential use of computer
visualisation for communicating design information between
designers and contractors. A briej-discussion of the results of
an industry survey that has treen conducted has been
presented. A prototype has been developed to demonstrate the
possible uses of computer visualisation models. Threedimensional models have been created using modelling
techniques in AutoCAD.

information Technology in the managernenr of Consrruction,

RlCS Research, London.
[ 2 ] Construct I.T., 1995, Bridging the Gap: an infonnarion
rechnology strategy for the United Kingdom construcriori
industry, H.M.S.O., London.
[ 31 Bennett, J., 1985, Corisrruction Projecr Management,

Butterworths, London, 1985.
[4] Snook, K., 1995, Cotisrruction Papers: CPI-Co-ordinate
Project Information. The Chartered Institute of Building, Ascot,
1995.
[5] Ganah, A., Anumba, C. and Bouchlaghem, N., 2000, The Use of
Visualisation to Communicate Design Information to
Construction Sites, ARCOM 16'hAnnual Conference, Glasgow,
pp.833-842.
[6] Rodriguez, W., 1992, The Modelling of Design Ideas, Graphics
arid Visiralisarioti Techniquesfor Engineers, McGraw Hill, New
York, 1992.
[7] Bertol, D., 1997, Designing Digiral Space: An Architects Guide
io VR, John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York.
[8] Li, H.,&Love, P.E.D., 1998 Visualisation ofBui[ding Inferior
Design io Reduce Rework, Proceeding of 1998 IEEE
Conference on Information Visualisation in London, IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, 29-31 July 1998, pp187-191.
[9] Newton, C. 1998 Architecture as Alchemy: Changing
Documentation Languages and Their Translation into Built
Forms, Proceeding of 1998 IEEE Conference on Inforination
Visunlisarion in London, IEEE Computer Society, Los
Alami tos.
[IOIRoscnman, M. A., & Gero, J. S., 1996, Collaborarive CAD
Modelling in Mulridisciplinary Design Domains, In Artificial
Intelligence in Structural Engineering, Springer, Berlin, 1996,
pp. 335-347.
[ 1 I ] Ka1ay.Y.. Khemlani, L., & Choi, J. (1998),An Integrated Model
to Support Distributed Collaborative Design of Buildings,
Auromation in Construction, 7( 1998)O pp. 177-188.
[IZIGanah, A. Anumba, C. and Bouchlaghem, N., 2001, Computer
Visualisation Support for Site Level Operations, Internarional
Posrgradunre Research in rhe Built and Human Environment,
Salford, 15- 16 March 2001, pp. 541-552.

Visualisation is a way of malting the best use of data. It
can assist in understanding concepts, interpreting data and also
communicating them. The visua.lisation tools available can
greatly improve the communication between designers and
contractors so that the errors can be avoided at the
construction stage of a project. Designers can identify the
missing design information before passing it to contractors.
Furthermore, contractors will be able to see design details and
identify any conflicting or missing information before
construction starts on site.
Work on the development of scenarios for the use of
computer visualisation will be carried out in more depth. A
communication system will also be developed to demonstrate
how computer visualisation can be used to enhance
collaboration between designers and contractors in solving
problems that may arise during the construction stage. It can
also bring the experience of conmwtion professionals to be
available at the dcsign stagc.

683

