Collated Path: A One-Dimensional Interface Element to Promote User
Orientation and Sense-Making Activities in the Semantic Web.
Christian Niles, Natalie Jerernijenko
Center for Advanced Technology
New York University
can207 @nyu.edu, nat @cat.nyu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
This paper details the design of a
onedinzensional interface element, the “Collated Path ”,
an effort to create a very light-weight information
nianipulation tool that could be used within a user’s
own dataset (e.g their history list), which could then
be used in combination with other searches. It is
optimized to present views [$the Semantic Web useful
f o r everyday applications. Emphasis was placed on
creating a tool with simple elements that could be
combined to create sophisticated views. Whereas
existing web information tools such as browser
history, and search tools like Sherlock present a
limited searchhetrieve view, the Collated Path is
designed to create a view that encourages the
interaction and tangibility of such data sources
enabling effective integration into the user’s
workspace. The model uses the metaphor of “pages”,
representing web resources, which are “collated” in
two variables according to some retrieved or
generated values, such as time accessed, popularity,
or relevance to search terms. In addition, the design is
general enough to accept values from an RDF model,
the W3C’s nzetadata standard f o r the web. The
conceptual framework is not restricted to web pages,
but the “page” metaphor (connects the concept with
urevious research that have urornoted document d e s
[ 2 ] , and other visualization methods,
while giving it a more grounded basis
f o r discussion.

Unlike traditional information centers like a local
library, the web as we know it today lacks any kind of
system to organize or describe what information it
contains. Search engines, price comparison sites, and
other web tools must visit every possible page and
guess their meaning and relationships to other pages.
In addition, current tools fail to give users any usable
interfaces for sense making and overview about the
pages we visit. Web browsers, for example, display a
single page at a time, replacing the current page with
the next without providing quick access to previous
pages or other contextual information, beyond ‘back’
and ‘forward’. However, it is extremely common to
look at pages collectively during a task, as when we
perform a web search and visit and revisit pages as we
encounter new information. As the standards body for
the web, the W3C has addressed the organizational
problems of the web in the form of the “Semantic
Web”, a vision for a web in which information has
meaning for machines as well as humans, creating a
more coherent and descriptive information
environment. The Cotlated Path addresses the need to
create better interfaces to exploit such information and
create an interactive representation of the context of
web resources and our usaee of them. An interface to

Figure 1 : A representative Collated Path, sizing and positioning
“pages” according to relative values. The position (x) values of
pages have been transformed by x3.

555
0-7695-1195-3/01$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

that allow for the construction of meaning. Research
into users’ revisitation patterns has shown that pages
often do have a shared, collective meaning, because
users revisit pages at a rate of 58%, especially recent
pages, implying that these pages are often used in
conjunction, and with a purpose [3].Integrating a view
of the relationships within a user’s current web
activity into the workspace would then prove useful,
allowing peripheral access, informal overview, and
manipulation of resources relevant to the task at hand.
In contrast, most browsers privilege a resourcecentric model by only allowing direct access to the
current and previous page, and @acing history and
bookmark information a few steps away, in a menu or
a window separate from the current page. Traversing a
link completely replaces the current page with the
linked page, and ignores any relationship between the
two. A web search will produce a result page that
displays a set of matches to the given query. Visiting a
match replaces the result page, and returning to the
result page will involve backtracking through the
user’s path, replacing the visited match. Besides
keeping a mental record of the various visited pages,
the user has the option to open each match in a new
window, open a history applet, or save each result in a
bookmark; all are cognitively heavy and require the
user to do the bookkeeping.
History and Bookmark information stored in
static trees and lists can be only sorted according to
certain fixed parameters, mostly derived from the
URL, and are designed to locate single pages rather
than expose a set of interesting pages. The process for
using such information using these tools begins by
formulating an information need and resolving it into a
set of possible matches, bounded by two points
(between two dates for example). After opening the
list, and navigating to an appropriate, manageable list,
the user must then translate their set of pages into the
titles given by the pages, through trial and error. In
short, the cognitive overhead is much too high because
it requires the user to know to a fairly certain degree
the exact page to retrieve before beginning the search.
Recent browsers have moved history and bookmark
system into a side panel, displayed on the left side of
the main browser window. The side panel, like most
browser tools, only displays the title of the page thus
limiting any comparison among other variables
including the search term. Additionally, trees and lists
obscure the degree of relation between resources they
display because the distance and size of every page is
the same. In a list sorted by date, the second item
could be I O minutes older than the first, or I O hours

the Semantic Web must cross the machine/human
boundary and allow the user to learn from the interface
to the data as well as the data itself.
The fundamental concept of the Semantic Web is
to make the information available on the web more
meaningful, by making it accessible to automated
tools that can augment our experience. We have
already become dependent on search engines, pricecomparison tools, and other filters to help us make
sense of the vast collection of information on the web.
If web information were more readable +forthese tools
the usefulness of the web could be increased. In
addition, our tools can allow us to make sense of
previously inaccessible data, like a thousands long list
of previously viewed web pages. Though the Semantic
Web is often described in examples with large or
global data sets like search engines and intelligent
agents, our research has focused on allowing
interaction within a more directed data set such as a
user’s usage history or current task. Our design
addresses the integration goal of the Semantic Web by
allowing such information to be integrated into
common applications and reused across tasks within
an application. For example, the Collated Path can be
used to integrate recent documents and events into the
periphery of the user’s workspace, facilitating reuse
and awareness.

2. Design Goals
Current tools, as stated before, are inadequate to
enable interaction and manipulation of resources in a
Semantic Web environment. Current implementations
fail to address the goals we feel are imperative to
allow dynamic user-directed views of the Semantic
Web:
Establish a context for the user’s current
position within their task or usage history.
Encourage the manipulation and integration
of the data set.
Allow for casual organization of their data
using methods such as ‘piling’ and informal
overview.
Present a cognitively lightweight interface,
Allow a degree of ambiguity that exists in
knowledge systems and user’s work habits.
These goals are focused towards amplifying the use of
web resources because meaning (semantics) is often a
product of use. By failing to allow the use of such
data, current tools inhibit the sense making processes

556

and cognitively lightweight interface to
the Semantic Web that allows casual
organization and informal overview.
Also, since the data set of the web is
diverse, content should be encapsulated
in a simple metaphor that can
aggregate many different types of data,
which
may only share some
comparable property, like last access
Figure 2 : A simple Colla’tedPath showing its linear nature.
date.
The metaphor of the Collated Path is a “Page”.
older but it will appear almost identical to the one
above it.
The metaphor is easily understood because of its
In the case of bookmark systems, the use of a
connection with web pages as well as paper
static tree structure is especlially limiting, because the
documents, yet, a “page”, or “document” is an
strict containment Property of trees forces each
abstract concept, which can represent any kind of
bookmark be contained by single
causing a
information resource. A Page could represent a
message posted to a mailing list, a stock portfolio, or a
cognitive overhead to maintain order as organizational
needs change. Previous research has discussed a need
fragment within an XML document. short, a page is
to
more
Or casual
methods Of
any resource that is interesting and comparable.
organization than trees within information interfaces,
The Collated Path takes a data set of Pages, which
like ‘piling’ [2,8,9,11].These studies have shown that
are ‘‘collated” into
meaningful order. The order
informal organizations are common in work processes,
is determined by a floating-point value, which allows a
and casual structures support iterative and dynamic
relative comparison between pages, such as
views of information relative to the task at hand. This
“Page A is 2.4578 days older than Page B”. Such
is especially true in a System like the Internet where
comparisons
are lost in other visualizations, such as
shared meaning between diverse resources may not be
current history tools, and the Aurorfllash projects
apparent until later use and further discovery. We feel
[4]. Our design uses two such collations to render the
that allowing informal Views Of resources not only
Page. On the one-dimensional line, the first collation
exposes the meaning and structure of the Semantic
defines page position on the line relative to other
Web, but also facilitates the use of and interaction
pages (the x-axis), The size (y) of pages is not a
with such information. Informal views allow the user
function ofposition (x), and a second collation defines
to mike quick generalized relationships between
the size of the page relative to the other pages. The
“H-ceS as they work, which helps to cope with the
collators of these two criteria can be equal, in which
the pages will appear sorted (since size is a
ambiguity and diverse composition of a distributed
system like the Internet, which should be exposed, not
function of position).
hidden by such an interface.
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate a sample layout of a set
of pages with the collators equal to each other
3. Towards a Conceptual Framework
(produce the same values). The smallest valued pages
appear towards the left, and the higher to the right. A
The focus Of Our research, as stated above, has
case where the collators were different, for example
been to
aspects Of the Semantic Web for the
the x collator collated by date, and the size collator by
purpose of facilitating multiFlle interpretations. Simple,
relevance to some search terms, would create
interfaces are needed in order to
achieve the integration goals stated in
the Semantic Web Activity Statement
and allow the benefits of the Semantic
Web to be an integral part o f end-user
applications. We have ‘chosen to
address these needs in terms of a onedimensional interface. The onedimensional interface allows us to
Figure 3 : A Collated Path using different “Collators” to map
achieve our goals to create a compact
position and size to its “pages”.

557

might have a higher value than another, but that
information gets passed on to the user who can bring a
nuanced context dependent interpretation to the
display. Our tools don’t always need to understand all
of the information it processes, just enough to
effectively present it.
We expect that many data sources will be able to
exploit the functionality of some standard collators,
such as Date, Numeric, String, etc.. However what
these collations mean will vary by application and
usage. Here we list some possibilities the Collated
Path gives for representing these meanings.

visualization where the size of neighboring elements
could be very different (see Figure 3).
The advantages of this framework are simplicity
and extensibility. The visualization is quite simple and
easy to decipher, without ambiguity within the details
of the representation. Higher dimensional interfaces
such as the Hyperbolic Tree [ 5 ] often introduce
ambiguity with less structured data because arbitrary
data sets do not have immediately recognizable
mappings into n-dimensional space. Positioning
information on a path is simple and easily controlled,
allowing direct-manipulation and modification of the
parameters that affect it, while still keeping the
representation recognizable and coherent. The use of a
timeline style presentation draws on user’s familiarity
with traditional timeline methods of positioning
historical objects in relation to each other, but has the
added benefit of being highly compact. Other works,
such as Lifestreams and Time-Machine Computing
have argued that temporal models of organization are
more effective than spatial, and our visualization
abstracts the ti me1i n e to display arbitrary in formation
including dates [9,8]. An alternate model considered
was the path model, based on breaking web activity
into discrete paths, or groups, of meaning [IO]. Yet,
this model proved too specific to certain data sets to
allow diverse expression, especially in a compact
form. In order to allow discrete differentiation, paths
must be resolved to the spatial metaphor, which we’ve
mentioned is too bulky for the task. In addition, other
work has argued that the applicability of paths to
larger work goals is often negligible [ 3 ] .
We consider the Collated Path extensible model
because the comparison routines are high-level and
simply return a tloating-point value. Using a floatingpoint comparison allows for relative comparison,
beyond simply “greater than” and “less than”. Because
the comparisons have a high precision, it allows for
comparisons to be layered, or chained, so that two or
three comparators could be combined to form higher
order comparisons like “give me all the messages on
this mailing list related to cooking within the past
year, privileging authors with high post counts”. This
structure will not distract the user from being able to
layer interpretation of the relationship of images of
documents, which is a more open-ended interpretation
possibility. Implementing a comparator is also very
similar to creating a standard comparison function as
used in many programming languages. Comparison
functions like these simplify the humankomputer
interface into a language both are fluent in. The
machine will not be able to interpret why one Page

Temporal Collation
Many current tools use temporal information to
organize information. Browser history and versioning
systems are two such examples. As mentioned earlier,
others have argued that time-centric metaphors for
information organization are more effective than
spatial ones [8,9]. We expect temporal collation to be
the predominant or the default collator. Browser
history has a direct connection with temporal
metaphors, and studies have shown that within
recurrent systems like the web, recency is a prime
indicator of use [ 2 ] .
Semantic Collation
Given a set of pages it may be interesting to collate the
pages according to their relevance to some search
terms, moderation level, or other semantic data. Such
data could be collected from outside sources such as
an annotation engine, or generated internally. In the
case of a newsgroup, for example, a Collated Path
could be used to position the pages in temporal order,
from oldest to most recent, and let page size be
determined by relevance or moderation level. This
would create a view that would display relevance
according to time. A similar collation could apply to
news feeds, allowing the user to highlight those stories
relevant to a certain topic.
User-Defined Collation
In certain cases, it may be interesting to allow the user
to directly set the values of pages. For example, while
size could be mapped to any value, the position of
pages could be set by allowing the user to position
them interactively, thus creating user-defined meaning
in terms of piles. Such an application might be a nonhierarchical bookmark system allowing iterative and
dynamic relationships, while allowing the machine to
map another variable like use rates to the size of the
Pages.

558

Position (x)

Compound Collation
There are certain applications where we do not want
an exact representation of the relative values of Pages.
For example, in applications of temporal collation,
pages with very recent time values may be of more
interest than older pages. In this case, we’d like to
transform the visualization to privilege recent pages,
and a compound collation would do the trick. A
compound collation accepts the output of another
collator as input, such as a temporal collator and
transforms it to create its output. To achieve the
example above, we’d appl:y the transformation xn to
the output of the position collator, with x being an
output value and n being a desired degree, such as 2.
An example of this is shown in Figure 1 . Another
possibility for compound collation is to use a third
collator to weight the input values. For example, we
could combine a User-Directed collation with another
collation, allowing the user to apply weights to
specific areas of the line in order to get greater detail.

Figure 4: A labeled model of the Collated
Path’s distinguishing features.
created by the edges of the pages{schneiderman). The
implied line is useful as a guide to navigation since it
reinforces comparison. For example an implied line
allows the user to see where a page exists in relation to
the pages to its left and right, because the line acts as a
guide for measurement. The implied curve shown in
Figure 4 is a line, because a strict application of the
framework described earlier will be linear, such that
the position of a page on the line is proportional to its
value relative to other pages. A median value will get
mapped to the center of the path and be half as large as
the largest value. The curve need not be linear
however. For example, in the case where we have used
a compound collation to apply a transformation to the
positioning collator, such as xn, the curve will
resemble the graph of the n-th root of x, as in Figure 1.
As mentioned above, the relative sizing and
positioning of elements allows for informal overview
of elements, due to its simplicity and quick
recognition. If the Collated Path shown in Figure 1
were to be interpreted as displaying a browser history
list, it is easy to discern where, in general, certain
pages lay in relation to each other. In addition, when
gaps are created, the set is broken into distinct subsets
that further aid in breaking the aggregate data set into
distinct groups, and as mentioned above, the implied
curve aids in quick comparisons to nearby objects.
When the data set becomes large, or pages are
extremely similar, pages may be displayed close
together and the differences between them will be
displayed equally small, eliminating the ability to
perform edge-detection and visual comparison
important to the search process [2].As a solution, we
have designed but not yet fully implemented a simple
zoom functionality which, when a user clicked on an
area on the path, that area would be emphasized,
scrunching the areas to the left and right. This is easily
implemented as a compound collation. A core benefit
of a zooming interface in this context is that the user
does not have to set up bounds for a view (i.e. between

With these, and other collators, we expect the
range of visualizations to be quite large, and the
Collated Path to be quite expressive, even beyond its
single dimension.

4. Exploratory Design and Observations
To understand how our framework might perform
an exploratory implementation was created in the Java
programming language. The intent was to identify
what relationships the model would express within the
data set, what visual cues would represent the
relationships, and to address any issues in the
visualization. Figure 4 diagrams the common features
of the Collated Path having both collators set equal
(also compare with Figures 1,2 and 3).
One of the most interesting features of the
Collated Path is that the items (weighted by floating
point numbers), do not have an even distribution in
either their posit@ or size. Such differences in
distribution help express relationships between pages,
and the set as a whole. When such differences are
severe, gaps appear in the line creating disjoint groups
of pages. Such a phenomenon would occur in a
Temporal Collation, for example, when periods of
idleness occurred in the data set, and in a Semantic
Collation when a certain subset of pages are of much
higher relevance than the rest of the set. When the
same collator determines both the position and size of
the pages (as i n Figures 1,3,4), an implied curve is

559

ensure that the bottom left corner is an absolute visual
reference while allowing more semantic value without
adding cognitive work. The problem with making
visual interfaces is that one needs to exploit very
familiar visual display forms, precisely because of
their familiarity. This seemingly small difference
makes it an additional contribution.
Although each system is generalizable, the designs
address different domains of use. The emphasis of this
project, and our future work, is focused on facilitating
the use and interpretation of information that the user
is
not
always
familiar
with.
The
MirrorworldsLifeStrames project+ on the other hand,
is oriented towards more familiar and personal
information sources, stored on local media. We expect
this difference to emerge more in further investigation.
Our hypothesis is that Lifestreams is optimized as a
general, albeit powerful, file retrieval while the
Collated Path is a ‘tool to think with’, to layout
different relationships, to use in an active sense
making process. Consequently the navigation and
zoom strategy is quite radically different.

two values), but only click on the area of interest,
keeping the focus on the interesting material. To return
to a wider view the click would be just below the xaxis
line. Again zooming out around the area of interest.
There is little aim required with this navigation
method, in so much one doesn’t have to ‘hit’ a menu
slider. The intent is to allow the cognitive focus to
remain on the document of interest while integrating
powerful navigation. [12,13,14]

5. Related Work
There are several related projects that explore
other alternatives for reinforcing semantic and
contextual cues in browsing.
The Mozilla Project has work-in-progress creating
more integrated and interesting ‘views of user-oriented
data [4]. Starting with Netscape Navigator 4.5, a
“Smart Browsing” feature was incorporated to provide
a list of pages related to the current page. In addition,
the Mozilla Aurora Project is developing a user
interface element that will unify user resources such as
email, history, and other RDF data sources. Another
project in planning stage is the “Flash Panel”, a list
that displays diverse “event” information, such as
email notifications, instant messages, or data feeds like
stock quotes. All of these however, still use
hierarchical trees and lists to display their information,
providing a familiar, but less expressive interface than
we feel is needed.
Our choice of a one-dimensional interface builds
on the crucial work done on Lifestreams [9] and Linda
before it. Lifestreams also allows access to diverse
document types, outside of tree structures, like file
systems. Lifestreams demonstrated the power of using
a single dimension, time, as the meta field around
which to display equal value to every document sort. It
is this commitment to the simplicity of the information
structure that is equally a commitment to reordering
around a parameter of interest. This is the critical
difference with our system and investigation. By
scaling the size of the items, we introduce another
“half-dimension”, breaking the ‘equal visual value’
principal implemented in Lifestreams products. This
threatens the strict simplicity that privileges
manipulability. However, our design intuition is that
an X/Y plot, (in which the x-axis is by default time) is
such a naturalized visual form for information that it
does not complicate the ability to visually compare the
image positions. Although it changes the relative size
of the document images it does not alter their x-value
position on the dominant axis. The overlapping pages

6. Future Work
Future work will be directed toward integrated the
Collated Path into a working environment to faciliate
detailed investigation of actual use We will implement
the Collated Path as a component for the Mozilla
browser, which will provide an environment in which
we can take advantage of multiple data sources such as
the web browser and email client. This will also allow
us enough functionality to conduct our evaluations in
an actual workspace and capture the vagaries of
combining this tool in the uncontrolled context of
multiple competing windows, multiple demands on the
person using the software, in the real context of trying
to get work done.
The following situations will be structure around the
following comparison: open and closed research tasks;
self and other generated file collection; textually and
visually driven information types.
Open-ended research is a context in which a person is
looking for particular information but also learning
from the subject of investigation more generally;
developing a sense of the different approaches to the
problem, how popular each approach is, who is
prolific in the area, how it applies in other fields, etc.
It is a task something like writing a paper, in which
you learn as much from the search as you do from the
actual object of search. This sort of information would
be legible from our tools, for example. doing a search

560

of one-dimensional interface papers, one could see the
clustering along the x-axis (time) in relation to the
number of publications, peaking around the early 90s
under the influence of Mirrorworlds. Or one could tell
peak areas of publication around SIGCHI, versus the
publication in SIGGRAPH, because one is clustered in
April, and one set in May. One could set the citation
rate as the Y-axis (size) and therefore recognize how
influential a document has been. If you wanted to
more carefully investigate this, one could collate the
citation rate along X to gel: a sense of the citation
behavior of the field.
Closed-ended research is tht: searching for a specific
piece of information. Our hypothesis is that.in this sort
of investigation can also benefit from the Collated
Path because it allows multiple ways to approach and
see an overview of results, maximizing the chance for
finding a specific piece of information. For example, if
a compound collation is available the data can be
weighted by many diverse variables. The user also has
the option to re arrange th’e views to answer more
interpretive queries like “the documents I am looking
for was published around 98, by the EPA or some
other federal funding agency, and had quite a few
authors. It had a diagram in it that was perfect”. The
user could first map the .page size by date, and
relevance to the EPA, and number of authors, and
visually find the page. This combines not only the
machines ability to sort and search, but facilitates the
user’s visual interpretation abilities.
We are also interested in observing and understanding
how people use the files generated by their own usage
(i.e. the history window of the web browser),
compared to a set of random web documents, or a set
ot pages from an organization’s internal website. Our
hypothesis is that in the case of self-generated material
there may be a greater emphasis on visual familiarity
when choosing a page. The reverse may be true for a
searching amongst the more visually consistent
intranet of a corporate site, where the size of the pages
would provide more contrast than the visual
representation of the page. We would expect a set of
random, possibly unvisited, web pages to be set
between these two. In addit.ion, the data set of the
search will affect how well a visual icon can be
created, and how recognizable certain can be to the
user. This feedback may provide us with a metric that
indicates when to privilege the visual manipulative
strategies provided, versus the collation facilities
provided.
The final comparison we are interested in is between
more textual based information like email and

message boards versus large visually driven
information like a photo album. We hope this will
provide further details relating to how spatial,
imagistic and organizational layouts interact. For
example, we know that even text documents can be
recognized visually, allowing one to recognize
different documents by their structure; compare an
academic paper to a header file of a program’s source
code. It may or may not demonstrate that images and
text documents can be treated equivalently as visual
resources.; Our hypothesis is that images are less
visually useful as thumbnails in an unfamiliar data set,
because there is a less predictable structure of
comparison.
These and other questions will be observable from the
daily insitu use of the Collated Path, illuminating the
complex interrelationships among web resources and
the ways in which we use and make sense of them.
Our tool s not intended to proscribe any top-down
sense making strategies but to reinforce diverse
approaches with a simple tool. It is this sense of
privileging many different sense-making processes
that is the great potential of the Semantic Web.

7. Conclusions
The Collated Path has promise as a general tool for
navigating relationships and comparisons between
resources in the Semantic Web. We feel it addresses
specific needs of the Semantic Web to privilege the
relationships between resources as much as the
resources themselves. It has value in its ability to
compress subtle differences into a compact
representation, while still allowing complex
relationships to be visualized. It demonstrates our
hypothesis that using simple representation strategies
facilitates complex manipulation strategies. We
understand sense making to be an active process that
involves many different resources and interpretations.
Further, the simplicity of the design makes it usable in
many mainstream applications, while it takes
advantage of advanced features of the Semantic Web
to model aggregate data sources from diverse sources
directed by both humans and machines

8. References
[I]

561

Setnnntic Web Activity Stntetnent
World Wide Web Consortium (W3).
<http:Nwww.w3.org/2001IswlActivitp

[8] Rekimoto, J. “Time-Machine Computing: A Time-

Mander, R., Salomon, G., and Wong, Y.
“A ‘Pile’ Metaphor for Supporting Casual Organization
of Information”. Proceedings of CHI ’92. (Monterey,
California, May 3-7, 1992), ACM, New York, 1992. Pg
627-634.

Centric Approach for the Information Environment”
CHI Letters. Vol. 1,l. 1999.
[9] Freeman, E., and Gelertner, D. “Lifestreams: A Storage
Model for Personal Data”. ACM SIGMOD Bulletin, 28,
January 1996.

Tauscher, L., and Greenberg, S. “Revisitation Patterns
in World Wide Web Navigation”. Proceedings of CHI
’97 (Atlanta, Georgia, 22-27 March 1997). ACM, New
York, 1997. Pg. 399-406.

[lo] Chalmers, M., Rodden, K., and Brodbeck D. “The
Order of Things: Activity-Centred Information
Access.” Proc. 7th Intl. Con$ on the World Wide Web,
Brisbane, April 1998, pp. 359-367.

The Mozilla Organization. RDF in Mozilla Docs
Brickley,
D.
<daniel.brickley@bristol.ac.uk>
<http://www.mozi 1la.org/rdf/doc/>

111 Kidd, Alison; “The Marks are on the Knowledge
Worker” Conference proceedings on Human factors in

Lamping, J., and Rao, R.. “The Hyperbolic Browser: A
Focus+Context Technique for Visualizing Large
Hierarchies” Readings in Information Visualization.
Card, S . , Mackinlay, J., and Schneiderman, B. Eds.
Morgan Kaufman Publishers, San Francisco. 1999.

computing systems: “celebrating interdependence”,
1994, Pages 186- 191

121 Fox, David, and Ken Perlin. “Pad: an alternative
approach to the computer interface.” Proceedings of the
20th annual conference on Computer graphics, 1993,
Pages 57 - 64

Munzner, Tamara. “H3: Laying Out Large Directed
Graphs i n Hyperblic Space”. Proceedings of the 1997
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization,
October 20-21 1997, Phoenix, AZ,pp 2-10, 1997

[ 131 Bederson, Benjamin B. and James D. Hollan “Pad++:

a zooming graphical interface for exploring alternate
interface physics.” Proceedings of the ACM symposium
on User interface software and technology, 1994,
Pages 17 - 26

Bray, Tim. “Measuring the Web” Readings in
Information Visualization. Card, S., Mackinlay, J., and
Schneiderman, B. Eds. Morgan Kaufman Publishers.
San Francisco. 1999.

[14] Meyer, Jon and Ken Perlin. “Nested user interface
components” Proceedings of the 12th annual ACM
symposium on User interface sofhvare and technology,
1999, Pages 1 1 - 18

562

