Urban Pilot: A Dynamic Mapping Tool for Personalizing the City
through Collective Memory
Aradhana Goel
Design Technology Group
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States
E-Mail: a troel(4mit.edu
URL: http://web.mit.edu/a goellwwwi

httn://boston.citvsearch.com/
httD://travel.excite.com/

Abstract

httn://www.diaitalcity.m.ip/
This paper ini*estigates (he use of handheld mobile
devices as e,vplorator:v personalized tools f o r dynamic
navigation of the citvscripe that go beyond cartographic
limitations cind director:v tvpe services. Unfortunately,
existing devices and their applications do not fully
address the impelling poteni’ial of real-time, interactive
tools. Moreoi,er, the ivolatile, unpredictable randomness
of the citv life and its ever-changing patterns is rarely
captured by static navigational means. This study
pvoposes a t o o l which encourages personalized
experiences of cities bv providing a dynamic information
space that overlaps the city with individual users, both
spdrillv and teniporull~v.

Wireless initiatives include:
hth,://www.vindieo.com

1. Context

With the new wave of wireless devices, there is an
opportunity to explore a context where one has access t o
information anytime, anywhere. There is an
unprecedented connectivity and orientation generated
with the emergence of personal-digital-assistants (PDA)
and with the advent of Global Positioning System (GPS)
technology. There is new thinking emerging that has led
to research into location-based, context-specific and
customized application for these systems. The challenge
this paper addresses is to exploit this real-time and
dynamic interface to capture individual s perception and
to amplify cognition in the context of city exploration.

City exploration has been traditionally done through
paper guidebooks and now is also aided by digital guides.
Some guides are targeted at a specific type of audience,
while others can be more generic. Digital guides add
anothcr level of dynamism to the traditional paper format.
Yet most of the prevalent digital city guides provide
Yellow Page Service - information that is represented in
black and white in a directory-based format. Information
retrieval is dependent upon a hierarchical system or
alphabetical query. Information is often represented by
the use of cartographic maps overlaid by textual narrative.
Guidebooks are static representations of a dynamic
phenomenon; they neither capture the dynamism of the
city, nor provide contextual iriformation which helps users
position themselves on the information map. Somc
examples are:
ht tp :i/www.d igi t nlc i t v. coni

0-7695-1195-3/01$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

2. Hypothesis
The city is a dynamic and regenerative phenomenon,
comprised of ever-changing people, patterns and

227

This thesis suggests that each query o r request for
information has its own appropriate representation. While
spatial maps best represent some themes (Directions,
distance, location), abstract textual representations could
better represent other themes (Timelines, Soundscapes
and Accessibility information). Hence, in each of these
layers, the information visualization is appropriated
according to the theme.

connections. These attributes make the relationship
between the individual and the city highly volatile. This
dynamic perception of the city contains in it these
hidden information patterns. Our minds engage the city at
various levels and continually attempts to decipher these
hidden patterns.
This paper claims that the engagement of the
individual s mind with the city can be heightened, and
hidden patterns can be revealed by the appropriate use of
a particular technology. The digital medium with its
inherent properties of time and mutability can be used to
generate a dynamic information structure of the city.
Because the experience of the body in space is the most
vital phenomenon, and it is equally important to be in the
right place at right time, this paper advocates mobile
handheld device technology as an appropriate medium for
urban exploration.
The paper proposes a triangular structure of Layering,
Networking and Filtering with the use of Personal digital
assistants (PDA s) to explore the city. One needs tofilter
the information through personalization and at the same
time, layer the information through collective memor?, to
generate a dynamic information structure in order to
represent the city as a dynamic phenomenon. The layering
of information also goes through a system of filtration
developed through a rating system.

3.1.1 Core
The core represents the information that is permanent
in nature but is updated regularly. These are urban
cartographic m a p s that are interpretive m a p s
(representational in character). Precision of scale and
reality is not necessary and distortion is used at times to
convey an idea. The best Visualizations are not static
images to be printed in books, but fluid, dynamic artifacts
that respond to the need for a different view [I]. These
visualization are arranged thematically to reveal different
spatial and temporal patterns of the city.
The proposed system progressively personalizes itself to
match the user-profile. This affects the core layer directly
and the themes reflect the persona and objective of the
user. The system makes these subjective maps according
to the user data. These are maps that become cognitive
systems, or rhetorical devices and inherently take into
account cultural dispositions [2].
Some of the examples of these are:
w
m

Layering
information Nnvviwrion

Filtering
Collebtve Memory

Custom ization
Personal ltlemory

3. Method
3.1 Layering
The information of the city is represented in thematic
layers that are organized by its degree of volatility.
Volatility of information refers to the degree of change in
perception, vis- -vis time. There is a core information
base that represents the periodically monitored data such
as the history of a particular place. The next level is the
services where the information is accessed from the server
in real-time, like the traffic and weather. One s own diary
represents the most versatile and personal information.
Thus community-based information data represents the
highest level of volatility because this data is regenerative
- constantly formed and reformed by social networking.

3.1.2 Services
These are information layers that represent the volatile
information that can be collected real-time from a central
server. This layer links the objects of reference to the
related services. For example, if a user chooses a
restaurant, then this service layer could lead to booking a
table through the wireless network. A graphic
representation of the users simultaneous access to various
services might look as follows:

228

3.1.3 Notes to Myself
The proposed system accumulates the personal
memoirs of the users as they interact with the tool and
each other to retrieve, edit and deposit information.
When a user begins to explore the space, he/she is
given a base map. At the beginning, the system makes
some general recommendations. As the user chooses a
path, the system records his travel data. The user has a
choice of personalizing this data and maintaining a
travelogue by annotating this map with text, graphic or
audio input. It is useful here to speculate that some
cognitive image maps could result from such a system
that can be of various types (Node and Landmark map,
Cartoons, Photo Montage, Pictorial, Graphical or
Illustrative).
These maps are concept maps or (mind maps, as they
are sometimes called) Usually such maps are
constructed informally by simply sketching them on
paper An individual can use a concept map as a tool for
re-organizing his or her won personal structure, and it
may reveal patterns of relationships between ideas that
were not evident when the concepts were stored
internally [3].
Users always need to have a choice to either
annotating the information a.s a personal memoir, or
sharing the information as a collective memoir. There is
also the choice of making all or a part of an individual s
itinerary sharable. The personal memoirs are accessible to
the user only and can be downloaded onto a remote
server, but the collective memoirs go into the database
and update the Notes to Share . These notes can be
accessed by time, by themes or by place.

ASSOCIATIVE

229

place) and Audience Characteristics (demographic
details of age and gender, interests).
These are rule-based filters that alter the thematic
information landscape, and may change the mode of
delivery (the tool developed by the author only focuses on
the change in the thematic information set and does not
deal with changing the mode of delivery).
At the most basic level, users get categorized into
travelers and the residents. For travelers, one could find
themes like: Where to eat, Survival Guide, Excursions,
Events and Activities etc. For residents, one could
customize the themes such as: Bread and Butter, Movers
and shakers, Nuts and Bolts etc.
The system also begins to customize information by
the interest and objective of the user. However, this
requires a more elaborate study which is out of scope of
this paper. But there are various secondary references
where an attempt has been made to categorize users and
their behavior patterns based on the above criteria.
An example of one such study is done by Michael
Southworth, University of California, Berkeley. He has
compiled a Matrix of social factors in map comprehension
and way-finding based on Literature Review.
Another example is the database o f Experience
Patterns [ 6 ] that has been accumulated by the Want
Innovation Center [7].

3.1.4 Notes to Share
As stated above, people with the intention of sharing
make these notes. This is the most dynamic layer, since it
is a result of constant evolution of ideas that occur as a
result of social networking. These annotations are
grouped thematically and then further sub-grouped by the
various user-groups. Some of the themes are:

c

5

x3

v,

+<&

.z

The primary goal is t o use this kind of digital
networking to tap local resources and generate global
results. It is analogous to a biological model: simple
pieces built from the bottom up to form complex artifacts.
The lines between generator and receiver are blurred.
Each individual is seen as a knowledge repository
contributing to the information landscape in becoming a
valuable link in these free-flowing and organic exchanges.
The value of this communication and collaboration is in
co-creation [4].
These layers encourage active exploration rather than
passive consumption, like a guide that can provide the
specifics if the person knows what he has in mind; or that
can be open-ended but supportive references which
encourage the reader to explore. [ 5 ] .

3.2.2 Temporal filters
Temporal filters are time-bound, contextual variables
that give information about the user s position (spatial,
temporal and psychological) at the time of use. They filter
the information landscape to the next level. At first, the
user chooses an Urban Lens. The design demonstration
shows four categories; The-Works (comprehensive
detailed view of the city), Hot-Picks (popular view), OffBeat (off the beaten track, unique view) and Get-Active
(adventurous and activity based exploration). Depending
on the current time and context of the user, the individual
can choose their persona and vary it as needed. Each of
these personas has its own appropriate way of interacting
with the city and has a unique sub-set of themes that are
filtered from the overall layers of information.
The next levels of time-bound variable are:
Time flexibility of the individual: This could determine
whether the tool would allow chances to occur (more
time) or deliver a programmed experience [8].
Energy Level or Mobilityfactor: This would affect the
scale of the maps presented to the user and also directly
affect the navigation layer and accessibility maps.
Sociability Factor: This would impact t h e
collaborative networking between the user and his peers
using the system. Depending on the users position on the
slider, one can turn him into an active, semi-active o r a
passive collaborator.

3.2 Filtering
Information layers are gradually filtered according to
an individual s personal profile. T h e s e filters
progressively update the information with an increasingly
relevant view of the city. It requires a basic framework
for understanding the audience, deciphering key
differences and usage patterns, categorizing them in user
profiles and developing an appropriate information
language for each profile. There are three levels of
filtration - pre-screen filters, temporal filters and
collaborative filters.
3.2.1 Pre-Screen filters
This initial level of customization of the tool sets the
backdrop for all exploration. The user input is done at the
time of application download. Input parameters are basic
profiles involving Context (time and familiarity with the

230

Learning Style: Visual, Auditory or Kinesthetic. This
would affect the representational style of information.
Price Sensitivity: Itineraries/ activities chosen
according to the user s pocket at that time.
These filters are visualized in the form of sliders which
enable a degree of variability.

Pilot users that match with the u s e r s address book), Peers
(Like-minded people matched by the system using their
profiling data. Link between them demonstrates the
concept of weak ties [IO]) and Strangers (All the others).
All information in Notes to Share is accessed by the
three categories above.

3.2.3 Collaborative Filters

3.3.2 Filtering of collective memory through Rating

This is the third level of pel-sonalization that is based
upon simultaneous group-use over a period of time. The
level of personalization would be limited when the system
is used initially. As each person uses the tool and makes
choices, a matrix is created that matches the user-profiles
with individual behaviors. As the collected data
accumulates over time through many users, the
probability of matching queries and results increases.

When a user retrieves information (in the form of
reflections, anecdotes, travel-tips etc.), he is given the
option to rate the information on a Rating Slider, (the
tool attempts to develop a system which generates trust).
As the points of data accumulate, each piece of
information progresses from being P e r s o n a l , to
Sharable and finally being Reputable. While the
personal information degenerates over a period of time,
the reputable information finds its place in the Core
L a y e r . This generates a collaborative system where
social networks are created and the information shared is
characterized by spontaneity, immediacy and even
volatility.

3.3 Networking
Permanent base information needs to be layered with
the volatile memory of people in order to present the city
as an interpretation, rather than as a stack of static
information data. P2P networking would capture
spontaneous interactions and use people as knowledge
repositories to develop a collective memory of a place.
Peer to peer, or P2P, is a network technology where all
the nodes have equal access to its peers that results in a
decentralized design which is. a powerful tool. [9]. This
tool would therefore generate social networks as well as
information networks, due to its dynamic organization.
Social networking is used as a tool to capture the
memory of people that are added to the city as knowledge
repositories. A system is created when the personal notes
of people are shared with the larger community on a
voluntary basis. These notes over a period of time get
rated. Some information degenerates over time while
others find their place in the core information layers. This
cycle adds an interpretive and regenerative layer to the
whole system, and is the key element that characterizes
the ecological property of the city.

4. Solution: the Application Tool

3.3.1 Sociability factor and U:ser-Groups
When the user downloads this application, he is
automatically registered into the system as a member of
the network. These people are connected directly to each
other, any time, and any location. Depending on the
sociability factor in the temporal filters, the user is
exposed to varied levels of interaction with their peers. A
low scale of sociability would let each person feel the
presence of his peers but would not allow real-time
interaction. On the other hand, a high scale of sociability
would allow synchronous networking. The system
categorizes them into three categories. Friends (Urban

23 1

yet available, but predicts that supporting technologies for
this kind of application would be very successful. Though
the author has carried out some design iterations (both
device and application design), this information system
could open various possibilities. The author would like to
carry out some usability tests on the design proposal and
further iterate based on the user- feedback.

The proposed tool is an application for an existing
handheld device with limited changes to meet with
concept requirements. The tool has been developed to
e n c o u r a g e s p o n t a n e o u s , serendipitous, real-time
explorations rather than pre-planned itineraries. It has
been tested by building user-scenarios that are basically
described in two main categories The first is a careful
exploration of a place where people have the commodity
Time and intent to Explore the cityscape. This is
generally done by outsiders and by residents who become
travelers in their own city from time to time. The level of
familiarity and knowledge about the place is limited and
the user wants t o assimilate most o f the relevant
information in a brief period of time. The second userscenario depicts a day-to-day relaxed navigation of a
place using the tool to find quick solutions to a query.
This scenario is applicable for residents and people with
high familiarity level. To view the design demonstration
of the
idea,
please
visit
the
website
httD:llweb.niit.eduia goeliwwwi

7. References
[ IIWare, Colin, Information Visualization: Perception for
Design, (Morgan Kaufman Publishers 2000): 382

[2]Miller, Naomi, Mapping cities, Boston University Art Gallery
2000
[3]Ware, Colin, Information Visualization: Perception for
Design, (Morgan Kaufman Publishers 2000): 376
[4]Viant Innovation Center Project, The Human Side ofPeer to
Peer: where technology andpeople come together, htto:!ivirrnt2ccdc-~.dinislc.nct!~agcs/fratncthoueht traffic.htnil, 200 1
[SIHack, Gary and Hollister Rob, Cashing in on the""Guidebook
Boom: It s a long, long way to 7 6 , Landscape Architecture,
January 1974

5. Conclusions
This paper started with the premise that one needs to
capture the hidden information patterns of the city in
order to experience it in a meaningful way. The proposed
tool reveals these patterns by creating a dynamic system
of information through layering and collective memory.
This tool not only updates the information, but also
creates a regenerative system that allows for the creation
of new patterns and interpretations. While personal
memory could generate a self-analyzing tool, it is
collective memory that can be seen as a social mirror
reflecting the ever-changing patterns o f urban life. This
tool then acts as a mediator between the individual and
the physical, emotional and collective space around him.
This paper has focused on this concept of connection
rather than the isolated design of application.

[6]Viant Innovation Center Project, E.yperience Architecture:
The strategy and design of ecommerce personalization,
littp:~iviaiitl-ecdc3.digisle.net~pa~esiframe
thought traftic.htin1,
2001, Experience Architecture is a framework for using
personalization technology to create personalized experiences
for different users. It includes techniques for understanding
people, technology platforms and a pattern language that applies
the best of off-line design principles to online design.
[7]The Viant Innovation Center is a research group at Viant,

which is an Internet consulting firm. http:///www.viant.com
[8]Hack, Gary and Hollister Rob, Cashing in on the""Guidebook
Boom: Its a long, long way to 7 6 , Landscape Architecture,
January 1974
[9]Viant Innovation Center Project, The Human Side of Peer io
Peer: where technology and people come together, http:iiviant2ecdc-3.dirisls.netil,ages"r:
thought ti-affic.html, 200 I

6. Further Work

[ I0]Granovetter, Mark S, The Strength of Weak Ties, American
Journal of Sociology, Volume 78, Issue 6 (May, 1973)

Future work might involve investigation into the
business model and the infrastructure needed to maintain
such a system. . The business model could be based on
advertisements, though monitoring and trading the
dynamic user-profile data could devise a better solution.
Another area of study that is crucial to this work is userinterface design. A thorough research into the spectrum of
device and application design needs to be researched. The
present is far away from realizing the dream of accessing
information by anyone, anytime, a n y w h e r e . This
investigation assumes a technology landscape that is not

7. Acknowledgements
This paper is a part o f thesis presented in partial
fulfillment of the authors graduate research program at
MIT. The author would like to acknowledge the thesis
committee (William J. Mitchell, William Porter, David
Rose and Carol Strohecker) for their help and guidance in
this research.

232

