A Study of Three Browser History Mechanisms for Web Navigation
Bill Killam
Userworks, Inc.
173%Elton Road, Suite 13%
Silver Spring, Maryland 20903
bkillam 0 user-centereddesigns. com

Tamer Nadeem
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
nadeem 0 cx umd.edu

Personal experience with history mechanisms of
popular web browsers, such as Netscape and Internet
Explorer has exposed many usability problems. Because
of these problems, Netscape history window is usually
avoided completely and the user relies on the back button
or the “Go” menu selection. Also, a user may not even
know that the history window is available, because it is
not integrated into the user browser display. Although
Internet Explorer has more organized history mechanism,
it does not provide an efficient organization of the order in
which the user has visited web pages. Accessing pages
that were recently visited still relies on the “Back” button,
and the back button does not contain all of the history.
As Kandogan and Shneiderman stated in one web
browser study, “...current interfaces for browsing on the
WWW are still primitive, in that they do not support many
of the navigation needs of users.. .They do not.. .aid users
in accessing already visited pages without much cognitive
demands”[9]. One factor that may aid in browser history
mechanism performance is providing a mechanism that is
more graphically inclined to enhance user’s short-term
memory of the web pages visited [ 7 ] .
The goal of this experiment was to determine i f
significant performance differences exist among several
browser history mechanisms including the ones with
visual enhancement. This experiment allowed us to gain
insights about web browser history styles that would
improve user performance in accessing visited pages. In
this experiment, we also desired user’s comments to gain
knowledge of personal preferences and satisfaction levels
associated with each browser history style.

Abstract.
Finding a previously visited page during web
navigation is a very common and important process.
Although most commercial brow.rers incorporate a history
mechanism, when accessing p q e s that were recently
visited users still rely mainly on i’he “Back”button. In this
paper we studied the effectiveness of visually enhanced
history browser mechanisms on web navigation.
We used three different history mechanisms as the
experiment treatments. Twenty-one college students were
the subjects of the experimental trials. With a between
subject design, three experimefi’tal groups were equally
divided according to subject profiles. Users read and
completed the given scenario. A quiz was given to
measure user performance on rhe tested mechanism. At
the end of the quiz, a subjective questionnaire was given
to measure user satisfaction.
The results showed that there is a signifcant statistical
difference among the three mechanisms. The more
visually enhanced history mechirnism proved to be more
effective in web browsing.

1. Introduction
1.1. Experiment motivation
Present browsers lack an efficient method for revisiting
web pages. When navigating the World Wide Web
(WWW), browser users experience difficulty in finding
web pages that they have previously viewed. In fact, in a
previous study it was found that 16% of subjects were
unable to find web pages that they had recently visited [6].
Additionally, users largely depended on the “Back” button
to access visited sites. In the results of the same study,
“0.1% of page accesses were through the history list, 42%
of page accesses used the Back-Button” for all web pages
navigated by subjects.

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.000 2001 IEEE

1.2. Overview of the history mechanisms studied
Following are brief descriptions of the studied history
mechanisms. Only three mechanisms were selected for
use in this study. They were chosen based on availability.
1.2.1.Netscape browser. Netscape is one of the most
common commercial browsers. It has a history window;

13

visually organized into domain trees2. It has an extra panel
to the left of the browser that contains the domains that the
user has visited. Each domain can be selected, by the
mouse, to view the specific tree of that domain. The tree
functionality is similar to that of GlobalTree mechanism.
The DomainTree browser window is shown in Figure 2.

separate from its browser window that appears when the
user requests it. This history is textually organized into a
list that includes titles (if any) of the web pages visited
and the URL addresses of those pages. To access a web
page, the user must locate the desired page by name or
address, and select it. Netscape‘s mechanism also
incorporates “Forward” and “Back” buttons used to move
to the next page or the previous page in the history,
respectively. In addition, a “Go” menu selection provides
the user access to pages through a drop-down list with
titles of the most recently visited pages.

---.--~

l

”

a

Y

.

.

-

y

l

“.l.-.U”mm.I

1.2.2. GlobalTree browser. The GlobalTree browser was
developed at Sun’. Its history mechanism is visually
organized into a single tree. All web pages visited by the
user are represented by thumbnail images of those pages
and organized as tree nodes with a global root. Each page
is represented only once in the tree, by the first link that
was used to access the page. Branches of the tree represent
links (paths) that the user has used. Each node can have
multiple children, but cannot have more than one parent.
Therefore, cycles cannot be formed in the tree; and if the
user navigates links in cycles, the last link that causes the
cycling is simply ignored and not displayed. The user then
can access a visited web page by mouse-clicking the
corresponding node in the tree. Additionally, the
corresponding node is outlined for the current page that
user is viewing. Figure 1 shows the GlobalTree browser
window.

If/

Figure 2. DomainTree browser window
(from left to right: domains list, current
domain tree and the current web page)

1.3. Review of related experiments
There have been many responses to the usability
problems of current history mechanisms. Most approached
solutions involve graphical interfaces.
One study done by Bederson and his colleagues
included a zooming web browser, called Pad++. Pad++
has a multi-scaling graphical environment, so instead of
having a single page visible at a time, multiple pages and
the links between them are depicted on a large zoomable
information surface [9]. The results of this experiment
showed that users answered questions 23% faster with
Pad++ over Netscape [3].
Another involved PadPrints, a browser companion that
dynamically builds a graphical history-map of visited web
pages [4] as in GlobalTree Browser. It was found that
PadPrints allowed users to complete tasks 61.2% quicker
than those who used the browser without PadPrints and to
reduce the number of pages accessed.
Other approaches included WebTOC, which was an
attempt to visually depict the contents of a web site with a
hierarchical table of contents through Java applets, and
MosaicG, which provided a two-dimensional graphical
view of the history [IO, 11.

EdUCdkd

snrrr

E
I
Figure 1. GlobalTree browser window
(history tree is shown in the left panel)
1.2.3. DomainTree browser. DomainTree browser was
developed at the University of Maryland, College Park
(UMCP) [7]. Its history mechanism is similar to
GlobalTree mechanism; however, DomainTree history is

’

*

Each tree represents set of pages located on the same web site. Each
tree is showed by the website name on the leftmost panel.

This browser is very similar to the PadPrint browser that developed at
the University of Maryland.

14

browser history mechanism. Therefore, tools had to be
developed to capture these inherently qualitative
attributes.
The first dependent variable was the time elapsed
during completion of each task (the nature of the task will
be explained later in the paper). The second variable was
the number of pages visited for each task. The last
variable measured was subjective satisfaction.
These three variables captured user performance and
satisfaction associated with the history mechanisms.
Analysis of these dependent variables is discussed in the
result portion of this paper.

1.4. Relevant psychological or other theories
Graphical over textual representations of web pages
represents fundamentally different cognitive tasks. T o
develop a mental model of the pages in Netscape or
Internet Explorer, users are required to mentally associate
pages that are presented in one at a time and often in a
random order. In addition, the window motion associated
with changing pages represents visual noise that likely
hampers the user’s cognitive visualization process.
GlobalTree and DomainTree provide images of the web
pages visited and their relationship as well as visual
information about the pages content. Finally, users must
attempt to mentally recall their internal map of the web
site whereas GlobalTree and DclmainTree mechanisms are
integrated into a panel and are constantly visible.
DomainTree also provides additional level of hierarchy
by dividing the action of accessing a page into two smaller
action steps: first, knowing in which domain the page is
located, and second, choosing the page within that tree.
This permits the history to be more manageable if the tree
becomes relatively large. GlobalTree and Netscape history
mechanism, on other hand, woidd overload the user with
information if the history is relaiively large.

2.2. Pilot study
The pilot study was conducted with three UMCP3
students. Each student used a separate and distinct web
browser history mechanism.
The pilot study was used to determine user feedback
and also, to answer some key questions in the
experimental design. For example, we wanted to know
how long the user would take to complete the experiment.
Also, we wanted to make sure if the directions and written
instructions would be clear to follow and understand. The
last question we wanted to know was if the experiment
would progress smoothly.
After the pilot study, subjects were asked to evaluate
the experiment. Their overall impression was that the
instructions needed to be made clearer. In response, we
simplified the directions and made them more direct.
Also, we complemented the written instructions with oral
explanations. To ensure undesired delays, we offered to
answer any questions users might have prior to the start of
the task scenarios.

2. Experiment
2.1. Hypothesis and variables
2.1.1. Hypothesis. The null hypothesis of the experiment
was: “There is no sigriifcrtnt difference it1 user
performance and satisfaction atnatig the different browser
history riiechanisms”. According to the results of the
experiment, we would either accept or reject this null
hypothesis. The dependent variables would be recorded,
and then statistically analyzed to determine the
significance.

2.3. Preliminaries
2.3.1. Environment and system. All trials were
conducted on five systems in the same on-campus
computer lab. The five systems were standard Sun System
Ultra workstations. They had the identical screen size,
mouse, chair, and keyboard. The trials were performed
approximately at the same time of the day. To
accommodate the problem of network delays, a proxy
server was developed to cache all the pages during the
scenario part of the experiment.

2.1.2. Independent variable. There was one independent
variable in this experiment, the web browser history
mechanism. We had three distinct treatments Netscape
browser, GlobalTree browser, and DomainTree browser.
Netscape was chosen to reipresent the standard (i.e.,
non-graphical) history mechanism in use today.
GlobalTree and DomainTree were chosen for their
visually enhanced history me1:hanisms. The difference
between GlobalTree and DomainTree allowed the testing
of the same type of mechanism each with different display
features. For example, the DomainTree browser allows
users to have several history trees maintained based on
their domain names, whereas GlobalTree incorporates
only a single history tree.

2.3.2. Informed consent. Informed consent form was
given to each subject. Subjects were required to sign and
accept the terms of the experiments before continuing.
The form requested subject’s permission to use the results
for research purposes, and it informed them that the data
would be anonymous. It was made clear that participation

2.1.3. Dependent variables. The experiment measured
user performance and satisfaction relevant to the web

University of Maryland - College Park

15

was to be logically sequenced. A natural method of
exploration was critical in attempting to emulate a real life
situation. Random links were not accessed, and so the
sequence of links was sensible. Finally, the most
important consideration was to create a non-linear history.
A tree with several branches would create a realistic
exploration that users would normally do, and therefore
would give a distinct advantage towards using a visually
enhanced history mechanism. The scenario took 20 - 25
minutes to complete.

was voluntary, and that the subject may leave at any time
during the experiment.

2.3.3. Background survey. A background survey was
given to subjects to identify their individual profiles and to
help determine experimental groupings. The survey asked
the subject's age, experience with web browsers, time
using browsers, and computer background.
2.3.4. Training. Each subject was given a written and oral
explanation of the specific history mechanism that he or
she was going to test. The written explanation of the
history mechanism was designed to quickly orient the user
to certain aspects of the history tool. During the training,
each subject could go to any site, explore the site, and use
the history mechanism until they feel familiar and
comfortable with its usage. Training took approximately
I O - 15 minutes.

2.6. Quiz
2.6.1. Setup. After completing the task scenario, the
subject took the quiz'. The quiz constructed to test how
long it would take users to locate the information they had
seen during the instructional scenario. The quiz was
administered via the computer and captured task time and
the number of pages accessed for each question. There
were 22 questions, each shown on a separate frame.
Figure 3 below shows the first question of the quiz. The
dialog box allowed the subject to respond to each question
on the computer screen. After each question was
answered, a pause box was displayed. The subject moved
on when he or she was ready to answer the next question.
The subject was expected to use the history mechanism to
answer the question. Figure 3 contains an example of
question and pause boxes.

2.4. Subjects
2.4.1. Profile. All subjects were UMCP students with:
more than 2 years of web browsing experience
more than 4 years of computer experience
more than 2 hours per week spent on web browsing
2.4.2. Subject design. A between subject design was used
for this experiment. The experiment had 21 subjects
divided into 3 treatment groups. Each group experienced
one of the history mechanisms. Age, experience, and
education level were considered when constructing the
groups.

2.6.2. Format. The quiz was in a multiple-choice format
(Figure 3). This format was used to eliminate possible
confounding variables (for example, typing speed) that
might affect t h e data. Other potential problems t h a t were

avoided through application of a multiple-choice format
include handling of misspelled words and imprecise
answers.
The multiple choice-format also reduced the
experimental time, which was another advantage. Overall,
the time range for the quiz was approximately 20 - 25
minutes.

2.5. Experimental setup
2.5.1. Introduction. After the training phase on the
browser, the subject was given further information about
the experiment. Specifically, the introduction described
the idea or purpose of the scenario and the subject goals
and objectives during the scenario. For this experiment,
the subject was instructed to research certain
archaeological information by going to the Archeology
Virtual Library. The goals and objectives were to get the
gist of the information on each web page and then, to
move on.

2.7. Subjective questionnaire
After completing the scenario and taking the quiz,
subjects were asked to repeat the instructional scenario
and part of the quiz with the other two browsers to
familiarize themselves with what the experience would
have been like with the other two types of history
mechanisms. The quiz was not administered and
performance data was not collected during the
familiarization activity. Since there were an odd number
of the subjects in each group, the order of presentation of

2.5.2. Scenario. The scenario was a list of 29 instructional
steps. Subjects were expected to read each step, follow it,
obtain the gist of the information, and move on to the next
instruction.
There were several considerations when creating the
scenario list. The first was that the information on each
web page had to be distinctive and useful. Therefore, users
more likely would recognize the information on a certain
page when questioned later about it. Also, the scenario

' The quiz is a set of questions related
experienced.

16

to the scenario the user

>,.;*...A.”%

~.~ . .

.

! *,,.&.*.I,?,

... ..-

__

.. .____

.-

__-

. .. . ...... ......

.- . .

..-

.. .-. .- . . . . .

. ..

Figure 3;.An example of the quiz screen and pause screen
We categorized the questions, according to the effort
needed to answer them, into two categories:

the other browsers during this familiarization was
counterbalanced to the extent possible (i.e., the
presentation order of the other remaining history
mechanisms was reversed for nearly half of each group).
After working with the othlx two mechanisms, a
subjective questionnaire designe’d to compare and rate the
mechanisms was completed. The rating scale was 1-9.
The subjective questionnaire took approximately 20
minutes to complete.

Simple Ouestions (8 questions): Simple question was
defined as a question in which required the subject to
locate a specific piece of information on a single page.
Example:
The Archaeological Society of Maryland Inc. web page
was designed by:
a) AppNet
b) Net Impression
c) Windy’s Design Studio

3. Results
3.1. Data gathering

ComDlex Ouestions (1 4 Questions): Complex question
was defined as a question in which the subject was
required to search for and locate information that could
answer the question and may have required comparisons
between pages. Example:
Which page was recently revised and updated: the
Museum page, or the Picture Gallery of Ceramics page’?
a) Museums page
b) Picture Gallery page
c) Can’t say, some information is missing

W e used an automated metzhanism for timing. We
measured the time needed by a subject to answer a
question from the moment the subject pressed the “Next”
button on the pause screen to the moment he or she
pressed the “Done” button on the question screen. Also,
we counted the number of pages the subject visited to
answer each question starting from the moment he or she
pressed “Next” to the moment hie or she pressed “Done”.
W e used a proxy server, in addilion to its caching feature,
to count the pages visited or accessed by the subject. The
process of timing and counting were transparent so that
subjects were less likely to be affected by performance
anxiety.

3.3. User performance
3.3.1. Time. For each treatment the performance times
for the corresponding trials of all 21 subjects were
compiled and the mean, standard deviations, maximum,
and minimum for each question category were computed.
Table I shows these results and a graphical representation
of these statistics shown in figure 5 .
T o determine if the history mechanism had a
significant effect on performance time, a 3x1 (single
factor) analysis of variance was computed. The ANOVA
determined that the different types of history mechanisms
had a statistically significant difference on performance
time at alpha=0.01 level for both the simple question

3.2. Data analysis
Questions with incorrect ans‘wers were removed from
the analysis. In addition, questions were the subject
accessed a very large number of pages5 were also removed
from the analysis. We believe this behavior did not
represent a subject attempting tci recall the location of the
required information but rather was searching for the data.
Three times or more the average accessed pages for the question, was
considered as a very large number of pages.

17

Complex Question

Simple Question

Figure 5. Time measurements of simple question category and complex
questions category
category (F2.,8=7.96, p<0.005), and the complex question
category (F2,18=19.67, p<O.OOOO 1).

Table 2. The t-test of the time performance

I
Simple
Questions

Complex
Questions

Net IGloball Domain

Net

Simple
Questions
tl2

NetScape GlobalTree
NetScape DomainTree
GlobalTree DomainTree

I Global IDomain

I

I

Complex
Questions

I

Ptwo-tailed

f12

2.33

0.038

3.21

0.008

4.30

0.001

5.95

0.000

1.28

0.224

3.32

0.006

I

Ptwo-tailed

3.3.2.Number of Pages. As we did with performance
time, for each treatment the number of pages for the
corresponding trials of all 21 subjects were compiled and
the mean, standard deviations, maximum, and minimum
for each question category were computed. Table 2 shows
these results with a graphical representation of these
statistics shown in figure 6.

A further analysis to determine the effects of the
history mechanisms, a t-test for the independent samples
(for each possible pair) was computed as shown in
Table 2.

Simple Question

Complex Question

Figure 6. Number of pages accessed of simple question category and complex
questions category

18

Simple
Questions

Table 4. The t-test for the number of pages
accessed

Complex
Questions

Simple

Complex

Net Global Domain Net Global Domain
Scape Tree
Tree Scape Tree
Tree
1.76

2.06

5.65

3.27

2.97

0.61

0.58

0.33

0.89

0.74

0.36

Max

3 93

2.86

2.36

7.12

4.12

3.29

Min

2.23

1.18

1.38

4.37

2.13

2.25

Mean 3.19
%d.

Dev.

NetScape GlobalTree
NetScape DomainTree
GlobalTree DomainTree

,

The reason for having the average of the GlobalTree
less than the average of the DomainTree in the simple
questions category is: for most of the questions, in using
DomainTree you have to move first to the specific domain
which contains the target page and then access the target
page. But in GlobalTree, you can get to the target page
directly since all the pages are reachable by single click of
a mouse. This means that for most of the questions. users
used DomainTree had to access one more page than the
optimal number than can be reached by using GlobalTree
history mechanism.
T o determine if the history mechanism had a
Significant effect on performmce time, a 3x1 (single
factor) analysis of variance was computed. The ANOVA
established that the different history mechanisms also had
statistically significant difference in reference to the
number of pages accessed at th'e alpha=0.01 level for both
the simple questions category (F2,18=
13.54, p<O.OOOS),
and the complex questionas category (Fz.ls=30.3I ,
p<0. 0000 1).
Also, a t-test for the independent samples (for each
possible pair) was computed. Table 4 shows the results for
each question category.
From table 2 and 4, GlobalTree-DoinainTree row
showed a significant differencc in the time measurement
between GlobalTree and DomainTree and no difference in
the number of pages accessed. One possible explanation is
that because GlobalTree displays more visual information
(nodes) than DomainTree, user:$prefer to spend more time
identifying their correct target node instead of exploring
nodes of which they are less certain.

-1.21

0.251

0.96

0.358

Table 5. User satisfaction

Mean

Std. Dev.

1 .O?

0.94

Figure 7. User satisfaction
As with performance time, a 3x1 (single factor)
analysis of variance was used for each treatment to detect
if the history mechanisms significantly affected users'
satisfaction. The ANOVA showed that there is
statistically significant difference at the alpha = 0.01
level (F;2,,0=29.95,p<0.00001)
The following table shows the result for the t-test on
the independent samples:

3.4. User satisfaction
The subjective satisfaction ratings were also compiled
and analyzed. The means and standard deviations were
calculated for all the S Scores of the subjective
questionnaire. The results are in table 5 with a graphical
representation in figure 7.

19

significantly differ between the GlobalTree mechanism
and the other mechanisms (table 7). Although subjects
were asked to skip any question they could not answer,
but the GlobalTree subjects tried to answer most of the
questions even if they had to access a large number of
pages. This attitude might reflect the nature of the
GlobalTree history mechanism that shows all accessed
pages in which it temps or forces the subjects to find the
answer even if they had to visit a large number of pages.

Table 6. The t-test for the user satisfaction

NetScape GlobalTree
NetScape DomainTree
GlobalTree DomainTree

I

I

t40

~~

Ptwo-tailed

~

5.16

0.000
0.000
0.041

4.2. History
satisfaction

3.5. Rate of Error

Table 7. Number of incorrect answers

Net Global Domain
Scape Tree
Tree
4

2

4

2

5

2

Large Number of
Pages

and

subjective

Results from the subjective satisfaction questionnaire
showed existence of statistically significant difference
between the three treatments. Users preferred the visual
effect of the history mechanism. None of the subjects
demonstrated any difficulty in using the three history
mechanisms, and they rated the mechanisms with similar
ease-to-use scores. Thirteen of the 21 subjects indicated a
preference for the DomainTree history mechanism, while
5 wanted to have the GlobalTree history mechanism
implemented in their browsers. Following are some of the
comments
0
“The tool of having all the pages visible is VERY
useful.”
0
“DomainTree and GlobalTree are far better in terms
of history but they cut space which lead to scrolling.”
0
“DomainTree is more logical in rcpresenting the
history.”
0
“I like the performance of the DomainTree. It would
be nice if I could bookmark the pages from the
history tree or save the history itself.”
e “The visual history tree was very helpful. Branching
definitely assisted with retention of where I could
quickly access desired information.”
0
“The “Back” button in DomainTree is not needed.”
0
“I personally liked DomainTree’s history tool more
than ClobalTree because i t separated the trecs by
domain. It would be best to make this as an option of
the browser.”
0
“The pages in the tree of the GlobalTree are so small
that you might get confused to figure which is
which. ”
0
“The technique of DomainTree allows the use of
separate trees resulting in bigger icon images that
showing more information in these images thus
helping in accessing the targeted page.”
0 “GlobalTree is more complicated. Images become
tiny and hard t o differentiate between them.”

We calculated the number of questions in each
treatment that were either answered incorrectly or that
resulted in an extremely large number of pages accessed.
Table 7 shows these counts:

3.6. Wrong Answer

mechanism

4. Discussion
4.1. History mechanism and performance issues
The statistics rejected our null hypothesis. The results
indicates the existence of statistically significant
differences in the user’s performance in terms of time and
number of visited pages among the three treatments. From
the above statistics, we can see that the DomainTree
history mechanism is the best when assessing performance
by time and number of visited pages. The t-test proved
that there is a significant difference associated with
performance time between DomainTree and GlobalTree
history mechanisms for the complex questions category.
One interpretation for having a significant difference on
the user time performance and not having that difference
on the number of pages between GlobalTree and
DomainTree is: GlobalTree display more visual
information (nodes) than DomainTree which make users
prefer to spend more time to recognize their correct target
node instead of going to suspicious wrong node.
From the error counts (table 7), the total numbers of
errors of the different mechanisms are the same. On the
other hand, the number of answers counted as errors due
accessing large number of pages for the answer is

20

4.3. Comment

be improved by making the list of domains more
informative. Some subjects suggested questions for future
browser research:
“For someone who likes to stay on [the Internet] for
four hours, it is very easy to have an enormous and
unmanageable tree!”
“When opening multiple windows, how will this be
handled by DomainTree and GlobalTree?”

The overall experiment went smoothly. The
environment was stable and quiet. Subjects were very
cooperative. Although we tried our best to counterbalance the environment, we were not able to hold all the
experiments at the same time. This was due to resource
limitations of the lab and availability constraints of the
subjects. All subjects used the DomainTree and
GlobalTree for their first time during the experiment. We
believe we could obtain more impressive results, if
subjects had a longer time (for example, two weeks) to
familiarize themselves with the browsers.
Negative feedback from subjects about the experience
were in reference to the small size of the GlobalTree
images and the overall length of the experiment.
Some also noticed a slow clown in GlobalTree and
DomainTree due to the their nature in drawing the history
tree images. One main reason for the slow down may due
to their implementation language. Java is used to
implement DomainTree and GlobalTree, while Netscape
is implemented by C. At present, C is more efficient than
Java. In the future if GlobalTree and DomainTree are in
implemented in C, or if Java lbecome faster and more
efficient, a significant increase in performance of these
history mechanism will be noticeable.

6. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. Ben Shneiderman for
his support and encouragement for this study. A lot of
thanks to Dan Kim and James Ahn for their help during
this experiment. Also, we would give a warm thanks to
our friends who were able to help us out with our
experiments.

7. References
[ I ] Ayers, Eric Z. and John T. Stasko, “Using Graphic
History in Browsing the World Wide Web”, Proceedings
of the Fourth International World Wide Web Conference,
Boston, December 1995.
[2] Bederson, Ben B., and McAlister, Britt, “Jazz: An
Extensible 2D+Zooming Graphics Toolkit in Java”, HCIL
Technical Report No. 99-07 (May 1999).
[3] Bederson, B.B, Hollan, J. D., Stewart, J., Rogers,
D., Druin, A., Vick, D., Ring, L., Grose, E., Forsythe, C.,
“A Zooming Web Browser”, 9th Annual ACM
Symposium on User-Interface Software and Technology
[4] Bederson, Ben B., Jonathan I. Helfman, Ron R.
Hightower, James D. Hollan, and Laura T. Ring,
“Graphical Multiscale Web Histories: A Study of
PadPrints”, ACM Hypertext ’98 Conference, Pittsburgh,
1998.
[ 5 ] Catledge, Lara D., and Pitkow, James E.,
“Characterizing Browsing Strategies in the World-Wide
Web”, In Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 27.
Elsevier Science, 1995
[6] GVU’s WWW Surveying Team. “GVU’s 10th
WWW User Survey”, 1998.
[7] Gandhi, Rajiv, and Kumar, Girish, “Domain Name
based Visualization of Web Histories in a Zoomable User
Interface”, Second International Workshop on Web-Based
Information Visualization - WebVis 2000
[8] Greenberg, Saul and Linda Tauscher, “Revisitation
Patterns in World Wide Web Navigation”, CHI ’97.
ACM.
[9] Kandogan, Eser and Ben Shneiderman, “Elastic
Windows: A Hierarchical Multi-Window World-Wide
Web Browser”, UIST 97. ACM.
[ 101 Wexelblat, Alan, and Maes, Pattie, “Footprints:
History-Rich Tools for information foraging”, CHI ’99.
ACM, 15-20, May 1999.

5. Conclusions
5.1. Impact for practitioners
The experiment’s results showed that the use of history
mechanisms in web browsers may have a direct effect on
user performance or satisfaction when revisiting web
pages. Statistics indicated that the use of visual aids in a
history mechanism is more powerful than using text or the
current history methods. In addition, our experiment
demonstrated that DomainTree is better than GlobalTree.
Research needs to be conducted on individual components
of web history mechanisms to see what impact they may
have on web revisitation patterns. In our experiment, we
noted that the subjects mainly depended on layout out of
their navigation paths while completing the scenario.
They, also relied on web page titles, URLs provided as
tooltips, or status bar information as reference points for
identification of previously visited web pages.

5.2. Suggestions for future researchers
We believe that we could obtain more impressive
results by increasing the speed of DomainTree and
GlobalTree and by letting subjects gain greater familiarity
with the browsers before the start of the experiment. Some
subjects recommended that DomainTree’s usability could

21

