Sens-A-Patch: Interactive Visualization of Label Spaces
Jonas Lowgren
Interactive animation studio
Kaserngatan 26, SE-575 35 Eksjo, Sweden
jonas.lowgren@ animationenshus.eksjo.se
Typical problem 2 (tp2): As a personal label collection is used with a view to inform a decision, research a
topic, inspire new ideas, there will always be relevant connections between labels that cut across the overt structure.
The labels are multivalent in the sense that an appropriate
structure for browsing may not be suitable for researching a
certain topic, and vice versa. But: existing tools are mostly
based on purely hierarchical structures, frequently to the
extent that the multivalent nature of the labels in disregarded entirely. They do not facilitate serendipitous discovery of relations, juxtapositions, relevant material in other
parts of the structure.
The rest of this paper is devoted to Sens-A-Patch, an
interaction technique designed to address these two problems.

Abstract
Sens-A-Patch is an interactive visualization technique based
on overlapping clusters in a icwodinzerisional space. It is
intended f o r long-term use oj”personal label collections
arid aims at providing a jluetit niediuni f o r restructuring
arid serendipitous discoven.
Sens-A-Patch iniplenients the principles of spatial meaning, focus+coritext and tight coupling in a space-eficierit
way It is also shown enipirically to be usable f o r broadcast media such as web-site index pages. Further developmerits in niunaging social irfortnation spaces and collecting
implicit relevance feedback art’ outlined.

1. Introduction

2. Sens-A-Patch concept and core principles

This work deals with personal, long-term management of
fair-sized label collections. A label is taken to be a symbol
of convenient size signifying some other information, typically a larger piece. Book titles and business cards are labels
in this sense; everyday examples of digital labels are web
bookmarks and file names. Most of us have digital label
collections that we grow, nurse and manage over extended
periods of time. Again, the bookmark menu of your web
browser is perhaps the most oklvious example. It also illustrates well two typical use-related problems of personal
label collections.
Typical problem 1 (tpl): As soon as the collection
grows beyond, say, twenty labels you have to start making
up your own classification system. Only rarely is there a
commonly agreed or enforced structure for ordering the
labels. Your classification system grows and changes over
time, as you learn more about ]:hedomains in question and
as your interests change. But: existing tools for managing
label collections do not deal very well with the organic
nature of your structures. The folders and subfolders of
web browser bookmarks seem to be too strenuous to afford
ongoing structure refinement in practice.

0-7695-1195-3/01$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

Sens-A-Patch visualization is based on a set of possibly
overlapping clusters or patches of labels, laid out on a twodimensional space. One patch at a time is active. Inactive
patches are faded into the background by making them
nearly transparent. Transparency of members in the active
patch is controlled by distance from the cursor. If distance
limits are set appropriately, the resulting effect is one of
moving a saturation lens over the active patch.
A patch is activated by moving the cursor over the activation area, or hotspot, of the patch. In the examples below,
the hotspot is equal to the area occupied by the patch heading. Other designs are also possible, including visual activation symbols or placing the hotspot in the visual center
of a patch without a formal heading.
Patches can be organized in a hierarchical structure,
where a patch contains not only labels but also other
patches. Activation proceeds through one hierarchical level
at a time. Activating a sibling in the resulting patch tree
deactivates the currently active patch and its children. In
the hierarchical case, a separate deactivation function con-

7

nected to a keyboard key also turns out to be useful. The
deactivation function maintains a stack of activations, and
consecutive deactivations thus work similarly to repeated
invocations of a regular undo function.
In practice, patch structure tends to guide spatial structure. Patch members are placed in physical proximity, forming spatial clusters. This is not necessary, strictly speaking,
but at the same time a natural choice since ‘patch’ is essentially a spatial concept.
Any two labels can have an association. If the cursor
moves over a label with an association, the associated
label is indicated. This is referred to as a ‘ping’ since the
first implemented prototype used a submarine sonar sound
together with visual feedback to indicate an association.
Associations cut across the patch structure to highlight
hopefully relevant relations outside the current focus of
visual attention and conceptual concentration.
The Sens-A-Patch concept is most easily illustrated
through examples. The first scenario below shows one
instance of using a Sens-A-Patch-based web bookmark
tool. The second scenario is a fictional sequence of snapshots over time, suggesting how meta-information contents
and structure evolve with the user’s knowledge and interests.

Animation

Aruroation magazine
SAS .Society For Animation Studies
Animation

$. Web miniation
Interactive irrrintatiort

2.1 Scenario: Researching a report
I am about to write a brief report on Dead End, one of our
recent projects. It is an artistic experiment in dynamically
generated narrative, where the actions of the main character
(Mr. Norman) are guided by his goals, emotionaVphysica1
status and what happens around him. The resulting story
repeats forever with small variations, sometimes taking on
a fascinating quality. (Numbers 1-4 below refer to the par-

tial screen shots on this page.)
1. First of all, I need to look at existing work in the area of
autonomous characters. I know I bookmarked some web
sites but i t has been a while since I visited this area of
my WebPatches. Let’s see.. . it should be in the Animation patch.. .
2. Ah, yes. Interactive animation.
3. Bruce Blumberg. The MIT guy who used to work on
believable animated characters. Maybe there is something I could use.
4. <Ping!> OK, I got a ping when I moved to Bruce Blumberg so there is an association to another web page in
the space. ‘Digital Theatre’? Wonder what the connection is? Pings are usually good, let me take a look.. .
It tums out that the Digital Theatre project at Aarhus university in Denmark that I bookmarked long ago contains indepth information on their development of the autonomous
animated agent Bouncy. It is certainly relevant for what I
am writing, even though Bouncy is a lot more reactive than
we would like Mr. Norman to be.

3 Y

rr,,)>lr ‘

Wrh dniin+tteri

U. of Tomnto Cognitiue Robotics Gmup

Diglt.4 Theatre: an experimentmum
A

U. of Tomnto Cognitive Robotics Gmup
Interactive animation

8

Neb aniniawm

2.2 Scenario: A portion of Webpatches over time
(fictional)

an early example of task-related piling. More recently, the
Presto system [6] builds on spatialization of query results.
Associations in the domain of web pages is demonstrated
by Rhodes [I21 and Czerwinski et al. [5]. Transparent user
interface elements have been explored [8, 91 with precursors going back to Colby and Scholl [4] and early work
at the MIT Aesthetics and Computation Group under John
Maeda. The concept of tight coupling comes from Ahlberg
and Shneiderman [I].
What appears new, however, is the particular combination of the ideas in the design concept Sens-A-Patch.

At the time of the screen shots on the previous page, my
Webpatches space contains a large pile of bookmarks in-the
Digital arts category. They have no intentional structure.
As I work on the report, I have reason to spend some
time in this area. Three spatial groups are starting to
appear as I move the labels around.
One of the groups is elevated to a new patch called Exhibitions. The catalyst for this decision was the addition of
a new bookmark: webmuseumdk. Looking at their site
prompted me to think about ,art exhibitions on the web.
When I have some spare time, I edit one of the remaining spatial groups to dissolve. it. Some of the bookmarks
are moved to other groups arid patches; some are moved
to the ‘gray zone’ where I keep delete candidates; some
are deleted.

3. Display space requirements
It might be interesting to estimate an upper limit as to how
many labels can be presented on a given Sens-A-Patch display surface. Let A be the area of the display surface. a/
is the average area of a label. a h is the average area of a
patch hotspot. nl is the sought quantity: the maximum total
number of labels.
First, consider the (degenerate) case where there are no
hotspots, and all labels are presented on the display surface
without overlap. In this case, nl is simply estimated by A h /
(the total display area divided by the average area of each
label). This corresponds to a design where the labels are all
active simultaneously and crammed back to back into the
display surface.
Next, we introduce one level of hotspots. The total
number of hotspots is called nh. These hotspots together
occupy an area A h = nhqI. The remaining area A-Al, is
available for labels. For each hotspot, there is room for
(A-Ah)/q labels, as above. Hence, the total number of labels
equals nh(A-Ah)/U[.
In the general case, assume that we havex hotspot levels.
They are structured in a tree, and we assume for simplicity
that labels appear only on the lowest level of the tree. We
further assume that the number of children for each tree
node is equal and call it the branching factor of the tree, or
B. Then, as in the x= 1 case above, the total area available
for labels is A minus the area taken up by hotspots. Hotspots share display space just like labels; only the B children of a specific hotspot (and its parent generations) are
activated at any one time. Ah is hence equal to x B q , . The
total number of activation paths to reach the labels is equal
to the number of hotspots on level 1 , times the numbcr
on level 2, ... times the number on level x. Given the
assumption that all these numbers are equal to B , then
nl = BX(A-xBah)/al.
As can be expected from a tree structure, the resulting
expression is roughly exponential in the number of levels.
If a/ = a h = 15 . 150 = 2250 pixels (typical value for ninepoint type with some whitespace), A = 640 ,480 = 307 200

2.3 Core principles
The design of Sens-A-Patch is guided by three core principles, as follows.
Core principle 1 (cpl): Spatial meaning and transspatial associations. The principle of spatial meaning and
physical proximity is consciously given primacy. Ordering
material in patches is the main structuring device of Sens-APatch. Typically, such structures can reflect semantic relations (‘all Animation bookmarks go here’) or task related
considerations (‘all material I need for my report goes
here’). Trans-spatial associaticlns complement the dominant spatial ordering. In technical terms, they can be manually entered, automatically ccmputed, or a combination.
This principle addresses typical problem tpl by providing
a more fluent medium for orgamization, infused with personal meaning. It addresses tp2 by pings, by coincidental
physical proximity and by abstaining from fixed borders
between categories.
Core principle 2 (cp2): Focus+context through visual
fade. The use of visual fade as a focus+context technique
is not all that common. Some three-dimensional visualizations create visual fade through perspective effects; SensA-Patch has no depth dimenslion and sidesteps many of
the navigation and orientation problems associated with 3d
spaces. This principle addresses tp2 by minimizing state
changes and preserving visual context.
Core principle 3 (cp3): Tight coupling. The interaction
technique creates a sense of involvement with the data. For
the user, the dynamic Gestalt [ 101should be one of a tactile,
malleable, almost organic information material. This principle is aimed at enhancing exploration and (re)discovery,
and thus addresses tp2.
None of these ideas are new. Malone [ 1 13 highlighted the
relevance of spatial organization. The Rooms system [7] is

9

are there, but not overlapping. Alphabetical order was used
where appropriate. The two designs are shown above.

pixels, and the branching factor B equals 10, then we get
the following estimates for nl for the first values of x:
x=O:n~=137.x=1:n/=1266.~=2:~/=11653.
However, other considerations come into play for practical design purposes. For instance, i t tends to be desirable
to create visual patches to reflect the underlying structure.
Appropriate use of whitespace around labels and hotspots
also yields a more inviting result. We can approximate the
first consideration by reducing the available display area A
(to reflect the estimate that for each patch, only a portion
of the total display space is usable in practice). The second
consideration can be approximated by increasing a/ and ah.
However, neither of these modifications change the exponential characteristic of n!. In conclusion, it would appear
that Sens-A-Patch provides a fairly compact visual representation while preserving the visual context.

The study is detailed in the appendix. Briefly, it showed
no significant differences between the two designs in terms
of information-location task performance. The Sens-APatch design was nearly unanimously preferred, and a
majority of the subjects characterized it in tactile terms.
An obvious conclusion is that Sens-A-Patch can be used
as an interaction technique also in broadcast situations of
first-time use, at least if the intended audience is visually
inclined. A secondary conclusion of more relevance for the
topic of this paper is that Sens-A-Patch indeed seems to
exhibit a certain tactility as demanded by core principle 3 .

5. Status and future work
Sens-A-Patch currently exists as a concept and a number
of prototypes and partial implementations. An obvious area
of improvement is the parts that are lacking, and primarily
appropriate tools for long-term growth and restructuring
of the information space. Once this is accomplished, longitudinal studies of personal use patterns is of the essence to
explore how spatial clusterings and structures of meaning
evolve in practical use.
A crucial issue is, of course, the move from personal
to social contexts. Nobody manages information in isolation. Sharing and cooperation are the essence of digital
media, whether we are concerned with project teams at
work or leisure networking at home. How can an arena for
social information sharing and juxtaposition benefit from
the work invested in each participant's personal structures?
Unlike approaches such as The Brain [ 3 ] ,a personal SensA-Patch space contains not only structural but also spatial
information of potential relevance in social contexts. (Not
to mention the lack of interconnections in the ThinkTank,
which is the current approach to social contextualizations
of personal Brains.) The issue has clear implications for

4. Sens-A-Patch for broadcast media
Even though this paper addresses questions of long-term
personal use, it is anticipated that Sens-A-Patch as an interaction technique might be adapted to other contexts. Indeed,
we have used it ourselves as a first-page navigation device
on our web site [2]. This situation is clearly different: no
long-term use and learning effects. The most important difference is the lack of personally evolved spatial meaning
that results from the web's current broadcast medium character. However, it was deemed a likely scenario and thus
worthy of empirical study.
A comparative study was performed ofthe instant usability of Sens-A-Patch in relation to a more conventional
design. The Sens-A-Patch design was confined in display
space to reflect the fairly small number of labels, used one
level of hotspots and came out rather light and pleasant.
The baseline design can be described as taking the interactivity out of the Sens-A-Patch design while preserving the
information contents and display space. The same labels

10

structured information management and connects nicely
with the currently massive interest in XML and other metadata efforts occasioned by the current state of the web.
A final issue worth mentioning is relevance feedback,
which is a core concept in information retrieval [13]. Relevance feedback refers to having the user rate the results of
a query. It has been shown to improve both recall and precision, but the main problem is finding a way of collecting
it without stepping over the urn's straidbenefit threshold.
The persistent space of Sens-A-Patch might provide such a
way. If IR algorithms are used to compute proposed associations in a Sens-A-Patch space, then relevance feedback
might be collected unobtrusively by analyzing the resulting use patterns. Simplistically, if an association is taken up
and much time and many clicks are spent in the associated
data, it might mean that the proposed association is implicitly given a positive relevance vote. Much more sophisticated inferences are possible based on the long-term use
of proposed material, yielding a relevant and trustworthy
association mechanism.

in a window-based graphical user interface. ACM Trans.
Graphics 5(3):211-243.
[8] Kamba, T. et al. (1996). Using small screen space more
efficiently. Proc Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI '96), pp. 383-390. New York: ACM Press.
[9] Kurtenbach, G. et al. (1997). The design of a CUI paradigm based on tablets, two-hands, and transparency. In
Proc. Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '97),
pp. 35-42. New York: ACM Press.
[IO] Lowgren, J., Stolterman, E. (1998). Developing IT
design ability through repertoires and contextual product semantics. Digital Creativity 9(4):223-237.
[ 1 I ] Malone, T. (1983). How d o people organize their desks?
Implications for the design of office information systems.
ACM Trans. OfJice Information Systems 1(1):99-112.
[ 121 Rhodes, B. (2000). Margin notes: building a contextually aware associative memory. Proc. Int. Conj Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 21 9-224.
1131 Salton, G. (1989). Aiitoniutic text processing: The
trunsjorniution, analysis arid retrieval of information by
computer: Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Acknowledgments
Appendix A: Details of Sens-A-Patch instant
usability study

The subjects in the usability study gave of their time and
reflections. Cecilia Katzeff provided input on experimental design. Valuable comments, were given by anonymous
reviewers. Thank you.
This work is partially funded by Eksj6 city council and
the EU structural development programme.

Our own web site was given two experimental start pages:
one presenting all the material on the site using Sens-APatch (referred to as version I , or V I ) and one presenting
exactly the same contents in a static text link format (v2).
The two interfaces V I and v2 were confined to the same
display size, which was defined as the minimum size necessary to accommodate the material at all in version 2.
The same 59 links were presented in (both versions of) the
start page, divided into six categories: News, Education,
Research, Production, Gallery and Contact.
The two interfaces V I and v2 were compared with respect
to user performance on fact-finding tasks and user preference. The results show that there are no significant differences in performance between the two interfaces, and that
V I , the Sens-A-Patch design, is nearly unanimously preferred for reasons coherent with our design principles.

References
[ I J Ahlberg, C., Shneiderman, B. (1994). Visual information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query filters
with starfield displays. Proc. Hunzati Factors in Conipiiting Systems (CHI '94), pp. 313-317. New York: ACM
Press.
[2] Animationens hus. www.animationenshus.eksjo.se, visited March 2, 2001. In Swedish.
[3] The Brain. www.thebrain.com, visited March 2, 2001.
[4] Colby, G., Scholl, L. (1991). Transparency and blur
as selective cues for complex visual information. Int.
Soc. Optical Engineering Proc. (SPIE), vol. 1460, pp.
114-125.
[ 5 ]Czerwinski, M. et al. (1999). Visualizing implicit queries for information mana,pement and retrieval. Proc.
Human Factors in Conipiii'ing Systems (CHI '99), pp.
560-567. New York: ACM I'ress.
[6] Dourish, P. et al. (1999). Presto: An experimental
architecture for fluid interactive document spaces. ACM
Truns. Computer-Human Interaction 6(2): 133- 161.
[7] Henderson, A., Card, S. (1986). Rooms: The use of
multiple virtual workspace,s to reduce space contention

A . l Procedure
Each subject was seated in front of an ordinary office computer with two Netscape windows open, one showing V I
and the other v2. The subject was told about the purpose
of the study and introduced to the two interfaces. She was
then asked to minimize the two windows. A task was given
as a written question. The subject read the question aloud
and any confusion concerning its meaning was cleared. She
was then told to use either V I or v2 to find the answer.
The experimenter timed the task using a stopwatch, starting when the subject opened the minimized window, and

11

noted any errors and problems on a protocol. A split time
was taken at the first click in the start page, and a task completion time when the subject started voicing her answer to
the question. After each task, the subject was asked to Back
to the start page and then minimize the window.
After completing ten tasks, background data were collected and the two designs were discussed in terms of user
preference, reasons for the preference, and associations
triggered by v 1 .

V I and v2 averages. The assumptions are that the underlying variable follows a normal distribution and that variances are equal in conditions V I and v2. Comparing the
computed t values with the critical value of a two-tailed test
(to.025, = 2.31) shows that the null hypothesis is accepted
on the 5% level for all tasks. In other terms, it is 95% certain that the differences in average times are due to random
effects (provided that the assumptions of normal distribution and equal variance are true).
Data on user errors were collected but are not included
here, since an error tends to affect the task completion
time and hence is already implicitly included in the times
above. However, it can be mentioned that the 95% confidence intervals of average number of errors overlapped for
V I and v2 in all ten tasks. This suggests that there are no
significant differences in error rates between V I and v2.
The interview data show a nearly unanimous preference
for v l . Eight subjects clearly state it as preferable. It is characterized as innovative, somewhat exciting and entertaining, appropriate for a web site dealing with animation and
interactive media (‘practice what you preach’). Six subjects
talk about it in tactile terms and compare it to painting on
paper or touching a water surface. The two subjects prefemng v2 see i t as more effective in terms of information
access, with a familiar scanning order and a systematic,
alphabetized structure.

A.2 Tasks
Each subject completed the same ten tasks. The tasks were
simple fact-finding, e.g., task 3 read: ‘Which animation student was awarded a prize for his contribution to the Virtual
Film Festival last spring?’ The subjects alternated between
V I and v2 to complete the tasks. Five subjects started with
v l , the other five with v2. Subjects were asked to locate the
answer in the web site even if they thought they knew it.

A.3 Subjects
Ten subjects volunteered to participate. They were students
and staff from Animationens hus, which means that they
knew a bit more than the average site visitor about the topic
of the tasks. On the other hand, their interests were similar
to the intended target audience for the web site (art, animation, etc.) which made them a representative test population. The sampling was thus deemed appropriate.
The subjects ranged from 19 to 52 years of age, with an
average age of 27 years. They were all frequent computer
users (close to daily use) and web users (weekly use). Computer and web experience was also reasonably high, with an
average of 7 resp. 4 years. On the average, they had visited
the Animationens hus web site only once or twice before.
Two subjects were female and eight male. They were not
paid for their participation.

A.6 Discussion
Interactive visualization is, of course, based on implicit
assumptions of the primacy of visuakpatial representations over symbolic/linguistic. By choosing subjects from
a school of animation, one may suspect that the experiment
is strongly biased in favor of the more visual design (VI).
However, the target audience for the web site in question is
expected to have a similar visual bias. The results are thus
reliable in this case, but i t is important to consider the visual
orientation of the intended audience before implementing
Sens-A-Patch as an interface to other web sites.

A.4 Hypothesis
The null hypothesis for performance was that there would
be no difference between V I and v2 in average times per
task for first click and task completion. The alternative
hypothesis was a difference (in any direction).
The hypothesis for preference was that v 1 would be preferred over v2. However, the important aspect of the preference study was not a binary likeldislike rating, but rather a
qualitative inquiry into how V I was experienced.

Table 1: Performance data and f values (N=10)
first click (s)
task completion (s)
Task
VI
v2
t
VI
v2
t
1
8.0
8.5 -0.23
38.8 32.0
0.81
7.5
4.7
2.23
19.2 27.1
-0.86
2
3
12.1
15.2 -0.59
60.3 54.9
0.22
0.95
35.5 78.3 -0.81
4
15.9 11.4
9.7
-1.11
38.1 28.1
0.52
7.2
5
6
15.1 58.3 -1.17
6.7 10.5 -0.85
1.00
6.5
1.20
22.0 10.5
7
8.3
38.8 59.5 -0.92
10.9 12.6
-0.32
8
50.5 110.5 -1.77
9
8.4 14.5 -0.82
0 Oh
14.1
-0.59
42.4 40.3
IO
11.1

A S Results
To start with performance data, each subject eventually
gave the correct answers to all the ten questions. Table 1
summarizes the average times to first click and to task completion, per task and interface used (VI or v2).
For each task, the Student-t test statistic ( t ) is computed
for first click and task completion in order to compare the

12

