Development of a Design Tool for Building Integrated Photovoltaics
Kin-chuen Kwok, Sandra Dixon", Nicola Pearsall
Northumbria Photovoltaics Applications Centre, School of Engineering, University of Northumbria,
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
*Department of Built Environment, University of Northumbria
E-mail: k.c.kwok@unn.ac.uk
software packages, but none of these tools address the
aesthetic visualisation of PV modules. A survey of tools
for the design of photovoltaic power systems in buildings
suggested that future PV design tools for the detailed
technical design stage should have the capability to
handle many different module types including those
which are user defined [ 2 ] . Though drawings and
photorendering of individual PV modules are available
from various sources, such as PV manufacturers'
brochures and PV related web sites (e.g. Solarlibrary), an
appropriate design tool will provide a better image for
designing custom PV modules or PV arrays, together with
consideration of the power rating. The details of some PV
design tools designed for the simulation of energy
performance can be found in References 3 and 4.
Horne et a1 concluded that computer-based models can
contribute to the visualisation of PV-clad buildings by
producing a range of images which represent design
options. The objective of this research is to address the
development of a BIPV design tool with particular
emphasis on the visualisation of PV modules and the
exploration of alternative design options. Computer
graphic processing techniques have been applied to
construct this design tool. It is intended that the tool will
be complementary to other PV related software packages
which address the electrical performance of the PV
system as well as to other building design software.

Abstract
This paper outlines the design objectives, approach
and results of the developnient of a building integrated
photovoltaic (BIPV) system visualisation prototype design
tool which was coded in Visual Basic for Applications. It
provides the designer with the flexibility to change the
photovoltaic cell types, cell sizes, the backing sheet
colours, the spacing between the cells and the spacing
between the modules. The module design can then be
applied to the building drawing. Features which provide
detailed specifications for the designed system are under
development.

1. Introduction
This paper presents the objectives, approach and some
example results of the d,zvelopment of a prototype
visualisation design tool for a Building Integrated
Photovoltaic (BIPV) system. A photovoltaic module is a
highly flexible building element. It is normally, although
not always, a rectangular panel of 0.5 - 1 m2 in area. The
appearance of a module depends on the colour and finish
of the cells and the appearance of the supporting layers. It
can be incorporated into the roof or walls of a structure or
used in canopies or sunshades. BIPV systems are installed
as an integral part of the building envelope and thus serve
multiple functions including weather protection,
contribution to aesthetics anti electricity generation. There
are many design options to generate an equal amount of
electricity. Since the use of I3IPV is more complex than a
conventional building envelope, careful design is needed
to realise all the advantages of this new building material.

3. Approach and methodology
It was identified that the design tool needs to be
capable of presenting images of both standard and custom
designed PV modules. The tool should provide the
flexibility to control, modify and update PV cell types,
cell sizes, the backing sheet colours and the spacing
between the cells and modules and to compare the power
rating of each BIPV design option.

2. Objectives of the visualisation design tool
Very often images of PV modules and PV arrays are
demanded during the early stages of building design. The
need to visualise photovoltaic-clad buildings has been
reported by Horne et al. [ I ] 'There are existing PV design

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

3.1 Element of a PV module image
The design process for the image of a custom PV
module involves the control and operation of the image

97

3.2 Controls and operations

elements. Images of PV modules consist of the following
elements: PV cells, supportive layer, name badge of the
manufacturer, metal interconnections, framing and
covering sheets. The PV cells and supportive layer
dominate the image of the module. The creation and
operation of images of these two elements are the focus of
this research project. The remainder of the images are
generally not visible at the building level and so have not
been included in the design. The upper covering sheet is,
of course, required to be transparent and so makes little
difference to the module appearance.

The control and operation of images of cells and the
supportive layers are classified into two groups: the key
functions and supporting functions. The selection of the
cell types and colours and modifying the size, spacing and
margins are key functions. The supporting functions are
the specification of the locations and drawing plane, layer
management, file management, view, zoom, and editing
of the images. The design process for the creation of an
image of a custom designed PV module is summarised in
Table 1 .

Table 1. Operations and functions of the design tool classified by elements
Design images of
Functions, by elements
PV cells
Select cell types
Colours
Sizes
Number of cells in row
Number of cells in column
Vertical spacing
Horizontal spacing
Create drawing layers
Supportive Layer
Select types
Colour
Size
Top margin
Bottom margin

Erase supportive layer only
Cost monitor
Output rating monitor
Drawing types
Draw raster images
Draw 3D geometry models

I

PV modules

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

I

PV array

Y
Y

Y

I

PVfaqade

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Auto

Y
Y
Y
Y
Auto

Y
Y

Y

Y
Y

Auto

Auto

Auto

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

98

Y

Auto

Y

Y
Y

bottom. The buttons on the next column are the six guided
steps to design a PV module. They are functions to
specify the PV cell image(s), drawing plane, cell size, cell
position and the detail of the module configurations. The
operations in the last step are to create or delete the
images of the cells and or the background layers. The
command buttons on the top row are designed for file
operation functions and are designed for ease of use. The
screen is designed such that the number of mouse clicks
and the distance of mouse movement are reduced to a
minimum.

3.3 User interface
The user interface has two modes. The full screen size
mode shows most of the design functions on a single
screen. The half screen size mode allows the graphic area
to be seen while stili allowing the designer to operate key
function buttons and whilst the design process is in
progress. The command buttons located at the top of the
left hand column are the frequently-used functions such as
buttons to call the viewer (dialogue box, isometric views,
and other frequently used views such as from the top or

Figure 1. Interface (full screen size mode) This interface provides a holistic view of the functions available. Buttons in
the top row are the supporting functions such as the file and layer management and the selection of drawing types. The
second row houses the butrons for the design of the PV module, while columns on the right of the third and fourth rows
are controls in designing PV arrays. The bottom box on the right hand side controls the drawing of demo PV modules or
systems. The image libraries are housed in the two boxes at the lower left of the screen.

99

Figure 2 Half-screen size mode and a raster image of a common 4 x 9 cell PV module
The half screen mode interface displays the key function buttons and the graphic drawing area simultaneously. Again, the
buttons of the top row are for file management, the layer dialogue box, and the selection of drawing types. Display and
viewing angles are controlled by the buttons in the left-hand column. The buttons in the second column toggle between the
six design steps. The buttons i n the following columns are for specifying images, drawing planes, cell sizes, positions, cell
numbers, and editing of images. As an example, a common design of PV module (using 4 x 9 blue cells on top of a yellow
supportive layer) is created by the tool and displayed in the graphic drawing area.

3.4 Raster and rendered images

The “raster image” provides an almost real time,
instantly accessible view of the PV modules. It does not
need any rendering process. It is a method with high
flexibility regarding the modification of the configuration
of the rows, columns and the spacing of the cells, and also
the cell types and the supporting layers. However, i t is not
compatible with the geometry-rendering method as the
raster images are invisible in a rendering window.
The 3D geometry approach offers a model to be
rendered and which can be viewed under various light
conditions. Images can only been seen after the models
are rendered. The length of rendering time depends on the
number of models and the dcgree of detail. A detailed 3D
geometry model of each cell may produce a better picture.

This research has explored and presented PV module
images by two approaches: “raster image based” and “3D
geometry model photograph based.” Both approaches
allow the designers to integrate the images of PV modules
onto a CAD drawing of a building or draw onto any 3D
space.
The first approach is to insert raster images of the PV
cells directly on top of the raster image of the PV module
supportive layer. The second approach creates 3D
geometry models, which are to be rendered by applying
either material images or mapping photograph images to
the models.

100

is shown in Figure 6. Note that this is the raster image and
so the windows and staircase area are not included. These
can be shown in the rendered image once the module
design is completed. The tool draws the raster image of
the modules i n less than 5 minutes.
The options of spacing, cell types and colour schemes
can be modified to examine design options. However,
since this paper is not presented in colour format, these
output functions cannot be properly demonstrated here.

Figure 3. Image of a custcm designed module created
with the design tool. The PV cell images are CAD drawn
images. They are laid on top of the supportive layer image
which is a scanned image of a blue tinted surface. Gaps
between the columns are 50 mm and those between the
rows are 10 mm. The margins on the left, top, right and
bottom are 10, 25, 10 and 50 mm respectively.

The images in Figure 4 are created to represent typical

4 x 9 cell modules. Image (a) is created by the raster

(a>

method, while image (b) is created by the 3D geometry
model. Image (b) uses scanned images of PV cells
mapped onto a supportive layer which has been rendered
as yellow plastic. Image (b) has four small white triangles
at the edge of each cell. This can be improved by refining
the shape of the 3D geometry models of the PV cells.

(b)

Figure 4. Images of PV modules. Picture (a) is created
by the raster image technique and picture (b) by mapping
the images onto the geometry models.

5. Conclusion

4. Example of system design

A PV module design tool for BlPV system design has
been developed. This tool provides a creative and
convenient solution for designing PV modules and
systems. The PV module images can be attached to a
CAD drawing or used as a stand-alone image to explore
the design options. The raster images provide speed of use
while the 3D geometry models allow the option to be
further examined under various lighting conditions.
Further development of this project will extend the tool to
consider power rating and cost implications for each
design option.

To illustrate the operation of the tool, an example
design using the PV f a p d e installed on Northumberland
Building at the University (of Northumbria is presented.
During refurbishment of the building in 1994, a 40 kWp
PV f q a d e was installed. Figure 5 shows the installed PV
system. Further information on the design and
performance of the system ciin be found in Reference 5.
The f a p d e system has a total of 468 identical PV
modules. Each module has 36 cells which are lOmm
apart. There are 5 modules in each cladding unit. The
spacing between each module and each unit are 50 mm
and 80 mm respectively. The: tool has been used to draw 5
rows of modules with 20 strings in each row. The images
of the 28 modules covering the staircase area were then
removed manually. An example of the output of the tool

6. Acknowledgement
This research was partially funded by the European
Regional Development Fund as part of the SPICE project,

101

co-ordinated by Renew North. This project aims to
stimulate the involvement of' small companies in north
eastern England to become involved in the design and
implementation of BlPV systems. The work also forms
part of a PhD study programme.

[2] Studio Architects Ltd., "Survey of tools for the design of
photovoltaic power systems in buildings " ETSU Report N o
S/P2/00289/REP, November 1997

7. References

[4]UCLA Schools of Arts and Architecture: Energy Tools
Design Directory, htto://www.aud.ucla.edu/enerev-desien-tool.

[3] DOE Building Energy Software Tools Directory,
htto://www.eren.doe.gov/buildings/tools
directory

[ I ] . M. Horne. R. Hill and R . Giddings. 'Visualisation of
Phoiovoliaic Clad Buildings", BitiMirlg Resenrch cttrd
l ~ ! f i J ~ ~ t t l ~ ~Vol.
/ / O t27,
t . NO. 2. 1999, p.96- 108

[5]

N. M. Pearsall and K. M. Hynes, Proceedings ofrhe 16'h

European Photovoltaic Solur Energy Conference,

James and James Ltd., 2000, p.1804 - 1807

Figure 5. Picture of Northumberland Building showing the PV module cladding facade.

102

Volume 11,

