Visualization issues in Telepathology :
the role of the Internet Imaging Protocol
Vincenzo Della Mea
Dept. of Medical and
Morphological Research,
University of Udine, Italy
Dellamea@dimi.uniua'.it

Vito Roberto
Dept. of Computer Science,
University of Udine, Italy

Roberto@dimi.uniud. it

Stated differently, user network interfaces and
transmission protocols are not to be considered as
independent modules, but tuned to each other, so that
selective visualization should correspond to selective
image transmission, both grounded on a suitable data
model. This is the main topic that will be addressed in
the present paper, in the domain of Telepathology.
In fact, the current practices of the pathologists, e.g.,
when examining microscope images, require attentional
visualization mechanisms. In addition, recent digital
cameras have resolutions so high, that it becomes difficult
to display them on a usual video monitor without the
need for scrolling the window, thus making the
visualization experience troublesome. Furthermore, also
the storage needed for such images can be huge, although
usually JPEG compression is accepted; this brings
remarkable transfer times, whenever transfer on the
lntemet is requested.

Abstract
Image visualization may bmome a dfficult task in
Telemedicine, especially whe.n large data sets are to be
delivered through the Internet and selectively analyzed by
the physician.
A new protocol -the Internet Imaging Protocol, IIP- has
been recently proposed by a Consortium of companies,
with the aim of distributing efficiently multiresolution
images on the WWW,for both visualization and printing
purposes. The proposed profocol is indeed sufficiently
general to be considered for a wide range of
applications. The present plzper analyses it from the
point of view of TeIepatholo>p, i.e., the transmission of
medical images coming.fiom microscopes. We argue that
pathology images can be delivered by means of the IIP,
with advantages on the visualization interface, which
closely reproduces the direct w e of a microscope.
A sample application is prexented, aimed at delivering
pathology cases for second opinion diagnosis as well as
for continuing medical education.

A new protocol -the IIP, Internet Imaging Protocol has been recently proposed by a Consortium of
companies, for efficiently distributing multiresolution
images on the WWW [l]. Such a protocol is primarily
aimed at publishing images suitable for both visualization
and printing; the former with the low resolution typical of
the Web, the latter at the higher resolution of the color
printers. Indeed the IIP general enough to be considered
for several applications, as we show in this paper in the
field of telepathology.
In the rest of the paper, a brief introduction to
visualization problems in telepathology is given,
followed by a description of the lntemet Imaging Protocol
and its applicability to such specific field. A prototype
application is then described, where the IIP is used for
continuing medical education as well as second opinion
telediagnosis.

1. Introduction
In the last years, digital medical images have been used in
a number of applications on the World Wide Web, mainly
for continuing medical education and diagnostic purposes.
Visualization on the Internet raises interesting problems
whenever large amounts of im(3gehequence data are to be
handled, which happens quite often in Telemedicine.
On the user side, the network interface should enable
attentional image visualization, i.e., on selected regions
of interest at the desired resolutions. Visualization
becomes a complex, dynamic mechanism of focus that
should fulfill two basic criteria: fitting to the user needs,
i.e., the current practices of physicians, and comply with
the limitations of the current browsers.
Another, well-known problem is transmitting image data
which often undergoes bandwidth limitations.
In addition, as far as the same data are concerned, the need
arises to dynamically access and retrieve the relevant data
subsets: a sort of indexing scheme is to be provided.

0-7695-1195-3101$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

Carlo A.Beltrami
Dept. of Medical and
Morphological Research,
University of Udine, Italy
Beltrami@uniud.it

1.1. Visualization issues in telepathology
Following a classical definition, telepathology is a
subspecialty of telemedicine aimed at supporting the

717

telepathology systems. In the following, we focus on
static telepathology, because it is often camed out on the
Internet and based on the use of digital cameras.
About the features of the microscope images, there are
no established standards, but at the present time no
particularly high color-sampling levels are needed (i.e.,
RGB with 8bitskhannel is sufficient, and some Author
reports even 256 colors), and JPEG compression up to
15: 1 ratios is acceptable [3,4]. Compression allows thus
to reduce the above mentioned storage amounts
respectively to about 100 KB (analog cameras), 450 KB
(consumer digital cameras), and 1.5 MB (photoscanners).

pathologist s practice by means of telematic tools.
Telepathology systems are divided into two categories:
static ones, where still images are available on a storeand-forward basis, and dynamic ones, based on realtime
video and sometimes on robotized microscopes. The
latter are mostly used for intraoperative telediagnosis (i.e.,
quick diagnosis performed during surgery to guide the
surgeon to further tasks), while the former almost for all
applications, including continuing medical education,
second opinion diagnosis, quality control, remote
quanti tation.
Although pathologists use different sources of
information, the basic one is the light microscope, which
allows for exploring biological tissue sections put on
glass slides using different objective magnifications,
ranging from 2x to 1OOx (plus a further multiplier
conventionally set to lox). The image exploration
patterns are roughly two: an overall observation of the
specimen at low magnification, with deeper analysis of
apparently meaningful clues, by means of higher
magnification objectives [2].
On the microscope, an analog or digital camera may be
connected, for digitizing the images.
Regarding the choice of the camera, different features
for analog and digital are available. An analog camera
(with one or three CCD chips) allows to show live
images on a monitor, or in the window of the acquisition
software on a computer; this way, focussing and selecting
the right fields is easy, and acquisition is fast. The
maximum resolution is limited to the PAL/NTSC
standards, which means images up to around 800x600
pixels for a 3CCD camera. Such images will occupy 1.4
MB uncompressed.
Digital cameras are currently available in two kinds:
consumer cameras with usual serial interface and
microscope adapters, and specifically designed cameras
with fast interfaces (i.e., SCSI or proprietary). The
former, with resolutions growing fast and currently sct up
to 1800x1200 pixels, are very cost-effective, but they do
not allow live images (as they are photocameras) except
for low resolution LCD display, sometimes with a videocomposite output. The latter are more espensive, but have
higher resolutions and also the possibility of displaying a
near-live image on the computer screen. A further and less
diffused category is such of photoscanners, which are
acquisition devices based on a linear CCD slowly
scanning the field of view, exactly as in flatbed scanners.
Such devices allow for very high resolutions (6-8
millions of pixels) but are comparatively slow in
acquisition, thus making their use difficult. Consumerlevel digital cameras generate images up to 6-7 MB
uncompressed; photoscanners (as professional digital
cameras reach up to 20-30 MB.
Apart from analog cameras, all other devices produce
images greater than the screens usually available on
personal computers. However, analog cameras are still
used in systems in which real-time video and fast
acquisition are needed, that is, almost all dynamic

A typical static telepathology application is centered
on a specialized patient record, containing patient data
useful to the specific application (e.g. a short clinical
history for diagnostic use, or more accurate descriptions
for education purposes) and images, mainly coming from
microscope, but sometimes also macroscopic pictures of
the sampled organ. Such patient record may be sent
directly by a pathologist to another pathologist for second
opinion consultation, or may be put on a server, to which
a pathologist may connect for consultation or for
continuing medical education. The patient record may
obviously be also intended for support to the student selfeducation.
While some years ago only relatively small images
were available, now accessing high-resolution images
within the patient record is feasible, but it introduces two
weaknesses into the interface:
- the whole image may not be fully displayed on the
screen, which does not easily allow for the first image
exploration pattern, i.e., the overall observation;
- the accurate observation of high magnification details
(second pattern) can be made only by downloading the
whole image in which the details are present. As
images, even compressed, occupy hundreds of Kbytes,
the process becomes slow.
The latter problem is also connected to the need of
digitizing whole glass slides, in order not to limit the
observation to some selected field. In this case, the
equivalent of an extremely large image becomes available,
with serious problems of substantially the same kind.

1.2. The Internet Imaging Protocol
The Internet Imaging Protocol was firstly proposed by
Hewlett-Packard, Live Picture and Eastman Kodak; then,
the Digital Imaging Group was founded, and many other
companies joined it. The protocol, together with the
companion Flashpix file format specification, is mainly
targeted at the photographic market.
The basis of the protocol is a tiled, multiresolution
image representation, which allows for an efficient
delivery of rectangular subsets of images at the desired
resolution. Each resolution is usually a half of the
immediately higher one. Other image-related information

718

is also available via the protocol, including image
technical features, author information and descriptive
notes. Such information is organized 'into' a rich object
model.
Although the IIP takes advantage of the Flashpix
image format (where images :are stored into square tiles at
multiple resolutions), it can be seen as a uniform way of
presenting images on the Inkmet, independently from the
file format on the server side.
The basic protocol commands are only three, and
allow for requesting tiles at a specific resolution (one or
more, on rectangular subsets), for requesting objects (i.e.,
information on images), and to set the data object storage,
i.e., where to bring the infomation, thus allowing even
extensions to the basic object model. Optional protocol
commands allow to perform some image processing on
the server (i.e., affine translorms, contrast adjustments,
rotations, etc.); in this way ,also intermediate resolutions
may be obtained. Further details are available on the
protocol specifications [ I ] .
In practice, the IIP may be used to request just a
section of an image at a definite resolution, by means of
specified client software.
The protocol is also independent from the transport
layer, although guidelines are provided for its
implementation on the HTTP and the sockets layer. In its
HTTP form, the implementation may be realized by
means of the CGI, and thus parameter passing occurs
following the usual HTTP "GET" and "POST" methods.
There is server and client software already available for
the IIP and Flashpix; furthermore, recently the Digital
Imaging group released an open-source reference
implementation of both server and client, developed in
Java [ 5 ] . Clients usually hav; a common set of features,
for easy image exploration through pan/scroll functions
(free and not restricted to the tile dimensions), and
resolution browsing. Furthermore, caching schemes are
implemented in order to avoid duplicate download of the
same image tiles, although duplication occurs through
different resolutions.

exactly correspond -and can be identified with- lower
magnification images.
The highest resolution images may be also obtained
by collating together multiple high magnification images,
eventually acquired with a robotic microscope, in order to
obtain a larger field of view.
The pathologist may start the visualization with the
lowest resolution image, selecting details to be observed
at higher resolutions, and requesting just the needed
sections of the images. In this way, a faster interaction is
provided, and the interface is more suitable for emulating
the use of the microscope, with the usual pattems of
visualization.
At the present time, one limitation may be envisaged
for the specific field of Cytology, in which specimens are
not cut in thin sections, as in Histology, but are made by
complete cells with variable thicknesses. In fact,
histologic specimens usually have a single focus plane,
while cytologic ones need also the observation of different
planes, due to their larger thicknesses; pathologists do
this by slightly moving the focus (+/- 3 micron), in order
to observe details otherwise not available. The latter case
is not directly manageable by the 11P as it is.
Flashpix - the IIP companion file format - has been
already tested in telepathology for educational
applications [6]; a comparison of FPX versus other image
formats is also available [7]. An experience on the use
wavelets for multiresolution image browsing has been
reported also [XI.

3. A sample application
The Italian Ministry of University and Research
selected and funded the project entitled "Italian Network
of Telemedicine for Research Education and Quality
Control in Anatomic Pathology" as a project of relevant
national interest [9].
The main network activities are: the remote expert
consultation; the multimedia case archives for education
and continuing education; the collaborative authoring of
multimedia educational material.
The project is headed by the Institute of Pathology at
the University of Udine, and currently involves five
italian universities (Ancona, Bari, Ferrara, Sassari,
Udine).

2. Advantages and limitations of the IIP
The main interest of the l i p for pathology lies in the
fact that the two interaction functions provided by IIP pan/scroll image exploration and resolution browsingclosely resemble the two main ways the pathologist uses
to navigate the glass specimen at the microscope. In fact,
the microscope stage movement may be emulated by the
pan and scroll functions, while the change of the
microscope objective may be easily put into
correspondence with the multiresolution browsing,
provided that the highest resolution image has been
obtained by a high magnification image (e.g., 40x).
Considering that many microscopes have objective
magnifications one twice the other (e.g. 2 . 5 x , 5x, lox,
20x, OX), lower resolutions inside an IIP-served image

3.1. The system
As the technological basis for the Network, a Webbased case archive has been developed, in which are stored
patient records for second opinion consultation as well as
for education (with different features). The archive was
implemented on a three-tier architecture, with a SQL data
base management system (currently MySQL) accessed
through an independent API, an interface level based on
HTML and PHP, and the client application made by a
Java-enabled browser.

719

information more precisely (e.g., in microscope images),
but are difficult to display using the available software such as web browsers- which, in tum, are more and more
popular in Telemedicine systems.
A quite similar problem arose in the digital
photography field: higher quality images are available,
and printing devices too, but the WWW delivers more
easily lower resolution images. For the latter problem, a
viable solution is given by the Internet Imaging Protocol.
By analysing the features of such a protocol, its
suitability for telemedicine applications is apparent. More
specifically, we have proposed and applied it in the
domain of Telepathology, where images come from a
microscope. A direct relationship exists between the
functionalities provided by the protocol and the
microscope actions.
In the Telemedicine field, the role of the IIP might
thus be that of an attentional tool, capable to support the
physician in efficiently selecting the right clues and the
adequate level of detail out of large, difficult to manage
images.
Although the system we presented delivers static
images through the IIP, the latter can be readily used as a
communication protocol for dynamic systems, i.e., by
having the IIP server directly connected to a robotic
microscope and an acquisition device. In fact, the
localization of the image subset may occur moving the
microscope stage on the desired location, while the
resolution change may be implemented as objective
change.

Images from the archive are accessible by means of
two interfaces: a traditional one (i.e., by displaying the
image on a web page) and another based on the IIP, at the
users’ choice.
The latter interface has been preliminarily grounded on
the Digital Imaging Group’s reference implementation,
which in turn was designed as a Java servlet to be run in
conjunction with a HTTP server. Following the latter
specifications, images were stored using JPEG.
The system has been implemented on a SunIUltra,
with the Apache web server and the Apache-Jserv engine.

3.2. Preliminary results
Three main archives are being developed within the
framework of the Italian Network of Telepathology:
- a second-opinion telediagnosis archive, in which rare
and difficult cases are inserted by pathologists for
receiving consultation from the network partners. At the
present time, the archive contains 19 cases.
- a continuing education archive, in which interesting
cases are put by postgraduate students in pathology and
other pathologists, with the aim of giving CME
material for postgraduate students as well as for
specialists. Compared to the consultation cases, the
latter contain more detailed clinical histories, and often
images from different medical fields (mostly
radiographs, CT, NMR). The current archive hosts 27
cases.
- an educational archive, where paradigmatic cases have
been stored, to be used as an educational support during
regular lessons in the pathology courses for the degree
in Medicine. Such cases are less detailed at the level of
patient histories, but with image descriptions (often not
needed in the other archives) and with simple questions
and answers, which the student should become able to
respond to. At present, 5 cases are available.
Still at the present time, the archives contain 51 cases
for a total of 300 images. The average dimension of the
images is 355 Kbytes (SD: 157 Kbytes). However, such
relatively low dimension is due to the fact that some
images were acquired in the past with low resolutions.
and thus low storage needs.
Figure 1 shows a sample image displayed through the
IIP interface.

In this way, the real-time operation of the microscope
may be realized, as already attempted by other Authors
with proprietary protocols [10,1 I]. The advantage of
eventually using IIP is the availability of different client
software, the likely growth of its use on the Internet, and
also the possibility of using the same client for acccssing
either static and dynamic image sources.
From the latter point of view, a main pitfall may be
recognized in the protocol, which regards its purely
bidimensional nature. In fact, not always microscope
images expose all diagnostic information on the same
focal plane, although usually they do. In some fields,
namely Cytology, the pathologist explores the nearby
focal planes, thus introducing a third dimension in the
image data, which could be seen as a volume (although
extremely thin). This behaviour may not be directly
reproduccd with the IIP and the currcnt software, but
specialized clients may be developed to browse through
different images, each one devoted to a single focal plane,
by maintaining the same coordinates.

Different browsers have been tested against portability
of the client program, which revealed execution problems
only on Netscape v4.7 on the Apple Macintosh (due to
the Netscape implementation of the Java virtual machine,
and solved in the most recent version 6.0).

4. Conclusions

Although the visualization experience through the IIP
appears faster and closer to the usual pathologists habits,
further investigations should be made in order to verify
whether the data effectively transmitted is truly less than
the highest resolution file size.

The availability of refined imaging technology namely digital cameras - has brought new problems to the
user interfaces, because larger images capture diagnostic

720

Figure 1. A histologic iniage shown at three resolution levels through the IIP interface. The
original image was 3200x2175 pixels, 24-bit color, acquired with a Leasfscan
Microlumina Photoscanner. Uncompressed, the image occupies about 19.9 MB;
after JPEG compression, about 1.4 MB.

72 1

[2] Y.Tsuchihashi, T.Mazaki, K.Nakasato, M.Morishima,
H.Nagata, LTofukuji, HShirakata, K.Naito, and Y.Akasaka,
The basic diagnostic approaches used in robotic still-image
telepathology , Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 5(S I),
1999, pp.115-117.
[3] D.J.Foran, P.P.Meer, T.Papathomas, and 1.Marsic ,
Compression guidelines for diagnostic telepathology ,

In fact, lower resolutions are generated and transmitted
from the highest one, thus, if the image is fully displayed
at every resolution, the total data transmitted may be
greater than that of the highest resolution image alone
(e.g., in the case of five resolutions, (1+1/2+1/4+
1/8+1/16)*image-size).

IEEE Trans. on Information Technology in Biomedicine, I ,

Further features of the protocol are still to be
experimented. In particular, the object model accessible
through the IIP may be used for adding descriptive
information and even, with a recent extension [12], audio
data. Such objects may be of interest for educational
applications, although when images are kept into a
database system, support for that is already present.
It should be noted also that the IIP may be applied to
different medical fields where high resolution can make
difficult the transmission and display of images, i.e.,
Radiology, Ophtalmology, etc.
We conclude that attentional capabilities like selective
and/or lower resolution transmission of tiles; hierarchical,
multi-resolution transmission, via the IIP protocol and
Flashpix format, greatly help in addressing the needs of
image exchange in Telemedicine.

1997, pp.55-60.
[4] V.Della Mea and C.A.Beltrami, Telepathology
Applications of the Internet Multimedia Electronic Mail ,
Medical Informatics 23, 1998, pp.237-244.
[ 5 ] Digital Imaging Group. IIP server and client. URL:
http://www.digitalimaging. org/downloads-iip. html

[6] A.Landman, Y.Yagi, J.Gilbertson, R.Dawson,
A.Marchevsky, and M.J.Becich, Prototype Web-based
continuing medical education using FlashPix images , Proc
of AMIA Symposium 2000, pp.462-6.
[7] C.S.Jao, D.B.Hier, and S.U.Brint, The display of
photographic-quality images on the Web: a comparison of
two technologies , IEEE Trans. on Information Technology
in Biomedicine, 3, 1999, pp.70-3
[SI J.Z.Wang, J.Nguyen, K.K.Lo, C.Law, and D.Regula,
Multiresolution browsing of pathology images using
wavelets , , Proc of AMIA Symposium 1999, pp.430-4.
[9] Rete Italiana di Telemedicina per la Ricerca, la Didattica
ed il Controllo di Qualit in Anatomia Patologica. URL:

5. Acknowledgements

http://www. telemed. uniud.ithitap/
[ I O ] G.Wolf, D.Petersen, M.Dietel, and l.Petersen,
Telemicroscopy via the internet, Nature 391, 1998,

This work was partially supported by the project Italian
Network of Telepathology , no. 9906348341, funded by
MURST (Italian Ministry of the University).

pp.613-4.
[I I ] M.Hadida-Hassan, S.J.Young, S.T.Peltier, M.Wong,
S.Lamont, and M.H.Ellisman, Web-based telemicroscopy ,
Journal of Structural Biology 125, 1999, pp.235-45.
[ 121 Digital Imaging Group. Flashpix downloads. URL:

6. References
[I] Digital Imaging Group. The Internet Imaging Protocol.
URL:

http://www.digitalimaging.org/downloadsJlashpix. html

l~ttp://tnembe~s.cligitnlin~ugit~g.org/publicspecs/

722

