A Simulation Environment for Construction Site Planning
Hissam Tawfik & Terrence Fernando
The Centre for Virtual Environments, Salford University, Salford it45 4WT, UK.
h.m. tawfik/t.fernando @salford.ac.uk
human interpretations and manipulation of data
and knowledge. Despite the significance of this
stage, the spatial organisation of the construction
site layout in terms of the allocation and
arrangement of the different spaces on the site has
not been satisfactorily accounted for by IT
modelling tools. This task tends to be carried out
manually by planners, despite the implications of
an increased cost and risk of activities at the site.
Efficient simulation tools are therefore needed to
support site plannedmangers to better analyse the
site layouts in terms of space and safety, and
generate improved site plans accordingly.
Recent research at UCL [ 131 suggests that 20%
of reported construction accidents can be
attributed to poor site logistics and that low
productivity is highly linked to inefficient space
planning and conflicts between subcontractors.
Other studies, in South Africa, have shown that a
substantial loss in materials and productivity
occurs due to the lack of integrated planning
systems and optimisation of site construction
activities [IO]. The spatial domain is critical to
construction projects and efficient tools to handle
the changing spatial arrangement on the site, over
time, is still yet to be developed. The placement of
the temporary facilities on site, a key site layout
planning task, is still carried out by planners based
only on their experience and intuition usually
resulting in increased transportation costs, loss of
time, and inefficient use of resources [ l l ] .
Another issue which has become continually
apparent to the construction industry in the UK
and elsewhere, as being critical to the construction
activity is safety on the construction sites. In the
last 25 years, 2,800 people were killed on UK's
construction sites as a result of construction
activities and many more have been injured or
made ill [8]. An estimated cost of E760 million
each year results from injury and ill health caused
by work, and from accidental damage to property
and equipment. Site operatives falling from height
is the largest cause of accidental death in the
construction industry and accounts for over 50%

Abstract
This paper presents the design of a simulation
environment f o r the modelling, visualisation and
optiniisation of construction site layouts. This
construction site workspace application aims to
support the site planning task by analysing space
arid risk on the site and generating automated site
layouts which satisb a combination of cost,
eficiency and safety cri,teria.
The construction site simulation environment
forms part of an EU funded project called
DIVERCITY (Distributed Virtual Workspace for
enhancing
Communication
within
the
Construction Industry). This involves 9
commercial arid academic institutions from 5
European countries, and is concerned with the
development of virtual simulation prototypes to
support the client brit+ng, design review, and
construction planning .stages of the construction
process. The site anar'ysis module comprises a
safe5 analysis component, a space analysis
component, and an opi'iniisation component. The
safety analysis component is a generic model for
the graphical and numerical representation of
riskfhazard spaces. The space analysis component
represents and classifies the various,spaces on the
construction site according to their relative
importance in ternis of accessibility and visibility.
The optinzisation component takes safety and
space analysis information, and pegorms site
layout optimisation according to travelling
distance minimisation, risk minimisation, and
space use rnaxinzisation criteria.

1. Motivation
Site planning in terms of organising the site
layout to facilitate consi.ruction activities is among
the most challenging tasks of the construction
planning process, and involves several steps of

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 1E:EE

199

and analysing spatial patterns and properties,
which could reflect on the potential for seeing and
accessing space [7]. Space syntax establishes
spatial relationships between objects and treats a
spatial configuration as a global system in which
local changes produce global effects across the
system. These methods offer the potential to
quantify the relative significance of different
spaces within a construction site.
Site planning could also benefit from
advancements in probabilistic optimisation to
generate automated site layouts. Techniques such
as genetic algorithms and simulated annealing [6]
[9] can perform fast and efficient search through a
very large number of possible solutions for
enhanced site layouts according to multiple criteria
that would otherwise be computationally too
expensive, or sometimes prohibitive, to solve
using traditional search methods.
A number of applications have emerged from
the increasing realisation of the potential
advantages of the aforementioned techniques for
construction site planning. Work carried out at
Stanford University [ I ] uses a 4D CAD
construction model for the detection of
construction activity conflicts in 4D, and the
categorisation of those conflicts according to
different types of time-space conflicts into design
conflicts, congestion, safety hazard, and damage.
However, this time-space analysis approach only
accounts for the “micro” level activity space
requirements. Therefore it was limited to the
spaces required
within the proximity of
components being installed and not large-scale
spaces located across the site such as cranes,
vehicles, temporary facilities, etc.
VIRCON is an ongoing project [3] that aims to
develop a prototype application for evaluation,
visualisation and optimisation of construction
schedules within a VR interface. It is intended to
address construction planning in terms of its
temporal and spatial requirements with respect to
the site layout, and spatial dynamics of plant,
people and material movement around site.
VIRCON aims to provide spatial analysis of
construction tasks around the site, by adopting a
space analysis tool such as space syntax, for the
analysis of construction spaces. Work carried out
by Mahachi et al. [lo] develops site layout plans
using the genetic algorithm optimisation (CA).
The planning of the site layout focuses on the
organisation of the temporary facilities such as site
offices, tool sheds, and storage areas so as to
reduce the travelling distance between them and
the other facilities [ 111. The CA approach seeks to
minimise the travelling distance, hence reducing

of those accidentally killed. Other major accidents
involve people being hit by falling objects, or
accidents involving vehicles and plant. These
causes are closely related to the use of space on
the construction site, and could therefore be
reduced considerably through better organisation
of the site layout. Therefore, IT tools are required
to support planners with the early evaluation of
spatial organisation of the site and its time, cost
and safety implication on the construction
activities, and to assist with providing enhanced
site layouts, hence, more efficient and safer
workspaces on construction sites.

2. Aims of the construction site
simulation environment
This work aims to design a modelling and
simulation
platform
for
supporting
the
construction site analysis stage, and allow the
evaluation and optimisation of the construction
site layouts. In particular, it addresses the space
planning aspects by assisting with the
representation and management of spatial
requirements on the construction site.
The key objectives of the site simulation
environment are the graphical and numerical
representation of spaces on the construction site
from the perspectives of safety and efficieny of
space use, and the application of optimisation to
assist site planners with the multi-criteria issue of
organising the site layout.

3. The state-of the-art technology
New tools for constructions site planning could
benefit from the significant advancements in
computer graphics, simulation and artificial
intelligence. VR technology has started to emerge
as a powerful and useful tool for construction
applications, as it can produce realistic and
interactive presentation of buildings. Extending to
4D simulation, where 3D objects are assigned
behaviour and relationships to each other can
enhance the simulation of the construction activity
by displaying the construction progress over time.
Fisher [4] discusses the benefits of 4D CAD
beyond the visual simulation, in terms of
providing the ability to collaboratively produce
and evaluate design proposals.
New techniques for the analysis of spatial
patterns of access and visibility known as space
syntax have been developed and are now being
applied in design decision support. Space Syntax
is an approach for mathematically representing

200

the construction material handling cost. It
performs a global search of solutions with
different facility positioning arrangements.

according to a construction schedule [ 121. The
user interacts with the VR environment by
selecting and adding building components to the
model. A geometric constraint based module [ 5 ]
defines the relationships between building
components and applies algorithms to perform
constraint recognition and handling between the
components, which allow for automatic
recognition
of
collisions
and
allowable
movements. The project’s schedule is linked with
the virtual display of the construction sequence,
which allows the visualisation of the construction
sequence to be carried out over time.

4. Formalisation of ithe virtual
construction site workspace
The virtual construction site workspace is a
simulation platform that aims to model and
optimise the construction site layout, by
accounting for various spatial safety and their
requirements. The objective is to present a support
tool to the site plannerdmanagers for improving
the efficiency and safety of task execution on the
site.
Detailed end-user requirements for this module
were identified during the requirements capture
stage of the DIVERCITE’ project, as follows:
The use of a user interface and/or GIS data, to
initialise construction site layouts in terms of
the building space, vehicle space, logistics
and equipment’s spaces, temporary works
space, temporary facility spaces, etc.

5. Design structure
The site planning workspace evaluates ihe
spatial organisation of the construction site and
provides for ways to generate enhanced site
layouts. The following steps represent the main
design functions that would be carried out by this
site planning module (see figure 1):
Site layout initialisation: initial layout is
generated by the user interacting with a VR
environment and populating the construction
site with different spaces (vehicles, building
components, temporary facilities, etc), taking
into
account
schedule
information.
Alternatively, an initial site layout is
constructed from GIS or CAD data.
Safety analysis: determines the hazard zones
of site spaces such as cranes, vehicles and
equipment, according to their variable degree
of risk and dimensions.
0
Space analysis: defines movement paths and
fields of vision for people and vehicles, and
evaluates accessibility and visibility on the
site.
Optimisation: the generation of a favourable
spatial arrangement of the site using an
optimisation algorithm, a user defined risk
minimisation,
space
use
-efficiencymaximisation and travelling cost minimisation
criteria.
The
Buildibility
schedule
provides
information on the changing spatial
dimensions of objects on the site over time,
such as the size of the building or the material
store, etc. This information could then be
fedback to the site modelling and optimisation
modules, to evaluate the site layout at
different stages of the construction period on
site.

Assessing the spatial configuration of the site
layout and its implication on accessibility and
visibility of the vehicles, personnel and
equipment in the site.
Safety evaluation of the construction site by
simulating the hazard zones surrounding the
different spaces.
Evaluating the distribution of the temporary
facilities on the site and its implication on the
travelling cost (time) of workers and
materials.
The incorporation of an optimisation approach
for improving construction site layout with
a combination of the
respect to
aforementioned efficiency, safety, and cost
criteria.
The visualisation and the interaction with the
simulation by using a VR interface.
Linking the construction site workspace to a
buildability schedule so as to obtain timevarying site layouts.
The construction sile analysis tool forms part
of the research carried out by the virtual
prototyping,
at the centre for Virtual
environments, Salford IJniversity, which involves
the use of Virtual Reality, 4D Buildibility
simulation, and constraint-based modelling, space
analysis and probabilistic simulation, for creating
virtual construction planning modelling systems.
The Buildibility simulalion module facilitates the
visualisation of the building construction sequence

201

Construction site
initialisation
GWproject data

-

Safety analysis
(Modelling of
I hazard zones)

;
‘

i

Optimised

..

Risk \\,
minimisation ;
criterion ,’

;

Site lavout modelling
I------------------

‘

Buildibilitv schedule
Temporal information

Site lavout
ODtimisation

\.\.

I

_-----_
L ------+ ;‘ Spaceuse..’\, .a-------------Optimisation
maximisation b - 7 (Genetic algorithms,
i
- - _ _ _ _ _ - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _+..criterion
_
,,’
simulated annealing)
,I!
---- ---------------1
iI (Accessibility
Space analysis
./
.-__-----and

:

_,---+.,______O’

I
I

\

I--I
I
I

0

I

I

I

‘-----------------I

::*

------cO

I

:

visibility modelling)

I
I
I
.-----_------___---_I

I
I
I

d.0

;

Travelling cos?\,
minimisation j
criterion ,,’

‘..

-_____---*

-1

Figure 1. The design components of the construction site planning module

6. Results

zone with variable extents of hazard around a
space (Fig. 2-C). This allows the generation of
h ~ a r d zones of different dimensions and
complexity for different spaces on a construction
site.

The following results represent progress to-date
on the safety analysis, space analysis and
optimisation parts, for which 2D analysis and
visualisation (i.e. top-view of the construction site
layout) is currently adopted.

6.2. Space analysis
The space analysis component relies on
analysing the spatial layout of a site using isovists
or fields of vision. The idea of space analysis
using isovists were first introduced by Benedikt
[2], and are also used as one of space syntax‘s
modelling techniques. The isovist of a point in
space is the visible field from that space, and can
be thought of as the geometry obtained by casting
light rays in all directions from that point.

6.1. Safety analysis
Hazard zones are represented by regions that
vary in terms of the size of the hazard area
surrounding a space and the distribution of the
degree of hazard across these regions. Figure 2
shows examples with a constant hazard
distribution (Fig. 2-A), a hazard zone with
different levels of hazard (Fig. 2-B), and a hazard

A- Constant hazard distribution

B- Variablehazard

levels

Figure 2. Hazard zones with different types of distribution

202

Full visibility
analysis

.

Visibility analysis !of a single point
Low exposure
High exposure
Figure 3. Visibility analysis of site space using fields of vision (isovists)

Figure 3 shows the result of applying visibility
analysis using isovist on a proposed site space
layout to visualise regions in the site, which offer
higher visibility. Spaces with higher levels of
"exposure" can then be used by the site planner to
take more informed decisions regarding to the
positioning of the different types of temporary
facilities such as staff rooms, parking spaces and
installations, in strategic areas on the site.

Free
space

Occupied
space

6.3. Optimisation
Figure 4 gives an example of the potential use
of mathematical optimisation for the positioning
of temporary facilities (TF)s on the site. Figure 4A shows a site layout and a number of preoccupied spaces with their corresponding hazard
zones, the user then proposes a distribution of 4
temporary facilities such as in figure 4-B.

Hazard
zone

Temporary
facility (TF)

Figure 4. Distance minimisation between temporary facilities using genetic algorithms

203

For the case of this example, a -single- distance
minimisation criterion between the locations of the
TFs with the constraint being avoiding preoccupied spaces and hazard zones. A Genetic
Algorithm (CA) [ 6 ] is applied on an initial
population of possible solutions including the
user's initial solution, together with the
optimisation criterion and solution constraints, to
evolve it over a number of generations into a
population of (low-cost) high-performance
solutions (Figure 4-C) with regard to the
optimisation criterion. After 50 generations, the
best solution of the CA population presents a
layout for which the travelling distance between
the temporary facilities is minimised (Figure 4-D).

8. References
[ I ] B. Akinci et al., "Formalisation and automation of
Time-Space Conflict Analysis", Working Paper #59,
CIFE, Stanford, 2000.
[2] M. L. Benedikt, "To take hold of space: isovists and
isovist fields", Environmenf and Planning B , 1979,
VoI.6, pp. 47-65.
[3] N. Dawood et al.. "The virtual construction site
(VIRCON): a decision support system for construction
planning", Proc. CONVR, University of Teeside, UK,
Sept. 2000.
[4] M. Fisher, "Benefits of 4D models for facility
owners and AEC service providers", Proc. Construction
Congress, Florida, Feb 2000, pp. 990-995.
[5] T. Fernando et al., "Interactive product simulation
environment for assessing assembly and maintainability
tasks", Proc. UKVRSIG Conf., Sept. 1998.
[6] D. E. Goldborg, Genetic algorithms in search,
optimisation and machine learning, Addison-Wesley,
1989.
[ 7 ] B. Hillier, Space is the machine, Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
[8] "Working well together to build safer construction
sites", E082:00, Health and Safety Executive, UK, May

7. Conclusions
The aim of this paper was to present a
simulation application for the evaluation and
optimisation of construction site layouts. The
objective was to allow the user to perform efficient
spatial evaluation of site layouts, and then generate
spatial configurations for construction sites
optimised with respect to the combined cost, and
safety aspects of the site planning task. The idea
was to facilitate the visualisation, modelling and
optimisation of the site layout from a variety of
spatial requirement perspectives that planners
would normally consider in a real site layout
design case.

2000.

[9] Kirkpatrick et al., "Optimization by Simulated
Annealing", Science, May 1983.
[IO] J. Mahachi et al., "Integrated construction
scheduling, cost forecasting and site layout modelling in
virtual reality", Proc. CONVR. University of Teeside,
UK, Sept. 2000.
[ I I ] J. Mahachi, "Construction site layout improvement
through a hybrid genetic algorithm", Proc. CONVR,
University of Teeside, UK, Sept. 2000.
[I21 N. Murray et al., "A virtual environment for
building construction", Proc. /7IhISARC, Taiwan, Sept.

Future work will focus on carrying o u t a case
study on a construction site so as to test the site
analysis and optimisation functionality with 'realworld' site layout scenarios.

2000.
[I31 B. Nutt et al., "Refurbishing occupied buildings:

management of risk under the CDM regulation",
Thomas Telford, London, 1998.

204

