Immersive Audio-Augmented Environments
The LISTEN Project
Gerhard Eckel
GMD - German National Research Centerfor Information Technology
eckelagmd.de
Abstiract
In this paper we report about the LISTEN project, a
research project funded by the European Commission in
the context of the Information Society Technology ( E r )
program'. LISTEN, which stwted in January 2001, will
provide users with intuitive access to personalized and
situated audio information spaces while they naturally
explore evetyday environments. A new form of multisensory content is proposed to enhance the sensual
impact of a broad spectrum of, applications ranging from
art installations to entertainment events. This is achieved
by augmenting the physical environment through a
dynamic soundscape, which users experience over motiontracked wireless headphones. Immersive audio-augmented
environments are created by combining high-definition
spatial audio rendering tech nology with advanced user
modeling methods. These allow for adapting the content
to the users individual spatia! behavior. The project will
produce several prototypes Lind a virtual-reality-based
authoring tool. Technological innovations will be
validated under laboratory conditions whilst the
protoQpes will be evaluated irt public exhibitions.

1. Objectives
Intuitive access to iriformation in everyday
environments is becoming ii central concern of new
information society technologies. An important question
is how established and well functioning everyday
environments can be enhanced rather than replaced by
virtual environments. Augmented or enhanced reality
technologies address this issut: but have concentrated so
far on the visual senbe and have mainly been used in
industrial applications. Auditory augmentation of visually
dominated everyday environments (such as exhibition
spaces) is a new and very promising approach in creating
user-friendly information systems, which are accessible to
everybody. The complementarjity between the visual and
auditory sense is the basis for a new type of multi-sensory
content, which will become feasible thanks to anticipated

'

LISTEN - Augmenting everyday environments through interactive
soundscapes, Fifth Framework Programme, Creating a user-friendly
information society (IST), Contract no.: IST-1999-20646.

advances in auditory rendering, wireless tracking, and
communication techniques in the context of this project.
LISTEN proposes a new type of information system
for intuitive navigation of visually dominated exhibition
spaces. Visitors are immersed in a dynamic virtual
auditory scene that consistently augments the real space
they are exploring. They wear motion-tracked wireless
headphones for 3D spatial reproduction of the virtual
auditory scene. A sophisticated auditory rendering process
takes into account the current position and orientation of
the visitors head in order to seamlessly integrate the
virtual scene with the real one. Speech, music and sound
effects are dynamically arranged to form an individualized
and situated soundscape offering exhibit-related
information as well as creating context-specific
atmospheres. The dynamic composition of the soundscape
is personalized through each visitor s spatial behavior, the
history of the visit, and interests or preferences either
expressed explicitly by the visitor or inferred from the
visitors behavior. The proposed system is targeted at all
kinds of exhibition applications ranging from art
exhibitions to industrial fairs. Curators, artists,
composers and sound designers will assist in the design
ofthe system and help to shape this new form of multisensory content.
The evaluation of immersive audio-augmented
environments will be carried out with virtual and physical
prototypes. The virtual prototypes will be realized with an
audio-visual surround-view display system using state-ofthe-art virtual environment technology. The physical
prototypes will be installed at 2 different sites. Out of the
many possible applications of immersive audioaugmented environments, the validation will concentrate
on museum applications. These are considered to be the
most demanding in terms of perceptual quality, openness,
flexibility and user-friendliness. The virtual prototypes
will be used to develop different scenarios. Advanced
audio guides will be developed showing the potential of
the new form of content for pedagogical applications. In
order to push the system to its limits, artistic applications
will be realized as well in form of virtual prototypes.
These prototypes will then be used to attract an
internationally recognized artist
who will
be
commissioned to realize the content for the main physical
prototype. This physical prototype will be installed at the
Kunstmuseum Bonn, a distinguished museum of modem

571
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 02001 IEEE

individual soundscape by freely moving from one zone to
the another - and it is this feature which is of central
importance to the LISTEN project.

art, and will be made accessible during several months in
a public exhibition.

2. Innovation

2.1.1. Audio Guide

Innovation in the LISTEN project is located on two
levels: the conceptual/artistic and the scientific/
technological one. On the conceptual level, LISTEN
proposes a new form of interaction between information
and people. The strength of the approach lies in its
simplicity and intuitiveness experienced by the end users:
people just put on discreet wireless headphones and
explore physical space by walking about. The space they
explore becomes the actual interface to the information,
which is presented in a virtual auditory space consistently
augmenting the real space. In order to achieve the
necessary consistency of augmentation, the LISTEN
project proposes a set of . innovations on the
scientific/technological level, which are necessary to
implement the conceptual vision of the project. Apart
from the innovations in the areas of wireless motion
tracking, binaural rendering, user modeling and
adaptation, virtual prototyping and authoring, the main
technological innovation of the project lies in the
integration of new generation technologies.

With LISTEN we generalize the audio guide concept
by conceiving an adaptive and personalized spatial audio
information system. This generalization is motivated by
the conviction that the time of auditory user interfaces,
especially in form of audio-augmented environments, has
finally arrived. What prevented the realization of
immersive audio-augmented environments in the past,
was the lack of the most impoqant requirement for
advanced auditory interfaces: the availability of a spatial
audio technology refined enough to make full use of the
human sense of spatial hearing. Such technology (i.e.
affordable wireless wide-area high-definition motion
tracking combined with advanced binaural rendering and
wireless digital audio transmission) only becomes feasible
now and will be developed further in the context of this
project. With this new technology all the features known
from traditional audio guide systems can be emulated and
- more importantly - a revolutionary set of new features
for the design of interactive soundscapes is created.
The key idea of the LISTEN concept is to place the
notion of space - of visual, auditory and imaginary space
and their relationships - at the center of the design. By
moving through real space, users automatically navigate
an attached acoustic information space designed as a
complement or extension of the real space. Virtual
acoustic landmarks will play an equally important role
than the visual ones for the orientation of the users in this
augmented environment. Acoustic labels can be attached
to visual objects. The particularities of auditory and
visual memory can be combined to create new forms of
non-linear
audio-visual narratives.
Objects
can
acoustically address the visitors when he or she passed
them, thus providing exhibit-related information and
calling for attention. Objects not in the field of vision can
gain the attention of visitors through localized acoustic
cues. Spatial regions can be provided with particular
acoustic ambiences creating atmospheres and contexts for
the visual perception of objects. Music and sound effects
can be used to create an individualized sound track along
the freely chosen path through an exhibition. The concrete
visual space may be overlaid with an abstract auditory
space, which proposes an alternative spatial structure.
This could be realized by permeable "acoustic walls",
which invisibly separate zones in a visually continuous
space. Along these borders room acoustic signatures could
change, thus creating different acoustic spaces in one
visual space. Spatial perception and navigation is one of
the best-developed abilities of human beings and is
therefore one of the most solid grounds an intuitive
human-machine interface could be based on.

2.1 Concept
The idea of individual auditory augmentation of
exhibition spaces is almost half a century old by now.
Early audio guides used taped explanations about the
artwork displayed in an exhibition. Visitors were wearing
headphones and had to carry the playback device. They
were also constrained to follow a particular path through
the exhibition. This path was defined by the sequence of
explanations stored on the tape, which allowed for linear
access only. Apart from controlling the playback level,
pausing the playback and eventually rewinding the tape,
visitors could not interact with the presentation.
Nowadays, audio guides use random access audio storage
technologies (e.g. RAM, CD, MD, or CDROM based)
allowing the visitors to enter exhibit specific codes to
recall corresponding audio presentations. This simple and
pragmatic solution is used by nearly all audio guide
services currently offered by almost all big museums.
Other types of audio guides were developed when wireless
headphone technology became available in the eighties.
Induction and infrared-based techniques were used to
create zones around exhibits where visitors could hear
audio clips repeated in loops. The main drawback of this
presentation technique is that visitors will typically not
amve at the start of a loop and therefore hear the end
before the beginning. The timing of the audio clips is not
individually controllable but shared by all visitors. The
main advantage of the wireless technology is that the
users don t need to carry any playback device and that
they can interact with the information by naturally
walking through the exhibition spaces. They create their

572

2.1.2 Immersive Audio-Augmented Environment

3. Partners

With the immersive audio-augmented environment,
LISTEN defines a new format of interactive audio
content. Rather than a predetermined, pre-recorded audio
program, listeners are offered a personalized audio
environment, based on their interaction with the real
space. The enhanced audio format can provide deepening
layers of information, giking increasing levels of
involvement. It will allow th,e visitors to find their own
level of engagement with an exhibition. The depth of
experience may vary giving each person the chance to find
his or her own level or area of‘comfort and interest. These
adaptive features of the LISTEN system are based on
advanced user modeling methods, which allow extracting
certain preferences from the user s spatial behavior. User
modeling also allows avoiding redundancies in the
presentation of audio information. The user model will
keep track of each users visit history and adapt the
presented information with respect to what the user has
already experienced. This will avoid repetition of
information where it is not explicitly desired by the user
and communicated to the system with a simple remote
control unit. By these means, LISTEN provides
enhanced, interactive sound tailored to the interests and
experiences of the individual visitor and to a variety of
exhibit types. These will range from art exhibitions in
museums to gallery instalhtions and from scientific
conferences to industrial fairs or marketing events.

The LISTEN consortium is composed of 5 experienced
partners, which complement each other perfectly in order
to achieve the objectives of the pro’ect Three important
research institutes (GMD’, IRCAM , IEMW4) bring their
scientific and technological expertise and resources to the
consortium. The partner representing the end users and
content authors (Kunstmuseum Bonn’) is from the
artistic/cultural domain and will guarantee for a high
quality of the public prototypes. The industrial partner
(AKG6) is a world-leader audio technology company who
will ensure that the project results correspond to realworld needs and meet industrial-strength standards of
quality and usability. The consortium is completed by a
group of artists, composers and independent consultants
(the most prominent of which is Larry Sider, director of
the School of Sound7) who helped to shape the project
and will continue to actively support it through its
lifetime.

1 ’

4. Artistic Dimension
The LISTEN project was bom out of an artistic vision of
a new type of sound work, a kind of dynamic soundscape
evolving through the behavior of the audience. The desire
to inscribe such virtual soundscapes into real architecture
and thus artistically articulate virtual auditory space and
real visual space was the driving force for the
development of the project over the last four years.
Applications
for
immersive
audio-augmented
environments outside the strictly artistic domain had to
be identified to gain the necessary scientific and industrial
momentum for a project of such volume to happen. The
social and economic relevance of the new technology had
to be inquired and argued to convince the European
Commission to support the project. Although many new
and exciting perspectives on the project where gained
during its extended preparation period, the original
motivation of the LISTEN project - to create a new form
of multi-sensory experience - remained its central concem.
We hope that the project will stimulate the imagination of
many artists and composers. Besides its technological
objectives, LISTEN has been designed to be a forum for
artists interested in immersive audio-augmented
environments. Please feel free and encouraged to get in
touch with the project in order to share and challenge our
vision (c.f. http://listen.gmd.de).

2.2 Technology
Innovation on the scientific/technological level is
concentrated in 4 areas: (1) motion tracking, (2) auditory
rendering, (3) user and world modeling, and (4) authoring
and simulation. Significant advances of the state of the art
in the 4 areas are necessary to realize the LISTEN concept.
Apart from the innovation in the individual areas,
LISTEN proposes an integration of new generation
technologies in an original way. Only the combination of
large-area high-definition wireless motion tracking with
advanced binaural rendering and wireless high-quality
digital audio transmission provides for the degree of
auditory immersion necessary to create convincing audioaugmented environments. Only the combination of novel
user modeling techniques with advanced virtual-realitybased world modeling, authoring and simulation
techniques can provide the basis for producing and
experiencing a new form of content: the immersive audioaugmented environment. The project consortium has
developed a detailed research agenda for the next 3 years
in order to meet the objectives defined in the project. As
the project only started a few weeks ago and is currently
involved with the details of the system design, there are
or course no detailed technological results to be reported
so far.

* GMD - German National Research Center for Information
Technology, URL: http://www.gmd.de
IRCAM - lnstitut de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique.
URL: http://www.ircam.fr
IEMW, Vienna University of Technology, URL:

’

htp://www.iemw.tuwien.ac.at
Museum of Modem Art of the City of Bonn, URL:
http://www.bonn.dekunstmuseum
AKG Acoustics GmbH, URL: http://www.akg-acoustics.com
School of Sound, URL: http:iiwww.schoolofsound.co.uk

‘
’

573

