A Conceptual Framework for a Decision Support System for Colour selection and use
in the Design of the Built Environment
Paul J. Bailey BSc (Hons), Dr. Mohan Manavazhi, Professor Paul Olomolaiye
School of Engineering and the Built Environment, University of Wolverhampton, UK

Abstract
Computer Visualisation is a common tool within modern
Architectural Design as to improve productivity and
communication factors. Whilst this may be the case, there
is evidence that Architects are abusing these new tools in
the provision of new designs. Colour representation is a
major factor within Architectural Design, but appears
neglected within the continuous development of Computer
Technology. This paper outlines the conceptual
framework f o r a decision support system devised to
improve the validity of colour representation in Computer
Visualisation and improve Architect - Client interaction
in the design process, whilst addressing the co-variables
which affect the perceptual process of Colour and
Computerised Architectural Design.

1.

to be produced, linking within available CAD systems to
provide a more detailed, valid and concise colour
solution, both physically and graphically.

2.
An overview of the psychological,
physiological and perceptual issues of colour
and colour utilisation
2.1

According to recent surveys, CRISP [4], over 95% of
Architectural and Design practices have adopted CAD
and some form of Computer Visualisation within the
expansion of the Built Environment. The growing
implementation of IT within the Built Environment has
made the manner in which colour is used even more
important in the creation and visualisation of new
buildings. However, there is no guidance currently
available for Architects, Designers or others to select the
appropriate representational colour according to the task
at hand. Current computer systems have the ability to
utilise available and internationally recognised colour
palettes, for example the RGB, Munsell and CIE Indices.
Yet within Computer Aided Design and Computer
Visualisation common programs and packages, which are
utilised in the generation of designs for the Built
Environment, do not, at present incorporate recognised
colour indices to be used in creating new designs and
imagery. Thus, whilst imagery may appear to be “photorealistic” in colour and texture, in reality the same colours
will appear differently when built than they appear on
screen due to the Computer and CAD system not using
related industry standard colour indices.
It has been suggested by Rambow & Bromme [9], that
the role of colour within computer visualisations follows
the form of the building, but is a decisive factor in the
definition of the function. There appears to be an
acceptance that certain colours are used for certain
functions, both internally and externally, within the Built
Environment. Thus, the utilisation of colours as a
psychological symbol of recognition necessitates full

Introduction

Whilst the inception and utilisation of CAD and
Visualisation may have automated the Architectural
Design process and given the Architect / Designer another
tool to produce and market new design concepts, it is
hypothesised that the use of CAD and Visualisation has
also given the Architect a further tool to manipulate what
the Client may see upon presentation. In addition, current
research also indicates that the role of the Architect is not
just as a designer, but also a prolific Psychologist,
profiling Clients using little information in an attempt to
decipher the Client’s wishes.
This paper aims to analyse this and will concentrate on
the consideration of colour in the form of computer
graphics and visualisation, including technological
advances and hindrances, psychological and physiological
implications on the perception of colour. The conceptual
framework outlined in this paper is the initial workings of
a decision support system of which the physical prototype
is tentatively titled “colouriZe”. The intention is to
enhance and adapt the psychological profiling of Clients
by Architects into a system which will utilise a Universal
Colour Index (UCI) and psychologically profile users
utilising simple direct questions about the design required

2 13
0 2001 British Crown Copyright

Colour and Computer Visualisation

Colour Index (ACI) is available to produce visually
stimulating and ‘realistic’ imagery, in an attempt to
generate a stimulus of visual perception parallel to
physical reality demonstrates the need for research in this
area, again reflected by the fact that there is currently no
reference or common link between CAD / Visualisation
of proposed structures and the regulations which guide
their construction into physical reality.
Treslstad [ 171 has commented that the most significantly
problematic issue within the generation and utilisation of
colour in this format is “matching the color [sic] of
images generated on the monitor with color [sic] of the
output”. Thus in order to achieve the universal accuracy
to be attributed to colour, it is necessary t h a some form of
consistent colour palette is devised, allowing for greater
accuracy and yielding predictable prints both from the
computer and in the physical constructive reality of the
Built Environment.

accuracy within the representation of these entities within
Architectural and Computerised Visualisation.

2.2

Architects: New Tools, New Powers

With technological change and utilisation the Architect
has conformed to using computer visualisation as a major
tool within the creation of new Architectural Designs.
Yet, since the growth of computer visualisations there
appears to be evidence suggesting that Architects are
using these new tools to manipulate their Clients’
perception of these designs. RIBA [IO] has found that the
Architect’s professionalism is in question as the Architect
often disregards the wishes of the Client through
manipulation of the imagery produced. There appears to
be a theoretical problem within the Architectural design
process, where the inaccurate representation of colour,
coupled with the controlling psychological attitude of the
Architect, is leading not only to the creation of false
images in respect of the validity of colour, but false
designs, which can ultimately confuse the Client. This has
been supported by Lawson [6], who stated “our job is to
give the client not what he wants but what he never
dreamt he wanted”. Whilst this could appear a positive
development, considering the report of RIBA [ 101 it could
be translated into purposefully not giving the client what
he wants within a design.

2.3

2.4

Physiological
perception

attributes

of

colour

Considering the physiological aspects of colour
recognition and perception, an individual human’s own
perception of colour, be it from a visually displayed
image or in physical reality, comes from separate
neurological pathways which converge in the human
brain to process a fully colourised image. Yet, according
to Greenfield [5], due to the manner in which the parvointerblob-pale-stripe
carries
the
high-resolution
information of such stimulations as colour perception,
there is no singular possibility that two persons can
perceive colours or colour definition in a n exact and
identical manner. Robertson [ 1 11 also stated that,
physiologically, the processing of signals within the cones
of the eye, based within the retina, does not allow for
absorption of colours i n a perceptual sense, thus leading
to the physical impossibility of two individuals sensing
and perceiving colours in the same physiological manner.
Robertson [ 1 I ] argues that these physiological variables
are not aided by the technological limitations
computational colour representation holds. It is suggested
that the user can produce random excursions of colour i n
order to prevent homogeneous regions of uniformed
colour, but that this, in effect leads to misleading illusions
in colour representation which are undesirable for
aesthetic and image processing / assessment. Current
computational software surrounding colour generation
and visualisation has the ability to produce
approximations of the colours desired, Stone [13], but
does not have the ability to form psychophysically
validated perceptual colour spaces.
Instead, the
approximations utilised in the current colour generation
process are based around simplified assumptions that are
seldom justified. In a similar manner Arrott & Latta [ I ]
have identified that colour production and visualisation

Computer Technology & Colour

It could be suggested that the forever progressing
advances of new computer technology are greatly
hindering matters within the world of Architectural
Visualisation and the utilisation of Computer Aided
Design (CAD), with certain elements speeding towards
the future, leaving the remainder behind as undeveloped
and forgotten areas of research such as the utilisation of
colour in computer graphics, and the link between colour
in visualisations and the built environment. This leads to
inaccuracies in the representation of colour within
computer visualisations, with false colours and palettes
producing impressive and aesthetic pictures but with no
physical validity, so much in fact that what appears within
a visualisation is only an approximation of how a piece of
new construction will appear when built.
There has been major research dedicated to alternative
aspects of colour, for example educational and the healing
of the environment, Marchese [ 7 ] , but not within the
production of computer visualisations within the Built
Environment. Computer Visualisations are not just visual
predictions of proposed space for evaluation purposes, but
key elements in the entire design and construction process
of the Built Environment. Yet considering the vast
amount of practices which now utilise CAD and
Computer Visualisation the fact that only an unregulated
and unrecognised palette, for example the AutoCAD

2 14

are usually achieved involving “the arrangement of color
[sic] on a two-dimensional plane.. .giving the appearance
of three-dimensions”. It could be suggested that this
aligns with the ideals of Tannenbaum [15], who stated
that the production and representation of colour is only
targeting a “pleasing color [sic] rendition”. In addition
Sechman [ 121 approaches the appearance of colour within
Architectural visualizations in that whilst they may appear
“impressive”, images said to be of a photo-realistic nature
are often “computer-like and devoid of real life-like
qualities”.

2.5 Psychological characteristics, profiling &
control
Psychologically there also appears to be a considerable
amount of evidence which demonstrates that the Architect
is not only a designer of the built environment, but also as
a Psychologist profiling the Client whilst manipulating
the position of both the generation of a design, and the
manner in which it is represented. According to
McGinnies [7] the design process is an order of
leadership, with the Architect performing as the leader to
his follower, the Client. Yet, it appears that within this
relationship the Architect is performing as an
Authoritarian Leader - “Architects make their design
decisions more or less without regard.”, Rambow &
Bromme [SI, demonstrating the apparent hold and control
which Architects have, not only over the designs, but over
the Clients’ perception and digestion of the presented
design.
The control and analysis of a piece of design imagery
depends on the amount of subjective magnitude which
arouses the visual stimulus of the Client, Baird & Harder
[2], including both the structure of the image itself, as
well as any other forms of cognitive stimuli, such as
colour representation. Lawson [6] comments that the best
designers are ones who allow their Clients into the design
process, but this appears to be only a theoretical element
compared with the actual reality within Architectural
practice. Lawson [6], Suwa & Tversky [14] and Rambow
& Bromme [9] suggest that the Architect, in essence, acts
as a psychologist with regards to his Client. The
Architects must profile the Client’s tastes, preferences and
general personality to be reflected within the
Architectural design to be created. Yet it has also been
suggested that the majority of Architects utilise this
element in order to conlrol the design, and literally
“convince” the Client that the design fits the ordered
brief, when in fact, that Architect has taken his own
initiative and manipulated the profile of the Client to fit
the design, rather than fitting the design to the Client.
There has been some discussion on which forms of
psychological concept the Architect uses, Ungureanu [ 181
suggested that Architects utilise the Gestalt theory, where
the psychological theory is used to interact with problems:

“the architect has a very important role to build an
improved Gestalt for our clients”. Yet it is continually
suggested that, “we [architects] just like the situation
when we sell and object that the customer can’t see”.
Other forms of psychological theory could also be
attributed to the manner in which the Architect works and
dependant upon consideration of colour, light and general
characteristic impacts of a building space the Architect
must behave and act in the manner of a Behavioural
Psychologist as he attempts to predict the reaction of the
users with the space created. The element of control
within the Architect’s nature of design could be attributed
and suggested to be in the format of an Evolutionary
Psychologist. Cosmides & Tooby [ 31 have suggested that
the formation of Behavioural Psychology does not
account for the manner in which subjects react with their
environment, “environments do not, in and of themselves,
specify what counts as ‘appropriate’ behavior [sic]”. In
fact, the Architect could be suggested to utilise some of
the theoretical nature attributed to the brains functionality.
Cosmides & Tooby [3] continues, stating that if you were
a designer of brains, you could have engineered the brain,
“to respond in any way you wanted, to link any
environmental input to any behavior [sic]”. Within the
control, creation and presentation of Architectural
visualisation to users and Clients, it is suggested that this
is what Architects do: design the image to obtain the
relevant reaction and response from the Client.
There appears to be some form of trade-off occurring
between the speed of production of a visualisation and its
overall accuracy and validity of the image created. Whilst
it is possible to select colours from a total gamut of 16
million, the average palette offered by CAD and
visualisation programs is 256 colours. It can be clearly
identified that the missing link is in this form of research,
is the manner in which colours are produced and textures
utilised.

3.

colouriZe : A Conceptual Framework

The system will provide a decision support system for
colour selection within Architectural design, both
internally and externally. This conceptual framework
aims to complete and redefine colour usage in the
visualisation of the built environment in order to provide
this missing link, providing the user (Client or otherwise)
with the ability to be psychologically profiled in terms of
the colour representation of an Architectural Design. This
will not only address the validity of computer generated
imagery and unify the reproduction of colour within
Computer Simulation procedures in the creation of a
universal standard, but would also remove some of the
manipulative psychological power from the Architect, and
ensure that the Client would receive a design to his full
specifications.

215

3.1

support system to run parallel to the UCI, in order to
provide the user with a manageable interface where
colour selection can be accomplished with ease, based
upon specific parameters

The Universal Colour Index (UCI)

Current forms of image production and visualisation
utilise an incredible array of colours and colour spectrums
in order to make the appearance of such images “realistic”
and credible towards the feel of a real-life environment.
Within these spectrums, for example the ACI, RGB,
Munsell and HLS indices use a whole manner of colours,
hues and shades to create and redesign the built
environment. Yet there is no firm link between the
creation of an image and its production and transition into
the construction of the built environment due to the
problematic fact that there is no direct link between the
colours utilised within image processing / creation and
those available in the physical form of paint to be used in
the design’s construction. Figures 1 & 2 show that whilst
there is a variety of colour shades and hues available
within these palettes, in comparison with each other there
are completely different varieties of colours available for
image production. Within general CAD and imaging
packages, there is the option of altering the standard
colours by way of hue, intensity, and brightness. Yet, it
could be suggested that such manual alteration removes
some of the productivity attributed to the utilisation of
CAD and Visualisation packages.
CAD and visualisation palettes do not conform to each
other, or to the recognised colour standards attributed to
paint, it is suggested that the formation of a Universal
Colour Index (UCI) is needed, not only to improve the
link between imaging and physical construction, but also
to improve the validity of computerised visualisations and
the transfer of images for concurrent engineering.
There is an abundance of different colour palettes
available both for paint and graphical utilization, yet these
again differ in such indices as the British Standard Colour
Index within the spectrum of colour for paint. Such
guided colour indices span over a vast array of colours
hues and tones, more so than those available within CAD
and visualisation palettes, and each one also corresponds
to a certain manufactured paint or dye available for
utilisation within the construction of the built
environment. All paint manufacturers, for example Dulux
and Crown, produce colour palettes to indicate the array
of paint colours available which conform with major
regulations, such as the British Standards. The intention
of the formulation of the UCI is to transport and combine
these palettes to form a comprehensive list of all available
paint colours. Although there may be similar colours
available within each palette, all would be included in the
formation of the UCI, so that every single comprehensive
shade, tone hue and colour can be accounted for, thus
eliminating the necessity of the manual alteration of
colour within selection. The UCI would comprise of
thousands of colours, all readily available on the open
market and due to the acute number of colours available
for utilization would necessitate a co-operative decision

3.2

The colouriZe Colour Database

The colour database for the framework will, upon the
input of specific parameters, return to the user with a
suggested palette of colours. The results returned will be
based upon the statistical approval of colour combinations
deemed acceptable and aesthetic for the particular design
described and inputted within the initial parameters of the
system.

Fig. 1 AutoCAD Colour Palette

Fig. 2 Microstation Colour Palette

The system itself will integrate with current CAD and
visualisation software, and will not only provide a
graphical and informative palette provided by the UCI.
but will also allow the user to utilise the colouriZe UC1
palette within the creation of Architectural CAD models
and visualisations. The data collection of the approved
colour combinations will be completed by physical
experimentation with subjects listing their preferred
colour combinations according to particular styles of
building, interior rooms, forms of construction, periods of
architecture, and general tastes and will be compiled, with
the given combinations being attributed to their
corresponding primary colours within the colouriZe
database.
Access to the entire library of the UCI will be available,
in turns of shades for particular colours, along with a

2 16

encompassing the necessary parameters of both the
Architect and the Client.
Certain fields will be key elements as to provide the user
with a profile, for example at least one preferred colour
title, e.g. BLUE.This, in turn will provide the user with a
palette of appropriate colours and shades related to the
search parameters. A further outline of the HCI
parameters of the system is as follows:

printable output listing the physical paint codes for the
colour selected. The necessil y for the printable output of
the source codes for paintkolour is attributed to the
differential appearances of Icolour due to hardware and
software performance. Whilljt slight variations of colour
are common due to the vast array of computational
specifications available, it i:j suggested that the system,
utilising recognised
and available colours for
construction, would provide a form of security for the
Client knowing that that colours represented within a
given image were of the specifications of available paints,
regulated to strict standards. Therefore, that system will
not only provide a valuable source of information within
the database, but would also remove some of the control
from the side of the Architect, improving the interaction
with the Client, and aiming for greater satisfaction from
the Client in respect to RIBA [lo]. A proposed screen
shot of the colouriZe system can be seen below in its
interactive purpose between the user and the graphical
system. The system will have the option of use externally
from a graphical interface. I1 is hypothesised that with the
availability of a concise palette, with extractable data of
paint codes and availability, the physical link between
design and construction will be vastly improved, along
with the increased validity of colour representation within
graphical systems.

3.3

COL0UR:The user will be prompted to select a known
colour from the Rainbow spectrum which will be in the
format of statistically approved aesthetic colour
combinations, providing the user with a defined palette of
all colours deemed “acceptable” and “pleasing” from
previous physical experimentation.

Computerised Psychological Profiling
Fig. 3. Predicted Screenshot of the colouriZe system
integrated within a graphical CAD system

In conjunction with a comprehensive and universal source
for colour is the inclusion of a computerised system of
psychological profiling. At present, this appears to be one
of the unknown key tools of the Architect, who will
profile the Client or user, with extremely little prior
knowledge, and utilise this profiling in a form of semantic
suggestion to market prepared designs. Psychological
profiling can be achieved by posing simple questions to
obtain an outline of a person. The framework for this
system will use this general concept in order to ascertain
the specific colour requirements for a design, utilising a
concise database of colours and styles and matching this
to the parameters set by the user, thus inadvertently
profiling the user psychologically. The basis of the
psychological profiling within the system will be that of
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) which will utilise the
parameters set by the user in assessing and returning a set
colour palette, with source information, to the screen. It is
hypothesised that there would be a defined difference
between the extent of technical knowledge of the
Architect and the Client, taking the position of the
Architect as an “expert” and the Client as a “layperson”.
Thus, the system will be devised so that not all parameters
need to be set to return a profile. In consideration of the
HCI element of the system, subject fields for
consideration will be condensed into a single format

TYPE: This option will allow the user to define a
specific building type or description, for example: School,
Hospital etc. There are certain colours befitting certain
forms of Architectural Design in an almost stereotypical
manner and the user will either select or input the specific
architectural type and will be presented with a colour
palette selection from the UCI of appropriate colours,
which has been seen as statistically befitting the building
type inputted.
USE: This particular consideration of the HCI interface
targets multi-use pieces of Architecture. Within buildings
that utilise a multi-use function, a separate field would be
necessary to indicate the other uses of the structure, thus
providing a full outline of the total use. Colour palettes
would thus be calculated regarding the individual
parameters of each section within the multi-use building.

INTERIOREXTERIOR: It will be essential for the user
to initially indicate whether the palette required will be
for an Interior or Exterior structure, considering the
factors and differences of considering colour for Interior
and Exterior utilisation.

217

STYLE: Architecture and Interior Design both hold
numerous genres of style or period which each hold an
individual colour palette deemed acceptable for utilisation
within the design and construction of a piece of
architecture. The system will recognise the parameters of
documented styles of Architecture, from Greco-Roman to
the Modern Movement, and return with an acceptable
UCI palette organised and calculated to the parameters of
the Architectural style required.
The completed system, with the inclusive HCI interface,
will prompt and guide the user through each stage of the
colour selection process aiming to provide the user with
an easy to use system for one of the most complex tasks
within design.

4.

Discussion & Conclusions

The system aims to fulfill what appears to be a missing
link within both colour research and the utilisation of
colour within the design and development of the Built
Environment. Computer Visualisation has provided both
the Architect and the Clients / Users with a tool in which
to fully communicate ideas in a clear and concise manner.
Computer Visualisation has been suggested to answer
some of the development issues of Architectural design.
For example, Thomas and Carroll [I61 suggested, “We
will have to design solutions to problems, and we will
have to do a better job faster”. CAD and visualisation
have answered this to a point, but now it is not the manner
in which designs are produced which is in question, but
the validity of the images produced by these accepted and
automated techniques and the manner in which they are
used.
RIBA [ l o ] suggested that Clients are not satisfied with
the manner in which Architects perform their creative
duties, that they have the ability to control the scenario of
design to the point of which the Client or User is
manipulated by the virtuosity of images. Including the
theories of colour within this particular scenario it can be
seen that the lack of control regarding colour
representation, production and utilisation could add to this
source of manipulation. The conceptual framework
outlined aims to fulfill the missing link between increased
productivity of Architectural design for the Built
Environment and computerised image validity by
removing some of the manipulative and controlling
psychological power from the Architect to the user
himself. The formulation of the UCI is the initial first step
of filling this link, providing a defined link between the
physical reality of construction and the virtual reality of
design visualisation, additionally increasing image
validity and trust in the utilisation of computer generated
imagery by those who perceive such visuals. Combining
this with providing an easy to use system which will
psychologically profile to specific and defined parameters

defined by the user, decreases some of the potential
manipulation of the Architect and increases participation
by the Client.
The success of the conceptual framework depends both
upon the willingness of the Architect to loosen the reigns
of control within design, and that of the Clienl’s
willingness to hold a greater active role within the design
process. Yet, either way, the system will provide decision
makers and implementers a supportive tool with which to
select, combine and utilise colours, of a valid nature,
within the continual development of the ever-expanding
Built Environment.

1. ARROT, M. & LA’ITA, S. (1992) Perspectives on
visualization. IEEE Spectrum. pp. 61-65.
2. BAIRD, J.C. & HARDER, K.A. (2000) The psychophysics
of imagery. Perception &Psychophysics, 62(1), pp 113-126.
3. COSMIDES, L. & TOOBY, J. (1997) Evolutionary
Psychology :A Primer. New York: Oxford University Press.
4. CRISP (1999). A review of current industry and research
initiatives on design. UK: C.R.I.S.P. Commission. <
http://www.crisp-uk.org.uk/REPORTS/995-Sum.
htw
5. GREENFIELD, S. (1997) The Human Brain: a guided tour.
London: The Orion Publishing Group.
6. LAWSON, B. (2000) How Designers think- The Design
Process demystified. 3rded., Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
7. MARCHESE, F.T. (1995) Understanding Images. USA:
Springer-Verlag.
8. McGINNIES, E (1970) Social Behavior : A Functional
Analysis. USA: Houghton-Miffin.
9. RAMBOW, R. & BROMME, R. (1995) Implicit
psychological concepts in architect’s knowledge: How large is a
large room? Learning and Instruction, 5 , pp 337-355.
10. RIBA (1993) Strategic Study- Phase 2. London: RlB.4
Publications.
11. ROBERTSON, P.K. (1988) Perceptual Color Spaces. IEEE
Cornputer Graphics & Applications, pp. 50-64.
12. SECHMAN, M. (1995) Hyperrealism in Architectural
Renderings: within RIERN OJEDA, 0. ( 1 996) Hyper-Realistic
Computer generated Architectural renderings. Massachusetts:
Rockport Publishers Inc
13. STONE, M.C. (1986) Color, Graphic Design & Computer
Systems. Color Research & Application, I 1 , pp. 75-82.
14. SUWA, M. & TYERSKY, B. (1996) What Architects See in

their Sketches: Implications f o r Design Tools. USA: Stanford
University.~http://www.unipaderbom.de/Staf~eb/chi96~l~b/
WWW/chi96www/shortpap/sm-txt. html>
15. TANNENBAUM, P.M. (1986) The Colorimetry of Color
Displays: 1950 to the Present. Color Research & Application,
11, pp.27-28.
16. THOMAS, J.C. and CARROLL, J.M. (1979) The
Psychological Study of Design. Design Studies, 1(1), pp. 5-1 1.
17. TRELSTAD, J.M. (1993) Color Printers. Architecfure. pp.
143- 14.5.
18. UNGUREANU, 0 (2000) Psychology & Architecture U S A .
<http://www.architects.f25.com/works>

218

