Information

Research Report
Animation Applications in the Capital Markets
William Wright
Visible Decisions Inc.
Toronto, Canada
wwright@vizbiz.com

Abstract

contour plots of statistical and scientific visualization.
It is now possible, on an inexpensive workstation, to
build, display and have updated in real time, visual
scenes comprised of abstract 3D geometrical forms.
The viewer’s point of view can move through these
3D scenes, which have been constructed of simple
and/or complex objects, and the objects themselves
can move within the scenes. Desktop workstations
can now move hundreds of thousands of independent
3D polygons per second on a display console.
Military and industrial simulations make use of
this computer graphics power in applications that
portray realistic visual scenesshowing tank combat in
urban centers, or merchant marine vessels docking in
busy harbors.
However this same hardware
technology can be used in managementand knowledge
worker tasks. “Information animation” is the
application of this level of computer graphics power
to data intensive, time critical, decision making tasks
where the 3D landscapecomprises numerical / textual
data and analytical models.
To support decision making tasks, information
animation uses 4D (3D plus motion) graphics. By
itself, 3D is not sufficient. The 3D display of data is
not a new concept and has often been used as a
communication medium when more emphasis on
impact rather than insight is desired. 3D does not
lend itself to rigorous comparative analysis becauseof
the distortions arising from a perspective view and
occlusion. However, by using motion and animated
interaction, it is possible to use 3D as a reliable,
accurate and precise decision-support tool. To quote
James Clark, the founder of Silicon Graphics Inc.,
“To make 3D work, you need to make it move.”
This new 3D and motion capability, which we
call information animation, allows a higher level of
expression, a significant increase in the amount of
data displayed, and a broader scope of application.
This paper provides a number of examples of
information animation applications in the securities
industry. These examples are drawn from equity
trading analytics and fixed-income risk management.
Many other applications are suggested as well,
including OTC trading, equity trading execution and
equities risk viewing. Before the discussion of these
various applications, there is a brief review of how
data visualization has been used in the past, why it
works so well, and the importance of graphic design.

30 computer graphics
can be extremely
expressive.
It is possible to display an entire
securities market, like the S&P 500, on a single
screen. A complex inventory of 3,000 positions can
also easily fit on a single screen. With the correct
approach to the visual design of the layout, these
massive amounts of information can be quickly and
easily comprehended by a human observer. By using
motion and animated interaction, it is possible to use
30 as a reliable, accurate and precise decision-support
tool.
Information
animation
applications
are
particularly suited to the securities industry because
that is where we find huge amounts of data, the value
of which declines rapidly with time, and where critical
decisions are being made on this data in very short
periods of time. Information animation technology is
an important new tool for the securities industry,
where people need to be in the decision-making loop
without sufsering from information overload.
Several examples are discussed including equity
trading analytics, fixed income trading analytics and
fixed-income
risk viewing.
Risk viewing
is
generalized
to include instruments and markets
beyond fixed-income,
namely equities, derivatives,
and foreign exchange. In each case, the common
elements are positions,
models of asset value,
parameterized models of risk sensitivity, and scenario
projections.
These visual risk models more easily
allow control and guidance of risk exposure over a
wide variety of scenarios and stress tests.

1

Introduction

Three-dimensional computer graphics can be
extremely expressive. With the correct approach to
the visual design of the layout, massive amounts of
information can be quickly and easily comprehended
by a human observer.
Data visualization has reached a new level of
capability which can be described as Information
AnimationTM. Graphics display technology and
applications have moved beyond the static or
interactive 2D bar charts, line charts and pie charts,
and beyond the interactive 3D scatter plots and

19
O-8186-7201-3/95 $04.00 0 1995 IEEE

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

See Color Plates, pages 136, 137.

2

some of the best examples of interactive 3D
information visualization. Numerous prototypes have
been constructed. These examples allow users to
better understand the structure of large datasets by
allowing viewing from different angles, by flying
through the data, and by interactively examining and
rearranging information objects. In these examples,
the structure of the visual presentation is provided by
the hierarchical or linear structure of the data itself.
This provides a natural data-orientedframework and is
a step forward in providing an application that is
aligned to the decision making task.
In financial data visualization, there is no
physical geographyto provide an organizing structure.
Dimensions corresponding
to variables in
mathematical functions can provide an organizing
structure. One of the first examples of financial data
visualization was the work done by Steven Feiner and
Clifford Beshers [2] on exploring the value of a
portfolio of options by interactively manipulating the
option market value function of six variables in a 3D
space. Higher dimensionality is achieved by
embedding one 3D space into another. This provided
a mathematically correct coherent framework but
perceptually still proved to be not as natural and easy
to understandas a geographicalstructure.
For abstract information visualization, we
believe process and decision models provide a more
natural framework. A visual layout that corresponds
to the rationale underlying a decision blends human
perceptual strengths with the exercise of human
judgement. Information visualization expands to
include decision visualization.

Origins of Data Visualization

The origins of data visualization are in the
statistical and scientific disciplines. The majority of
early work involved 2D analysis of multidimensional
and multivariate data sets via static images and
graphs. These static 2D images are useful in analysis
but have more merit in the presentation of final
results. Prominent statistician John Tukey [91 was a
pioneer of exploratory data analysis.
More recently, dynamic graphics have been used
in, for instance, spinning 3D data plots. “Dynamic”
in this context also means direct manipulation by the
user, where the user interacts directly with the
graphics by use of the mouse. Dynamic graphics
much more readily supports the process of finding and
understanding patterns and anomalies in the data, as
shown by Cleveland [ 11.
In the sciences, 3D visualization is typically
used in analysis and presentation. Faced with
understanding the large amounts of data generatedin
simulations and computational experiments, scientists
often turn to visualization as the only practical way to
digest the stacks of output created by overnight runs
on supercomputers. Converting the stacks of output
into a static 3D image is a useful way to sift through
the information overload and pick out the patterns and
anomalies of interest. Visualization broadened the
scope of scientific exploration by expanding the
horizon of what could be understood.
The National Center for Supercomputing
Applications has created innovative 3D animations for
data visualization [4]. One of the most well known
animation studies was of the smog formation in the
Los Angeles area. The techniques makes use of
traditional frame-by-frame animation methods. Each
frame is rendered and then transferred to video tape,
where motion can be viewed at the standardvideo rate
of 30 frames per second. While motion is achieved, it
is not interactive. The viewer is limited to a predetermined
set of presentations
and the
communication of pre-conceived messages. These
visualizations do not support data analysis becausethe
relationships and featureshave already been identified,
and the information has been extracted and prioritized
for communication purposes.
In scientific visualization, the 3D image is
always based on an underlying physical structure. For
example, the smog study presents data overlaid on a
3D map of the Los Angles basin. Whether in
physics, molecular, chemical or biological studies,
the images use the physical structure of the elements
themselves. Coherent data sets with an underlying
xyz arrangement of positions provides a natural and
easily understandableframework for a 3D image.
Information visualization using 3D animation is
a current research area for Xerox PARC. This work
by Card, Ma&inlay and Robertson [3, 51 provides

3

Anne Treisman describesit well [7]. If you were
to step outside in an unknown city, you would
immediately recognize objects organized in a coherent
meaningful framework. You would see people, cars,
buildings, trees. You would not be aware of detecting
colors, edges, movements and distances and of
assembling them into multidimensional wholes for
which you would retrieve identities and labels from
memory. Meaningful wholes seem to precede parts
and properties. This apparently effortless achievement
is repeatedcontinuously.
Visualization works because the visual cortex
dominates perception, and becausekey aspects of the
perception process occur rapidly without conscious
thought. This human visualization power can be
harnessed to allow the presentation of massive
amounts of data and to highlight patterns hidden in
that data. Used effectively, visualization can
accelerate perception of data.
By designing
visualizations with human strengths and weaknesses
in mind, it is possible to exploit people’s natural

20

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Human Visual Perceptual and
Cognitive Abilities

guidelines and heuristics. There is a rigor and
discipline in the graphics design process whose intent
is to reveal and not obscure. Graphics design methods
have largely evolved from dealing with 2D graphics
used in the print medium. However, their spirit and
mandatesare directly applicable to a 4D medium.
In 4D information animation applications, the
successof the graphics visual design (i.e. the shapes,
layout, colors) is critical to the success of the
application. Graphical elements need to be carefully
selectedand arrangedto reveal data and relationships.
Poor graphics design will obscure the data and its
meanings. The visual design simply needs to be
perfect. Users must see the message and not the
medium.
Edward Tufte [8] articulates this discipline best.
According to Tufte, excellence in graphics consists of
complex ideas communicated with clarity, precision
and efficiency. Graphical displays should induce the
viewer to think about the substance, present many
numbers in a small space, make large data sets
coherent, encourage the eye to compare different
pieces of data, reveal the data at several levels of
detail, from a broad overview to the fine structure.
Graphics reveal data, and can be more precise and
revealing than conventional numerical computations
and displays.

ability to recognize structure and patterns, and
circumvent human limitations in memory and
attention.
The human brain excels at processing images
and recognizing patterns. Contrast this with how the
brain handles rows and columns of numbers and
letters. In a stressful, time-critical environment, such
as a trading desk, it would be easy to miss a crucial
number displayed among dozensin rows and columns.
It takes a good deal of precious time to digest a set of
interrelated numbers. Using information animation,
the size, color, shape, and motion of the data can all
be used to indicate the information you want and its
significance.
Scientific study of perception and cognition have
established some explanations for why visualization
is so powerful, but much still remains to be
understood
Certain aspects of visual processing seem to be
accomplished simultaneously for the entire visual
field at once. Some aspects of visual processing are
also automatic in that it does not require attention to
be focused on any one part of the visual field. Other
aspects of visual processing seem to depend on
focused attention and are done serially, or one at a
time, as if a mental spotlight were being moved from
one location to another. Visualization tasks involve a
combination of preattentive and attentive human
behaviors. Psychological research, see Rogowitz, et
al [6], has shown that certain visual stimuli attract
attention, can be searchedin parallel, and are perceived
effortlessly by observers. These extremely efficient
preattentive visual competencies are engaged before
conscious or attentive thought is required. In fact,
Zeki [lo] discusseshow four parallel systems within
the visual cortex have been identified, each concerned
with a different attribute of vision: one for motion,
one for color, and two for form.
Powerful visualizations are designed to enlist
both preattentive and attentive processes. A
preattentively encoded attribute may be used to
identify a region in the visualization which demands
further attentive scrutiny.
There is virtually unlimited freedom in how we
represent data. The difficult question is how best to
represent it. The study of graphical perception needs
to be expanded to examine the effectiveness of new
representational techniques such as new forms of 3D
geometry, animation, transparency, depth cues and
connections. In the absenceof scientifically derived
rules, it is necessaryto depend on the graphics design
profession.

4

5

Information
animation applications are
particularly suited to the securities industry because
that is where we find huge amounts of data, the value
of which declines rapidly with time, and where critical
decisions are being made on this data in very short
periods of time. Information animation technology is
an important new tool for the securities industry,
where people need to be in the decision-making loop
without suffering from information overload.
As outlined earlier, 3D seems to hold some
promise as a general decision support tool - but we
need to determine exactly what it means to put
abstract information in 3D, and what benefits it
provides. These are key questions, and to help answer
them, several prototypes, or “dynamic illustrations,”
were built to provoke business thinking regarding
benefits, and to help further develop the basic
technology.
This paper will discuss examples of work from
1992 created and operated on a Silicon Graphics
workstation based on a MIPS R4000 CPU with a
graphics hardware accelerator. The underlying
software provides a 3D animation engine allowing
data-driven and user-driven animation. Each 3D
scene is completely open to interaction at any point
in time. None of the interactions or animations are

Graphics Design

While science can not always explain the
functions and provide explicit rationales, the graphics
design profession has developed highly effective

21

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Information Animation Examples
in the Securities Industry

at the bid, trades at the offer, etc. For each attribute,
it is possible to develop a graphical icon or glyph
which will visually and precisely communicate the
value of the attribute. These graphical elements can
be called “signs” becausethey are designed to display
significance. For example, Color Plate 2 shows a
trade by trade sign for each equity.
Color Plate 3 shows a bid/offer sign for an
equity with numerical data displayed beside the sign.
This is an important requirement for information
animation applications. Visual perception can be
used to quickly seeanomalies and patterns. However,
at some point, detailed data is needed. The user must
be able to point at signs and retrieve the numerical
and textual data behind the signs. This capability is
called brushing (Cleveland, 1988).

predefined or precalculated. Animation frame rates of
four to six frames per secondare achieved.

6

Equity Trading Analytics

Figure 1 shows a two dimensional image of the
equities in the Toronto Stock Exchange index of 35.
The Toronto Stock Exchange makes available each
equity’s order book (i.e. all the current bids and offers
and their price and size). For each equity, we are
showing the depth of the book. The baseline is the
price of the last trade. The offers are above, and the
bids are below the baseline. The height above or
below is proportional to the price of the bid or offer.
The length of a bid/offer’s bar is proportional to the
size of the bid/offer. This display immediately shows
where bids and offers are unbalanced (e.g. more bids
than offers) and where there is liquidity.
Figure 2 is a 3D extension of Figure 1. The
area of each bid and offer is proportional to the size of
the bid and offer. We can use Figures 1 and 2 to do a
side-by-side comparison to see what added value a 3D
layout provides. The 3D layout in Figure 2 appears
to provide faster comprehension, and an accelerated
perception. A 3D layout also provides more display
area - more elbow room, so to speak. However, 3D
is not sufficient. It is not possible to precisely
compare two equities, and it is not possible to exactly
see the book for an equity located towards the rear of
the display. To make 3D work, it must be able to
move. To be precise with comparisons, the view of
the landscape and elements within the landscapeneed
to move so that the user can see exactly what the
values are. The prototypes allow a user to move the
landscapeand to zoom in to any area of interest.
In the next prototype, we explore how much
information can be usefully displayed in a single
screen. The landscape in Color Plate 1 shows the
TSE 300 with the TSE 35 along the right forward
edge. The landscapeis arrangedin an neutral fashion by industry subgroup and alphabetic order within each
subgroup. An actual user would order the landscape
to correspond to particular interests and models of
value. Several different forms of mouse and keyboard
driven navigation are supported,including zooming to
a point of interest, walking, running and moving to
preset fixed points of view.
The TSE 300 landscape can be connected to a
live data feed, and can display in real time the liquidity
of the most significant portion of the Toronto market.
With real time data, the landscape bubbles as trades
occur and as the bids and asks are updated. Compared
to existing quote screens which can display 20 or 30
equities at one time, this landscape provides an order
of magnitude more information.
Of course, liquidity is just one attribute of an
equity’s performance. Others include net change on
the day, volume on the day, volume at a price, trades

7

Trading

Analytics

The next prototype, in Color Plate 4, shows the
Canadian federal bond market. The green yield curve
along the left edge shows the Federal benchmark
issues as of early January 1992. The first yield curve
in red, along the front edge shows the Federal curve as
of early February 1992. Using the slider bar, we can
play back in a sequence, the values for each day’s
closing yield curve from January to February.
Whatever day is currently displayed is shown in the
second yield curve (yellow) along the front edge. At
the beginning of the sequencethe yellow curve is the
same as the green curve. At the end, the yellow is the
same as the red. Rotating the scene so that we have a
2D view of the yellow yield curve (Color Plate 5), we
can play back each day’s yield curve. As we do that,
the yellow curve moves and changesover time.
This period of time captures an interesting event
- the U.S. Federal Reserve cut interest rates by a full
percent. As we playback the data, we see the impact
of this event on the CanadianFederal bond market. In
the animation, you can see that the curve experiences
a large drop, and then recovers to near previous levels.
In the center of the scene,spreads(i.e. differences
in yield) are being displayed. The spreads are taken
between the start date (green curve) and the current
date (yellow curve). Positive spreads are gray, and
negative spreadsare purple. As we animate the scene,
all the spreadsmove up and down with time.
Severaluseful conclusions can be made with this
prototype. First of all, it becomes readily apparent
that the Federal bond market is not an entirely orderly
market. Our expectation was that the Federal bond
market should be a liquid market with few
discontinuities or anomalies. However, as you can
see the boundary between positive and negative
spreadsis ragged. There are positive spreadslocated
among the negative spreads. Further, these anomalies
persist for several days at a time.

22

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Fixed-Income

change in interest rates). The scenario P+L
calculations are done rapidly so that the P+L value
changesinteractively with a change in the yield curve.
There are several ways a user may interact with
this landscape. One or several bond issuers can be
selected from a list of all issuers. The corresponding
positions in these issues are then highlighted within
the inventory so that the user can see what is held and
where it is held. The total line then shows the total
for the selected set of issuers. The market risk
scenarioscan be performed on the selectedset.
Another type of query example is a filter based
on size of position and implemented using a slider
bar. The user can filter out all small long and short
positions, so that landscape displays only the large
magnitude positions.
This risk viewing landscape provides several
conclusions. An on-line system could display
perhaps 20 to 40 positions per screen. A 3D
landscapedisplays 3,000 or more positions per screen.
Using query and filtering, it is possible to highlight
patterns that may be hidden in a numerical display.
We believe a 3D visual approach provides more
insight in minutes than traditional computer
numerical displays could provide in hours.

It is also interesting to note what is happening
in this prototype from a human perceptual and
This is a 20x20 spread
cognitive point of view.
matrix displayed over 20 days for a total of 8000
spreads. Compared to a trader’s traditional quote
screen or spreadsheetdisplay which would show at
most perhaps 80 spreads, this is a two order of
magnitude improvement in displaying information.
The display allows the user, in just a few seconds,to
pick out the items of interest. Further, these items
are presented in a context which supports informed
evaluation. Related instrument spreadsare shown in
the same landscape neighborhood. At any time, the
user can click on an anomaly and retrieve numerical
and textual data describing the issuesand their values.
Another conclusion is that the prototype has the
entire field of “spreads” moving. One of the
objectives of information animation is to be’able to
imbed information in motion. The user can see
waves move acrossthe surface of the spreads. Subtle
differences in the waves, which indicate delays and
anticipations in several spread regions, can be
perceivedand detectedquickly.

8

Fixed-Income

Risk Management
9

Additional

Examples

The next example is a fixed income inventory
application. Color Plate 6 shows on a single screen a
bond inventory with over 3,000 positions in it. Long
positions are in green; short positions are in pink.
The left axis shows portfolios and trading groups.
The front axis shows time to maturity. Height is
used to show the value of the positions. Along the
front of the landscape is a total line that totals across
trading groups. At the rear is a yield curve based on
the bid yield of a set of benchmarks.
Color Plate 6 is displaying a profit/loss for each
position for a yield curve shift scenario. Other
models of asset value can also be displayed (e.g.
weighted price value of a basis point or benchmark
equivalent).
The user can point at one of the positions and
retrieve fully detailed descriptive numerical and textual
details related to that position’s size, issue and issuer..
Animation is used in this landscape to help
assessmarket risk (i.e. risk due to change in interest
rates). The yield curve can be moved, in even or
uneven shifts, and as it moves, the impact on the
inventory’s projected profit and loss can be assessed.
Projected P+L values change by increasing or
decreasing in size. Users can quickly see where the
inventory is hedged (i.e. insensitive to changes in
rates) or where it is exposedand by what degree.
Projected P+L is calculated using pre-computed

Information animation applications can provide
significant value in many areas of the securities
industry. The risk viewing application can be
expanded to instruments and markets beyond fixedincome, including equities, derivatives, and foreign
exchange. In each case, the common elements in the
application are positions, models of asset value,
parameterizedmodels of risk sensitivity, and scenario
projections. Risk viewing starts with being able to
quickly see thousandsof positions on a single screen.
Effective risk visualization
requires direct
manipulation of such risk parameters as interest rate
risk, volatility risk, currency risk, and credit risk.
These visual risk models more easily allow control
and guidance of risk exposure over a wide variety of
scenarios and stress tests. Simple combinations of
changesto risk parameterswill quickly reveal exposed
positions and help suggest more effective risk
managementstrategies.
Another information animation application can
be developed for trading in the OTC (over-thecounter) market. NASDAQ level 2 market-maker
data provides bid and ask information for all market
makers in an equity. Generally, there are 10 to 50
market makers per equity. Numerical equity trading
displays now in use are limited to showing market-

fixed income analytical

maker activity

parameters

such as the dollar

value of an 01 (i.e. unit value for a change of l/100
of a percent in interest rates) and convexity (i.e.
second order approximation for sensitivity due to

23

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

for just one equity at a time.

Further,

the user is able to see only 15- to 20 market makers
at once, and must page back and forth to see other
market makers. Considering that an individual trader

animation technology will evolve into a powerful
new decision-making medium, which will unify
disparate sources of data and disconnected task
processes.
At this point, we can summarize a number of
key components used in any information animation
application.

makes a market in approximately 10 equities, the
trader is left with the choice of either continuously
flipping through 20 or 30 screens, or just not being
able to see what the other market makers are doing.
An information animation landscapecan easily show
on one screen all the market makers for a watch list
consisting of 10 equities. Each market maker’s
current activity, their activity since market open, and
several other analytics can all be seen simultaneously.
Similar concepts apply to trading on the Toronto
and London stock exchanges. Both exchangespublish
broker identifications on bids, asks and trades. An
information animation landscape can show who is
trading what equity and at what price levels. For 50
or more equities, it is possible to see on one screen
for every broker, who is trading at the bid or offer,
their volume weighted average price (VWAP), and
how their trading has changed over the day. This is
simply impossible to do any other way. This kind of
display can provide a new level of intuitive insight
and improved trading performance.
Equity trade execution is another task that could
benefit from information animation. In any given
asset management firm, hundreds of buy, sell, sell
short orders may need to be executed in one day.
These orders need to be optimally managed across
different sources of liquidity, such as POSIT, DOT,
and Reuters Instinet. An information animation
landscape allows order aggregation from many
portfolios, and then allows those orders to be routed
to appropriate trading systems. The status of each
order and the quality of execution can be displayed for
hundreds of orders simultaneously on one screen.
In fact, information animation can be used in
general to unify and simplify diverse sources of
trading data. It is possible to integrate on a single
screen market data, news, positions, P+L, order
management, order routing, portfolio allocations, and
historical time series data. Only the expressivepower
of 4D graphics has the display capacity to do this.
Only the human visual perceptual channel has the
bandwidth to assimilate this volume of data.

A sign is a graphical geometrical
Signs.
object that represents a set of related data elements,
and is transformed as the data changes. For example,
the current bid and ask of an equity can be represented
by one sign. Each sign needs to be optimally
designed to portray the significance of the data.
“Sign” is preferred over the word “glyph” because it
stressesthe need for effective illustration.
Controller
signs.
This is a sign that maps
a set of related input/output process control
parametersto a geometrical object. For example, an
interactive yield curve used to assessmarket risk on
an inventory is a controller sign.
Landscapes.
Each information application is
based on one or more landscapes. A landscape
consists of an arrangement in xyz space of signs and
interactive controller signs. Effective landscapes
reinforce - or make apparent - information attributes,
decision models and the task process.
Navigation.
Information
animation
applications require new user interface methods to
allow users to move through the landscapes. These
include zooming in and out, walking and running
along an xyz vector, returning to predetermined fixed
points of view, and a local heads-up capability to
allow quick controlled viewing in the immediate
neighborhoodof a landscape.
Brushing.
Users need to be able to point the
cursor at a sign and retrieve the precise numerical and
textual information behind it.
Queries.
Landscapes need to be searchable,
and to allow the display of the results of those
searches. Users must be able to select any data
attribute, whether it is price movement or size of
position, and filter the landscape so that only those
qualifying signs are displayed in the landscape. Query
results can be displayed either by removing any signs
that do not meet the search criteria, or graphically
highlighting just the signs that do meet the criteria.

10 Conclusions
Rows and columns of numbers are a
representation appropriate for machine processing but
do not draw upon human perceptual and cognitive
strengths. With 3D and 4D graphical representations,
people can see more information, more quickly, with
more comprehension.
These 4D graphical
applications are a significant technological advance
and can be thought of as a new type of decision
support medium. Information animation applications
combine large amounts of rapidly changing data with
interactive decision-making models. The most
effective landscapesencapsulateand simplify complex
decision making process models. Information

As with any new technology, there are a number
of challenges in developing information animation
applications. Perhaps the most significant is the
choice of the geometrical representations for the
signs, and the layout within an application landscape.
The semantic challenge is to illustrate large,
24

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

[31 Mackinlay, J.D., G.G. Robertson and S.K.
Card, “The perspective wall: Detail and context
smoothly integrated”, Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ACM, April, 1991.
[41 NCSA - National Center for Supercomputing
Applications, Video, “Smog - Visualizing the
Components”, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Visualization
Services and
Development Group, 1990.
[51 Robertson, G.G., S.K. Card, and J.D.
Ma&inlay, Information visualization using 3D
interactive graphics, Communications of the
ACM, 36(4), 1993.
[61 Rogowitz, B.E., D.T. Ling, and W.A. Kellogg,
“Task Dependence, Verdicality, and PreAttentive Vision: Taking Advantage of
Perceptually-Rich Computer Environments”,
Human Vision, Visual Processing and Digital
Display III, SPIE Vol. 1666, 1992.
[71 Treisman, A., “Features and Objects in Visual
Processing”, Scientific American, Nov., 1986.
181 Tufte, E.R., The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, Chesire, CT, Graphics Press,
1983.
[91 Tukey, J.W., “Exploratory Data Analysis”,
Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley, 1977.
[lo] Zeki, S., “The Visual Image in Mind and
Brain”, Scientific American, September, 1992.

multidimensional and multivariate data sets without
compromising the dimensionality or granularity of
the data. Every variable for every data point must be
able to be shown without invoking summary or
reduction methods. The design challenge is to clearly
and intuitively present the data.
Another challenge in building landscape
applications is to effectively incorporate process
models and decision models. Landscapes support
decision making tasks, and much labour intensive
knowledge engineering is required to identify and
represent the underlying task domain. To bypass this
development bottleneck, information animation tools
will need to be developed which will allow end users
to create their own landscapes.
Two other technology challenges are worth
mentioning. A high level of animation performance
is required. A large amount of 3D geometry in the
landscape needs to be updated with new data and
redrawn in subseconds to achieve animation frame
rates of at least four frames per second. Considerable
effort and insight into new data structures and
rendering algorithms were required in the prototypes
to reach the frame rate achieved. Even higher
performance levels are required as larger volumes of
data are input into landscapes, as 3D landscapes
become larger in scope, and as signs make more use
of motion as a representationmedium.
Finally, ease of use and user interface design are
crucial to application success. Information animation
is a new way of working with information and
requires innovative user interface techniques. Several
new techniqueshave been developedin the prototypes,
and more are being tested. Much more work needsto
be done in this area. The expressive power of
information animation provides an opportunity to
dramatically simplify user interfaces.
Information animation has an important role
within organizations. With significant investments
made in computing infrastructure over the last decade,
organizations have vast amounts of business data
available to support decision making. So much data,
in fact, that some current conditions might be
described as information overload. Used effectively,
information animation can accelerate perception,
provide insight and control, and allow this flood of
valuable data to be harnessed for competitive
advantagein businessdecision making.

References
[l]
[2]

Cleveland, W.S., and M.E. McGill, eds.
Dynamic Graphics for Statistics, Belmont, CA,
Wadsworth Inc., 1988.
Feiner, S., and C. Beshers, “Worlds within
Worlds - Metaphors for Exploring nDimensional
Virtual
Worlds”,
ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software, 1990.

25

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

