A Shattered Perfection: Crafting a Virtual Sculpture
Robert J. Krawczyk
College of Architecture, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
krawczyk@iit.edu
Abstract
In the development of a digital sculpture for a
competition entry, a mathematical approach was
investigated as a method to develop a variety of forms.
This paper covers the initial inspiration for the sculpture,
Georg Nees’s Gravel Stones, and then the series of
approaches that were developed expanding the starting
concept. Each step in the process is described including
the decisions and alternatives that were explored. The
sculpture was entirely built and developed with custom
software using a series of related mathematical concepts.
The software and related digital representations became
the sculpting material and the sculpting tools.

The sculptures were executed in wood, stone and
metal, displaying each to a high level of perfection.
In the creating of virtual three-dimensional forms, the
advances in modeling and rendering methods have
progressed from simply being realistic to being hyperrealistic, perfect beyond the properties possible with real
world materials [4]. Even in the digital form generation
course I teach, the goal is the same, highly mathematically
based forms rendered in some nearly unreal material,
Figure 2, [2].

1. Introduction
Georg Nees’s Gravel Stones (Cubic Disarray), created
between 1968 and 1971, was the initial inspiration for this
series of digital pieces. What attracted me to this piece
was the simplicity of the concept and the overall
interpretation of transforming order into disorder. This
piece is an early example of pen plotter based art, where
finely drafted drawings driven by a computer were
becoming possible. Gravel Stones consists of an array of
12 by 22 squares. The first row of squares is all aligned
next to each other, as each subsequent row is created; each
square is randomly offset from its original center and
rotated. The offset and rotation is slowly increased till the
last row is reached.
What intrigues me with this “ancient” piece was the use
of exact mathematical computations to model a chaotic
image and the progression from the ordered to the
disordered. This piece has greater meaning to me today
since many of the recent efforts in developing perfect
forms and curved surfaces are of great interest in product
design, sculpture, and architecture.
Particularly in
sculpture, the works of Helaman Ferguson, Charles O.
Perry, Robert Longhurst, Brent Collins, Robert Rathburn,
and John Robinson all exhibit this quality. All are
described in detail by Ivars Peterson [5]. Most of these
works are the result of advanced computer software tools
and some by related automated manufacturing

techniques. Most use a mathematical basis for
generating the form in total, or at least portions of it.

Figure 1. Gravel Stones by Georg Nees
Others have also found this piece an interesting basis
for interpretation. William Kolomyjec created two pieces,
Boxes I and Boxes II in 1973, Figure 3 [1]. These differ
in the direction the progression was taken; inside out and
outside in. These pieces were also created as twodimensional drawings.
I certainly appreciate the beauty of today’s near perfect
forms and the tremendous artistic vision and
craftsmanship it takes to create them. As a personal

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 2. Examples of form generation

Figure 3. Boxes I and Boxes II by William Kolomyjec

a.

b.
Figure 4. Variations to the initial Nees piece

response to this movement towards perfection and
beyond, I decided to challenge myself to investigate
methods of generating perfection with ones that would
shatter it. Using perfection to create imperfection. The
goal was to have an underlying perfect framework visible,
not just being surface bound.

c.

2. First step
The first set of programs were written merely to
duplicate the Nees piece. The same range of parameters
was explored. Methods were developed to randomly
regulate the square offset and rotation. A variety of offset
and rotational parameters were developed. Figure 4

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

displays a few of these. The first variation, 4a, is very
similar to the original Nees piece. The second, 4b,
increases the rotation change by a small amount and the
offset factor a much greater amount. The third, 4c,
investigates the closing of the open spaces between the
squares created by increasing the offset factor. In this
case, an option is added to also increase the size of the
square, along with the other parameters.
Since the goal was a sculptural piece, the next step was
to extend the Nees piece into the third dimension. When
extending the squares to three-dimensions as cubes, the
possibility of varying the vertical dimension became
apparent. The first set of variations simply stepped the
cubes in an increasing manner. This follows the original
arrangement and spirit of the Nees piece.
Treating the cubes separately gave the piece the same
line quality as in the original Nees piece. When the cubes
are combined or unioned, the line quality disappears and
the a stepped volume quality appears, as well as, the
further definition of the row arrangement. Figure 5
displays two such variations. In 5a, the offset and rotation
have small values and the size of the cube is only
increased in the height dimension. In 5b, greater variation
is included in the offset and rotation, and the size of the
cube, length and width, is also increased.

could be modified in some increasing or decreasing
pattern. Since the piece is moving into three-dimensions,
the height of the each cube was also varied. This now
covers all the dimensional and location qualities of each
individual cube.
To develop a set of possible directions for increasing
and decreasing patterns, a square base form was selected
to investigate each. The direction could be increased or
decreased with a variety of starting and ending points or
edges.
Here are a few patterns that were considered:
a. increasing from one edge to the opposite edge, as
in the Nees piece
b. increase from one edge to the center
c. decrease from one edge to the center
d. increase from the corner point to the center point
e. decrease from the corner point to the center point
f. increase from the corner point to the opposite
edges
g. increase from the midpoint of the edge to the
opposite edge
h. use a curve, as defined as a mathematical
function to vary the parameters
i. all random, no orderly increase or decrease

a.
Figure 5. Extending into three-dimensions

b.

3. One step back, one step forward
To further develop this concept, it seemed that a more
orderly approach should be taken to better understand the
range of variations that were possible. First the variation
in the plane of the piece. The offset and rotation were
being randomly varied as in the Nees piece. In addition to
these two parameters, a third, the size of the cube, length
of sides, was being varied. Now all three parameters

Using a square as the basis for the patterns,
symmetrical variations could be ignored. These of course
could be considered if the base was rectangular as in the
Nees piece. In keeping with the Nees piece directional
patterns are linear, except for the last two that are random
and by function.
The by function pattern is interesting because it enables
expanding the Nees piece to include both decreasing and

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

a.

b.
Figure 6. Curve functions

c.

Figure 7. By function variations
increasing parameters in a single pattern and to change the
progression along both the width and the length of the
piece. Most of the curves investigated are based on a
simple combination of sine and cosine functions.
The curve functions also have an inherent set of
variations based on their period, the angle covered over
some distance. The first assumption was that the function
starts at 0 degrees and ends at 360 degrees over the entire
length and width of the piece. As the total angle is
increased from 0 to 720 degrees or decreased from 0 to
180 degrees, the curvature is extended or compressed over
the piece. Of course the starting angle does not have to be
0, it could be any angle, so any specific portion of a curve
could be captured.
Some functions have the unruly behavior of decreasing
to a negative height. Two methods were developed to
deal with those, one was to introduce a minimum cube
height so the piece is always above a base, or simply take
the absolute value of the function so it never decreases
below the base.
.

4. Continue forward
The possibility of symmetry using a square base was
very appealing but fairly predictable after a few
variations. A rectangular base was tried again, but a
similar conclusion was reached. The square form did give
a compact form that was desired, so other basic compact
forms were investigated. The first in the series was a
circular form. The circular base modified the effect of
direction because of the radial lines starting at the center
and ending at the outside edge. The concentric lines have
the additional property that the starting and ending points
are the same. Because of the limited number of possible
edges the directional patterns were found not be extensive.
To increase the number of edges, an inside edge was
added, resulting in a ring form.
Figure 8 displays a few of the directional variations
developed on the circular base. This study included a
variety of increasing and decreasing directions, both
radially and concentrically. A number of by function
combinations were investigated to see what the entire
range of using the circular form could be. Once the initial
studies were completed, a few final sketches were
developed, Figure 9 displays three variations of the
circular base and the ring concept.
A number of sketches were developed until a final
form was found. Figure 11 displays “Shattered Perfection
1304”, the entry for the digital sculpture competition.
1304 had a great variety in the underlying surface and the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

shattering of the surface matched the visual effect that was
desired. The final piece was also compatible with rapid
prototyping equipment, one of the requirements of the
competition.
The last variation that was considered and not fully
developed was the shape of each element that breaks the
surface. It does not need to be in the shape of a cube.
Others were considered, circular, triangular, hexagonal,
pentagonal, and octagonal. None of these seemed to
break the surface with such sharpness as the square did.
These other shapes also did not overlap enough to form a
single larger volume or they had so many edge points that
they introduced an undesired softness to the piece.

5. Look back
Writing software to create a form is very similar to the
process of sculpting – material, existing media, is
subtracted from or added to in constructing a form. In
software, nothing exists at the beginning, the process is
first additive and then subtractive. The software you use
does to some extent, as real materials, determine what you
can do. By this I am referring to the geometric entities are
included to create volumes. This might include the
construction of simple volumes; cubes, spheres, torus, or
surfaces. You can take advantage of simple operations to
construct complex forms. For example, creating a bezier

Figure 8. By function pattern variations on a circular base

Figure 9. Variations on a circular base

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

enhance the possibilities either related to the properties of
real materials or some that are unique to digital
representations. Of course, the limitations of virtual forms
are few, but when you decide to realize them, the curve
from a set of points or line segments and then using that
curve profile to create a surface.
The software
environment which you select can actual material choices
can limit the form. The question that begs to be asked if
they need to be realized at all.
It is very interesting to take a finite set of elements that
have a finite set of parameters that can be constructed in a
predictable manner individually but not so when
combined. Another interesting aspect of this approach is
the repeatability of results. This is critical to better
understand the total concept you are investigating and also
in developing an idea in an orderly fashion - if you
choose to. It is important to me to have a rational
underpinning of the work I produce. Software enables me
this type of tool – to such a degree that producing the
pieces physically have little interest many times.
I have also found that conceptual art was been a rich
resource for developing and better understanding digitally
based art. A good starting point has been the description
of conceptual art as developed by Sol LeWitt:
“When as artist uses a conceptual form of art, it means
that all of the planning and decisions are made
beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair. The
idea becomes a machine that makes the art” [3]
In my reading of his notes, he has a desire to create a
“machine for art” by describing the patterns that
comprised a concept.
How does this differ from
developing art with software? The artist concentrates on
the development of the concept and the ideas within it.

All of the parameters are defined and computational
methods are developed to support a particular concept.
The computer instructed by the software actually creates
the piece. There is a great parallel here with the crew and
drafters that create some of LeWitt’s work.
The
conceptual aspect of digital art is an area that has few
limits. With the large number of mathematical concepts
that can be applied to generating forms, the possibility of
developing the unexpected is great.

6. References
[1] Kolomyjec, William, 1976, "The Appeal of Computer
Graphics", Artist and Computer, edited by R. Leavitt, Harmony
Books
[2] Krawczyk, Robert, 2000, "Evolution of Mathematically
Based Form Development", in Bridges 2000 Conference,
Mathematical Connections in Art, Music, and Science
Proceedings, edited by Reza Sarhangi, Southwestern College
[3] LeWitt, Sol, 1967, “Paragraphs on Conceptual Art”, in
Artforum,5 no. 10 (June, 1967); p. 79-83
[4] Ojeda, Oscar, 1996, Hyper-Realistic: Computer Generated
Architectural Renderings, McGraw-Hill
[5] Peterson, Ivars, 2001, Fragments of Infinity, A Kaleidoscope
of Math and Art, John Wiley & Sons

Figure 10. Shattered Perfection 1304

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

