Climate Visualization: Issues and Methods in Geographic Lightning Research
Colleen M. Garrity
Arizona State University

Abstract
Geographic visualization techniques may benefit
climate research, especially spatio-temporal investigations
empowered by visual perception, knowledge, &
understanding. In this research, a temporally-composited
animated map of lightning events was created for the
Phoenix, Arizona, Metropolitan Area using four years of
U.S. Bureau of Land Management direction-finder lightning
data. The product was designed both to communicate
existing research hypotheses on spatio-temporal lightning
characteristics and to explore the seasonal variations of
lightning frequency during the summer monsoon season.
Development of geovisualization tools, especially
interactive tools, may augment the potential for discovery in
climate research.

1. Climate visualization
1.1 Overview
Geographic visualization, or geovisualization, provides
an important means of data exploration, particularly for vast
quantities of climate data that are being collected or
generated for further analysis. For this research project,
geovisualization is defined as the graphic display
(communication) and visual (cognitive) analysis of georeferenced information [2]. While climate visualization
applications appear in large quantities on the World Wide
Web, development of new climate geovisualization data
manipulation and display methods may provide
opportunities for discovering new relationships and
hypotheses that are otherwise unseen.
This research addresses the spatiotemporal
characteristics of lightning strikes in thunderstorms based
on an animated map of Phoenix-area lightning strikes
created for the monsoon seasons of 1992-1995.
Geovisualization procedures can take advantage of the high
spatiotemporal resolution of the lightning strike data to
show both spatial and temporal characteristics of the data in
one package. The animation of mapped lightning data
illustrates spatiotemporal characteristics of the lightning

strike data in the Phoenix metropolitan area and facilitates
limited data exploration for the given time period.

2. Southwest U.S. monsoon lightning
geovisualization
Development of an animated map product served two
purposes, first to facilitate visual testing of existing research
findings regarding spatial and temporal characteristics of
monsoon lightning, and second, to investigate the frequency
of lightning strikes as summer monsoon seasons progress.
In terms of MacEachren’s cubic model of map use [4],
map product evaluation can be understood in three
dimensions: first, a continuum of presenting known
information to revealing unknown information; second,
human map interaction level on a continuum from low to
high interaction; third, audience continuum from public to
private. The intended audience is private, for data
exploration purposes, and the level of interactivity with the
data is restricted.
Through a temporal composite of the lightning data, the
animated map serves dual purpose of communicating known
information and exploring the hypothesis that lightning
frequency remains the same throughout the monsoon
season. The purpose of creating a temporal composite is to
investigate the climatology of lightning rather than
approaching the data from a more meteorological, stormtracking perspective.

2.1 Project creation
Phoenix area lightning strike data for the 1992-1995
monsoon seasons were obtained via the U.S. Bureau of
Land Management (BLM) network of lightning direction
finders and subsequently processed by Global
Atmospherics, Inc., of Tucson, Arizona, USA, a commercial
data service company [1] that corrected random and
systematic errors in data accuracy. The data incorporated

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

into this portion of the lightning research consist of the date,
time, and latitude-longitude location of each strike.
The data exploration component of this research
distinguishes this animated map product as a
geovisualization ( how monsoon lightning varies from week
to week through the monsoon season). Patterns existing in
the data with respect to higher strike frequency over
topography [5] and diurnal variations of strike locations [3,
5, 6] should be evident in the animation. To investigate the
seasonal variability in frequency and density of lightning
strikes, each week of the monsoon season (1-13) is animated
as a composite 24-hour day.
The raw data were first consolidated into weeks of the
monsoon using Fortran programming. Database files were
created for each week of the monsoon season and broken
down further into individual databases for hourly
components. In all, 312 hourly composite files were
created. Each of these hourly composite files was mapped
onto a uniform background that shows elevation and major
roads in the Phoenix area, using 1:250,000-scale USGS
Digital Elevation Models in ESRI ArcView 3.2. Individual
maps were processed using Adobe Photoshop 6.0 to
preserve the colors produced in ArcView. Macromedia
Director 6.0 was used to animate the series of maps. Clock
and timeline graphics were also created in Photoshop and
incorporated into the animation to indicate monsoon week
and hour of day in which the strikes for each frame
occurred.

4. Conclusions and future research directions
The geovisualization project was successful both in
communicating known information and in facilitating data
exploration regarding spatiotemporal characteristics of
monsoon lightning in the Phoenix metropolitan area. The
temporal compositing (or brushing) method used on the
lightning data demonstrated both diurnal variation of
lightning strikes and topographic lightning frequency
differences. The animation product also enabled data
exploration of lightning strike frequency, showing that
monsoon lightning strikes exhibit intraseasonal variability.
This project illustrates the necessity of geovisualization
research to maximize the incorporation of ways to
interacting with climate databases. Climate research
innovation relies upon the ability of the researcher to
identify the temporal and spatial scales at which processes
operate. Multiple temporal and spatial data brushing
techniques are vital to climate research that uses
geovisualization. Even greater potential in climate
geovisualization research lies in the incorporation of
multiple datasets for analysis.

3. Results and Discussion
Diurnal patterns of lightning strikes identified in
lightning literature were evident in this project. In all
monsoon weeks, lightning strikes begin occurring in higher
terrain in late morning and early afternoon and they occur in
lower terrain in the afternoon and evening hours.
The higher frequency of lightning strikes in
mountainous regions was also captured in the
geovisualization project. Throughout the animation, areas
of higher terrain appear to receive more lightning strikes
than areas of low elevation.
Visual comparison of strike activity from week-to-week
through the monsoon season indicates that strike frequency
varies throughout the monsoon season.
The process of creating this project reveals some
limitations in these particular methods of climate
visualization and can inform direction for future efforts.
These are primarily aimed at geographic data exploration
and knowledge discovery. Both of the aforementioned
research projects incorporate a simple database. As more
datasets are added to climate analyses, increased levels of
interaction with the data become necessary.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

References
[1] Cummins, K.L., E.P. Krider, and MD Malone, 1998. “The
U.S. National Lightning Detection Network ™ and Applications
of Cloud-to-Ground Lightning Data by Electric Power Utilities.”
IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility 40(4):
465-480.
[2] DiBiase, D. 1990. “Visualization in the Earth Sciences.”
Earth and Mineral Sciences, Bulletin of the College of Earth and
Mineral Sciences. 59(2): 13-18.
[3] King, T.S. & R.C. Balling, 1994. “Diurnal Variations in
Arizona Monsoon Lightning Data” Monthly Weather Review
122(7): 1659-1664.

[4] MacEachren, A.M. 1994. “Visualization in Modern
Cartography: Setting the Agenda.” Visualization in Modern
Cartography. A.M. MacEachren and D.R. Fraser Taylor.
[5] Reap, R.M. 1986. “Evaluation of cloud-to-ground lightning
data from Western United States for the 1983-84 summer
seasons.” Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology.. 25
(785-799).
[6] Watson, A.I., R.E. Lopez, and R.L. Holle 1994. “Diurnal
Cloud-to-Ground Lightning Patterns in Arizona during the
Southwest Monsoon.” Monthly Weather Review 122 (8) 17161725.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

