Challenges in Interactive Visualization for Knowledge Management

Julia Ahlers and Henrik Weimer
DaimlerChrysler Research, Knowledge-Based Engineering, 10559 Berlin, Germany
Henrik.Weimer@DaimlerChrysler.com

Abstract
Today, knowledge management is widely respected
as a promising tool to simultaneously improve product
quality, product time to market and overall cost. In
practice, one of the key challenges however is to provide
mechanisms for the structuring, navigation, retrieval and
visualization of knowledge. In this paper, we present and
discuss these challenges from a practical perspective and
discuss some promising trails to their overcoming.

1. Introduction
Today, many economies and markets are
characterized by slow growth. For example, the European
Central Bank’s most recent survey of professional
forecasters estimates a GDP growth in the European
Union for 2002 of 1.5% and for 2003 of 2.5% [2]. As a
consequence, companies today can no longer rely on
market growth to provide for their revenue growth. In
other words, for a company to grow, it has to extend into
new markets, to pursue mergers and acquisitions, or to
increase the company’s market share in the no longer
growing markets.
The key for success in marginally growing markets
lies in mastering the magic triangle of quality, cost and
time. Improving performance in any of these factors,
while leaving the remaining factors unchanged, will lead
to business success. Practice tells however, that tweaking
the performance in of the elements of this magic triangle
likely worsens the company’s performance in the others.
Knowledge management aims at supporting the
innovation cycle in a company, by limiting these inherent
inhibitions between the key success factors.
In this section, we define the concepts used in this
paper. First, a motivation and definition of knowledge
management is provided. Second, we introduce the most
commonly applied elements of knowledge management:
communities of practice and books of knowledge.

1.1.

Knowledge management

A good introduction to knowledge management can
be found in [6] and [1]. This section, far from a
comprehensive overview, presents only those aspects of
knowledge management of particular relevance to this
paper.
The major goal in knowledge management is to foster
the flow and buildup of information and knowledge that is
relevant to the organizations business processes.
One very immediate, practical and common approach
focuses on communication improvements through
communities of practice. Communities of practice bring
together the experts of a particular domain, to provide
them with a platform for discussing and solving problems
common to them. The actual implementation of wellworking Communities of practice is a major challenge in
itself. Here we again refer the interested reader to [6] and
[1].
Frequently, the experts in a Community of practice
now document their agreed best practices or guidelines for
performing a certain task in their domain. This paper is
concerned with the problems surrounding the utilization of
these documented best practices or guidelines.

1.2.

Books of knowledge

A book of knowledge is a collection of commonly
agreed best practices on a particular topic.
For example, an insurance company may have a
community of practice for life insurance sales. This
community brings together the most experienced life
insurance salesmen the company has. They discuss their
tricks and insight to all aspects of life insurance sales: how
to identify and approach potential customers, what aspects
to point out to best convince certain kinds of customers,
what conditions in the life insurance contract are
changeable and which are fixed, and so on. Actually, the
insight and experience of these senior life insurance sales
experts is so great and valuable that their community of

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

practice is asked to produce guidelines for life insurance
sale. These guidelines will then be passed to less senior,
less experienced life insurance agents, to help them
improve their sales. This collection of guidelines is
referred to as the book of knowledge for life insurance
sale.
Technically, a book of knowledge is a collection of
text, supported by tables, sketches, figures and so on. As
the name suggests, the structure followed is the one of a
book, breaking the content down into chapters and
sections. A natural and common approach for arranging
these chapters is to follow the sequence of business
processes in the domain, to mimic the break down
structure of the product the knowledge is dealing with, or
to follow the product lifecycle.
In practice, all those working in the domain of the
book of knowledge will frequently consult the document,
as it contains the agreed best practices for this domain. In
an extreme, a book of knowledge can even be employed
for standardizing processes and technologies in a larger
company.

2. Limitations of text-based knowledge
In practice, the major challenge is to allow the
knowledge user to find the information relevant to him. In
her daily work context, the user should be able to identify
those aspects of the knowledge base that are relevant to
her own work and her own context.
In this section, we point out some of the limitations of
the traditional, document centered approach to managing
knowledge. The following section describes the currently
most promising path for reducing these limitations.
Representing explicit knowledge in a collection of
text documents or books of knowledge is quite common in
practice. However, some intrinsic limitations of large
collections of text must be overcome for this
implementation of knowledge management to be effective.
First, a book tends to be a large collection of text.
Therefore, relevant information is quite hard to find. More
precisely, a user attempting some every day task will have
to find all statements in a whole collection of books of
knowledge, all relating to her task.
Second, and worse, the same information on a
particular aspect may be present several times throughout
the books of knowledge. For example, the property of a
particular material or a key business process will be
touched upon many times. Hence, the relevant information
must be duplicated.
Third, maintenance of a book of knowledge, let a
lone a whole collection of books, is hard. Many people
contributed to the knowledge base, and conditions under
which the statements in the books of knowledge have been

made are constantly changing. What is worse, the
conditions under which these statements hold are very
rarely documented. In fact, the conditions under which
these statements hold may not even be known.
Fourth, due to the structure and complexity of books
of knowledge, ambiguous or inconsistent information can
creep in. As a consequence, the quality and acceptance of
the knowledge management initiative may be drawn into
question.
Fifth, the interdependence of issues addressed in a
book of knowledge is typically not documented and not
represented, let alone visualized.
From our point of view, a good system for knowledge
navigation should provide mechanisms to address these
five key issues. In the remainder of the paper, we provide
more a detailed view on some of these issues.

3. Ontologies for knowledge management
Currently the most promising approach for
overcoming some of the limitations of the text-based book
of knowledge approach lies in employing ontologies and
semantic web technologies for the structuring and
management of the documented knowledge.
In this section, we briefly introduce the concept of
ontologies and describe how they are applied to managing
information.
The most widely accepted definition of an ontology,
due to Gruber [5], is an explicit specification of a
conceptualization. In the given context, an ontology is a
data structure representing an agreement between the
people and systems involved. In this sense, ontologies
form a basis for communicating about a given topic.
More precisely, an ontology represents the objects,
their categorization, properties and relationships. In
knowledge management, ontologies provide a good
metaphor for the structuring of knowledge bases.
Certainly, when building ontologies, we are restricted
to modeling a small window of the real world, seen from a
certain perspective. For example, depending on the
context, we can understand the concepts of “man and
woman” as “husband and wife”, “father and mother”,
“employee and manager”, “customer and salesperson”,
and so on. Not all of these meanings can be anticipated,
let alone modeled, when building an ontology
representing the concepts of “man and woman”. Figure 1
depicts the structure of an ontology in a more technical
context. Here, concepts are depicted in boxes,
relationships as lines between boxes. The details of the
concepts are not shown, a mere to these details hint are the
pointers to elements in the CAD drawing on some of the
concepts.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Engine Top End Assembly
Camshaft

LVSDUWRI

LVPDGHRI

Rocker Arm

Steel

LVSDUWRI
LVVXSSOLHGE\

Engine Valve

LVSDUWRI

Inhouse
Engine Valve Seat

LVSDUWRI

Figure 1. An example of an ontology in a more
technical application.

One aspect of particular importance in the context of
ontologies is that in an ontology, knowledge is not only
embedded in the concepts and their properties; the
relationship between concepts themselves are essential
elements. Therefore, every user interface approach must
integrate the representation of concept details with the
representation of relationships between concepts.

4. Interfaces for knowledge management
This paper is concerned with the task to devise
methods for interaction and visualization in knowledge
management. In particular, we wish to enable the user to
take active benefit of interconnections between
information elements present in knowledge bases.
In this section, we first recall some of the general
rules for user interface design, and discuss related work.
We then proceed to describe some intrinsic conflicts that
we found between the goals of knowledge management
and the rules for user interface design, and point to a few
directions for their overcoming.

4.1.

General rules for user interface design

The psychology of sensation and perception on the
one hand, and software ergonomics on the other hand
form the basis of user interface design. Here, we wish to
distinguish between the design of the interface, i.e. the
look and feel, and the design of the interactions, i.e. the
paths a user takes through the system to achieve a given
task.
The principles of human sensation and perception [4]
provide a good basis for the design of user interfaces.
Even today, Miller’s [8] fundamental statement of 1956,
limiting the human intake of perceptions to “seven plus or
minus two” elements, is widely regarded and respected.
As human beings, we focus on objects that stand out in
their shape and color from the surrounding, and rapidly
recognize familiar patterns and shapes.

Consequently, graphical user interfaces should be
designed around the following principles [3]: The user
interface should not be too cluttered, elements in the user
interface should be grouped by meaning, color and shape
should be used consistently, active elements should be
highlighted, and so on.
Further, the principles of human communication
provide a basis for the design of human computer
interaction. Shneiderman [12] points out the following
“golden rules of user interface design” as follows: strive
for consistency, offer informative feedback, permit easy
reversal of actions, reduce the load on short term memory
to name a few.

4.2.

Challenges in knowledge visualization

As it turns out, implementing the general rules and
principles for user interface and user interaction design is
particularly challenging for knowledge management.
Intricate links are present between the goals of knowledge
management on the one hand and the principles of user
interface design on the other hand, that are quite hard
challenges in practice. Here, we discuss these challenges.
Computer
Processability
vs.
Human
Understandability. From the perspective of knowledge
management, on the one hand, it is important to maintain
information in a representation fit for machine processing.
Advanced search and filtering algorithms, constraint
solving methods and classification are all examples that
are only usable on information that is well structured and
highly formalized. From the perspective of user interface
design, on the other hand, a human understandable
knowledge representation is essential; highly formalized
information representation is counter productive.
Consequently, we find a fundamental conflict between the
goal of presenting information in a form suitable for
presentation to the user on the one hand, and for
processing on the other hand.
Local Detail vs. Global Context. A second
fundamental problem in knowledge visualization is to
provide both local detail and global context to the user.
On the one hand, detail information of the knowledge
elements, their attributes and properties, should be visible.
In practice, only the detail information will convey the
meaning of a knowledge element to the user. On the other
hand, context and overview for the information is essential
to the user to interpreted the information from the right
point of view and in the right context. Hence, we find an
intrinsic conflict between the goal of providing a visual
access to local detail and global context at the same time,
ideallz at a level adapted to the individual user’s needs.
Lamping et al. [7] suggest a “fisheye technique”
based on hyperbolic trees [9] [10] that places the object
under inspection in the center of the display and arranges

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

related objects around. However, detail information of any
extent becomes extremely hard to provide using such
methods. Frequently, detail is only visible after the user
clicked on one element, and is then displayed in a separate
window.
Overview vs. Complexity. Knowledge bases tend to
contain quite large amounts of information. In almost all
cases this information was provided by domain experts,
not experts in information management or in visualization.
We find it a particularly hard challenge to provide the user
of the knowledge base with a good overview of the
information dealt with on the one hand, and to not burden
him with too much complexity on the other hand. The
overview of information is essential to enable the user to
understand how different aspects of the knowledge base
play together. One approach based on zooming has been
presented by Suh et al. [14]. However, a fitting concept in
the context of knowledge base visualization is still
needed.
Structure vs. Content. A good visualization of
knowledge bases, must provide access to the information
elements as well as to the structure present. In practice,
this requirement becomes quickly impractical, as the
information density that can be packed into a user
interface is limited. Hence, we find an intrinsic conflict
between the goal of providing structure and the goal of
visualizing detail content. Semantic networks, topic maps,
and hyperbolic trees focus on visualizing the structure of
information. The actual context, images, text, numbers,
and so on, are frequently depicted in a separate frame, or
even a separate window that pups up based on user
selection. Figure 2 depicts a semantic network augmented
by detail information, which quickly becomes too
cluttered. For practical knowledge visualization we wish
for an interface that integrates the presentation of structure
with the presentation of content.
Flexibility vs. Consistency. On the one hand,
information of widely varying kind should be provided
during the knowledge base exploration. On the other hand,
consistency of information is necessary for the user to
efficiently absorb the information presented. We find it a
particular challenge to provide the knowledge authors
with the freedom to express on the one hand, and to assert
consistency of the information on the other hand.
Bi-directional Relation vs. Reversal of Actions. Bidirectional relations are a fundamental principle in
ontology modeling. For example, if we know that a certain
staff member is the author of a certain publication, then by
symmetry we know that the publication is written by the
staff member. In essence, the bi-directionality of relations
is a consequence of the information modeled being factual
knowledge. Even if the inverse relation “written by” were
not represented in the knowledge base explicitly, it is
existent due to the nature of the information stored. Bidirectional relations allow for navigation from one

concept to another and back (here, from staff to
publication and back). This point of view is however
inconsistent with the reversal of actions metaphor that we
know and are used to from the back or undo buttons
present in almost all applications. When employing bidirectional relations, the user has to actively navigate back
to the starting point to achieve reversal of action. Hence,
one particular challenge is a peaceful coexistence of bidirectional relations and of reversal of action.

Figure 2. A semantic network provides visual
overview (left); an integration of structure and
content quickly becomes cluttered and impractical
(right).

Innovation vs. Known Metaphors. The interactive
visualization of semantic information calls for innovative
interaction design. As users build expectations about how
to handle software systems, they tend to get used to
popular interaction designs. Moreover, many users of a
knowledge management system will be neither willing to,
nor have the time the time to learn and explore a new
interaction design in much depth. Changing to a new
interaction concept corresponds to human effort, which,
incurred by significant a number of users, quickly
translates to money spent. Therefore, the foremost goal in
practice is to employ known interaction mechanisms as
much as possible. Further, the user interface design should
relate to expectations the user may have from the real
world, for example by employing meaningful symbols.
Hence, one challenge is to find a good balance between an
innovative, adapted visualization and employment of
known metaphors.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we first introduced knowledge
management as a promising tool to achieve core business
goals of an organization in today’s markets. We presented
two essential elements of knowledge management,
communities of practice and books of knowledge.
Looking more closely at books of knowledge, we then
identified limitations of the traditional approach of
document management, and pointed to ontologies as a
way of overcoming these limitations. Finally, we
discussed human interface issues in the visualization of

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

knowledge bases. We distinguished between interface
design and interaction design, and identified a number of
key challenges, that we still see unanswered from a
practical point of view.

6. References
[1] Davenport, Thomas H. and Prusak, Laurence, “Working
Knowledge: How Organizations Manage what they Know”;
Harvard Business School Press, 1998.
[2] European Central Bank, ”ECB Monthly Bulletin, March
2002”;
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/mb200203en.pdf,
European Central Bank, March 2002.
[3] Foley, James D.; van Dam, A. et al., “Computer Graphics –
Principles and Practice”. second edition., Addison-Wesley,
1996.
[4] Goldstein, E. Bruce “Sensation and Perception”, fifth
edition, Wadsworth, 1998.
[5] Gruber, Thomas, “Toward principles for the design of
ontologies used for knowledge sharing”; International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, Vol. 43, No. 5/6, pp.
907-928, Nov. 1995.
[6] Kelleher, Dominic and Levene, Simon, “Knowledge
Management – A guide to good practice”; British
Standards Institute, 2001.
[7] Lamping, John; Rao, Ramana and Pirolli, Peter, “A Focus
+ Context Technique Based on Hyperbolic Geometry for
Visualizing Large Hierarchies”, Xerox Palo Alto Research
Center, Palo Alto, CA.
[8] Miller, G. A, “The magical number seven, plus or minus
two – Some limits on our capability for processing
information”; Psychological Science, Vol. 63,1956
[9] Munzner, Tamara, “Exploring Large Graphs in 3D
Hyperbolic Space” IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 18-23, 1998.
[10] Pirolli, Peter; Card, Stuart K., Van Der Wege, Mija M.,
“Visualizations of Large Tree Structures”, Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center, Palo Alto, CA
[11] Reed, Michael and Heller, Dan, “OLIVE: On-line Library
of
Information
Visualization
Environments”,
http://otal.umd.edu/Olive/, University of Maryland, College
Park, Department of Computer Science.
[12] Shneidermann, Ben, “Designing the User Interface –
Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction”; 3.
revised edition, Reading/Massachusetts; Addison-Wesley
Longman Inc. 1998
[13] Stolte, Chris and Hanrahan, Pat, “Polaris: A System for
Query, Analysis and Visualization of Multi-dimensional
Relational Databases” Computer Science Department,
Stanford University, Information Visualization 2000.
[14] Suh, Bongwon.; Bederson, Benjamin B., “OZONE: A
Zoomable Interface for Navigating Ontology”, Human
Computer Interaction Laboratory, Computer Science
Department, University of Maryland at College Park.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

