Toward Topic Maps Processing and Visualization
Pascal Auillans
Mondeca, Paris, France
LaBRI, UMR 5800, Univerist´e Bordeaux I, Talence, France
auillans@labri.fr

Abstract
The development of XML has enabled the construction
of a semantic web through different standards. This paper,
which focus on XML Topic Maps, intends to present the benefit brought by the graph theory in the user’s main concerns
: processing and visualization of topic maps.

1. Introduction
The recent development of the XML standard has enabled, on one hand, the definition of grammar allowing the
construction of a semantic web. Among these grammars,
XML Topic maps [13] seems to be one of the most attractive. This standard enables the semantic organization of
topics and their relationships. On the other hand, the definition of grammars which allow precise drawing over the
internet, such as XML/SVG [6], or GraphXML [9] . However, these standards are only interchange grammar. Much
work has to be done to make XML Topic Maps standard
useful for the end-users. Presently, topic maps are just a
huge information repository for which we need to define a
query language as much as we need to find a way to present
them to the end users. This paper will present interesting
approaches in term of both topic map processing and visualization based on graph theory, which we find is the most
appropriate tool. Therefore, the XML Topic Maps standard
and a formal model will be introduced and used to present
some possible processes and representations of topic maps.

2.1. The XML Topic Maps specification
The aim of XML Topic Maps specification is to offer
an interchange format allowing users the creation of a semantic network of index over a document layer. In order to
achieve this, the main object proposed by the specification,
called topic, will allow users to introduce a subject about
which they possess or may possess information. The links
between these topics and their related information are defined by objects called occurrences.
The second important concept of topic maps is the interconnection of these topics for offering users an intuitive way
to browse or search for information. To do this, the XML
Topic Maps specification offers two objects : the associations and roles. When a user consider that there a relevant
relation between topics exist, an association is created in
which all of those topics are linked by roles.
To make this network meaningful, different semantics
are defined. The first allows the definition of types for the
different object. These types are actually defined by the topics themselves and are used by roles, topics, associations
and occurrences. The second semantic, called scoping, allows users to constraint the validity of an association.

2.2. Elements of graph theory

2. Graph Theory and Topic maps

The different terms and results of graph theory, which
are used to define a topic map formal model and understand
the process and representation that will be proposed, will
be now introduced. For more information on concepts and
standard algorithms of graph theory, the following books
are suggested : [3], [5].

The aim of this section is to show how the XML Topic
Maps specification can be formalized using graph theory. Therefore, the XML Topic Maps specification will be
briefly presented, followed by all the different term and results of graph theory which will be used in the rest of the
document. Finally, the formal model associated with topic
maps used in the KePT project will be presented.

is a couple ´Î µ,
2.2.1. Generality.
A graph
where Î is the set of vertices and the set of edges.
An edge is a pair of vertices Ü Ý . We usually say that
Ü and Ý are incident with , or that they are the endpoints
of . Ü and Ý are said to be adjacent or neighbors. The
neighborhood of a vertex Ú , usually noted Æ ´Ú µ, is defined
by : Æ ´Ú µ
Ù¾Î Ù Ú ¾ .

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The order of a graph, which will be noted Ò, is its number of vertices, and its size, noted Ñ, is its number of edges.
The degree of a vertex is the number of edges that are
incident with it.
Example
1

ber of edges it contains. The distance between two vertices
Ü, Ý in a graph G, noted ´Ü Ýµ, is the minimum length of
all the paths connecting them. It is now possible to extend
the definition of the neighborhood to the -neighborhood,
defined by Æ ´Ú µ
.
Ù ¾ Î ´Ù Ú µ
2.2.5. Hypergraph. Hypergraphs are a generalization
of graph concept, where an edge is incident with an
unspecified number of vertices. In that case we will use the
term hyperedges. The representing graph of a hypergraph,
À ´ÎÀ À µ is a graph where the set of vertices is the
union of the set of vertices and the edges of the hypergraph,
and there exists an edge between two vertices if and only if
one of the vertices is a hyperedge incident with the other
´ÎÀ
Ú
¾ À Ú ¾ µ.
vertex :
À
An important property of representative graph of hypergraph is that the vertices can be decomposed into two sets
such that there exists no edges between any couple of vertices belonging to the same set. These types of graphs are
therefore named bipartite graphs.

2

3
6

Ë

4

5

Figure 1. Graph simple
2.2.2. Subgraph. A partial graph of
´Î
µ is a graph
´Î
µ where
is a subset of .
´Î
µ is a graph ´ µ
An induced subgraph of
´
µ where
is a subset of Î and is the subset of
such that for every vertex couple of , there exists an edge
between them in ´ µ, if and only if one exists between
them in .
Let
´Î
µ be a graph. We will call a path
a sequence È
Ü½ ½ Ü¾ Ü  ½  ½ Ü with
of
Ü ¾ Î and ¾ and
Ü Ü ·½ . A path is
said to be simple if each vertex appears only once. A
Ü½
cycle
 ½ Ü is a path where endpoints
are the same vertex (Ü½
Ü ). A circuit is said to be
  ½ , appears only once.
simple if each vertex Ü , ¾ ½

1

3

4

2

4

E
6

B

5

C

6

D

E

C

Figure 3. A hypergraph (left) and its representing graph (right)

The following definition, the basis of the definition of a
topic map which will be briefly presented in the next section, allows multiple incidence of a vertex to a same hyperedge.
Definition.

Î

´

6

3
5

3
5

D

1

1

4

B

A

2.2.3. Tree. A Tree is a connected graph without cycle. The size of an order Ò tree is then Ò   ½. The vertices
of degree 1 are called the leaves.
A spanning tree of a graph G is a partial graph of G
which is a tree.
Examples

2

A

2

Î

¯Î

7

–
–

2.2.4. Distances. The length of a path or a cycle is the num-

–

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

hypergraph

Á µ, where:

is

a

-tuple

À

Á are disjoint finite sets, which we call as follows:

Figure 2. Tree

2

A

Î

is the vertex set of À,

is the edge set of À,

Á is the incidence set of À.

¯

Î È ´Á µ is a mapping from Î to the set È ´Á µ
Î
of all the subsets of Á (the image of a vertex is a subset
of Á ), which we call the vertex-connector of À, satisfying the following conditions:
Ú

Ú¼ ¾ Î

Î

Ú

´ µ

Ú

Î

Î

¾

Ú¼ µ
´Ú µ

´

3. Topic map processing
One of the most interresting aspects of the approaches
to Topic Maps through graph theory is the efficiency of the
computation (the notion of algorithms’ complexity is defined in [7]), defined by the number of instructions a program executes in order to obtain a solution. Usually in
graph theory, the number of instructions is a function in
terms of the number of vertices and/or edges. The efficiency
of the computation is mainly due to the fact that graph theory uses the notion of locality : most of the algorithms require only knowledge of the current vertex and its neighborhood, and not knowledge of the whole graph.
The current efforts made to define a topic map query language does not take into consideration the graph description
of the topic map. Rather, they are primarily based on the
usuall query language. In this section, some standard problems which are efficiently solved using graph theory, will
be presented.

(1)

Á

(2)

Î

(notice that for any incidence « ¾ Á , there exists a
unique vertex Ú ¾ Î , such that « ¾ Î ´Ú µ, that we
will call the vertex-endpoint of «)

¯

È ´Á µ is a mapping from Î to È ´Á µ, that
similarly satisfies the following conditions:
¼¾

¼

´ µ

´ µ
´ µ

¾
(as previously, for any incidence «
unique edge ¾ , such that « ¾
call the edge-endpoint of «)

(3)

Á

(4)

¾ Á , there exists a
´ µ,

3.1. Filtering

that we will

In the XML Topic Maps specification, besides the standard object’s type mechanism, (instanceOf), a mechanism, called scoping which does not exist in RDF, allow
the definition of validity constraints on associations of subjects. The obvious aim of this mechanism is to allow the
quick filtering of the relationships in the repository. In principle, one may think this problem requires the knowledge
of the whole repository, and therefore the use of graph theory is not appropriate. By taking a closer look at the formal
definition of a topic map [2], this processing still uses the
locality notion. In our topic map model, the The application defines special edges of the graph. The process of
extracting some elements having a specific semantic then
consists of the extraction of the -neighborhood of the semantic vertex. Logic functions may also be processed in the
same way using the union intersection mechanisms on the
extracted sets.

2.3. From topic maps to graph
Recently, the topic maps community began several
project such as [2] or [4], for defining a processing model
for topic maps. The aim of these work is to obtain a formal
representation of what topic maps are . The common point
in all of these proposition is the definition of topic maps by
the use of graph theory elements. In [2], a generic definition
is given of what a topic map should be. Roughly speaking,
a topic map is a couple composed of a hypergraph, which
represents the elements of the topic map and an application
(anti-lift) which associate a set of the hypergraph elements
to a vertex (topic). The aim of the anti-lift is to define the
semantic caracterisation (instanceOf, scope) of the hypergraph elements by a topic.
Definition. A topic map
´À µ, where:

¯ À ´Ì
of Ì ,
¯

Ì

Ì

3.2. Reduction

may be defined as a couple

The main idea of topic maps is to offer users a knowledge repository on which requests will be performed.
Problems arise when the amount of information returned
by the request is too big to be relevant. In this case, it may
be useful to offer the user an overview mechanism to which
an exploration process is added. There mainly exist two
differents approches to perform such a process. The first
one uses classification methods, while the second one uses
graph clustering tools.

Á µ is the homogenous hypergraph

Ì È ´Ì
Á µ is a mapping from the topic set
of Ì to the set of the subsets of elements of Ì , that we
call the covering of the topic map, with the constraint
that
Ø¾Ì

ÀØ

Ø

´ µ

3.2.1. Classification.
3

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

This mechanism, presented in

more detail in [8] and studied with specific regards to Topic
Maps in [10], is used in order to classify objects according
to some criteria of similarity. The idea is to create a pattern
matrix ÅÑ Ò in which lines represent objects and rows
represent their properties. The values of the cells are
defined as following :

Å

´

½

¼

if has the property
otherwise

-

- distance ´Ù Ú µ-paths : This request consists of the
extraction of a subgraph composed of all of the paths
for which the maximum distance is between two selected vertices and for which each element satisfies the
given semantic constraints. This request answers the
question “Does a connexion exists between this two
information, in such context ?”

(5)

By the use of factorial analysis, it is then possible to find
sets of similar objects. However, this process is usually time
consuming, and therefore cannot be used for real time applications.
Regarding topic maps, several approaches are possible.
To define the properties of the vertices, one can use their
types or the types of their roles. In the latter case, the values
can be set to the number of roles of that type.

4. Topic map visualization
A well-known expression states, ”A small drawing is
better than a long sentence.”, except in some simple requests, such as tree or distance-one neighborhood extraction, it is very difficult to find the suitable text representation
of a topic map. In this section, some ideas about graphical
representation will be presented. We will see that several aspects of the topic map will influence the drawing and must
therefore be kept in mind. The first apparent parameter is
the size of the topic map itself (number of vertices and edges
of the graph). It is obvious that trying to draw a topic map
having thousands of vertices is useless for a user except is
mechanisms such as zooming are proposed. Moreover, we
will see that some other parameters, such as the topology
of the topic map, may also be important. Finaly, works on
visual aspects of the drawings according to either the user
specifications or, once again, to the topology of the topic
map itself, will by presented.

3.2.2. Clustering. Clustering is a technique based on
the graph topology allowing the definition of sets of
vertices.
´Î
µ is a set
Definition. A clustering of a graph
Ë Ë½ Ë of clusters, which are subsets of Î , such
that their union is equal to Î . If every pair of sets of Ë are
disjoint, then Ë is called a partition and we will use the term
graph partitioning.

An interesting approach to topic map clustering is based
on the -dominating set problem of a graph, which can be
expressed as follows:
Definition. Let
-dominating set of

Î

´

µ

be a simple graph. Ë

Î

is a

if :

Ú ¾ Î , Ù ¾ Ë , such that ´Ù Úµ

-neighborhood : This request consists of the extraction of the subgraph induced by the vertices at a maximum distance from the selected vertex, in which
each element satisfies the given semantic constraints.
This request answers the fundamental question “what
is related to that specific information in such a context?”

.

The primary advantage of this approach is the easy definition of a set of representative vertices of the clusters,
which are the dominating vertices. These representative
vertices may either be used to define the labels associated
with the clusters, or to generate a new semantic constraint.
Nevertheless, the detection of a -dominating set in a graph
is a NP-complete problem, considered one as the worst class
of problems in computer science. This constraint implies
that no real-time algorithm may be implemented to find a
solution. However, some heuristics have been presented in
[1] in order to obtain an acceptable solution in real-time.

4.1. Visualization of small topic maps

3.3. Navigational requests

As previously said the types of drawings that will be
presented in this section are suitable for small topic maps,
usually with less than a hundred vertices. We will see
that topological properties have to be taken into account
in order to render the drawings and therefore the graph
relevant. This section will be conclude by showing how
even when the graphs do not possess strong topological
properties the bipartite property of the representative graph
of the hypergraph may be useful.

As of yet, a general mechanism has not been defined for
requests management. However, some requests have been
implemented based on the two fundamental principles of
navigation and filtering. The two requests, based on theses
principles, implemented are the following :

4.1.1. Tree visualization.
these types of drawings
must not be neglected for several reasons : they are easiest
to implement, the resulting drawings usually render the
underlying graph relevant, and this topological property of
the graph may be checked in linear time. The later reason
4

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

implies that in a real time process, a software is able to
make the decision of choosing these types of drawings.
One may think that tree drawings are not suitable for
topic maps since they describe non hierarchical index.
However, one must not forget that semantic constraints of
the subgraph extraction algorithms may actually easily lead
to the extraction of a tree. This is the case, for example,
when a user select semantics of familial relationships.

of edges crossing (which usually lead to misunderstanding
the graph) and offer the users a better appreciation of the
distances between the objects.

4.1.2. Hierarchical visualization. Some requests may
produce graphs for which the topology is extremely hierarchical, although they are not trees. As in the example of
the previously presented request of distance ´Ù Ú µ-paths
extraction, a possible representation which could clearly
represent that hierarchical notion would be to draw the two
selected vertices, one on the top and one on the bottom of
the drawing, and then to draw inside the area defined by
their paths.
Figure 5. Kartoo hypergraph representation

Figure 4. Distance 4 (1,7)-paths hierarchical
representation

Figure 6. Bipartite graph representation

4.2. Visualization of large topic maps

4.1.3. graph visualization. Since it is sometimes difficult
to choose a proper hypertext representation of a graph issued from a topic map, it is also difficult to find a proper
graphical representation. However, one must keep in mind
the important characteristic of a hypergraph, and therefore
of the topic maps : it can be represented by a bipartite
graph. we can use this characteristic when the choice of
the drawing cannot be determined by stronger topological characteristics. The two following figures show these
two types of drawings. The first, issued from the kartoo
(http://www.kartoo.com), explicitly draws a hypergraph. This type of representation is somehow already
fuzzy for a sparse hypergraph, consisting of the neighborhood of a vertex. The second, issued from Mondeca’s software, use the bipartite characteristic of the hypergraph. This
leads to what we call a polar drawing in which the center
vertex is the one selected by the user and the other vertices
are placed by layers around it. We find that such a representation offers better aesthetic criteria, such as the reduction

We have presented techniques for visualizing small
graphs. Similarly, techniques exist for drawing large ones.
Let’s consider two approaches to the representation of large
topic maps : Either simply drawing it, or applying special
processing in order to reduce the size, and then define a
mechanism allowing the user to browse it.
In the first instance, tools such as zooming scaling . . . ,
must be provided in order for the user to understand the
information provided. The main advantage of this representation is that it offers a general view of the graph. However,
this view is not always meaningful.
In the second instance one may use the clustering techniques which can lead to the creation of a new graph, called
a quotient graph.
´Î
µ be a simple graph and
Definition. Let
Ë½
Ë a clustering of . The quotient graph
´Î
µ is defined by :

5

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Ë

-

Î

Ë½
´Ë Ë µ ¾

Ë

¸

,

[3] C. Berge. Graphs and Hypergraphs. North-Holland Publishing, 1983.
[4] M. Biezunski and S. Newcomb.
Pmtm4, a
processing model for xml topic maps,
2002.
http://www.topicmaps.net/pmtm4.htm.
[5] J. Bondy and U. Murty. Graph Theory with Applications.
North Holland, 1976.
[6] J. Ferraiolo and D. Jackson. Scalable vector graphics (svg)
1.1 specification, 2002. http://www.w3.org/TR/SVG11/.
[7] M. Garey and D. Johnson. Computers and Intractability, A
guide to the theory of NP-Completeness. W.H. Freeman and
Company, 1979.
[8] A. Gordon. Classification. Chapman & HALL/CRC, 1999.
[9] I. Herman and M. Marshall. Graphxml - a graph description
language. Lectures Notes in Computer Sciences, 1984:52–
62, 2000.
[10] B. Le Grand. Extraction d’information et visualisation de
syst`emes complexes s´emantiquement structur´es. PhD thesis,
University Pierre et Marie Curie, 2001.
[11] M. Marshall. Methods and Tools for the Visualization and
Navigation of Graphs. PhD thesis, Dept. of Mathematics
and Computer Science, University of Bordeaux, 2001.
[12] P. d. Mendez. Combinatorial hypermaps vs topic maps. In
P. Gennusa, editor, XML 2001-Europe, Berlin, May 2001.
[13] S. Pepper and G. Moore. Xml topic maps (xtm) 1.0, 2001.
http://www.topicmaps.org/xtm/1.0.

Ú ¾ Ë Û ¾ Ë , ´Ú Ûµ ¾

A somewhat classical architecture creates recursively
quotient graphs until the suitable size is obtained. This leads
to the creation of a cluster hierarchy which will help the user
to browse the graph.

4.3. Visual cues of topic maps
To conclude this section treating the visualization of
topic maps, we will briefly present work issued from information visualization in order to offer drawings which can
be more easily understood. When dealing with graphs that
do not possess strong topological properties, in order to obtain a good drawing, one can consider that offering visual
cues on the drawing is an acceptable solution for facilitating comprehension. Standard graphs’ visual cues are the
shape, color, size of the vertices and edges. For example,
specifically regarding topic maps, it may be interesting to
draw with two different shapes or size the vertices according to the set they belong to (topics or association). Colors
may also be easily associated with the vertices and edges
according to their types (semantics) . . . .
There exist some interesting approaches that allow the
automatic detection of these visual cues by a topological
analysis of the graph. For more information on this subject,
see [11]. Algorithms may, for example, detect important
areas of the graph and emphasize them.

5. Conclusion
In the first section, we saw that graph theory can
perfectly answer the need of a formal model that the XML
Topic Maps community is seeking. What’s more is that it
offers suitable and efficient solutions to the main concern
of users - processing and visualization.
Acknowledgement. The researches presented in this
paper are part of the KePT (Knowledge e-Publishing
Tool) funded by the European Commission, IST, which
involves four university laboratories : LIRMM (Montpellier), Ljubljana University, EHESS (Paris) and LaBRI
(Bordeaux).

References
[1] P. Auillans and O. Baudon. Graph clustering for very large
topic maps. In P. Gennusa, editor, XML 2001-Europe,
Berlin, May 2001.
[2] P. Auillans, P. d. Mendez, P. Rosenstiehl, and B. Vatant. A
formal model for topic maps, 2002. accepted at International
Semantic Web Conference 2002 (ISWC2002).

6

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

