Issues in Delivering Multimedia Content to Mobile devices
J. Arreymbi and M. Dastbaz
South Bank University, School of Computing and Information Systems, Centre for Multimedia
m.dastbaz@sbu.ac.uk & arreymja@sbu.ac.uk

Abstract
The scalability of a computer system is its response to
growth. It is also depended on its hardware, its operating
system and the applications it is running. Most distributed
systems technology today still depends on bus-based
shared memory which do not scale well, and systems
based on the grid or hypercube scheme requires
significantly less connections than a full inter-connection
that would exhibit a quadratic growth rate.
The rapid convergence of mobile communication,
digital broadcasting and network infrastructures calls for
rich multimedia content that is adaptive and responsive to
the needs of individuals, businesses and the public
organisations
This paper will discuss the emergence of mobile
Multimedia systems and provides an overview of the issues
regarding design and delivery of multimedia content to
mobile devices.

1.Introduction
Mobile multimedia is new phenomenon that has taken the
mobile communication industry by storm. This
phenomenon, that of being capable of delivering effective
integrated content, in proper format - colour, images, video,
graphics, animations and text (SMS), combined with
already extensive use of voice (audio) on mobile devices,
which users can leisurely interact with. Although progress
in this area has been slow, the wireless/ mobile multimedia
and inevitably mobile commerce (m-commerce), will become
a huge industry in the next 4 to 5 years. Forecasters, The
Kelsey Group, Ovum and Durlacher estimates that wireless
advertising revenues, (which is only one aspect of the
potential mobile commerce), will reach between $16 billion
and $23 billion by the year 2005. With the imminent
introduction of the 3G mobile phones - with far more
multimedia enabling tools - in Europe, it is important that
we take a closer look at the industry development stages
and the evolving consumer needs that goes with the

various technologies. While this medium promises
personalised, localised, interactive and immediate
commercial opportunity, this potential could also be the
potential Achilles heel of business over wireless devices.
This report will look at the make-up of technological issues
driving the industry, in relation to mobile devices, mobile
Internet, and the design and communication aspects
enabling the delivery of multimedia contents.
The buzzword being splashed around is Convergence and
by it we mean the convergence of multimedia technology
with the telecommunications industry. If for example
features of the telephone and television are combined, the
resultant is a visually enriched communication tool that
makes applications such as home shopping, distance
learning, remote collaboration with specialists, and
interactive access to live and stored video sources around
the world possible [1].

2. Mobile Devices
Wireless/Mobile devices are the most powerful
communication devices with respect to ubiquity,
immediacy, interactivity and mobility, and therefore can act
as the most powerful business communications devices, if
used appropriately. In this context, mobile devices
comprise handheld electronic computing devices that are
capable of delivering multimedia content over high-speed
wireless networks, specifically the Internet, for access to
real-time data access. These devices require a wireless
modem or other connection mechanism. Examples of these
devices are Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) phones
or “smart phones”, Palm VIIs, Pagers, Personal Digital
Assistants (PDAs), Laptops, Communicators etc. They can
be either one-way or two-way communication devices.
There are also the LAN/WAN-based Internet appliances.
These devices are not in the main stream yet, and for the
most part will emulate their wired counterparts, such as the
PC, to allow the user to conduct specific tasks within their
LAN or WAN range without the tether of a network
connection. An example of these is a Web Tablet that

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

allows users to access the web while roaming within their
office or home.

3. Mobile Internet
The fixed Internet provides connectivity to real-time
web-based data content using a hard -wired connection,
and introduces users to the power of an incredibly
interactive medium. The mobile Internet on its part
introduces users to instant gratification anywhere. Now
users can interact with companies, products, offers and
services whenever and wherever they have connectivity
through a wireless network and/or device. The wireless
uses broadband technology and offers scalability. With the
World Wide Web (www) on mobile devices and the advent
of microbrowsers and other technologies (e.g. WML),
these takes interactivity to the next level – interactivity
anywhere. Research by the WAP Forum have shown that
wireless device users do not expect to “surf” the net but
rather find out a timely, personalised summary of relevant
information. A subscriber may want to receive timely traffic
warnings in the area where he is. Ultimately, there will be
technology progress until location-based messaging
becomes mainstream. Users will be able to access data that
is contextually relevant to them based upon where they are,
what they are doing and what they want. This relevant data
is extremely powerful especially when incorporated in the
delivery process, with other media – multimedia content.

4. WAP
The Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) is a protocol
that enables mobile phones to communicate with a server
installed in the mobile phone network. Major mobile
phones vendors such as Nokia, Motorola, Siemens and
Ericsson etc., formed the WAP forum and support WAP as
an open, global specification. The ability to link Internet
and mobile phones is a facility that is going to insure wider
use of this technology. WAP defines a standard on how
information or value-added services and Internet content is
filtered and viewed on mobile phones and other wireless
devices. While traditional web pages are written in HTML
(Hypertext Markup Language), a WAP enabled device
displays pages written in WML (Wireless Markup
Language). The Wireless Application Protocol uses client server approach. It incorporates a small micro-browser into
a mobile phone and all WAP services and applications
reside temporarily on the WAP server and not on the
phone. It empowers mobile/wireless device users to easily
and securely (through Wireless Transport Layer Security

(WTLS)), access and interact with information and services
instantly over the wireless Internet or WAP enabled sites.
WAP has many application areas including access to
content and corporate IT-systems, up-to-date financial
information, sports results, email, calendars and “to-do”
lists etc. – ideal for persons on the move. WAP users will
be able to access traffic reports, weather forecasts, news
information, mapping and location services; with the future
possibility of m-commerce transactions and online banking
and payment (m-banking and m-payment).
XY network has launched Europe’s first multimedia WAP
advertising campaign, in which, the WAP portal service
carried a 10-second multimedia advertising bursts for
vnu.net, the online IT news and reviews portal from VNU
Business publications. The one interesting thing about this
campaign - apart from the fact that it was one WAP portal
advertising another - is that the ads were truly multimedia,
revolving around both WAP graphics and sound. Such is
how far this technology has come. WAP is compatible with
most operating systems, including PalmOS, EPOC,
Windows CE, FLEXOS, OS/9 and JavaOS, and provides
service interoperability even between different device
families. WAP supports the wireless network standards
including CDMA, GSM, PDC, PHS, TDMA, FLEX, DECT
and Mobitex, as well as understanding the WMLScript,
WML language (an XML application) that is optimised for
small screens and navigation without a keyboard.
WAP Architecture
When a request is passed from WML (Wireless Markup
Language) it is passed to a WAP Gateway, which gets the
information required from an Internet Server. This
information is stored in either HTML format or directly
prepared wireless terminals that use WML. If it is in HTML,
the content needs to be translated into WAP prior to being
sent back. This requested information is being sent back to
the WAP client using whatever mobile network bearer.
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø

WAP has a layered type of architecture:
Wireless Application Environment (WAE)
Wireless Session Protocol (WSP)
Wireless Transaction Protocol (WTP)
Wireless Transport Layer Security (WTLS)
Wireless Data Protocol (WDP)
Bearers e.g. Data, SMS, USSD etc.

Wireless Application Environment (WAE) is the interface
provided to the user and the technologies used. WAP
applications are developed using the following tools:
Wireless Markup Language (WML), WMLScript (a

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

scripting language similar to JavaScript and WBMP. This
layer is the most important for Applications and Multimedia
development.

5. Communication Issues
The history of creating wireless communication devices
dates back to Marconi's attempt in introducing wireless
communication in 1895. It was however in the early eights
that the first generation of cellular systems appeared in the
U.S. These systems were called Advanced Mobile Phone
Systems and operate in the 824 – 849 MHz and 869 – 894
MHz bands. At the same time, in Europe, similar systems
called NMT (Nordic Mobile Telephone System), were
developed which operated on 450 and 900 MHz bands.
These systems use FM (Frequency Modulation)
modulation for speech and in-band signalling. These first
generation systems were primarily designed for speech
transmission. However, some experiments of data and low
bit rate video transmission over these systems have taken
place [2]. (Furht, 1999).
During this period, voice links were generally poor, handsoff unreliable, capacity low and an inefficient use of the
available radio spectrum. Also, security then was nonexistent, with calls quite easily intercepted. However, there
are still quite a fair number of the 1G mobile phones in use
today, mostly in developing countries. These first (1G)
analogue systems were largely specific to each country and
have limiting international usage. Presently in some areas,
the 1G spectrum is being auctioned for the 2G and 3G
mobile use.
The second-generation (2G and 2.5G) mobile phones were
developed to use digital encoding which included the
Global System for Mobile (GSM) communication standard,
Digital-Advanced Mobile Phone Service (D-AMPS), and
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA). This is digital
wireless telephony transmission technique that allows
multiple frequencies to be used simultaneously (spread
spectrum) within the same bandwidth with reduced mutual
interference in each transmission. Most communication
systems around the world currently use 2G networks,
which support high bit rate voice and limited data
communications. At best they offer auxiliary services such
as data, fax, and Short Message Services (SMS) and
international roaming. Most 2G protocols offer different
levels of encryption. However, extended 2G and 2.5G
systems can provide additional features such as packetswitched connection, General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)
and enhanced data rates, which are High Speed Circuit
Switched Data (HSCSD), and Enhanced Data Rates for
GSM Evolution (EDGE). In 2G mobile phones,

communication between the handset and the base station
takes the form of an encrypted data stream, making
eavesdropping almost impossible. As well as voice calls,
2G phones can also send and receive data, so they can
provide limited data services such as text messaging and
Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) browsing using
micro-browsers. Most mobile phones in use today are the
second-generation (2G) mobile phones. The enhanced
standard 2.5G mobile phones, which have recently become
available extends 2G technology to offer improved data
capabilities, such as higher transmission rates and “alwayson-connection”. Therefore, most recently developed mobile
phones can support more advanced data services.
The future is 3G and/or 4G and is the new kid on the block
in digital mobile telephony. With an estimated 5 billion
wireless subscribers by the year 2005(source: Nokia), the
Third-generation (3G) mobile phones present protocols that
support much higher data rates measured in Mbps and are
intended for applications other than voice – such as mobile
games. The 3G systems promise to offer higher speeds and
“always-on” data connections. It will also support heavy
bandwidth hungry multimedia applications such as fullmotion video; video-conferencing and advanced data
services with full Internet access. The 3G networks are also
designed to support large numbers of users more efficiently
than 2G networks and allows for future expansion. Japan,
last year 2001, launched its 3G network. Meanwhile Europe
and part of Asia/Pacific regions planned their 3G launch
this year 2002 at the earliest; and the USA to follow on
later. But in fact, the long delay affecting the European
launch has cast some doubts in the minds of analysts,
vendors and providers alike, as to whether this will take
place at all.
The Universal Mobile Telecommunication Service (UMTS)
system, which replaces GSM, is a 3G standard supporting a
theoretical data throughput of up to 2Mpbs will possibly
be lunched globally by 2005. This is one of the key building
blocks that will drastically improve the value proposition.
The UMTS networks will solve the GSM problem of
competing data and voice traffic, because of access to new
frequency bands and significantly more capacity to carry
both voice and data traffic – therefore less congestion.
UMTS is a digital packet switching technology and offers
similar benefits as GPRS (always-on and optimised for IP)
and offer higher transmission quality as well.

6. Design Issues
The challenging aspects of actually fulfilling multimedia
content delivery on some mobile device stems from design

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

of these devices. Some of the more powerful so-called
“smart phones” are WAP enabled thus can access WAP
sites. However, due to the limitations of physical size and
bandwidth of existing mobile devices, businesses face the
challenge of communicating a message in limited space.
Also, because of the nature of the device size, weight and
difficulty to navigate on these devices, users exhibit very
limited patience, concentration and/or attention span.
Mobile devices are very different to PCs and present some
limitations too:
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø

Smaller displays
Different input devices (e.g. phone keypad, voice
input and graffiti pen etc.)
Relatively Less powerful CPUs
Less memory
Restricted Power consumption
Shorter Battery life
Colour Resolution (pixels)

All these limitations pose design problems, which needs
to be overcome. Devices have difficult user interface that is
different to that of a PC and lacks a mouse. Also, the limited
screen size means that the GUI is not appropriate for this
kind of device.

2.

3.

Is the delivery time critical? For example, news,
weather, sports and stock market updates need to
be in real-time frame, therefore best effort and
viewed when broadcast live.
Is the content viewed on delivery? If it is, does it
need to be stored locally and can be viewed in
real-time and/or past-time? Some content may be
stored for later, but would obviously require
storage capacity.

For example, CNN, and NY Times are already
supplementing their news coverage with teletext feeds to
deliver data direct to mobile phones. The delivery of
electronic newspapers using information selected to be of
interest to the reader was been possible. Others such as
BBC provide live-FM radio broadcasts to mobile devices
equipped enough to support and carry this service
functions.
7. Current Trends
Current trends in mobile multimedia run along the tracks of:
distributed, and hybrid systems. Distributed or Online, in
the sense that the multimedia is accessed directly and is
interactive across great distances. Hybrid systems are
those applications that merge or attempt to merge both
previous tracks. We are currently seeing many software
applications, particularly the latest office-suite productivity
software, that offers.
Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) functions that
include not only traditional stand-alone objects such as
pictures, or even audio, but also even the ability to link to
WWW and Internet sites. Also these applications, and
others such as Microsoft FrontPage, allow end-users to
collect commercial multimedia applications via networks
with little or no formal expertise; indeed, end-users can
similarly distribute the multimedia applications that they
themselves have created.

Fig1. Nokia's vision of the future of mobile computing
and telecommunication
In earnest Mobile Multimedia in any area prompts three key
questions:
1.

Can delivery be guaranteed and is guaranteed
delivery necessary? This would be the case for
downloading information updates where the file
structure is critical. However, many other
applications would not require this.

The merging of distributed networks such as the WorldWide Web and mobile /Wireless-WANS has made possible
information access that was previously unheard of. One
primary focus for the library and information science
professional is the current creation of digital libraries.
These electronic depositories can be accessed through a
variety of interfaces, but the World-Wide Web has
provided an optimum platform-independent interface.
Projects such as the Corbis digital-image library and George
Lucas's announced intention to begin producing
completely digital films are indicative of this trend. Even the
Gutenberg Project, which has maintained a decidedly

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

monomedia format, has been the focus of privatisation
attempts that would undoubtedly have led to an
enhancement of the Project's collection via a multimedia
interface (and most likely a fee). This trend illustrates not
only the potential for wide access to materials, but also the
possibility of the privatisation of libraries, the social and
cultural ramifications of which must be examined in depth.
The reality is that despite all the hype, the mobile
multimedia revolution and with it m-Commerce and other
application areas has not yet emerged. The technical
problems, some of which were highlighted above, plus
important design and development issues associated with
developing such applications are still far from being
resolved.
More realistic tasks as far as research in this area is
concern is identifying the real issues that exists in terms of
delivery of multimedia content to these mobile devices.
Although the emergence of tools such as WML and WML
script go some way in trying to address some of the issues
regarding application development the real challenge lies in
the development of new paradigms in HCI suited to the
new generation of multimedia communication devices that
in future will replace our current desktop machines.Perhaps
the best way to describe the current stage we are in is the
words of the words of Michelangelo: Ancora imparo - “I
am still learning”.

6. References & Resources
[1] Dastbaz, M. “Designing Interactive Multimedia
Systems”, McGraw Hill Publishers
[2] Furht B. (Ed.): Internet, Multimedia Systems and
Applications (IMSA'99), October 18-21, 1999, Nassau,
The Bahamas. IASTED/ACTA Press, 1999.
[3]
David
Pogue,
March
7,
2002
www.nytimes.com/technology/circuits/07STAT.html.
Resources Used:
Markku
Kylanpaa,
Oct
12,
www.vtt.fi/projects/mobmulti/.mobmulti.html

1998

Langer, J., Larsson, G., 2001. CDMA2000- A world
review Ericcson Review No. 3, 150 -158.
Larsson, G., 2000. Evolving from cdma one to third
generation systems. Ericcson Review No. 2, 58 -67.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Muller, F., et al., 2001, Further evolution of the
GSM/EDGE radio access network. Ericcson Review No.
3, 116-123.
Novak, L., Jonsson, A., 2000. WAP - Catalyst for the
future Ericcson Review No. 1, 14 -19.
Novak, L., Jonsson, A., 2001. SyncML - Getting the
mobile Internet in syn Ericcson Review No. 3, 110 -115.
Novak, L., Svensson, M., 2001, MMS - Building on the
success of SMS Ericcson Review No. 3, 102 -109.
UTMS, Sept 2001. Shaping the Mobile Multimedia
Future, an extended vision from the UTMS Report No.
10, 150 -158.

