Visualizing the Spatial and Temporal Distribution of User Interaction
Data Collected in Three-Dimensional Virtual Worlds
Katy Börner, William R. Hazlewood & Sy-Miaw Lin
Indiana University, SLIS
10th Street & Jordan Avenue, Main Library 019
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
E-mail: {katy, whazlewo, symlin}@indiana.edu
Abstract
This paper reports work in progress on the analysis
and visualization of the spatial and temporal
distribution of user interaction data collected in threedimensional (3-D) virtual worlds. Two tools are
introduced. The “WorldMapper” reads in a so-called
propdump file and creates a 2-D clickable map showing
the layout of the world as well as interaction possibilities
such as teleports and clickable web links. The second
tool visualizes user interaction data such as navigation,
chatting, and Web access activity overlaid on the world
map. Resulting visualizations are meant to support social
navigation, design evaluation and optimization, and the
study of virtual communities. Both tools are
demonstrated on a 19-person information treasure hunt
for information in a 3-D virtual world. The paper
concludes with a discussion and an outlook.

Keywords: Information Visualization, Virtual Worlds,

However, the resulting visualizations gave very
limited insight into the spatial and temporal distribution of
different user activities. Also, the utterances recorded in
the chat log files have been restricted to those from users
nearby; i.e., within a limited hearing range.
This paper presents tools for the spatially- and
temporally-referenced analysis and visualization of
complete sets of user interaction data recorded utilizing
bots (software programs).
The next section provides an overview of 3-D world
mapping and user interaction visualizations. Section three
briefly introduces the 3-D online browser technology
used. Section four explains and discusses the
WorldMapper tool. Section five introduces different
visualizations of user interaction log files, which are used
in section six to analyze the data of a 19-person
information treasure hunt in a 3-D virtual world. The paper
concludes with a discussion and an outlook.

Spatio-Temporal Maps, Social Navigation, Usability

2. World Maps and Visualizations of User
Interaction Data

1. Introduction

Today, computers are highly interconnected via the
Internet. A large number of diverse, text -based, 2-D and 3D graphical multi-user systems is available to connect
users not only to data but also to expertise of other users.
Consequently, there is an increasing interest in the
analysis and visualization of social interactions (Donath,
1995; Erickson et al., 1999). See (Börner & Lin, 2001) for a
review of social visualization research.
Another line of research focuses on the visualization of
MUDs or 3-D virtual worlds themselves in the form of 2-D
or 3-D spatial maps. Martin Dodge’s Atlas of Cyberspaces
section on MUDs & Virtual Worlds provides an excellent
overview (2000). Elaborated maps by Andrew Smith
(Smith, 2000) even show the urban density and the
teleport systems of his 3-D world. The AlphaWorld
Mapper 1 by Greg Roelofs and Pieter van der Meulen
provides access to a complete, zoomable 2-D map of a VW
that has roughly the size of California (429,025 km2).

The efficient utilization of 3-D virtual worlds (VWs) will
require tools that support social navigation, enable the
evaluation and optimization of the interface (or “shared
space”), and facilitate the study of virtual communities to
support their formation and evolution.
Our research aims to demonstrate that advanced data
mining and information visualization techniques (Card et
al., 1999; Chen, 1999; Ware, 1999; Spence, 2000; Dodge &
Kitchin, 2000) can be advantageously applied to augment,
evaluate, optimize, and study collaborative 3-D VWs and
to study their evolving communities (Börner, 2001).
In Börner & Lin (2001), we presented different
analysis and visualization techniques that help answer
questions such as: How many users participated in a
discussion as logged in the chat files? How much overlap
exists among the log files? How much do specific users
chat, and who chatted the most? How long is the average
utterance length for different users? How often do users
whisper? How many questions have been asked? Etc.

1 http://mapper.activeworlds.com/aw/

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The existing systems teach many valuable lessons
about how to visualize online spaces, their users,
navigation and conversation activity, as well as “social”
relationships. However, the analysis of computer-mediated
communication is dominated by textual analysis without
spatial reference, using linguistic discourse analysis and
ethnographic methods (Herring, 1996). Studies that
examine graphical chat rooms (e.g., Suler’s Palace study)
have used field observations, e-mail interviews, studies of
mailing lists and participant observation exclusively.
Naper (2000) was among the first to analyze chat text
logged in a 3-D VW and calls for analysis of graphical
elements.
To our knowledge, there exists no system that traces
and visualizes spatially- and temporally-referenced user
interaction such as navigation, object manipulation, Web
access, or chatting in 3-D VWs. This may be due to the
fact that most 3-D online browser systems provide an
exclusive chat log (oftentimes restricted to a fixed number
of close-by avatars) of a 3-D world experience. Information
about when and where a certain utterance was made, user
positions, object movements, teleports/warp usage, or
Web accesses is lost. However, spatial references are vital
to identify places where people typically speak, to find
teleport designs that work, etc. and ultimately to augment,
evaluate, optimize, and study 3-D VWs and their evolving
communities (Börner & Lin, 2001). Temporal aspects of
user interactions are key to identify user-user interaction
and collaboration among others.
This paper presents and demonstrates two tools that
aim to benefit the design, evaluation, optimization, and
study of 3-D VWs and their communities.

3. Three-Dimensional Online Browser
Today, a large variety of commercial online browser
systems can be used to design customized 3-D VWs.
Among the most frequently used systems are Blaxxun’s
online community client-server architecture,2 Microsoft’s
Virtual Worlds Platform, 3 Active Worlds technology by

creation of multi-modal, multi-user, navigable, and
collaborative virtual worlds in 3-D that are interconnected
with standard Web pages and are accessible from
standard computer platforms via the Internet, 24 hours a
day and 7 days a week. Mouse, keyboard, and screen are
used as the main human computer interface, as are
commonly used interactions such as point and click,
icons, and menus. However, the browsers provide access
to a 3-D virtual world that users can enter and explore
together.
Browser systems differ in the ease of building within
the worlds, their scalability and extensibility, and the size
of the user communities they manage to attract.
Active Worlds (AW) stands out due to its
exceptionally fast browser download, easy installation,
and surprisingly low system requirements. AW is based
on Render Ware, an interactive 3-D Graphics API. It differs
from VRML-based systems in the ease with which
participants can build within the world. A user simply
selects an existing object, makes a copy of it, and renames
it as a different object. A large object library is available.
The real-time object download is based on proximity and
enables the creation of very large worlds. AW has a large
user community dating back to mid-90s. As one of the
most popular VW systems, it hosts over six thousand
different worlds in its main entertainment-oriented
universe, and more than one hundred sixty worlds in
EduVerse, a special universe with an educational focus.
Figure 1 shows the AW interface. In contains three
main windows: a 3-D graphics window populated by
avatars, a Web browser window, and a chat window. At
the top are a menu bar and a toolbar for avatar actions.
Users can collaboratively navigate in 3-D, move their
mouse pointer over an object to bring up its description,
click on 3-D objects to display the corresponding Web
page in the right Web frame of the AW browser, or
teleport to a different area. The browser maintains a
history of visited places and Web pages so that the user
can easily return to previous locations and pages.

Activeworlds, Inc., 4 and the new Adobe Atmosphere
browser. 5 Damer (1998) and Börner (2001b) provide
reviews of different browser systems and existing virtual
communities.
Available 3-D browsers vary in many details, such as
their programming language, storage methods for objects,
and how 3-D objects are rendered for 2-D display.
However, all the systems mentioned above facilitate the

2
3
4
5

http://www.blaxxun.com/community
http://www.vworlds.org/
http://www.activeworlds.com/
http://www.adobe.com/products/atmosphere/

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 1. The AW browser interface

The Information Universe6 (iUni) (Katy Börner, 2001a)
is a world in AWs EduVerse. An overview map of this
400m by 400m world rendered in 2-D based on the list of
objects that made up the world on Feb 22nd, 2002 is
displayed in Fig. 2. All 3-D objects are rendered in white.
Web links and teleports are indicated by green and red
dots respectively. This map is clickable and was generated
by the WorldMapper explained in section four.

The dimensions of each object – used to determine and
avoid encroachment during object design and
manipulation – are specified in the so-called registry file.7
Data Analysis. In order to render a map, the object file
is parsed for the complete set of objects, their positions,
and rotations. The exact dimensions of each object are
determined by consulting the registry file. In addition,
teleports and web links are identified and stored
separately. Subsequently, object positions and sizes, as
well as positions of teleports and web links, are scaled
according to the size of the requested map.
Visualization
and
Interaction
Design. The
visualization consists of a grid of reference, objects, marks
for teleports and web links, and a legend that are drawn in
this sequence. The map is clickable; i.e., a mouse click on a
certain area on the map instantaneously teleports the user
into the corresponding area in the 3-D VW, easing
navigation.
The Active WorldMapper interface is available online
at http://iuniverse.slis.indiana.edu/map/. Users can enter
general information such as world name, size, and contact
person information as well as an object file and registry file
(optional). A click on “Map it” results in the rendering of a
two-dimensional, clickable map like the one shown in Fig.
2.

5. User Visualization
Figure 2. Map of iUni with Web links (green) and
teleports (brown). Major areas are labeled.
There are five different learning environments – a
Natural Disaster Area, a Science House, a Quest Atlantis
portal to different theme parks for kids, an Art Cafe, and a
Virtual Collaboration area. Black and blue area labels
denoting the five learning environments and community
areas respectively have been added by hand.

4. WorldMapper
World mapping comprises data collection, analysis,
visualization and interaction design.
Data Collection. In AW, information on objects that
make up a virtual world – such as time of building, builder,
position, orientation, object name, its description
(displayed when user moved mouse pointer over this
object), and any actions such as teleporting or display of
web links – are stored in the object file (also called
propdump file), and can be obtained by the owner of a
world.

The visualization of user interaction data requires the
collection of usage data, data analysis, and data
visualization.
Note that we are using Active Worlds technology.
Other browser systems may require different user logging
and visualization approaches.
Data Collection. In AW, the hearing range is limited
to, maximally, a 120m distance. Accordingly, chat log files
only collect utterances of users’ avatars that are in close
proximity.
11:37:29
11:37:37
11:37:49
11:37:54
11:38:04
11:38:07
11:38:17

'Let's plan our tour'
'Let's go to cafeteria to eat!'
'ok...great!'
'what's next?'
'08 will pay for our meal!'
'can we all go some where else?'
'We need to answer questions on
the sheet?'

Figure 3. Time-stamped chat utterances

7
6 http://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~katy/iUni/

05
06
07
08
06
08
05

A sample AW registry file is available
http://www.activeworlds.com/help/registry.html.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

online

at

To ensure complete chat logs, a program named
LogBot was utilized. This program logs all user positions.
Chat and navigation actions are time-stamped. Figure 3
shows a section of the time-stamped chat utterances of
subjects 05 through 08 that acted as members of team 2 in
the treasure hunt (see section six).
Data Analysis & Visualization. Time-stamped chat
and position data can be utilized to visualize spatially and
temporally referenced navigation and chat activity of
users. Diverse visualizations are discussed in section six.

6. Information Treasure Hunt
The proposed visualization tools have been applied to
analyze and visualize data collected during an
“Information Treasure Hunt” in a 3-D VW.
The study took place in a laboratory setting using PC
computers with 19-inch monitors. Nineteen subjects – ten
males and nine females – participated. Subject completed
degrees varied with nine at graduate-level coursework and
ten at undergraduate-level coursework. Their backgrounds
included Information Science (4), Instructional Systems
Technology (3), MLS/MIS (1), Leisure Studies (1),
Computer Science (8), Electronics & Communication
Engineer (1), and other (1). Subjects’ average age was 28.
Three of the subjects were native speakers in English,
eight in Mandarin Chinese, three in Korean, three in Hindi,
one in Tamil and one in unspecified language. Eighteen of
the subjects were right-handed, and only one is lefthanded. Seventeen of the subjects touch-type. Their
average number of hours spent on the computer per week
is 34.11 hours and the average weekly hours on the
Internet is 24.11 hours. Three of the subjects rated their
knowledge on computers as 5 (5 being expert), eleven
rated themselves as 4, four as 3, and one as 2. Seventeen
of the subjects had visited a text -based chat environment,
seven had visited a 3-D single user virtual environment,
and four had visited a 3-D multi-user virtual environment
before.
Subjects in this study were instructed to login to “iUni”
by starting the EduVerse Browser from the desktop.
Subjects were provided with a brief introduction to the
environment and navigational instructions and had five
minutes to explore the different navigation and interaction
possibilities.
The main task was to collectively search for the
answers to ten questions (Q1-Q10) about the world
comprising:
1. How many student residences are there?
2. Write down the names of all students that have
residences.
3. Find ‘Magster’s Mansion’ and answer: How many
worlds are linked from her menu system?

4.

In the ‘Meeting Place’ area you will find a sign that
links to lecture slides. What was the topic of this
particular lecture?
5. What are the four main resources that are available in
the ‘Library’?
6. How many different areas are in the ‘Art Café’?
7. In the ‘Quest Atlantis’ area: Is ‘Jonassan’ displayed
in the ‘Tower of Power’?
yes/no
8. How many household appliances are linked from the
‘Science House’?
9. In the ‘Natural Disaster’ area: How many different
types of buildings are dis played?
10. How many video streams are accessible in the ‘Virtual
Collaboration’ area?
The answers had to be reported by one team member. To
complete the task, subjects needed to find their assigned
teams and decide on a strategy to quickly find information
necessary for answering the provided questions. Also,
teams had to agree on how to exchange information with
each other. Figure 4 shows the locations of answers to Q1Q10.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4. Places that provide answers to Q1-Q10

Subjects did have access to and used a static, nonclickable map such as the one displayed in Fig. 2 for
navigation.
Figure 5 visualizes the number and length of utterances
made by the 19 S's during the information treasure hunt.
Subject numbers are plotted on the x-axis. The y-axis
represents the number of utterances. Each utterance is
represented by a rectangle of uniform height. The width of
the rectangle corresponds to the number of more or less
meaningful “words” in the utterance. Utterances
containing more than 14 words are displayed in red.
Shorter messages are shown in light yellow. Subject
number 09 clearly posted most messages – exactly 101.
While 01 posted only 11 (although rather long) messages.

Figure 5: Number and length of utterances
Figure 6 shows the chat (yellow) and web access (red)
activity for subjects 01-19 over the entire time period.
Teams are labeled in blue.

The first chat utterance was made around 11:12a. The first
chat-based attempt to find team members was made at
11:24:22 when subject no 10 said 'hi 15 i am looking for
you'. The time in-between is filled with the exploration the
browser interface, greetings, and first interactions with the
VW. Its follows a very active time in which Ss try to find
all their team members. According to the chat log, team 4
succeeds first at 11:32:40. Subsequently, teams get a
chance to concentrate on answering the ten questions. No
team finishes this task in the given time but several teams
manage to exchange some answers at the end.
Accordingly, Fig 6 shows times of active chat interaction
and solitary information search.
Figure 7 shows the navigation trails of team 2 (subjects
05-08), team 3 (subjects 09-12), and team 4 (subjects 13-16)
plotted after 15, 30, 45 and 60 mins. Analyzed in
combination with the detailed chat logs, team 2 and 3
divided the questions and exchanged the answers they
obtained at the end. Team 4 decided on a simple protocol,
such as MOV for moving and HALT for halting.
All three teams have been coordinated and busy
searching for answers and exchanging information in the
last 15 mins. With regard to the highest scores the teams
gained, team 2 has the most answers, and team 4 has the
least. The strategy that team 4 employed took them way
too much time in negotiating. A spatial comparison of the
navigation trails with Fig. 4 reveals which of the answers
could have been found by the different teams.
The analysis of the pre-test questionnaires revealed
information on different search strategies such as
consulting a 2-D map of the world (similar to figure 1),
flying up to locate team members, view the main places to
find out key words of the target, and chat. Chat was
reported as the main information exchange strategy by 15
S's. Seven Ss reported that they tried to meet with their
team members to divide the tasks and then go to different
places to find answers. Among the problems encountered
by subjects are: 6 S's reported difficulty in communicating
with others (possibly due to the limited hearing range), 6
S's reported getting lost in iUni, and one reported losing
sense of direction. Also, we asked S's for what purpose
they used the 3-D world and chat. Result for 3-D world
consisted of the following: for fun (6), navigation (6),
locate answers (5), meet teammates (1), learning (1). Chat
was used for: idea exchange (8), finding teammates (5),
communication (5), recognizing & acknowledging signals
(1), finding locations (1).
Asked for other comments, S's acknowledged good
interface design. Although some got lost multiple times,
they reported they felt very excited. Three S's found it
very interesting. Two mentioned again that it is easy to
lose sense of direction, and hard to contact team members.

Figure 6. Time sequence of chat activity

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Suggested improvements are to add a “private chat
room” for each team (1); and a more meaningful map –
should depict position; should display the direction like
“north” or “up” (2); and to give more time to find answers
(1).

7. Discussion & Outlook
The paper presented an analysis and visualization of user
interaction data that reveals the spatial and temporal
distribution of different user interactions in a 3-D VW.
The visualizations are intended to assist users in
making sense of the world, its information resources, and
collaboration possibilities, to aid designers with the
organization and layout of world content and the selection
of interaction possibilities, and to enable researchers to
study the communities evolving in 3-D VWs.
Future work aims at a real-time visualization of user
positions to be displayed in a clickable map to support
social navigation. This will require the continuous
collection of usage data, data analysis, and data
visualization. We will test this map by re-running the very
same Treasure Hunt experiment. It is expected that the map
will ease finding other team members as well as spatial
navigation.
While demonstrated and tested in a simple Information
Treasure Hunt, it should be obvious that the proposed
mapping and user interaction visualization tools are
applicable to support diverse applications, e.g., education,
e-commerce, or entertainment, that utilize multi-user VWs.
Given the ease in monitoring almost all activity in the
virtual space, care has to be taken to ensure that extensive
user tracking and analysis benefit the users rather than
invading their privacy. At any point in time users need to
be fully aware what interaction data is being recorded,
analyzed, and visualized. Otherwise, the system is likely to
approach the status of a panopticon.

Acknowledgements
Several students are involved in this research including
Alan Lin, Hakan Tuzun, and Min Xiao. Martin Dodge
provided insightful comments on an earlier version of this
paper.
We acknowledge ActiveWorld’s generous support in
providing free hosting of 3-D VWs for educational
purposes as well as an active research environment in
EduVerse. The research was supported by a High
Performance Network Application grant from Indiana
University 2000/2001.

References
Börner, K. (2001, October 18-20). Twin Worlds:
Augmenting, Evaluating, and Studying ThreeDimensional Digital Cities and Their Evolving

Communities (to be published by Springer). Paper
presented at the The Second Kyoto Meeting on
Digital Cities Digital Cities 2001 - International
Symposium and Workshop, Kyoto, Japan,
Börner, K. (2001a). Using Active Worlds Technology to
build an iUniverse of 3-D collaborative learning
environments. IEEE Learning Technology
newsletter. Available:
http://lttf.ieee.org/learn_tech/issues/january2001/.
Börner, K. (2001b). Virtual World Technologies for
Digital Cities of Tomorrow. Invited Talk at the Panel
Collaboration in Building Future Digital Cities. The
Second Kyoto Meeting on Digital Cities, Kyoto,
Japan. Available:
http://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~katy/research/dc01panel.pdf.
Börner, K., & Lin, Y.-C. (2001, July 25-27). Visualizing
Chat Log Data Collected in 3 -D Virtual Worlds.
Paper presented at the Information Visualisation
Conference, London, England: IEEE Press, pp. 141146.
Damer, B. (1998). Avatars! Exploring and Building
Virtual Worlds on the Internet. Berkeley, CA:
Peachpit Press.
Dodge, M. (2000). An Atlas of Cyberspaces. Multi-User
Dimensions (MUDs) & Virtual Worlds. Available:
http://www.geog.ucl.ac.uk/casa/martin/atlas/muds_v
w.html.
Donath, J. S. (1995, November 5-9, 1995). Visual Who:
Animating the affinities and activities of an
electronic community. Paper presented at the ACM
Multimedia 95, San Francisco, California: ACM Press,
Erickson, T., Smith, D. N., Kellogg, W. A., Laff, M.,
Richards, J. T., & Bradner, E. (1999). Socially
Translucent Systems: Social Proxies, Persistent
Conversation, and the Design of "Babble". Paper
presented at the Proceeding of the CHI 99 Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems: The CHI is
the limit: ACM Press, pp. 72 - 79.
Herring, S. C. (Ed.). (1996). Computer mediated
communication. Linguistic, social and cross-cultural
perspectives. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John
Benjamins Pub Co.
Naper, I. (2000). System features of an inhabited 3-D
virtual environment supporting multimodality in
communication. Paper presented at the 34th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on Systems
Sciences: Los Alamitos, CA: Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Computer Society.,
Smith, A. (2000). Mapping 30 days. CASA. Available:
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/30days/mapping.htm.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

