Texture Mapping on Irregular Topology Surface

Jin Jin Zheng
Jian J Zhang
National Centre for Computer Animation
Bournemouth University
United Kingdom
jj_zheng@lycos.com
jzhang@bournemouth.ac.uk

Abstract

The quality of a mapping function is judged by a

Texture-mapping a triangular or rectangular surface is

number of factors (efficiency, ease of use, image quality,

easy to perform. However, it is not so for irregular

etc.), out of which the quality of the final image is the

surfaces (n-sided surfaces where n > 4) due to lack of

most important. This criterion is further broken down

proper global parameters. In this paper we propose a

into sub-requirements, including the continuity of the

mapping function capable of texturing an irregular

texture, the distortion of the texture. Although texture

surface based on the modelling expression of Zheng-Ball

distortion is usually unavoidable if the surface is not a

n-sided surfaces.

developable surface, a good mapping function should
always try to minimise it [1].

1. Introduction

Texture mapping for triangular and rectangular
surfaces is relatively easy to perform. This is because

Texture mapping is a technique widely used in

that the parametric co-ordinates of these surfaces can

computer graphics. Since the texture function is defined

serve as the texture co-ordinates. Although it still leaves

in the texture space T2 and the surface over which the

the question of texture distortion, the mapping itself is

texture is to be mapped is defined in the ordinary 3D

straightforward. A standard method is to treat the

3

space R , the idea of texture mapping is to develop a

parametric co-ordinates of a surface patch as the texture

function, called the mapping function M, such that it can

co-ordinates. The texture co-ordinates can then

map the texture onto the 3D surface desirably. That is

interpolate the texture values across the surface.
However, problem arises if we wanted to map a

M: T2 → R3

piece of texture onto an object with holes and branches.

Clearly the quality of the final image is dependent on

This often comes with irregular topology. That is a

the quality of the mapping function, M. Due to the variety

model contains n-sided surface patches, where n > 4,

of curved surfaces and their geometric features such as

such as pentagons and hexagons. One understands that

curvature, twist and topology, much effort in texture

such an irregular surface patch does not have global

mapping has been expended to the development of proper

parameters which can be used to interpolate the textures

mapping functions.

across the surface patch [2]. This problem also arises

1
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

with the popular subdivision surfaces, and polygonal

being done either with a high amount of human

models which are often used in building animated

intervention or degrading of visual quality. This applies

characters.

to both smooth surfaces and polygonal modelling.

In this paper, we propose an analytical mapping

One method used quite often by animators is to

function for texture mapping of irregular surfaces. This

split an irregular surface model into a number of

1

mapping function provides a C continuous interpolation

triangular or quadrilateral pieces. Each of these pieces

scheme which is used to index the texture map in the

can be individually texture-mapped using its texture

texture space. It is able to texture any n-sided surface

co-ordinates. The problem for this approach, as can be

areas and can be incorporated into subdivision surface

easily understood, is the discontinuity between the

models to texture the neighbourhood of the extraordinary

seams. This problem further exacerbates when the

points1.

model is animated, due to lack of coherence of the
moving images.

The basic idea of the proposed mapping function is
constructed based on the use of Zheng-Ball surface

Two-part texture mapping, one of the early popular

patches [3] and Catmull-Clark subdivision rules [4].

techniques proposed by Bier and Sloan [5] is another

Instead of keeping subdividing an irregular mesh to

method employed in irregular surface texture mapping.

infinity [2], our method only conducts subdivision once.

Despite it effectiveness in many applications, it is not

A mapping function is then developed over the irregular

very easy to use, especially when the surface is

surface. The steps of generating the mapping function can

arbitrarily concave.
Solid texturing [6] is theoretically applicable to

be summarised as follows
•

•

Subdivide the initial single texture image once within

both solids and surfaces of any complexity. In practice,

the texture space and subdivide the corresponding

however, it is very tedious if one is to render a surface

surface mesh in the 3D space R3 using Catmull-Clark

using solid texturing. A large amount of human

subdivision rules.

intervention is required.
Subdivision surfaces have in recent years become a

Generating each mapping function for each irregular

popular

patch.

surface-modelling

scheme

in

computer

animation due to their capability of irregular topology.

Applying texture to each sub-patch has then become

Several texturing mapping methods have been proposed

trivial.
The remaining of this paper is organised as follows:

for such surface models. Since a large part of a

Section 2 gives a survey of the related work in texture

subdivision surface model is usually covered by

mapping. In section 3, a mapping function is developed

ordinary surface patches, such as B-Spline and Bézier

for texture-mapping of single irregular patches. Section 4

patches, the focal point is on the texture mapping of the

explains the procedure of texture-mapping irregular

irregular regions. A method proposed by DeRose et al

objects, followed by the results and examples in section 5.

[2] makes use of the subdivision rules for surface

Section 5 concludes the paper.

generation to interpolate the texture co-ordinates, which
are used to compute texture values. It is proved that the

2. Previous work

interpolation scheme using the same subdivision rules
as for the surface mesh produces a smooth mapping
over the surface. Effective as it is, it heavily relies on the

Traditionally texture-mapping of irregular surfaces is

use of the subdivision procedure, which in theory
1

requires an infinite number of iteration. In other words,

Extraordinary points are those whose valence is not 4.

2
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

this is not an analytical method. As a result, it makes any

smoothly. Therefore, if other regular patches are

further operations, such as differentiation a difficult job,

textured properly, a textured model will be made

although not entirely impossible [7]. Another recent

complete by texturing the irregular patches.
•

texture mapping method [Piponi & Borshukov 2000] was

A new spline surface was developed by Zheng and

proposed by Piponi & Borshukov where a subdivision

Zhang [8], which is as powerful as the subdivision

surface model is divided into a number of regions. Using

surfaces, i.e. able to smoothly model complex

a simplistic mass-spring system to even out the surface

objects containing both holes and branches. This

deformation, this method, called pelting, is able to

scheme again makes use of Zheng-Ball patches.

produce a continuous colour map by combining together

Thus the proposed texture-mapping function can be

the separate regions. Although it is not aiming for

naturally incorporated into this new spline surface.

arbitrarily n-sided surface types, it is effective for

It can also be (approximately) applied to

subdivision surfaces.

Cutmall-Clark subdivision surfaces, due to the
geometric closeness of these two surface schemes..

3. Mapping function for irregular surfaces

•

This scheme is analytical and smooth. Therefore it
is possible to produce information for further

To map colour or indeed any scalar values from one

operations, such as differentiation.

space (domain) to another smoothly relies on the

In the following, we are briefly reviewing this

derivation of a smooth mapping function which bridges

irregular surface scheme and then discussing how to use

both spaces in a reasonable fashion. For texture-mapping

it for our texture mapping.

an ordinary quadrilateral parametric patch, for example, a
Surface modelling

popular mapping function is to regard the parametric

An n-sided quadratic Sabin [9] and Zheng-Ball [3]

co-ordinates of the surface as the texture co-ordinates.

patch is defined as follows, where n ≥ 3.

This is possible simply because such parametric surfaces
possess natural parametric co-ordinates.
An n-sided surface patch does not have so simple

r ( u) =

∑ ∑ Bλ (u)rλ
j =0 min λ = j

parametric co-ordinates. Many modelling methods for
such surfaces are based on the control points. A

(1)

continuous surface shaped by these control points are

where

modelled using special purpose smooth functions. In

λ = (λ1 , λ2 ,Λ , λn )

represents

the

n-ple

subscripts. min λ = min in=1{λi } . u = (u1 , u 2 , Λ , u n )

essence, these are the interpolation functions.
In this paper we resort to one of such functions [3] for

represents n parameters of which only two are
independent. rλ stands for the control points in 3, as

texture-mapping irregular surfaces. The reasons that we
choose this scheme are three-fold:
•

1

shown in Figure 1, where we use a hexagon as an

It is useless to view an n-sided surface as an isolated

example.

surface within a model. Any model, no matter how
simple it is, contains a number of patches, regular
and irregular. The surfacing method proposed by
Zheng and Ball is proven to be compatible with both
B-spline and Bézier patches. More accurately, they
can be connected with these popular surface models

3
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

r000020

r000110

r000200
r001100

r000011
r11111

r000002

parametric domain. In the case of Figure 1, the domain

r002000

is a hexagon. The surface is C1 continuous and behaves
like a Bézier patch along its boundaries, cf. [Zheng &

r011000

r100001
r200000

r110000

Ball 97].

r020000

Mapping functions

Figure 1. Control points for a

A mapping function for texture mapping can be

6-sided Zheng-Ball Patch.

viewed as one that maps a scalar value (colour in this
case) from a planar 2D space to a curved 2D space (the

Bλ (u) are the associated basis functions whose

curved surface). In another word, it is to construct

expressions are given as following:

functions f(u,v) and g(u,v) for each pair of parameters s

  2  2  n λ j
  u j (1 + f λ (u) ) + S , λ = (1, Λ ,1)
 
  λi −1  λi  j =1
Bλ ( u ) = 
n
 2  2  u λ j (1 + f (u) ),
for otherλ ' s
λ
j




 λi −1  λi 
j =1


and t, such that:

∏

s = f (u, v)
t = g (u , v)

∏

where u, v are the parameters of the target surface; s, t
are the original texture co-ordinates which are used to

(2)

index the texture map to colour a point on the surface.

where
S ( u) = 1 − ∑
λ

So, at each geometric point on the surface with

 2  2  n λ j

  u j (1 + f λ ( u) ) (3)
 λi −1  λi  j =1

∏

parameters (u,v), there is correspondingly a pair of
texture co-ordinates (s,t), which will index a unique
colour for the surface point.

and the functions f λ (u) and the parameters are given by:

•

n = 3.

To arrive at a mapping function for irregular

f 2δi ( u) = −2ui +1ui + 2

(4)

f δi +δi +1 (u) = −ui + 2

(5)

f λ ( u) = 0

•

λ = (1,1,1)

for

surfaces, we propose that both f() and g() be also
constructed by formula (1), under the condition that
both the texture map and the surface to be textured have
the same topology.

(6)

u1 + u 2 + u3 = 2u1u 2u3 + 1

In practice, the 2D texture co-ordinate associated

(7)

with a geometric control point rλ of an n-sided surface is

f λ ( u) = 0

(8)

n ≥5.

ui = 1 −

considered as the fourth and the fifth components of the

∏

j ≠i −1,i
n

dj +

∑

control point. So, at each parameter vector u of the

∏d j

j ≠ i ,i +1

∏d j

surface, from formula (1), not only a 3D geometric
surface point but its associated 2D texture co-ordinate

(9)

will be obtained as well. The 2D texture co-ordinate is

k =1 j ≠ k −1,k

then used to index a colour value on the texture map. In

in which di are auxiliary variables satisfying
d i −1 + d i +1

 2π 
= 1 + 2 cos
d i , i = 1,2,Λ , n
 n 

this way, the original texture pattern is mapped across
all the surface points.

(10)

A mapping function so constructed provides a
smooth transformation from the original texture map to

Formula (1) defines an interpolation function over a

the mapping on the surface. To prove the smoothness is

4
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

•

not difficult. Suppose the original scalar texture function
T=T(s,t)

is

differentiable.

Since

formula

(1)

is

edges, located at bi =

differentiable, so are the mapping functions f and g. It
follows
that
the
new
texture
T = T ( f (u, v), g (u , v) ) is differentiable.

The control points bi are at the middle points of the

function

1
(b2i −1 + P )
2

The control points ci are at the centres of the faces
and are located at c i =

1
(b2i −1 + b2i + b2i+1 + P )
4

The purpose of the subdivision step is to isolate the

4. Texture-mapping an irregular area on an
object of irregular topology

irregular patches which can be modelled separately.
This step also serves to connect both regular and
irregular patches smoothly, hence to achieve an overall

Objects of irregular topology are those with both holes

C1 smoothness.

and branches. These objects cannot be easily modelled
using the traditional parametric patches, such as NURBS.

P8

Subdivision surfaces are one of the most popular schemes

P7

c4

able to tackle this problem. A method proposed by Zheng
and Zhang [8] is also a good alternative, which differs
P9

from the subdivision method in that the whole model can
be expressed analytically. Both methods subdivide an

b3

b5

P10

P5

c2

P

c5
b1

object into both regular and irregular regions. The regular

P6

c3

b4

b2
c1

P1

P4
P3

P2

regions are those which can be covered by quadrilateral
faces, whereas the irregular regions are covered by
n-sided faces, where n ≠ 4. Using the mapping function
proposed in the last section, we are able to texture-map

Figure 2. Control points P, bi and ci for patch

any such irregular areas.

around the mesh vertex P. Pi are the

In the following, we explain how to incorporate the

surrounding mesh vertices. Valence of P is 5.

proposed method into the spline surface proposed by
Zheng and Zhang.

Once the irregular patches are identified, their

Similar to Catmull-Clark subdivision surfaces, it also

texture-mapping becomes straightforward using the

starts from a user-defined irregular mesh M0. The
construction procedure includes two steps:
(1).

Subdivide

the

initial

mesh

using

proposed mapping function (1). Suppose there is a pair
of texture co-ordinates (si,ti) for each initial mesh vertex

the

Pi. During the aforementioned subdivision procedure,

Catmull-Clark rules [4] once, resulting in a refined mesh

these two texture co-ordinates are considered as the

M1.

fourth and fifth co-ordinates of each vertex undergoing

(2). Around each vertex P of the refined mesh M1, a
patch is constructed. If the valence of P is 4, the patch is a

the same subdivision operation. As a result, a new
refined mesh M1 is produced, so are a set of new
vertices, each associated with a pair of new texture

bi-quadratic Bézier patch, cf. [12]; if the valence of P is n
(n ≠ 4), the patch is modelled as an n-sided quadratic

co-ordinates. The texture co-ordinates of these vertices

patch [3]. The control points for this irregular patch is

are then used to define the texture vertices to use in

given in Figure 2 [8], as follows:
•

mapping function (1). Now we are ready to texture map

The central control point is the same as the mesh

the sub-patches.

point P itself.

5
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

To texture-map a regular Bézier or B-spline patch is

represents more of a challenge, however, for irregular

quite easy. As mentioned above, there are many methods

surfaces due to lack of such global parameters.

available such as linear or bilinear interpolation. It is a

In this paper, a mapping function is developed to

challenge if irregular n-sided patches are involved. The

texture-map a surface of an irregular topology. This

method provided in this paper is applicable to both

method is based on a modelling function for an n-sided

regular and irregular patches.

surface patch. To represent both the geometric and

As mentioned in the last section, we represent both

texture information concisely, a point on a curved

the geometric control points and the texture control points
by rλ in (1). Since they all employ the same function, it is

surface is regarded as a 5-dimensional vector, where the

intuitive to combine both the geometric and texture

and the last two are the texture co-ordinates. This

information together for each point on the spline surface.

method consists of three steps:

This means that we represent a surface patch in a 5D

•

first three components are the geometric co-ordinates

Apply once the Catmull-Clark subdivision rules to

space. The first three co-ordinates, x, y, z are its real

a single texture map that corresponds to the surface

co-ordinates in 3D and the last two co-ordinates s and t

patch, resulting in one pair of new texture

are its texture co-ordinates Hence, for each parameter
vector u a vector r (u) in 5D space results. Substituting

co-ordinates for each control point.
•

For each control point of the patch, construct a 5D

the texture co-ordinates into a given texture function

vector whose last two components are the newly

gives the texture colour of a point on the patch.

obtained texture co-ordinates.
•

5. Results

Substitute these new 5D control points into (1) to
create the texture co-ordinates of any point on the
surface. Surface texturing is then undertaken using
these texture co-ordinates.

The texturing method provided in this paper is
implemented in a Pentium III 850 dual CPU PC by using

It is worth noting that texturing an n-sided surface

VC++ and OpenGL.
Figure 3a shows a textured regular pentagon

has been made amiable to production only with recent

consisting of 5 triangles. Figure 3b shows a deformed

popular development of subdivision surfaces. But these

pentagon model, where discontinuity of the circled

subdivision surface based texture-mapping methods

pattern is obvious. By using the texture mapping method

rely on the use of the subdivision rules. Because it is

provided in this paper, no discontinuity occurs, as shown

procedural, analytical properties may not be easily

in Figure 3c.

derived. The proposed method is actually applicable

Figure 4a shows a regular pentagonal texture. The

also to subdivision surfaces, as can be seen from the

texture is mapped onto a geometric model in Figure 4b. In

construction process. There may be a small amount of

Figure 4c, the model is concavely deformed, which is

geometric discrepancy between the spline surfaces

then smoothly textured with the same pattern (Figure 4d).

proposed by Zheng and Zhang and the subdivision
surfaces in the neighbourhood of the extraordinary

6. Conclusions and discussion

points. But the discrepancy has negligible effects on the
texture mapping result. The fact that the mapping
function is differentiable will make many further

Texture-mapping a regular surface has been well

operations much easier.

studied and many effective methods are developed based
on the use of their natural parametric co-ordinates. It

6
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

References

[9]. M A Sabin (1983). Non-rectangular surfaces suitable for
inclusion in a B-spline surface. In T Hagen, ed.

[1]. J J Zhang (1998). Lease Distorted bump mapping onto

EUROGRAPHICS’83. 57-69.

surface patches. Computer and Graphics 22(2-3). 233-242.

[10]. C S Neo and Z Huang (2001). Texture mapping on

[2]. T DeRose, M Kass and T Trong (1998). Subdivision

subdivision

surfaces in character animation. SIGGRAPH’98. 85-94.

CAD/Graphics

[3]. J J Zheng and A A Ball (1997). Control point surfaces over

2001.

using

multiple

August

22-24,

images.
Kunming.

International Academic Publishers. 170-179.

non-four-sided areas. Computer Aided Geometric Design

[11]. D Piponi and G Borshukov (2000). Seamless texture

14(9). 807-820.

mapping of subdivision surfaces by model pelting and

[4] E Catmull and J Clark (1978). Recursively generated
B-spline

surfaces

surfaces

on

arbitrary

topological

texture blending. SIGGRAPH 2000. 471-478.

meshes.

[12]. G Farin (1997). Curves and surfaces for computer aided

[5]. E A Bier and K R Sloan (1986). Two-part texture mapping.

[13]. J Mccartney, B K Hinds, J J Zhang (1994). Leather

Computer Aided Design 10 (6), 350-355.

geometric design. Academic Press. Fourth edition.

IEEE Computer Graphics and Application 6(9). 40-53.

texture synthesis and rendering. Computer & Graphics

[6]. D R Peachey (1985). Solid texturing of complex surfaces.

18(1). 87-92.

SIGGRAPH'85. 279-286.
[7]. J Stam (1998). Exact evaluation of Catmull-Clark
subdivision

surface

at

arbitrary

parameter

values.

SIGGRAPH’98. 395-404.
[8]. J J Zheng and J J Zhang (2002). Smooth Spline Surface
Generation over Meshes of Irregular Topology. Submitted
to Computer Aided Geometric Design.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3. (a) Textured regular pentagon. (b). Texture mapped with five
triangles. (c). Texture mapped using the method provided in this paper.

7
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4. (a). Textured regular pentagon. (b). Texture mapped onto a model. (c).
Deformed model. (d). Deformed model with smoothly mapped texture.

8
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

