Virtual Collaboration Environment for Aircraft Design
Markus Durstewitz1, Bernhard Kiefner2, Reimund Kueke3, Heikki Putkonen4, Pertti Repo4,
Tuomo Tuikka4
1

Airbus GmbH, EIX – New IT Methods
21129 Hamburg, Germany
Markus.Durstewitz@airbus.com
2
Airbus GmbH
ERX-Interdisciplinary Technol. Projects
28199 Bremen, Germany
Bernhard.Kiefner@airbus.com

3
Astrium GmbH
Space Infrastructure, I0621
28199 Bremen, Germany
Reimund.Kueke@astrium-space.com

Abstract
This paper presents a virtual collaboration environment
for aircraft design. The presented system, abbreviated as
VCEAD, provides virtual prototyping and communication
features for synchronous collaboration between geographically distributed designers. Concurrent design reviews on large scale objects, such as aircraft fuselage, are
possible over distance due to the technological choices of
the system. These include XML, VRML and Java based
solutions to provide shared virtual prototypes, component
identification, and attribute changes distributed over distance for collaborative review of the shared object.
Awareness of collaborating partners is provided in a
communication manager that can be used to launch communication tools, encompassing audio, video, collaborative drawing board, shared text and chat tool. These communication facilities are open source MBone tools. The
paper introduces the domain, design rationale for the
VCEAD system, and explains the functionality by presenting exemplary uses.

1. Introduction
In the future, worldwide co-operation needs efficient
support of co-operative work practice. A major issue is the
organization of distributed workflow over large distances.
The federal system of the European Union leads to more
and more trans-national (European) companies, which
incorporate the skills and experience of a widely spread
workforce. Also on global scale markets, companies and
organizations are becoming increasingly multi-sited,
operating with partners and customers around the globe.
In particular for the area of product design for
aircrafts, accuracy and timeliness of communication is

4

Dept. of Information Processing Science
University of Oulu
90014 Oulu, Finland
[firstname.lastname]@oulu.fi

vital. On the one hand there have been several attempts to
use information technology to support design and
manufacturing [1, 2] and to decrease the amount of faceto-face meetings, like video conferencing and special
conferencing systems based on electronic whiteboards.
However, these systems have had only minimum impact
on the conceptual design due to lack of support for sharing
visual data of a 3D-design.
On the other hand availability of products for shared
3D-design workspaces for distributed design teams has
been increasing during the last few years, e.g.
“OneSpace™” from CoCreate and “Xbrisio™” from
Tecoplan. These systems are designed as stand-alone tool
solutions and integration into existing heterogeneous
CAD/PDM process chains is difficult and costly.
This paper addresses virtual early prototyping [3] as a
technology to support the visualization of the object of design in combination with the facilities for communication.
Together, virtual prototyping technology and communication facilities that have been built to support shared virtual
prototyping, compose a virtual collaboration environment
for aircraft design (VCEAD).
Virtual early prototyping means that future artifacts
can be designed within 3D computer world before they
actually exist. A wide variety of approaches exists for virtual early prototyping in research, immersive tools for
collaborative design [4], using haptic interface [5], or
CAD for virtual teams [6], to name a few. The virtual collaboration environment presented in this paper is based on
Internet technologies, using VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language, http://www.web3d.org) and Java [7]. This
is due to the mundane need to use virtual prototypes in
every computer desktop available to the collaborating
partners [8]. XML (eXtensible Markup Language,
http://www.w3.org) is used to manage structure informa-

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

tion for VRML components, which contains tessellated
geometry information.
Along with the virtual prototyping technology a set of
communication facilities have been built. A Java based
communication manager provides floor control, i.e. turn
taking, and awareness of users. It is used also to launch
MBone based tools, video, audio and chat.

2. Collaboration in Aircraft Design
The demand for distributed and concurrent engineering
teams will rise in respect to current programmes, e.g.
A380 or A400M, to satisfy requirements for reactivity and
competitiveness and to assemble the best resources temporarily together for design efforts. For the A380 programme, engineering work is carried out at Airbus France,
Germany, UK and Spain, and at Belairbus in Belgium as
well as at subcontractors and many more suppliers all over
the world, which are involved in the project, as shown in

Figure 1.
So as the project participants become more and more
involved, the work share between project partners will
increase rapidly. Thus, efficient communication is vital for
critical phases in the life cycle of complex engineering
products, such as conceptual design phase, where most of
the design decisions defining performance and cost of the
future product are taken. Later on changes are very costly,
increasing with each of the following development stages.
Concept design activities are performed in projectoriented teams. Due to product complexity, there is a high
degree of supplier specialization, large organizations, as
well as small and medium sized enterprises (SME’s) are
involved in collaborative design activities. In order to
respond to market competition and economies of scale,
they have to manage tight deadlines on a geographically
distributed European scale.
Geographical distribution of the project teams requires
efficient communication between designers (solution de-

Sec. 13

Figure 1. Work share for Airbus A380 (not current status)

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

velopers), the responsible programme managers (decision
makers), and the customers (requesters for customizing or
changes). Misunderstandings based on communication
problems are considered to be the main bottleneck in the
current co-operative design process. Such communication
problems within distributed and concurrent design emerge
from different languages, cultures, traditions/experiences,
design tools and different design environments.
The use of a virtual environment connecting all participating teams would greatly improve communication in
concurrent and distributed engineering [3]. The benefits
are reduced failure-rates as well as iteration loops and
shorter lead-time respectively, faster availability for product data, design information and explicit design objects.

3. The VCEAD System
3.1 Composing the virtual prototype
Figure 2 shows structure parts like panels, stringers,
ribs and beams of section 13 of the new Airbus A380.
Section 13, is a part of the front fuselage (cf. Fig. 1) that
will be assembled under the responsibility of Airbus
Germany in Hamburg. The final assembly line of this
aircraft is done in Toulouse, France.
The structure parts (Fig. 2) are at an early stage of the
design phase and the digital 3D data representations of
these parts are called SAM - space allocation model. The
space allocation model is used to validate the global
aircraft architecture in the feasibility and conceptual stages

of the design process and serve as a contract between
systems and structures specialists when the main project
work begins.
Space Allocation Models are principally used to visualise and validate global aircraft architecture described by
Aircraft Master Geometry[9]. These models are the first
stage in the development of a new aircraft digital prototype, intended to reduce lead times and costs whilst
adopting a right-first-time approach[10]. They allow the
DNA (Develop New Aircraft) programme to migrate from
feasibility through to the conceptual phase. Furthermore,
they allow multi-disciplinary teams to concurrently build a
number of concepts prior to evaluation, concept freeze,
and further definition in the detail design phase.
Space Allocation Models are created for many
stakeholders involved in a new aircraft development programme. In future, space allocation models may be used to
validate build transportation and airport compatibility.
They may be used as a marketing tool for public relations
or used with virtual reality systems for airline and customer demonstrations.
The data shown in Figure 2 is tessellated geometry in
VRML 2.0 format containing about 400 VRML objects
with over 2800 geometry shapes based on more than half a
million triangles. The VRML data has been derived from
3D solid models, which were designed originally with
used products from DASSAULT SYSTEMES and IBM:
CATIA™ and ENOVIA VPM™. Both are tools used by
Airbus. CATIA™ (CAD) is used for design-purposes,
whereas ENOVIA VPM™ (PDM) is used to manage all
documents and data associated with the products.

Figure 2. Virtual prototype: Section 13 of Airbus A 380 front fuselage

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Integrating virtual environments within the existing
product development environment is crucial for successful
support of engineers in their product development process.
The generation of information for the virtual (reality)
environment must be easy and always based upon the
newest versions of data as they are contained within the
CAD/PDM-environment. Two problems have to be solved
in order to retrieve information from the CAD/PDMenvironment:
·
Extraction of the model-description from the
CAD/PDM-environment for visualization within the
virtual reality environment.
·
Extraction of the product-structures/hierarchies in
order to assemble the models to more complex
structures for the virtual environment.
In order to retrieve the hierarchical structure from the
PDM-environment, the STEP-export-feature of ENOVIA
VPM™ is used. VPM exports STEP (STandard for the
Exchange of Product Data) from which all the necessary
information can be extracted. This includes both the
hierarchical structure of the product, the names of the
components, the relative transformation as well as the
CAD-files describing the geometry.
After the extraction of the information, it has to be
stored in a more readable format, to be used by other
applications. The information within a virtual environment
can be reduced to hierarchical structures, names, modelfiles and transformations.
XML offers the capability to store the information. Hierarchical relations can be described using simple parentchild-relations of XML-nodes mirroring the hierarchy retrieved from the STEP-export. Further information like

names, model-files and transformations are added as attributes.
The retrieval of geometric information from the CADenvironment into the virtual environment is based upon the
part-oriented conversion of CAD-models into VRMLmodels. For each part exists a model-file which is converted into a VRML-file.
The conversion of CATIA-models into VRML-models
can be performed in two ways – manually or automatically. The manual conversion can be performed either for
each single model or for complete structures from where
the elementary model-geometry can be extracted using the
hierarchical information provided by the corresponding
STEP-export. For manual conversion the CATIA DMUNavigator™ is capable of exporting the loaded CATIAmodels as VRML 1.0-files. The automatic conversion can
be performed using batch-capable converters.

3.2 Communication facilities
The communication manager (window title:
Conference V1.4) on top of Figure 3 lists all the
participants in the collaboration, by their names. The small
icon is a picture of the user, or a company logo, etc. The
list also reveals what is the role of the person in the
meeting: a yellow star is a control indicator, pinpointing
the person in control of the shared virtual part. A queue
number in the same column indicates that other designers
have requested the control. A small megaphone icon
indicates if the person is talking, providing awareness for
the group. An antenna icon animates the level of line
quality, being green if the connection is good, and gray

Figure 3. VCEAD environment, engineering visualization and communication manager

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4. Collaboration tools
corresponding a disconnected line.
In the center of the communication manager is a
viewpoint panel. This panel has a root entry for each user
in the system. Each user can define his viewpoints, name
and add them to the viewpoint tree. ‘Publish’ button has
dual functionality depending on the users situation. When
a name is written for the viewpoint the button is ‘Add’
button. After that, the user can share viewpoints by
publishing them, using the ‘Publish’ button. The icon of
the published viewpoint is a minimized image of the 3D
model. A larger image appears when the mouse cursor
enters the button area.
The next panel is the user image panel. There the
image of ‘Heikki’ is on top meaning that ‘Heikki’ as a user
has control over the virtual prototype. It is a still image,
since videostream is used for providing video on the
design objects. Pressing Launch-buttons, ‘Editor’,
‘Wboard’, ‘Chat’, opens the selected MBone (Multicast
Backbone) tool, i.e. Text editor, Whiteboard and Chat tool
respectively. If the application is running, the application
window will become active.
Figure 3 illustrates the collaboration environment
along with the virtual prototype of Airbus A380 outer skin
panels with stringers and ribs. The structural diagram
(window title: Editor), on the left of the Figure 3 describes
the elements of the virtual prototype. Every element can be
pointed at by selecting them on the list. The person having
control can edit the selected part, e.g. change color, size
and position, or make the part invisible. Furthermore, it is
possible to look inside sections.

Figure 4 depicts all the collaboration tools that can be
opened from communication manager. MBone seemed to
be the best candidate for communication services [11].
MBone uses multicasts, which is an efficient way of
transmitting streaming data. MBone is not well suited for
long distance routing, however, since its packets must be
routed separately from point-to-point TCP/IP packets.
The communication system we have built connects our
own data with MBone. Since multicast packets are
transmitted point-to-point across the network, with the
synchronization events the additional data is synchronized
as well. Thus, there are no significant delays in the system
caused by separate multicast and other packets.
Audio tool, (RAT: ©1995-2000 University College
London, UK) on the lower right corner of Figure 4
(window title: RAT v: AitVepop_audio), starts
automatically. Microphone sensitivity and headphone
volume can be adjusted. To further support awareness of
persons it is possible to make sounds appear from different
directions.
Videoconference tool, (Videoconference VIC: ©The
Regents of the University of California, CA, USA) is on
the left corner of Figure 4 (window title:
AitVepop_video). The individual video frames can be
brought on top. Also, if the user receives control, then this
users video window comes on top. Figure 4 demonstrates
two exemplary physical prototypes (not of the aircraft, yet)
as shown through the video window.
Whiteboard tool, (Whiteboard WBD: ©Loughborough
University, UK) (window title: AitVepop_whiteboard,
Figure 4) is a drawing tool with basic drawing

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

functionalities. It can also import bitmaps, and postscript
files. Especially the possibility to import postscript files
has been found as a useful feature.
Text editor, (window title: AitVepop_editor, Figure 4)
allows meeting participants to make shared documents,
such as meeting minutes.
Chat tool, (window title: Chat Panel, Figure 4)
distributes messages to every user. Chat tool is built by the
AIT-VEPOP project group.

4.

Conclusion

This paper described the implementation of a virtual
collaboration environment in aircraft design, the VCEAD
system. A communication manager was introduced to
share virtual prototypes. Floor control was provided for a
single user to control a shared virtual prototype over distance. Additional awareness of the users in-group sessions
was provided within the communication manager. MBone
tools are used for communication over the Internet, providing streaming video, and shared whiteboard functionality.
It was shown that virtual collaboration environments
have a very high potential for supporting cooperation and
communication processes within a complex and distributed work organisation. It seems that humans, in particular
designers, tend to reason visually about the product.
Therefore, the visualisation of results, for example, in
terms of a shared virtual prototype, represents a major
benefit regarding communications and common understanding, which will result in higher quality and shorter
lead-time.
The project team applied real-world use cases where
design teams co-operate despite geographical distance. It
was shown that VRML and Java are sufficiently powerful
to share information coming from heterogeneous CAD
systems and design environment. But in order to provide
additional features to perform component identification
and to manage the virtual prototype, XML based solutions
were needed. With the VCEAD system, the AIT-VEPOP
project provided a proof of concept of the applicability
and usefulness of a virtual collaboration environment
within a distributed work organisation.

Acknowledgements
This paper presents work performed within AITVEPOP project[12] (July 2000-June 2002). AIT-VEPOP
(IST –1999-13346) is a European Research Project within
the IST programme of 5th Framework. Members of the

AIT-VEPOP consortium are EADS CCR (co-ordinator),
Airbus Germany GmbH, Astrium GmbH, Flowmaster
Ltd., CNAM, University of Oulu, and DFKI.

References
[1] J. W. Erkes, K. B. Kenny, J. W. Lewis, B. D. Sarachan, M.
W. Sobolewski, and R. N. SumJr, "Implementing Shared Manufacturing Services on the World Wide Web," Communications of
the ACM, vol. 39, pp. 34-45, 1996.
[2] A. Stork and U. Jasnoch, "A Collaborative Engineering Environment," presented at TeamCAD: GVU/NIST Workshop on
Collaborative Design, Atlanta, GA, USA, 1997.
[3] M. Durstewitz, N. Chevassus, and C. Nuber, "AIT-VEPOP:
Virtual Early Prototyping - A means for supporting the work of
Distributed Virtual Teams in Concurrent Engineering Environments," presented at ECEC 2001, Bremen, Germany, 2001.
[4] B. Conner, M. Cutts, R. Fish, H. Fuchs, L. Holden, M.
Jacobs, B. Loss, L. Markosian, R. Reisenfield, and G. Turk, "An
Immersive Tool for Wide-Area Collaborative Design," presented
at TeamCAD: GVU/NIST Workshop on Collaborative Design,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 1997.
[5] J. M. Hollerbach, E. Cohen, W. B. Thompson, R. Freier, D.
E. Johnson, and T. V. ThompsonII, "Virtual prototyping for human-centric design," presented at NSF Design and Manufacturing Research Conference, Vancouver, Canada, 2000.
[6] H. Kress, "Networked Collaboration in Distributed Design
Teams," presented at International Symposium on Global Engineering Networking (GEN '97), Antwerp, Belgium, 1997.
[7] D. Brutzman, "The Virtual Reality Modeling Language and
Java," Communications of the ACM, vol. 41, pp. 57-64, 1998.
[8] T. Tuikka and M. Salmela, "Facilitating Designer — Customer Communication in the World Wide Web," Internet Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, vol. 8,
pp. 442-451, 1998.
[9] Airbus Industry, "Space Allocation Model,", vol. Sep., Issue
B, 1999.
[10] Airbus Industry, "Digital Mock-up - The Guide,", vol. July,
Issue A, 2001.
[11] M. R. Macedonia and D. P. Brutzman, "MBone Provides
Audio and Video Across the Internet," IEEE Computer magazine, pp. 30-36, 1994.
[12] AIT-VEPOP,
vepop.oulu.fi/, 2000.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

"AIT-VEPOP

website,".:

http://ait-

