Applying Gestalt Principles to Animated Visualizations of Network Data
Keith V. Nesbitt, Carsten Friedrich
University of Sydney, Australia
knesbitt@cs.newcastle.edu.au
Abstract
Graphs are a commonly used data structure for
representing relational information. Drawings of these
structures, as node and link diagrams, can provide a
useful visualization of the underlying abstract data. This
makes drawings of graphs a useful tool in information
visualization. Indeed graph drawing has been applied in
many application areas including software engineering,
knowledge
management
and
for
depicting
communication networks. The spatial layout can help the
user build up a cognitive model or 'mental map' of the
information structure. Many automatic algorithms for
producing drawings of a graph have been implemented.
In many domains it is also common for the underlying
information to be dynamic and this means the graph
drawing must be updated. Unfortunately, even small
changes to the underlying data can result in dramatic
changes to the final drawing and this means the user may
totally lose their previous 'mental map'. Animation
between the two versions of the layout is one approach
that can assist the user to make the transition between
the two drawings. We have been examining how to apply
the Gestalt principles of organisation to this animation
phase. The aim is to assist the user in understanding the
structural and visual changes that have occurred in the
layout. Results of that work are described here with
relevant examples.

1. Introduction
Visualising data as a graph is a common requirement in
many application domains. Node and link diagrams are
extensively used to model software systems [1], represent
knowledge maps [2] and to describe communication
networks [3]. Many algorithms have been developed to
automatically produce graph drawings [4]. These
drawings can help the user to build a cognitive model of
the information by providing a structured spatial
representation of the abstract data. This cognitive model
is often called a "mental map" [5]. It is very common for
the data to change with time. For example, nodes in a
communication network may be added or removed or a

software system is modified. A new layout can be
automatically computed but this new layout may have a
very different spatial arrangement, even for parts of the
graph that did not change. Even when the data does not
change the user might want to change the way a graph is
drawn. For example in a graph depicting the employees
of a company a user might want to switch from a topdown view showing the hierarchy in the company to a
proximity view which draws people close to together if
they interact a lot. This may cause the user to lose the
existing "mental map" as the new drawing may bear little
resemblance to the previous one.
One approach to help the user in maintaining the
"mental map" is to provide an animation of the graph
between layouts. This allows the user to follow the
movement of nodes and links as they change. This
approach has been used for example to help navigate web
maps [6]. While a simple translation between node
positions seems like an elegant solution it does not work
in practice for complex graphs where hundreds of nodes
may be changing position. A more sophisticated
approach is to decompose the positional changes into
structured motions like rotations, translations, etc. and
then apply them serially in the animation [7]. A brief
review of this animation technique is provided in section
3.
Even with animation between drawings the user may
have difficulty perceiving the structural change that has
taken place. In an attempt to help the user understand the
structural transitions we have explored the use of the
Gestalt principles of organisation in designing better
animations.
In this paper we utilise the Gestalt principles to help the
user identify organisationally structured motions in graph
animations. Ideally these animations should be naturally
and simply understood by the brain and so allow even
very complex transformations to be followed.
Gestalt principles describe how the perceptual system
organizes or groups disjoint visual elements into coherent

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

structures, forms or 'Gestalten' (Figure 1). These
principles are described in Section 2. Their relevance to
animated graphs and how they can be applied are then
discussed in Section 4. Finally a range of other
perceptual issues and direction for future work are
discussed in Section 5.

Figure 1. Shows how objects similar in shape, size and
colour tend to be grouped together. The disjoint visual
elements (circles) are perceived as a larger visual form (a
cross).

2. Gestalt Principles of Organisation
Perception of visual structure and form, even in
stationary images is difficult. A complicated issue is that
the overall picture we perceive often seems unrelated to
its component parts. This phenomenon is often described
by the saying "the whole is more than the sum of the
parts", or in terms of graph drawing, “by looking at
individual nodes we don’t necessarily learn much about
the overall structure of the graph”. The Gestalt principles
were developed to help explain these holistic
characteristics of perception. One of the most appealing
things about these principles is that they are themselves
simple to state, understand and apply.
Gestalt Psychology developed in the 1900's to help
counter the associationist view that stimuli are perceived
as parts and then built into complete images. About
1910, German researchers Max Wertheimer, Wolfgang
Köhler, and Kurt Koffka rejected the prevailing models
of scientific analysis in psychology and used the
principles of field theory to explain cognitive processes,
which could not previously be explained without a
holistic viewpoint [8]. In particular Werthheimer studied
the illusion of motion pictures or "apparent motion".
Gestalt is the German word for form. The Gestaltists
proposed a theory of pattern perception that relies on the
overall form and is not predictable by considering its
components. Factors that impact on the perception of
form and impact on how parts are grouped into structural
forms are captured in what are called the "Gestalt

Principles of Organization". The importance of these
concepts to art and design were explored at the Bauhaus
by such artists as Paul Klee, Wassily Kandinsky and
Josef Albers.
The "mental map" of information provided by a graph
drawing is very dependent on the perceived form or
structure in the overall layout. Gestalt principles describe
how many elements presented together tend to become
grouped into distinct patterns. Hence these principles
strongly influence how the components of a network
drawing, the nodes and links are organised and perceived
as a whole.
We wish to assist the user maintain a consistent mental
map through animated transitions of these network
drawings. The hypothesis is, that by applying these
Gestalt principles during animation we can encourage
the perception of a more consistent structure. This should
better allow the user to understand the relation between
the before and after drawings of the network and so make
appropriate adjustments to their mental map.
The Gestalt principles [9] of organisation that we have
considered are:
1. The Law of Simplicity
2. The Law of Familiarity
3. The Law of Similarity
4. The Law of Good Continuation
5. The Law of Proximity
6. The Law of Common Fate
7. The Law of Connectedness
In the following section we illustrate these principles
briefly with examples taken from the domain of graph
drawing. To demonstrate the significance of the Gestalt
principles some examples (Figures 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
were especially designed in a way that the perceived
structure is not equivalent to the real structure of the
graph as defined by the edge relations.
2.1 The Law of Simplicity
"Every stimulus pattern is seen in such a way that the
resulting structure is as simple as possible" (Figure 2).
2.2 The Law of Familiarity
"Things are more likely to form groups if the groups
appear familiar or meaningful." (Figure 3).
2.3 The Law of Similarity
"Similar things appear to be grouped together" (Figure
4).
2.4 The Law of Good Continuation

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

"Points that, when connected, result in straight or
smoothly curving lines, are seen as belonging together,
and the lines tend to be seen in such a way as to follow
the smoothest path" (Figure 5).
2.5 The Law of Connectedness
"Things that are physically connected are perceived as a
unit." (Figure 6).
2.6 The Law of Proximity
"Things that are near to each other appear to be grouped
together" (Figure 7).
2.7 The Law of Common Fate
"Things that are moving in the same direction appear to
be grouped together" (Figure 8).

A

B

Figure 5. The law of good continuation states that we
perceive smoothly curving lines and straight lines in
smooth paths. In this graph we perceive the nodes as part
of smooth curves and straight lines.

C

Figure 2. The law of simplicity states that we perceive an
ambiguous structure [a] to be made up of simple shapes
[b] and not the more complicated possibilities [c]. This is
also related to the law of good continuation as the edges
in [c] make sharp turns which violate this law, where as the
straight lines in [b] are a more natural interpretation.

Figure 3. The law of familiarity states that we perceive
structures that appear familiar such as a rectangle in this
figure.

Figure 4. The law of similarity states that similar things,
such as the black nodes in this graph tend to be grouped
together.

Figure 6. The law of connectedness states that we
perceive connected objects as a single structure. Hence
we see here two connected graph components.

Figure 7. The law of proximity states that we perceive
objects that are close in space to be part of the same
structure. Here the spatial arrangement means we
normally perceive four groups of paired columns even
though it is possible to devise other groupings, for
example, by row.

Figure 8. The law of common fate states that we perceive
objects that move together to be part of the same
structure (the second column).

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3. Animated Networks
Graphs are a common way to visualise relational data. In
many systems the drawing of a graph can change
according to program or user actions. If the changes are
big it is usually very hard for the user to maintain a
mental map of the graph (Figure 9). Showing the
transition from the initial drawing to the new drawing as
an animation can significantly increase the user’s ability
to preserve the mental map (Figure 10).
An animation is a sequence of images where consecutive
images differ in a subtle but highly structured way. If the
images are shown to a human in consecutive order and at
adequate speed the objects in the images will be
perceived as moving. This effect is known as apparent
motion.
In graph animation we move the nodes and edges of the
graph to transform it from one drawing to another. For
any two drawings of a graph there is an infinite number
of ways to transform the initial drawing into the final
drawing. The quality of the animation has a huge impact
on how well the user is able to understand the changes.

Unfortunately, exploiting the ability of the brain to
understand biological motion in graph drawing seems
very hard.
In the following we propose guidelines on how to
generate and evaluate graph animations focusing on
using the ability of the brain to interpreted
organisationally structured motion.

Figure 9. An automatic layout algorithm can dramatically
alter the drawing of a graph. Figure 9 shows the "Initial"
and "Final" drawing of a graph which has been
automatically redrawn using a force directed algorithm. It
is difficult to relate the two drawings.

The human brain is specialised to recognise and interpret
certain kinds of structured movements especially motions
that have a physical, an organisational, or a biological
interpretation. This is partly ecological and partly
learned. The brain has evolved to aid survival in the
world and so tends to perceive or assume biological
motions. The brain while developing also learns to
recognise familiar patterns, structure and motion that it
encounters in the physical world.
Friedrich and Eades proposed an algorithm that tries to
exploit the ability of the human brain to interpret
physical motions. Given an initial and final drawing of a
graph the approach tries to find an animation that would
be interpreted by the brain as the movement of threedimensional objects in space [7]. This algorithm first
divided the animation into a series of translation,
rotation, scaling, and shearing operations. These
operations define the set of two-dimensional affine linear
transformations which is identical to the projection of
motions of rigid bodies in space onto a plane. Applying
an interpolation of these operations to the original graph
provides an "easy to follow" animation from the original
to the near final graph structure. A final step involving
some linear interpolation is often required to reach the
final graph drawing. This is because not all modifications
can be described by affine linear transformations [7].

Figure 10. Shown here a some key frames from an 100step animation from the initial to the final drawing of figure
9. The animation significantly increases the users ability to
preserve the mental map.

4. Applying the Gestalt Principles
In this section we examine how Gestalt principles can be
applied when creating graph animations. The goal of
graph animation is to communicate changes in the
structure and appearance of a graph to the user in a way
that allows the user to maintain a mental map of the
graph. As the Gestalt principles determine how we
perceive a drawing, we aim to exploit this characteristic
to draw the users attention to important parts of the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

graph and help the user identify groups of nodes and
edges that move similarly. In the following we look at
each law and propose ways to use its properties. These
recommendations are of a very general nature and we are
aware that an implementation in some cases would be
very challenging. This section should therefore be
understood as a set of design guidelines or criteria for
evaluation of animations rather than as a proposal of
design methods. However, we give suggestions about
how some of the ideas could be implemented or what
heuristics might give promising approximations. Some
further, more detailed approaches, on determining
Gestalt clusters in graph drawings can be found in [11].
4.1 The Law of Simplicity
"Every stimulus pattern is seen in such a way that the
resulting structure is as simple as possible."
4.2 The Law of Familiarity
"Things are more likely to form groups if the groups
appear familiar or meaningful."

drawing is decomposed into familiar and simple
geometric shapes. These can, for example, be major
geometrical clusters in the graph. These shapes can be
incorporated into the graph drawing as background
elements or even completely replace the nodes of the
clusters. These elements are then transformed during the
animation along with the nodes and edges (Figure 11).
A first preference would be for very simple shapes like
squares, circles and triangle. However, regular polygons
that enclose the major clusters are more common in
graphs. We can also imagine more anthromorphic or
biological shapes like deformed ellipsoids or spirals that
may occur.
A possible approach is to combine smaller faces of the
graph to polygons or compute the convex hulls of
geometric clusters and then shade them (Figure 11). This
produces pleasing results, is feasible to implement, but
relies on the perceptual bias to pick out the familiar and
simple shapes in the graph.
4.2 The Law of Similarity
"Similar things appear to be grouped together."
The law of similarity can be simply applied. For example
colouring key nodes in red, or colour coding nodes based
on clusters. This help to preserve the structure during
animation. It also has the benefit that it provides
landmarks within the structure that help the user
navigate the new mental map (figure 12).

Figure 11. By shading the polygons formed by the graph
edges we highlight the "simple and familiar" structure in
the graph. This figure shows some key frames in the 100step animation.

We propose to apply these two principles together. To
help, highlight simple and familiar structures in the
graph. For example before animation the original

Figure 12. Each cluster in the graph is colour-coded to be
made 'similar'. Even with the few time steps from this 100frame animation shown here it is obvious that the clusters
are now easier to follow during the reconfiguration. Note

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

that one node which is part of far right cluster in the initial
drawing actually changes clusters during the animation.

animation are shown. Note
connections are enhanced.

4.3 The Law of Good Continuation
"Points that, when connected, result in straight or
smoothly curving lines, are seen as belonging together,
and the lines tend to be seen in such a way as to follow
the smoothest path."

4.5 The Law of Proximity
"Things that are near to each other appear to be grouped
together".

4. 4 The Law of Connectedness
"Things that are physically connected are perceived as a
unit."
We suggest supporting these principles by highlighting
key structural edges in the graph. These need not be
semantically important edges but could just be edges that
are perceptually dominant. We would expect, for
example, line connection “clusters”, straight lines,
horizontal, vertical, and at various key angles such as 45
degrees that straight lines would stand out to the user.
Similarly, we would expect biological-like curves to be
dominant.
We propose to make these edges more dominant by
overlaying a thicker line. One way to do this is to treat
the nodes as points in a 2-D space and then apply
standard statistical methods to find lines. More complex
curves might be suggested by using key nodes to describe
a nurb. Another pragmatic approach would be to apply
edge detection algorithms from the image-processing
domain so that edges or different orientation are
emphasized (figure 13).

how

key

structural

When computing an animation we should aim to
maintain proximity as much as possible. That means that
if nodes or edges are close to each other in the initial and
final drawing the animation should keep them close
together during the whole animation. The expected effect
would be that the brain of the user groups nodes and
edges automatically to clusters according to proximity. If
we avoid breaking these clusters during the animation
the visual complexity of the animation is lower than if we
do. Thereby enhancing the quality of the animation. It is
also thinkable to shrink clusters before the animation to
assist the user in perceiving them as an entity.
4.6 The Law of Common Fate
"Things that are moving in the same direction appear to
be grouped together."
We found that this law not only holds for objects moving
in the same direction, but even for objects which move in
any structured way. Examples for structured motions
where objects do not move in the same direction would
be rotations and scalings. The effect of applying this law
coincides with the results of previous work found in [7].

5. Discussions and Future Work
It is possible to construct scenarios where principles
conflict. For example nodes could be coloured the same
on some clustering criteria and hence are perceived as
grouped by the "Law of Similarity". Yet when the nodes
move the clustering may break. We found that in
animations it seems as though the "Law of Common
Fate" takes some precedence.
Imagine the nodes
previously grouped together moving to two new clusters
that are separated in the new structure. In this case the
"Law of Common Fate" will at some stage override the
"Similarity Law" or “Proximity law” as the animation
proceeds.

Figure 13. A horizontal edge detection algorithm (followed
by a contouring effect to invert the image) is applied to the
same graph in Figure 11. Key frames from the 100-step

There are a number of obvious directions future work can
take. This paper proposes a number of ways to apply the
principle but they are yet to be completely implemented
and tested. However our informal evaluations suggest
they will be useful at least in some graph animations. Of
course a number of areas will require more formal human
factors experiments to measure user performance and
understanding.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

We discussed briefly the role of conflicting perceptual
cues. It is possible that where the Gestalt laws present
conflicting information that this may be confusing to the
user. However it may still provide useful information
about the way the structure has changed because it helps
the user map the changes. For example, the user might
think, "the red nodes have moved position but I
remember where they were located in the original
drawing and can see where they have been placed in the
new drawing".
It is of course possible to construct more complex
examples. These could involve multiple conflicting laws
and more work needs to be done to determine when and
where this might be useful or indeed detrimental to user
understanding.
Our work has involved abstract graph drawings with
little consideration of the domain for which the drawings
are being applied. Yet it is very likely that different
application domains may suggest unique applications of
the principles. These may be highly task specific. For
example when navigating graphs of web pages, it is
normal to colour recently visited web pages. These
similarly coloured nodes could be useful structural cues
suggested by the "Law of Similarity".
Software system models often show important base
classes, which could be depicted as differently shaped or
coloured nodes in the graph. Other information such as
level in an inheritance hierarchy could also be used to
colour or shape similar nodes. Readily calculated
information such as edge degree could be used to
enhance edges from these important classes and hence
assist in applying the "Law of Connectedness". Indeed
standard UML notation already uses shapes such as
triangles and diamonds to label different edge types like
composition (diamonds) and inheritance (triangles). At
different times a software engineer may wish to maintain
different "structural views" and so we could apply
different Gestalt rules to different parts of the software
graph depending on their task.
Semantic Maps are a more general form of knowledge
representation, but like software models they may have
key concepts, which are important in determining the
overall structure of the graph. Again these might be
recognised automatically by the number of edges that
connect into a node or could be more tightly under user
control. The user might for example select the important
nodes in the graph that is those they wish to follow.
These could be coloured red for example before the
animation occurs.

The Gestalt principles apply not just for visual perception
but are also to our perception of sounds. For example this
helps us recognise patterns in music and to segregate
sound into discrete streams [10]. Sound can provide
useful grouping cues and it may be possible to integrate
sound cues to assist users in transforming their mental
map.

6. References
[1] P. Eades and K. Zhang (1996), Software Visualization,
World Scientific.
[2] K. M. Fairchild, S.E. Poltrock, and G. W. Furnas (1988),
SemNet: Three-Dimensional Graphic Representations or
Large Knowledge Bases. In R. Guidon (ed.) Cognitive
Science and Its Applications for Human-Computer
Interaction. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Pp
201-233.
[3] R. A. Becker, S. G. Eick, and A. R. Wilks (1995),
Visualising Network Data. IEEE Transactions on
Visualisation and Computer Graphics, 1 (1 March), pp 1628.
[4] G. Di Battista, Peter Eades, Roberto Tamassia and I. Tollis
(1998), Graph drawing: algorithms for the visualization of
graphs, Prentice Hall.
[5] P. Eades, Wei Lai, K. Misue and K. Sugiyama (1995),
Layout Adjustment and the Mental Map, Journal of Visual
Languages and Computing 6, pp 183 - 210.
[6] P. Eades, R. Cohen and M. Huang (1997), Online Animated
Graph Drawing for Web Navigation, Graph Drawing 97,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1353 (Ed. G. di Battista),
pp 330 - 335.
[7] C. Friedrich and P. Eades (2001). Graph Drawing in
Motion. Submitted for publication to: The Journal of Graph
Algorithms and Applications.
[8] R. B. Sekuler and R. Blake (1994). Perception (3 rd Edition).
McGraw-Hill Inc.
[9] E. B. Goldstein. (1999) Sensation and Perception (5th
Edition). Brooks/Cole Publishing.
[10] E. M. Wenzel (1994), Perceptual Principles in Sound
Grouping. Auditory Display, Ed. Gregory Kramer, SFI
Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proc. Vol. XVIII,
Addison-Wesley, 1994.
[11] C.T. Zahn (1971). Graph-theoretical methods for detecting
and describing gestalt clusters. IEEE Trans. on Computers,
C-20(1):68--86, January 1971.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

