On Visualizing the Semantic Web in MS Office
Christian Fillies,
Semtation GmbH, Germany, cfillies@semtalk.com
York Sure,
Institute AIFB, University of Karlsruhe, Germany, sure@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de

Abstract
This article gives an impression how existing RDFS
based Semantic Web knowledge web services can
already now be integrated in the creation process of
semantic nets in MS Visio with SemTalk. We are
presenting two examples: looking up object names in
WordNet and using Ontobroker as an inference engine
on ECCMA [11] ontologies. This article shows how
different 2-dimensional visualization techniques such as
DAMLVisio [5] or simple Visio shapes can be applied to
semantic web models in order to address a broad range
of users with very different expectations on the notation.
Keywords: RDFS, Web Services, Visio, Ontobroker

1. Introduction
SemTalk [1], using a Microsoft Visio front-end, offers an
easy to use editor for semantic web ontologies and
processes. Using an open, graphically configurable meta
model, Visio can be easily adapted to different model
worlds such as CASE Tools and organizational models.
These models, with the help of Microsoft Office XP
SmartTags, allow users to easily use semantic webs
during their daily work with other MS Office products
such as Winword, Excel or Outlook.
The whole idea of the semantic web is to share common
– more or less – formalized knowledge via the Internet
[2]. While the main idea was to establish a common
knowledge platform for machines, we are focussing on
people exchanging their ideas in a (graphical) knowledge
network. Key issue for sharing knowledge is the use of a
common terminology, e.g. in form of ontologies [3].
Though there exists already common practices how to
develop and use ontologies [4], ontologies are due to

their complex nature far from being a commodity and
require substantial tool support during development.
Most of the existing online and offline glossaries can be
viewed by browsers that visualize exactly one node in an
network. Some tools generate hyperbolic trees or similar
visualizations on demand. Our experience about
communicating knowledge is, that complex problems
can better be understood by manually created diagrams
describing a specific scene or scenario. People prefer
using a mixture of drawing tools combined with
modelling tools which gives them a great flexibility to
use the advantages of both. This article shows how
different 2-dimensional visualization techniques as
DAMLVisio [5] or UML [6] can be applied to semantic
web models using Visio for multiple audiences. Our goal
is to integrate existing RDF(S) [7,8] based semantic web
knowledge services tightly into the creation process of
semantic networks and business processes. We are
covering too examples: looking up object names in
WordNet [9] and using Ontobroker [10] as an inference
engine to process ECCMA ontologies.

2. Architecture
SemTalk does work on an RDF(S)-like XML data
structure. Diagramming information and object oriented
features like methods and states have been added to
RDF(S). It also has an optimized structure for basic
inferences as inheritance and graph traversals. There is
an object engine providing a COM API in order to be
able to use the engine within MS Office products. For the
graphical presentation of models we have used MS Visio
for two reasons: (i) the tool is widely used in industry,
therefore people are used to it and (ii) it is easily
extensible through an API.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

which is an important success factor in Knowledge
Management.

4. WordNet
WordNet®, which was developed by the Cognitive
Science Laboratory at Princeton University under the
direction of Professor George A. Miller, is a huge online
lexical reference system whose design is inspired by
current psycholinguistic theories of human lexical
memory. English nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs
are organized into synonym sets, each representing one
underlying lexical concept. Different relations link the
synonym sets. SemTalk uses WordNet via Dan
Brickley’s RDF(S) web service for WordNet 1.6 [12].

Figure 1: Architecture Overview of SemTalk

The SemTalk object engine is used to define semantics in other words a Meta Model - for existing Visio shapes.
You can graphically define which shapes are allowed to
be connected with each other. SemTalk supplies the
infrastructure to define complete modeling methods
inside Visio. Those methods are e.g. for DAML, for
Enterprise Resource Planing (ERP) product modeling
and for Business Process Modelling (BPM) methods.
SemTalk has a couple of interfaces to CASE tools like
Rational Rose and to BPM tools. There is a simple report
generator that creates HTML tables by using XSL for
formatting.

3. Notation for Semantic Webs
In respect to the very broad audience we want people to
be able to read our models without learning a notation.
We have best experiences using the very simple bubble
notation, shown in some of the pictures below. It is
important to label most of the links and not to use
graphical encodings which are known from graphical
languages as Entity Relationship diagrams or UML.
For readers with a technical background more complex
notation with various shape types can be used. Examples
are the DAML Notation and e.g. a user interface for a
product configuration engine.

Figure 2: A small vehicle model build from WordNet

The models are being build with external model
repositories incrementally. Once you have used a class
name in a model you can look for related objects in
external repositories and integrate them into your model
(Figure 3). The idea of using an external glossary
basically ensures that people are talking about the same
thing with a well defined Uniform Resource Name
(URN) to identify objects and related hyperlinks to
access their definitions. The other benefit users have
from such ontologies is that they are getting hints for
related objects or subclasses to use in the model.

One of the great advantages of using Visio is that is
contains a large collection of predefined and extendable
shapes. The shapes correspond quite natural to classes.
Using pictures improves the acceptance of the models

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

list of possibly relevant knowledge bases is being send to
an Ontobroker server. The server returns a list of XML
encoded solutions to the query. Each variable binding in
a solution can be a reference to an object in a knowledge
base. The user can insert objects into SemTalk directly
from the URNs provided in the result set.
Figure 4 is showing the query interface in SemTalk. A
user selects one or more ontologies and a query. The
Result set consists of all possible Solutions for the FLogic query “FORALL X,Y<-X::Y.” which means X is
a (direct or indirect) subclass of Y.
In the example we are using a subset (Farming & Fishing
& Forestry & Wildlife &..) from a large ontology named
Universal Standard Products and Services Classification
(UNSPSC) developed by ECCMA.
Figure 3: Subclasses of vehicle offered by WordNet
The objects remember their origin and can be refreshed
(or replicated) from their external data source once the
source has changed.In a very similar way you can link
one class to a another class living in an external model
which was created using SemTalk and which is
published on a web server. This technology results in a
web of hyperlinked models based on RDF(S) as a
common standard.

5. Ontobroker
Finding knowledge on the semantic web can be done
more intelligent than just looking up words in a
dictionary even if this is based on RDF(S). Additional to
web services such as WordNet and the SemTalk internal
indexing inference engines like Ontobroker1 can
provide a new dimension of reasoning capabilities.

The Electronic Commerce Code Management
Association (ECCMA) is a not-for-profit, unbiased,
membership organization that oversees the management
and development of the UNSPSC Code. The UNSPSC is
a new classification first developed in the summer of
1998. Both the Dun & Bradstreet Standard Product and
Services Classification (SPSC) and the United Nations
Development Program (UNDP) United Nations Common
Coding System (UNCCS) were used in its development.
The UNSPSC currently covers 56 industry segments
from electronics to chemical, to medical, to educational
services, to automotive to fabrications, etc.
A good overview of this and similar content standards
can be found at [17].

Ontobroker exploits knowledge models and data from
different sources to answer queries. For that purpose it
evaluates axioms contained in the knowledge models to
derive new knowledge or to check the consistency of the
available knowledge. It runs as a middleware system and
thus may be used by a variety of applications of as an
information delivering base. Ontobroker is already used
by the W3C as a reference implementation (SiLRI [13])
as an inferencing tool for semantics for the Web.
Ontobroker can be accessed as a web service similar to
WordNet. SemTalk stores models as knowledge bases
somewhere on a webspace reachable for Ontobroker. A
query in Ontobrokers query language F-Logic [14] and a
1

Ontobroker is available from Ontoprise GmbH, cf.
http://www.ontoprise.com

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4: Administration of Ontobroker

The mission of SemTalk is to empower end users to
publish models to the semantic web and to exploit the
knowledge from their desktop applications. Since we do
not expect end user to learn and use an object oriented
logical language like F-Logic, we have build a query-byexample-style graphical interface show in Figure 5.

•
•

you can not use "SubClassOf" between to
instances.
keep
consistency
between
multiple
visualizations of the same object.
navigation etc.

Figure 6: Subset of the DAML meta-model in SemTalk

Figure 5: A graphical F-Logic Query
Queries are defined the same way users are already
familiar with from reading the models. Existing models
can be used as patterns. Some parts of the model are
marked as variables (single uppercase character). The
graphical query is then translated to F-Logic and send to
Ontobroker.

6. DAML
DAML is the Darpa Agent Markup Language [15]. The
goal of the DAML effort is to develop a language and
tools to facilitate the concept of the semantic web.
DAML is basically a much richer layer on top of
RDF(S). For SemTalk we are using the VisioDAML
shapes developed by John Flynn [5].
What SemTalk currently does for DAML is:
•

driven by the meta-model it will check if you
can use a connector between any to objects e.g.

Figure 7: DAML Notation in SemTalk
The (RDF(S) compatible) classes which you will find in
SemTalk are just used for the DAML meta model
(Figure 6). The SemTalk object engine controls which
pairs of shapes may be connected. E.g. a “subClassOf”
connection is not allowed between a class and a property.
Figure 7 is a DAML drawing build with SemTalk. A
DAML class is represented as an instance of the
SemTalk class "DAML#Class", DAML instances are
instances of the SemTalk class "DAML#Instance".

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

"DAML#HasClass" is just a link between two SemTalk
instances. This implies that the basic inferences like
inheritance of attributes are not available for DAML in
the dialogs.
Compared to this the integration of RDF(S) is much
deeper. If we read an RDF(S) file we are creating
SemTalk classes which can be used as:
-

classes for Visio masters
business objects in business processes
...

SemTalk classes implement a subset of RDF(S) (e.g. no
SubProperty of, binary properties only).
The current DAML Visio shape set does not cover the
DAML extension DAML+OIL [17]. As soon as a
proposal for a depiction of DAML+OIL is available this
can be implemented in SemTalk by extension of the
graphical Meta Model and by adding the new Visio
shapes.

“Make Hyperlink” converts the SmartTag into a static
hyperlink for those users not having IE. Static
Hyperlinks are early bound (in the context of the author)
while SmartTags are using late binding (in the context of
the reader). Late Binding is more interesting since it may
translate terms from one context to another on the fly.
If users have SemTalk installed on their machine they
may also edit the underlying Visio model in order to add
new information to the model or change the text based
on linked objects from the model.
SmartTag technology is recognized by most of the users
as one of the key enablers for knowledge management
because it is proactive. It points the user to the semantic
model which describes in an easy understandable way
what the text / email / sheets is talking about. This
technology helps e.g. (i) technical writers to be sure to
use the right term in their context Or (ii) shows a
business process that describes how to proceed.
A concrete usage scenario for this approach is to ensure
the consistency of technical documentation in the IT
department of a bank [16].

8. Summary
7. Using the Semantic Web from MS Office
XP
If you read this text from an Internet Explorer 6.0 or
Word XP you will mention a SmartTag on the word
SmartTag in this sentence as shown in Figure 8.

Using SemTalk models are able to give context to
keywords.
They also create a starting point to
understand and communicate process information. As the
availability of semantic web knowledge source is
increasing, the need for reliable and scalable inference
engines such as Ontobroker becomes obvious.
The Visio editor enables a wide range of users to use and
understand models. By the integration of the technology
into the daily work processes, the acceptance, and thus
the usefulness of the models rises.

9. References
[1]

[2]

Figure 8: A SmartTag action menu
SmartTags are recognized while you a typing. The
SemTalk SmartTag Recognizer finds any class in models
of users choice. The “HTML” option will open an
HTML representation of the model.

[3]

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Fillies,C.; Weichhardt, F.; SemTalk: A RDFS Editor
for Visio 2000
Position Paper, ICCS 2001 9th International
Conference on
Conceptual Structures / Semantic Web Working
Symposium (SWWS)
Tim Berners-Lee, Jim Hendler, and Ora Lassila
published an article about the Semantic Web in
Scientifc American. "A new form of Web content that
is meaningful to computers will unleash a revolution
of new possibilities". See
http://www.scientificamerican.com/2001/0501issue/05
01berners-lee.html
Gruber, T. (1995). Towards principles for the design
of ontologies used for knowledge sharing.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
(43):907–928.

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

S. Staab, H.-P. Schnurr, R. Studer, and Y. Sure.
Knowledge processes and ontologies. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, Special Issue on Knowledge Management,
16(1), January/Febrary 2001.
John Flynn. DAMLVisio Shapes, cf.
http://www.daml.org/visiodaml/
Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J. and Jacobson, I. (1999) The
unified modeling language user guide, AddisonWesley, Reading Mass.
W3C. RDF Schema Specification.
http://www.w3.org/TR/PR-rdf-schema/, 1999.
O. Lassila and R. Swick. Resource description
framework (RDF). model and syntax specification.
Technical report, W3C, 1999. W3C Recommendation.
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax.
WordNet, cf. http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/
S. Decker, M. Erdmann, D. Fensel, and R. Studer.
Ontobroker: Ontology Based access to Distributed and
Semi-Structured Information. In R. Meersman et al.,
editors, Database Semantics: Semantic Issues in
Multimedia Systems, pages 351–369. Kluwer
Academic Publisher, 1999.
cf. http://eccma.org/unspsc/
Dan Brickley. RDF(S) web service for WordNet 1.6,
cf. http://xmlns.com/2001/08/wordnet/
S. Decker, D. Brickley, J. Saarela, J. Angele. A Query
Service for RDF. Query Languages 98, W3C
Workshop.
M. Kifer, G. Lausen, and J. Wu. Logical foundations
of object-oriented and frame-based languages. Journal
of the ACM, 42, 741–843, (1995).
Darpa Agent Markup Language (DAML), cf.
http://www.daml.org
Fillies, C., Wood-Albrecht, G., Weichhardt, F., A
Pragmatic Application of the Semantic Web Using
SemTalk. WWW2002, May 7-11, 2002, Honolulu,
Hawaii, USA ACM 1-5811-449-5/02/0005
DAML+OIL ontology markup language, cf.
http://www.daml.org/2001/03/reference.html March
2001
Dörr, M., Guarino, N., Fernández López, M.,
Schulten, E.,
Stefanova, M., Tate, A., State of the Art in Content
Standards. OntoWeb Deliverable 3.1.
www.ontoweb.org/download/deliverables/D3.1.pdf
November 2001

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

