Browsing Newsgroups with A Social Network Analyzer
Chin-Lung Chang

Ding-Yi Chen

Tyng-Ruey Chuang

Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica
Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan
evirt@iis.sinica.edu.tw dingyichentw@yahoo.com trc@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Computer-mediated communication (CMC) systems
such as Usenet newsgroups, e-mail lists, online chats, etc.
facilitate large-scale human interactions and produce large
sets of activity records. These datasets can be used to analyze and visualize the social networks exist at the online
forums. Such analyses often improve our understanding of
online inter-personal interactions, as well as lead to better
designs and implementations of CMC systems.
We report in this paper our experience in designing a
newsgroup browser based on ideas from social network
analysis. Our analyzer identifies reciprocal sub-groups in
newsgroup discussions, and utilizes visual methods to help
users look for leading authors and provocative articles.
This is especially helpful for late comers to catch up and
participate in popular and noisy newsgroups.

1 Introduction
Social network analysis studies the relationships among
social entities, and on the patterns, structures, and implications of these relationships. It also aims to discover the
dynamics among sub-groups in a social network [12].
With the mass popularity of Internet and World Wide
Web, many social activities have moved to online forums
that are mediated by computer systems. These computermediated human activities leave a huge amount of records
in behind. These datasets can be used to analyze the social networks exist at the online forums. Such analyses can
lead to better designs and implementations of the computermediated communication systems.
This research is supported, in part, by National Science Council of
Taiwan (contract no. NSC 90-2219-E-001-004) and by the Institute of Sociology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan (theme project “Information Technologies and Social Transformations”). Contact author: Tyng-Ruey Chuang
(trc@iis.sinica.edu.tw).

For example, AT&T had analyzed collections of phonecall records to determine, among others, if every person can
always reach any other person by phone via a small number
of intermediaries [2]. IBM had analyzed the hyperlinked
structure of the Web pages to discover many an emerging
cyber community whose members all have their web pages
point to some theme pages [7, 9].
We have designed and implemented a social network analyzer to help users browse Usenet newsgroups. We report
in this paper the motivations and ideas behind such a browsing tool, and the experience we gain in using the browser.
To make this article self-contained, we also give a brief introduction to basic social network analysis, most of which
is derived from graph decomposition and analysis.

2 Why Analyze Newsgroups?
Usenet newsgroups are online forums where users discuss various topics by posting articles and responding to
others’ articles. The topics are organized as a hierarchical
directory of newsgroups, with each newsgroup dedicated to
a specific topic. There are thousands of newsgroups, and a
great number of people participate in the discussions either
actively (posting and responding to articles) or passively
(just reading the articles).
Newsgroup articles are in text format, and many a newsreader provides only a command-line interface. (A newsreader is a user agent program for accessing newsgroup articles.) Usenet newsgroups are popular, even in this Web
era, because newsgroup servers are operated in a distributed
and autonomous manner. Users need not depend on certain
authoritative servers (which may be unreliable or censorious) to receive newsgroup articles. Moreover, once an article is posted to a server, the article is automatically propagated to other servers, all over the world. The distributed,
peer-to-peer, architecture of newsgroup service allows a
user to reach a large and global audience with little userside system administration overhead. As a result, Usenet

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

newsgroups encourage mutual interactions among the users.
They become online “places” where people freely exchange
thoughts on subjects of one’s interests.
To help a user browse a newsgroup, a newsreader often
arrange the articles in the newsgroup in several ways, using
article header information defined in RFC 1036 [6]. Typical
header information includes article subject, author’s e-mail
address, and posting date, etc. Each article is also assigned
a globally unique id in the Message-ID header. Furthermore, if article b is a reply to article a, then b should include a’s message id in b’s References header, together
with all message id already referenced by a. These references allow a newsreader to “thread” articles by the order of
their correspondences. Some Web-based newsreaders perform additional server-side processing to further help users
search and browse the newsgroups (see, e.g., [1]). These
web-based newsreaders allow users to locate relevant articles more easily by cross-indexing articles by author names,
subject keywords, and other article data.
Threading and cross-indexing are useful for organizing
newsgroup articles, but are not so helpful in identifying
mutual interactions among the authors. Often a newsgroup
user is looking for meaningful dialogues among the participants. Threading articles is not good enough as not necessarily all articles in a thread contribute meaningfully to
the discussion: There certainly exist “me too” articles and
advertisement. Cross-indexing the articles by author names
or subject keywords do not help much either in finding mutual interactions, as it loses the temporal dimension in group
discussions.
To better capture mutual interactions in newsgroups, and
to identify opinion leaders, we analyze newsgroups as they
are social networks. The act of replying to posted articles is
viewed as an embodiment of social interactions. From the
interactions we extract sub-groups that exhibit dialogues for
further investigation and browsing. Our analysis is especially helpful for “late comers” to catch up and participate
in popular and noisy newsgroups. Another motivation in
analyzing newsgroups as social networks is to better understand interactions in and characteristics of online communities. Our analyses use simple graph algorithms and probabilistic methods, and are described in the next section.

3 Basic Social Network Analysis
A social network of n persons is viewed as a graph of n
nodes v1 v2 : : : vn . There is a connection from person vi
to person vj (e.g., vi responds to vj ) if there is an edge from
node vi to vj , written as vi ! vj . Often the graphs (and
the social networks they represent) are directed. That is, the
existence of an edge vi ! vj does not necessarily imply the
existence of the edge vj ! vi (e.g., vi responds to vj does
not imply vj responds to vi ).

Let G = (V E ) be the notation for a graph G consisting
of a set of nodes V and a set of edges E . We write jV j = n
to say the G has n nodes, and jE j = m to say that G has
m edges. We say that there exists a path from vi to vj in
G, written as vi vj , if either the edge vi ! vj is in E ,
or there exists a node vk in V such that vi ! vk is in E
and there exists a path vk
vj in G. A graph is strongly
connected if for any two nodes vi and vj in the graph, both
vi vj and vj vi .
A graph G can be decomposed in a unique way into a set
of k strongly connected components (SCC), S1 S2 : : : Sk ,
where each Si is a strongly connected maximal sub-graph
of G. The decomposition of a social network into SCCs is
very appealing for several reasons. The decomposition is
unique and needs only time linear to jV j + jE j. The resulting SCCs form a directed acyclic graph (dag) among themselves. Hence, the sub-groups represented by the SCCs are
stratified in some sense.
Edges that connect SCCs in the dag are easy to identify. Therefore, one can use SCCs to identify sub-groups
in a social network, and use them to study the relation
among the sub-groups. Furthermore, there are well-defined
characteristics of SCCs that can be used to study the subgroups they represent. Given a strongly connected component G = (V E ), the following characteristics of G are
always well-defined and easy to compute. They also lead to
certain sociological interpretations.
size. The size of G is measured by n
ber of people in the SCC.

=

jV j, i.e., the num-

density. The density of G is defined as m=(n(n ; 1)),
where n = jV j and m = jE j. It characterizes the
density of personal links in a SCC. If each person in
G links to every other person in the SCC, then G has
density 1. The minimal density of a SCC is 1=n for a
SCC of size n. It occurs when the SCC is just a ring.
diameter. The diameter of a SCC G is the length of the
longest path between any two nodes in G. The diameter describes how “far away” any two persons can be in
a group. The diameter of a group of size n is between
1 and n ; 1 (inclusive).
adjacent matrix. The adjacent matrix A = (ai j ) of a SCC
G is a n n matrix such that ai j = 1 if vi ! vj ,
otherwise ai j = 0. In the weighted adjacent matrix,
one has ai j = wi j where wi j is the weight on the
link from vi to vj .
transitional probability matrix. The transitional probability matrix X = (xi j ) is defined in terms of the
adjacent matrix A by xi j = ai j = j ai j . X can
be viewed as a normalization of A. That is, we require every person in a group to have the same amount

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

P

of influence. The more people a person links to, the
less amount of influence the recipients receive from
the person. The transitional probability matrix can be
similarly derived from a weighted adjacent matrix.
prestige vector. From a transitional probability matrix X ,
one derives an unique stationary probability vector
=
= X , and
1 2 :::
n ] such that
i =
i
is called the prestige vector, and i the prestige
1.
degree of person vi . The larger a person’s prestige degree is, the more attention s/he receives from others in
the SCC.

P

By definition, i = 1 x1 i + 2 x2 i + : : : + n xn i .
That is, a person’s prestige is simply measured by the
total amount of prestigious attention s/he receives from
other people in the group. Although the definition of
is circular, one can always find an unique solution
when given a SCC G.

pP

prestige norm The norm of the prestige vector is de2 . It follows that the infined as jj
jj =
i
i
p
equation n=n
jj jj < 1 always holds. A larger
norm indicates larger divergence in people’s prestige
degrees (meaning that a small subset of authors receive much more attention than others in the SCC). If
people all
have the same prestige degree of 1=n, then
jj jj = pn=n, the smallest possible value.

4 Analyzing Newsgroups as Social Networks
To analyze a newsgroup as a social network, we let nodes
in the social network be the unique e-mail addresses found
in the From headers of all the articles in the newsgroup.
That is, the nodes are the authors. For each article a that
has a References header, we add a directed edge from
a’s author vi to another author vj if vj ever posts an article
whose message id (in Message-ID header) appears in a’s
References header. That is, there is personal link from
vi to vj if vi ever replies to an article posted by vj . The
above constructs a multi-graph from a newsgroup. It is a
multi-graph because there may be multiple correspondences
between two authors. The Subject header is not used in
the construction of the multi-graph.
Note that RFC 1036 requires that: If an article a replies
to article b, then a must include b’s message id, as well as all
message id already referenced by b, in a’s References
header. The resulting multi-graph, hence, contain edges
that denote indirect references which may or may not be
relevant in author correspondences. We decided to implement two versions of the author social network: One that
is faithful to RFC 1036, and a simplified one where edges
resulted from indirect references are eliminated. The simplified network is nicer in that every edge now represents a

direct correspondence between two authors and is supported
by a unique newsgroup article.
We then decompose the multi-graph into SCCs so that
every author in a SCC would, directly or indirectly, have a
path to any other author in the SCC. Now, for any two authors vi and vj in a SCC, we merge all edges from vi to
vj into a single edge with weight wi being the number of
edges from vi to vj before the merge. We then compute the
transitional probability matrix of the weighted adjacent matrix, and calculate its prestige vector. An author’s prestige
degree hence indicates the amount of attention s/he receives
from others in the SCC. This social network of decomposed
SCCs, along with metrics of all the SCCs (size, density,
etc., as seen in Section 3) as well as each author’s social
metrics (prestige degree, total number of messages posted,
etc.), are both tabulated and visualized with an interactive
graphic user interface for newsgroup users to explore.

5 Visualizing Newsgroups as Social Networks
We used Graphviz and its Grappa Java package (both
from AT&T [3]) for automatic layout and visualization of
the social networks. Java routines are attached to graphic
elements (nodes, edges, etc.) of the social networks so that
these elements can be activated to retrieve information. For
example, one clicks on an edge to retrieve the newsgroup article associated with the edge. One clicks on a node to get a
list of all the articles posted by the author who is associated
with the node.
Our browser provides two views of the social network
in a newsgroup: A detailed view that exposes all correspondences among the authors, and a global view where the
nodes are SCCs and the edges are inter-SCC connections. A
global view provides a glimpse of the newsgroup dynamics
as a whole, and can be used to compare the dynamics of different newsgroups. We use the following visual mappings
for social metrics in the detailed view.
The number of articles posted by an author is mapped,
logarithmically, to the node size. If n articles are
posted, the node will have size log2 (n + 1). This ensures voluminous authors will not visually dominate
the display.
The prestige degree of an author is mapped to the node’s
gray level. The darker a node is, the more prestigious
the person is.
The correspondences between two authors are mapped to
edges between the two nodes.
Nodes belong to the same SCC are grouped into a bounding box in the detailed view, so that sub-groups are easily
recognized. The following visual mappings are used in the
global view.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The size of a SCC, i.e., the number of authors in the SCC,
is mapped, linearly, to the SCC’s node size.

10

The density of edges in a SCC is mapped to the node’s
gray level.

22

2

26

27

The diameter of a SCC is illustrated by a line pointer of
the matching length that originates from the node’s
center.

36

33

0

1

55

34
39

49

50

53

54

43

The prestige norm of a SCC is mapped to the angle between the above line pointer and the 12-o’clock vertical position. A large prestige norm is mapped to a
large angle.

56

62

57

58

SCC014

7

25

Figure 1 shows the author network in newsgroup
sci.logic for article correspondences from April 23 to 27,
2002. The layout of the network clearly shows two large,
and separated, sub-groups in the newsgroup. Voluminous
authors are easy to spot (larger nodes), so are prestigious
authors (darker node). The edges outside of the SCCs are
correspondences that are not reciprocal (receivers do not reply to the senders, either directly or indirectly). Authors
who fail to receive any response appear as singleton nodes.
Figure 2 shows the same newsgroup in which the nodes
are SCCs and edges inter-SCC connections. The two large
nodes denote the two large SCCs. They are of the same
size (both have 9 authors) but one of them is darker than the
other (one has denser correspondence among its members
than the other SCC does). Of the same figure, one can combine the singleton nodes into a single component, as well
as combining those “source” nodes (authors who reply to
others but themselves receive no reply from all others) and
“sink” nodes (authors who receive replies do not respond in
any way) into separate components. We arrive at Figure 3,
a typical “bow-tie” structure that is found in the connectivity graph of all Web pages [4]. The core component of the
“bow-tie” structure is a giant SCC (in this example, actually two equally large SCCs), and the three components the
singleton, the source, and the sink nodes, respectively. It is
thought that each of the four components will contain about
1/4 of the total authors.

24

32

5

14

6

13

44

12

17

77

35
61
51

42

52
SCC012

11
64
38
45
66
18

19

71

72

67

74

75

46

76

48

73

69

16

65

15

78
3

23
SCC008

59

4
9

21

28
29
31

68

41
79
8

37

6 Exploring Newsgroups as Social Networks

40

70

Our browser allows users to use social network metrics
to explore a newsgroup, both visually and interactively. In
particular, a user can easily identify SCCs in the newsgroup
and look for authors of high prestige degrees (i.e., dark
nodes in SCCs). The user clicks on the node to find out all
the messages posted by the authors, and go for postings that
had received many replies. By reading only those attentiongrasping articles of a few leading authors, one can get a
good idea of the current hot issues. This is especially helpful for late comers to catch up and participate in popular

47

80

30

81

63

60

20

Figure 1. Author networks in newsgroup
sci.logic from 2002/4/23 to 2002/4/27.
Note: 82 authors posted 125 articles in 32 threads during
the period. There are two large SCCs. Each includes 9
authors. There is no connection between the two SCCs, and
each engages in its own sub-group conversation. A brief
dialogue occurs in a third SCC (of size 2), where one author
receives additional input from others outside of the SCC.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

10
1
0

22

2

26

27

36

33

55

34
39

49

50

53

54

56

57

64
38
18

19

71

72

74

75

46

76

48

78

79

81

73

69

65

8

80

23

40

15

37

16

20
67
3
47
70
30
59

63

60

14

62

35

42

58

32

43

and noisy newsgroups. In general, because there are fewer
SCCs than threads (excluding singleton SCCs), an exploration based on SCCs often takes less time, and is more effective, than going into long threads for interesting articles.
Note that SCCs are grouped by authors, while threads
by articles. The two are orthogonal ways of organizing the
a newsgroup. Our browser also provides the conventional
“thread view” of a newsgroup. It is useful because several
threads may take place in a large SCC. Our browser further
provides the ability to colorize all threads that are within,
coming into, or going out of a SCC. The colorized threads
are used to identify authors in other SCCs who also participate in the threaded discussions. They also help make clear
the multiple threads one may have in a large SCC.
The screenshot in Figure 4 illustrates this exploration
process. The right half of screenshot is the main window,
which provides a detailed view of the social network in
newsgroup sci.logic. We are examining SCC012 and colorize all threads within, into, or out of the sub-group. On
the lower left of the screen is a window that lists all authors
in SCC012. We select the one with higher prestige degree,
and learn that he has posted 6 articles. When an article is
selected, content of the article is displayed in the middle
left window. This article is in thread no. 3, and we can
use the thread view window at the upper left corner to help
find all articles in the thread. However, as colorized in the
main window, it appears that all articles of this thread are in
SCC012, so we need not look further into other SCCs.

7 Related and Current Work

52
61
51
12

11
45
66

Rank0

Rank1

Rank2

Rank3

Rank4

Rank5

Figure 2. SCCs and inter-SCC connections in
newsgroup sci.logic (redrawn from Figure 1).

G(0) S(5)

G(2) S(29)
14

8

G(1) S(20)

15

51

47
30

12
66

33

19
67

Rank0

Rank1

Rank2

Rank3

Rank4

Rank5

Figure 3. Singleton, source, and sink nodes
are combined, respectively (redrawn from
Figure 2). Together with the core SCCs, they
form a “bow-tie” structure.

The idea of using links as endorsements is not new.
Many Web page search techniques are based on this idea,
see for example [8]. The use of stationary probability vector
as an indication of the prestige degree among social entities
is not new either. Some sociologists proposed the idea about
50 years ago (see for example [12, pp. 205-210]). This
work applies the above ideas to help browse newsgroups.
In particular, we utilize the standard From, Message-ID,
and References headers of newsgroup articles, and construct from them a social network of authors.
In Netscan, Smith and Fiore explore and visualize author
connections to help users participate in newsgroup discussions [11]. They rank authors by the number of articles they
sent and received, while we use the prestige vector derived
from the authors’ correspondence matrix to help identify
leading authors in sub-groups. Loom, by Donath and Karahalios [5], and Conversation Map, by Sack [10], also visualize Usenet newsgroups. Both Loom and Conversation Map
connect authors by threading the correspondences among
them. However, our newsgroup analyzer seems to be the
only one that decomposes the correspondence network of
the authors into strongly connected components, and to an-

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4. Exploring newsgroups with a social network analyzer.
alyze each SCC separately for their social metrics.
Our current system is implemented as a stand-alone Java
application. It will be nice to have a Web-based system where the user interface, the analyzer, and the data
source are modularized into independent software components. This way, one can customize the Web-based system for other computer-mediated communication systems
(e-mail lists, etc.).

[6]

[7]

[8]

References
[1] Google groups. <http://groups.google.com>.
[2] J. Abello, P. M. Pardalos, and M. G. Resende. On maximum
clique problems in very large graphs. Research Technical
Report: TR 98.32.1, AT&T Labs, Oct. 1998.
[3] AT&T Research Labs.
Graphviz — Open
Source Graph Drawing Software.
<http://
www.research.att.com/sw/tools/graphviz/>.
[4] A. Broder, R. Kumar, F. Maghoul, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan, R. Stata, A. Tomkins, and J. Wiener. Graph structure in the Web. Computer Networks, 33(1-6):309–320, June
2000.
[5] J. Donath, K. Karahalios, and F. Vi´ega.
Visualizing conversation.
In 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences,. Maui,

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Hawaii, USA, Jan. 1999.
IEEE Computer Society. <http://www.computer.org/proceedings/
hicss/0001/00012/00012023abs.htm>.
M. Horton and R. Adams.
Standard for interchange of USENET messages. RFC 1036, Dec. 1987.
<http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1036.txt>.
IBM Almaden Research Center.
Campfire Home
Page. <http://www.almaden.ibm.com/cs/k53/
campfire.html>.
J. M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. In Proceedings of 9th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 668–677. San Francisco,
California, USA, Jan. 1998.
R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan, and A. Tomkins.
Trawling the web for emerging cyber-communities. Computer Networks, 31(11-16):1481–1493, May 1999.
W. Sack.
Conversion map: An interface for verylarge-scale conversions. Journal of Information Management Systems, 17(3):73–92, 2000. System online at
<http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/ sack/cm>.
M. A. Smith and A. T. Fiore. Visualization components
for persistent conversions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 136–143.
Seattle, Washington, USA, March – April 2001. ACM.
<http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/365024.365073>.
S. Wasserman and K. Faust. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press, June
1994.

