Studying Design Collaboration in DesignWorld: An Augmented 3D Virtual
World
Leman Figen Gül and Mary Lou Maher
Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition, University of Sydney
{lgul3679, mary} @arch.usyd.edu.au

Abstract
New technological developments offer new
collaborative design environments to designers. There
is a great interest in these new tools however it is clear
that we know very little about how these new design
media would affect the way architects collaborate. The
study reported in this paper characterizes the
collaborative design behaviour of a pair of designers
in a prototype which has a 3D modelling tool and 2D
sketch pad. The experimental study involves collecting
data while a pair of architects work on a prescribed
design task. The collected data includes video, verbal
protocol data, and screen images. Our study shows
that while 2D sketching encourages development of
design ideas, the 3D virtual world encourages
collaborative modelling of design solutions, in
particular designers collaboratively refine the 3D
model to visually analyse the design idea as they
effectively develop realistic design representations.

1. Introduction
Recent developments in virtual environments and
the availability of high bandwidth networks have the
potential to bring significant changes in the way that
Architecture,
Engineering
and
Construction
professionals collaborate and design. This paper
presents a case study that characterizes collaborative
design behaviuor in an augmented collaborative virtual
world.
Research into the impact of technology on
collaborative design can lead to a more critical
understanding of how collaborative design can be
facilitated. An understanding of how to facilitate
collaborative design includes various factors including
the role that communication media plays, the use of
materials and computer tools and the way people
communicate verbally and non verbally [1]. Previous

studies of differences in collaborating using remote
sketching and virtual worlds show that a major
difference in design process occurs when designers use
sketches to communicate when compared to 3D
models while in virtual environments [2, 3].
Characterising collaborative work can assist in our
understanding of how the collaborative design process
can be facilitated and how new technologies can be
introduced into the workplace. The role of new design
media, the use of external representation and the way
people communicate verbally and non-verbally are
important issues in this study. The aim is to study
designers’ activity so that it may be better understood
and this understanding may be employed in the
creation of better computer support that will improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of collaborative design
activity.

2. DesignWorld Study
The project undertakes a case study of how
designers work collaboratively using an augmented
virtual world. The designers use a prototype,
DesignWorld, that is a combination of 3D modelling
and sketching tools. Figure 1 shows the interface of
DesignWorld. The 3D virtual world client, SecondLife,
is on the left, and a web-base browser interface that has
a link to the 2D sketching application, GroupBoard, is
on the right (see [4] for more information about the
system architecture). Designers have a choice of
working in 3D virtual world or remote sketching in a
shared white-board at the same design situation.
We conducted a series of structured and controlled
experiments where a pair of designers was
collaborating on a design task. Our designers were
architects, so the design task was the design of a tower
that includes a small shopping centre (a gift shop),
viewing area, and a café/restaurant.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Desktop
Screen1

PANEL

Microphone 1

Microphone 2

Desktop
Screen2

Camera 1

Camera 2
DVR

Figure 1. Interface of DesignWorld
They were given the design brief and asked to
complete the design in one hour. The brief specified
that the viewing area should be high enough to provide
a view over the water. The designers had a training
session in a neighbour site where they were asked to
build a tower, so they become familiar with the
environment.

Figure 2. Experiment setup
The DVR system was set to show four different
views on one monitor as shown in Figure 3. Two
cameras were used to monitor the two participants’
behaviours and the other two views were video streams
directly from the two designers’ computer display
screens. Two separate microphones for each participant
were fed into the DVR system through a sound mixer.

2.1. Study methods
We use protocol analysis to study and compare the
impact of virtual environments on collaborative design
behaviour. This has been accepted as a research
technique allowing characterisation of processes in
designing [5]. While earlier studies generally focus on
the protocols’ verbal aspects [6], later research
acknowledges the importance of design drawing [7]
together with design thinking which can be interpreted
through verbal descriptions [8-10]. We can understand
how virtual environments impact designers’ focus
during the design session by gathering information
about their communication and behaviour.

2.2. Experiment
We recorded the designers’ activities and
communication in the session with a surveillance
digital video recording (DVR) system. In order to
simulate high bandwidth audio and video, both
designers are in the same room and can talk to each
other, but can only see each other via a web cam. In the
experimental set-up, two cameras, two microphones
and two computers were connected to the DVR. shows
the equipment set-up where two participants are
located in the same room with a panel in between
them. The cameras and video streams were connected
to a typical desktop computer configuration with a
vertical screen, keyboard and mouse.

Figure 3. Two designers collaborating in
DesignWorld

2.3. Video and verbal data coding
The data from the experiment includes a continuos
stream of video and audio data. The stream of data for
the session is segmented for coding and analysis. We
used software called INTERACT for our coding and
analysis process. The protocol is segmented based on
an interpretation of an event. Dwarakanath and
Blessing [11] state that an event could be defined as a
segment of time which begins when new portion of
information is mentioned or discussed, and ends when
another new portion of information is raised. This
segment definition is the most favourable one for the
study, since the occurrences of actions and intentions
change quickly as architects draw/model and
communicate interactively (see [2, 3] for more details
on the interpretation of the event ).
Each segment is then coded according to a coding
scheme. The coding scheme allows us to characterize
the designers’ behaviour in the 3D virtual world. The
coding scheme has the following categories:

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

•

Communication in collaborative design: design
communication,
awareness,
and
communication technology;
• Design Representation: realization, agents
actions, and perceptual focus;
• Working mode: individual and meeting, and
• Representation mode: 2D and 3D.
Communication in collaborative design:
Communication in collaborative design refers to
verbal design communications that have direct
relevance to the designers’ collaboration to solve a
particular design problem as well as their interactions
with each other and the tools. This category has
subcategories that are design
communication,
awareness, communication technology and others. The
design communication category aims to capture the
discussions in terms of ‘design collaboration’, ‘design
ideas’, ‘design scope’, and ‘design semantics’. The
communication technology category looks at the
discussions held between participants related to the use
of the tools and the collaborative environments in
terms of ‘problem’, ‘howTo’ and ‘things/properties’.
The awareness is another code that looks at the
discussions held between participants related to the
presence and activities of others. The other code
captures utterances that are not related to designing.
Design representation:
The second main category, design representation,
captures when and how designers create and use visual
information that is mostly accompanied by verbal
information. The design representation coding scheme
has three subcategories: agent actions, realization and
perceptual focus.
Agent actions:
The agent actions category looks specifically the
interaction of the designers with his/her surrounding
that is the physical world and the virtual world. The
interaction occurs in three ways: gesturing, engaging
with elements, and tools, as summarised in Table 1.
Table 1. Agent actions
Gesturing
OnElements
OnTools

Hand gesturing in face to face, moving avatar
for pointing the objects, using cursor
Inspecting the design, changing views
Engaging with the tools (paper, pen or clicking
and/or dragging objects/buttons on digital
environments)

Realization:
This category has two subcategories: realization
process and realization actions.
The realization process category is adapted from
Atman and Bursics’ [12] design step category, as
shown in Table 2. The aim of these codes is to capture
discussions held between participants related to the
realization of the design ideas that includes decisions,
modelling and describe.

Table 2. Realization process
Modelling
Decision
Describe

Modelling, describing how to build an idea, how
to make it, measurements, calculations
Select one idea or solution among other
alternatives
Define the design to others

The
realization
actions
category
shares
characteristics of Kavakli and Gero’s [13] 'drawing
actions' category and has Cardella et al’s[14]
‘representation’ category. The category looks at the
interaction of the designers with the visual information
that is a drawing in GroupBoard or a 3D model in
SecondLife. This category has the following codes:
write, create elements, continue elements, add
elements, and delete elements, as shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Realization actions
Write
Create
Elements
Continue
elements
Add to
elements
Delete El.

Creating a written response or writing down ideas
to be used later
Engage with (creating/drawing) point, line, plane,
volume or in 3D virtual world cloning, duplicating
an object
Continuing sketching or modelling/ developing the
same representation further (modifying, moving,
transferring, grouping)
Returning to the previous element after engaging in
a different activity or working on different part of
the representation.
Erasing elements

Perceptual focus:
The Perceptual focus category has two codes:
object/entity and spatial relationship as shown in Table
4. This category looks at the visual information as well
as the verbal information. When designers engage with
the visual features of the design product that are size,
shape, colour or texture, etc, it is coded as
object/entities. When designers engage with the spatial
relationships of the objects that include positions,
locations, alignments, etc it is coded as spatial
relationship
Table 4. Perceptual focus
Object/
entity
Spatial
Relationships

Engage with visual features of elements; shape,
size, dimensions, colour, texture, material,
Engage with spatial relation of elements;
position, direction, alignment, x, y, z coordinates,
being up, down, left or right

Working mode:
The third main category, working mode, includes
two codes: individual and meeting. The descriptions of
individual and meeting codes are adapted from Kvan et
al’s cognitive model of collaborative design [15].
Representation mode:
The last category, representation mode, has two
codes: 2D and 3D. This category captures which mode
the designers are working in: sketching in GroupBoard
or 3D modelling in SecondLife.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

3. Observations from the design session
The designers started by developing a scheme on
the GroupBoard and identified the maximum size of
the individual pieces that they would make in Second
Life. Their ideas on the building involved 3 blockstructures and a triangle theme. They spent some time
in talking about various options on the shape of the
tower, which included a cantilevered slab, interesting
fillet shapes and a triangular type arrangement. Then
they separated functions such as a viewing area, café,
restaurant and shopping arcade and confirmed the
dimensions for them. In this paper we refer to the
designers as Alex and Brown. Figure 4 shows the
design solution in DesignWorld.

Figure 4. The final outcome in SecondLife
When Alex built a column for the tower, he did not
create a new one but copied one of the towers from the
other side and resized it. Then he cloned other copies
and moved them upward to increase the height of the
tower. Brown made the triangles on the ground level
and moved it to the top of the tower, which would be a
basic structure for the roof and other levels. From time
to time, they were just flying out to have a look at the
design from the sky. They cloned the triangles and put
them at different heights respectively for making each
floor. Brown made the thin walls connecting the levels
while Alex worked on the triangles. At this point, they
did not talk to each other but concentrated on their own
work. They kept inspecting where their partner was
working and what he was producing.

4. Analysis and interpretations of the
results
After coding each segment, the coding software
INTERACT provides us with the total duration of each
action in each category. Figure 5 shows how much
time the designers spent on communication content
category codes. Time is expressed as the percentage of
the total elapsed time for each session (which is
approx. 1 hour). Communication content durations
were divided by the total time elapsed in each session,
where duration percentages are obtained for each code.
Design
communication
(designCom)
duration
percentages are highest, which are followed by

communication about software features (commTech
and awareness.)
Communication content

60.00%
50.00%
40.00%
30.00%
20.00%
10.00%
0.00%
awareness

commTech

context free

designCom

Figure 5.Bar charts for communication content
Figure 6 shows the duration percentages of
realization process actions of the designers (Alex is d1
and Brown is d2). The figure shows that the modelling
actions category is the highest followed by describe
and decision action categories. The time spent for
communication on how to build the model is relatively
high compared to the other two actions (29%
modelling, 10% describe and 6% decision). This shows
that they focused on modelling/ refining the design
idea and on the details of building the tower.
Realization process

d1

d2

35.00%
30.00%
25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%

decision

describe

modelling

Figure 6. Bar charts for realization process
actions of the designers (d1 and d2)
Figure 7 shows the timeline of the representation
mode actions of the designers. They only spent a
limited time in 2D sketching pad, in particular they
used it at the beginning and then most of the time they
worked in the 3D modelling mode.

Figure 7. Timeline of representation mode
Figure 8 shows the duration percentages of
perceptual focus actions of the designers (Alex is d1
and Brown is d2). The graph shows that the spatial
relationship action is the highest in both designers’
perceptual focus. This demonstrates that designers
focused on the spatial relationships of the objects,
rather than on the object models.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Perceptual focus

they focused on the spatial relationships of design
objects.

d2

d1

spatial

object

0.00%

20.00%

40.00%

60.00%

80.00%

Figure 8. Bar charts for perceptual focus of the
designers (d1 and d2)
Figure 9 shows the duration percentages of
realization actions of the designers (Alex is d1 and
Brown is d2). The continue element action category is
significantly high followed by create element and add
element action categories. This demonstrates that the
designers engaged more with modifying/ moving
objects in DesignWorld than creating new objects. This
is due to the nature of the 3D modelling where one
simple click creates an object but then the user needs to
move it to its place, and position, rotate or modify its
properties. Our previous studies also showed similar
modelling action cycles where designers inspect the
representation, create, move and modify the design
objects while in 3D virtual worlds [16].
d1

Realization actions

d2

write
delete
Create
Element
Contiu.
Elements
Add
Elements
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

Figure 9. Bar charts for realization actions of
the designers (d1 and d2)
The realization actions and perceptual focus actions
categories are shown along the timeline of the session
in Figure 10. The beginning of the session is on the
left, and the length of each horizontal bar indicates
how long the designer spent on each action. The graph
shows only Alex’s actions over time. It can be
observed that the create element action and the object
focus actions were parallel actions in some cases
however the continue element actions and the spatial
focus actions were parallel in most cases. The continue
element action in DesignWorld includes modelling and
developing the same design representation further. This
demonstrates that when the designers develop/ model
the external design representation, most of the time

Figure 10. Realization actions and perceptual
focus
The designers worked both separately and together
during the session, as shown in Figure 11. This is due
to the nature of the 3D world, where participants have
the opportunity to do task divisions and work
separately (individual mode) on different aspects/parts
of the design product. This result also shows that the
3D virtual world could support teams to work
collaboratively but at the same time could support
individuals to work separately on the different
parts/aspects of the design.

Figure 11. Timeline of working mode
Our preliminary results can be summarized as
follows: First, the analysis of the communication
content showed that the designers are focussed on the
design task indicating that the virtual world does not
distract them from designing. The designers in the
virtual world spent a relatively small amount of time
talking about digital tools and awareness of each other.
Second, the analysis of the design representation
category shows that in the 3D virtual world they spent
more time on spatial relationships of the design
elements and modifying existing objects to develop the
design further rather than creating new objects. Third,
the analysis of working mode showed that the
designers spent more time in individual mode which
means they designed their parts of the product
separately (towards one design) rather than working on
the same elements. And finally, the analysis of the
representation mode shows that the designers spent
around 10 percent of their total time working in the
sketchpad and the rest working in 3D modelling mode.
Working with the sketchpad occurred during the first
quarter of the session, where the designers developed
the basic concepts of the design, followed by working
in the 3D virtual world to construct the design.

5. Conclusions
As available bandwidth increases and new
augmented virtual environments are developed to
support collaborative design, designers are provided
with a broader range of choices in how they
communicate and collaborate at various stages of the

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

design process. While it is essential and expected that
the basic requirements for effective verbal
communication are available during the collaborative
session, there are numerous options for providing a
shared representation of the design problems and
solutions. In this study we focused on the impact of the
technology on collaborative design behaviour in
DesignWorld. We presented a case study of a pair of
designers collaborating in an augmented 3D virtual
world.
The case study described here characterizes and
compares design behaviour and representational focus
of two designers using DesignWorld. We demonstrated
that designers were able to effectively communicate
and design in DesignWorld. Our preliminary results
showed that the 3D virtual world encouraged
collaborative modelling of design solutions, in
particular the designers collaboratively refined the 3D
model and visually analysed the design idea as well as
they
effectively
developed
realistic
design
representations. The designers focussed on the
concretization of design ideas in the 3D world, while in
2D sketching mode, the designers stayed with abstract
design concepts. In the 3D virtual world, our designers
spent time on refining/ modelling the design concept
that was agreed upon in the sketch pad. We also
observed that the designers spent time on individual
work and successfully integrated their parts of the
design.
In this paper the nature and benefits of a 3D
augmented virtual world are revealed by analysing the
design behaviour of a pair of designers. The results
show that they focussed on the visualisation models of
how object comes together and are synthesized.

6. Acknowledgments
DesignWorld was developed as a part of a research
project funded by Cooperative Research Centre for
Construction Innovation in the University of Sydney.
The project title is team collaboration in high
bandwidth virtual environments. The authors also
would like to thank the second coder.

7. References

Using Face to Face and Remote Sketching and 3D Modelling
Environments, In Clients Driving Innovation: Moving Ideas
Into Practice CRC for Construction and Innovation,
Australia, 2006.
[4] M.L. Maher, M. Rosenman, K. Merrick, and O.
Macindoe, DesignWorld: An Augmented 3D Virtual World
for Multidisciplinary Collaborative Design, In Caadria 2006,
Osaka, Japan, 2006.
[5] A.C Cross and N. Cross, Observations of Teamwork and
Social Processes in Design, In N. Cross, H. Christiaans, and
K. Dorst (eds), Analysing Design Activity, West Sussex,
John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
[6] Akın, Ö., Psychology Of Architectural Design, Pion,
London, 1986.
[7] Ö. Akın and C. Lin, Design Protocol Data and Novel
Design Decisions, Design Studies, 16(2), 211-236, 1995.
[8] J. Stempfle and P. Badke-Schaub, Thinking in Design
Teams - An Analysis of Team Communication, Design
Studies, 23(5), 473, 2002.
[9] M. Suwa, T. Purcell and J. Gero, Macroscopic Analysis
of Design Processes Based on a Scheme for Coding
Designers' Cognitive Actions, Design Studies, 19(4), 455,
1998.
[10] M. Suwa and B. Tversky, What Do Architects and
Students Perceive in Their Design Sketches? A Protocol
Analysis, Design Studies, 18(4), 385, 1997.
[11] S. Dwarakanath and L. Blessing, The Design Process
Ingredients: A Comparison Between Group and Individual
Work, In N. Cross, H. Christiaans, And K. Doorst (eds), In
Analysing Design Activity, West Sussex, John Wiley &
Sons, 1996.
[12] C.J. Atman and K.M. Bursic, Verbal Protocol Analysis
as a Method to Document Engineering Student Design
Processes, Journal Of Engineering Education, 87(2), 121 133, 1998.
[13] M. Kavakli and J.S. Gero, Strategic Knowledge
Differences Between an Expert and a Novice Designer, In:
J. Gero And K. Hori (eds), In Strategic Knowledge And
Concept Formation, Key Centre of Design Computing and
Cognition, University of Sydney, 55-68, 2001.
[14] M.E. Cardella, C.J. Atman and R.S. Adams, Mapping
Between Design Activities and External Representations for
Engineering Student Designers, Design Studies, 27(1), 5-24,
2006.
[15] T. Kvan, Collaborative Design: What Is It? Automation
in Construction. 9(4) 409-415, 2000.
[16] M.L. Maher, Z. Bilda and L.F. Gül, Impact of
Collaborative Virtual Environments on Design Behaviour,
In DCC06, 2006.

[1] B. Munkvold, Implementing Collaboration Technologies
in Industry: Case Examples and Lessons Learned, London,
Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[2] M.L. Maher, Z. Bilda, L.F. Gül, and D. Marchant,
Studying Design Collaboration in Virtual Worlds, In
Studying Designers'05, Key Centre of Design Computing
and Cognition, University of Sydney, 2005.
[3] M.L. Maher, Z. Bilda, L.F. Gül, D. Marchant, and H.
Yinghsiu, A Cognitive Study of Collaborating Architects

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

