Towards Classifying Visualization in Team Sports
Mitchell Page and Andrew Vande Moere
Key Centre of Design Computing & Cognition, University of Sydney
mpag5967@mail.usyd.edu.au, andrew@arch.usyd.edu.au

Abstract
Visualization and team sports have an important
and established relationship that is seldom understood.
Team sports can be considered as complex activities
containing a considerable number of abstract datasets
and participant categories, such as athletes, coaches,
referees and spectators. This paper proposes that the
field of visualization has been applied within team
sports in various ways to provide these participants
with representations of these datasets. This has
resulted in data-augmented games which are easier to
play, judge and watch respectively.
This paper provides a review of past and current
applications of visualization within team sports. A
model is presented to classify sports visualizations
along conceptual axes. This model will allow future or
potentially untapped applications of team sports
visualization to be identified and classified.

1. Introduction
Visualization has been connected with different
meanings within different contexts. Many areas offer
detailed descriptions for visualization. For instance,
scientific visualization is the use of visual images that
aid the understanding of complex scientific concepts
[1]. Information visualization is the visual
representation of abstract data to amplify cognition [2].
So-called non-visual visualization is the use of human
senses other than sight to convey data, such as sound
and touch [3]. In effect, the field of visualization
includes: information graphics, the images such as
maps, charts and cartograms used to represent data [4];
as well information design, the communication of
information for efficient and effective use through
visual narratives within an illustrated context [5].
Team sports are a fundamental constituent of
society today, available through almost every modern
communication medium. They can be viewed on
television, heard on radio, read in newspapers, and
followed via the internet or mobile phone. Unlike

individual sports, team sports require the collaborative
involvement of multiple participants simultaneously.
For this to occur, all participants must posses a
synchronous understanding and global overview of the
game-play aspects. As team sports naturally become
more complex over time, such as with the regular
introduction or modification of rules and regulations,
they become increasingly difficult to understand.
Different forms of visualization have been applied to
solve this problem.
The conceptual use of visualization within team
sport can be broadly interpreted. It is applied in a
variety of ways; from scientific representations of
physical quantities such as motion and trajectory, to the
more contextual representation of game rules and team
identity. This wide approach to visualization methods
can be attributed to the abstract nature of the data.
Team sports visualization is thus described as any
representation of game-related data which supports the
understanding of its participants; where game-related
data refers to any information or dataset which affects
or directly results from game-play.
By visualizing specific aspects of team-sports, the
games have become more comprehensible. For
example: colors and numbers have allowed athletes
and teams to be identified; field lines and marking have
enabled rules to be followed; while more recently
advanced computer generated graphics have allowed
even the most complex sports data to be understood by
a range of non-expert television viewers.
However, when implementing visualization within
team sports, two issues arise. Firstly, decisions need to
be made such as: what data should be shown, how to
show it, and who to show it to. Secondly, it is
important to address whether there exists any need for
it. Therefore, any sports-based visualization
development needs to be justified. Little research has
been undertaken to identify the varying applications
and methods of visualization within team sports. This
paper reviews these, and uses the findings to produce a
conceptual model which can be used to explore,
describe and identify current applications and to
discover novel, still untapped opportunities.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

2. Visualization in team sports
The use of visualization within team sports can be
divided into three categories:
- Athlete-centered, which focuses on supporting
the athletes as well as coaches.
- Spectator-centered,
which
supports
the
spectators or audience.
- Judgment-centered, which is geared towards the
accurate, fast and effective judgment of team sports by
one or more official referees.
In the following sections, several past to present
cases and research of the use of visualization within
team sports will be reviewed. This paper highlights
four main areas within the team sports domain where
visualization has been applied: a) clothing (e.g.,
uniforms, player numbers, etc), b) environment (e.g.
court, field, etc), c) media (e.g. billboards, augmented
television broadcasting, etc), and relatively recently d)
wearable computing (e.g. sensors, tangible displays,
etc). Each of the cases discussed are able to be
classified as either: athlete-centered, spectator-centered
or judgment-centered visualizations.
• Clothing. It may appear not obvious at first sight,
but team sports uniforms can be considered themselves
as a form of visualization. Mainly employed as a
technique to discern between different teams on the
playing field, the use of visualization in uniforms has
expanded to represent information about the
identification of a single athlete or team both during
and after game-play.
Three of the most conventional forms of existing
clothing visualization in team sports are:
- Numerical depiction provides a visual means to
identify the position of a player. The first record of the
use of numbers in team sports was in 1928, where the
competing English Football teams wore numbered
shirts [6]. Prior to this the only way to identify a player
was to refer to a provided match itinerary.
- Color helps to give a team a pre-attentive
identity. The first sporting teams in the 1800’s chose
their colors based on tradition [7], thus color visualized
information about their unique heritage. While heritage
is still a leading factor, teams today sometimes choose
their colors based on psychological factors. For
example, the color red is believed to represent
dominance or aggression [8].
- Name Identification. In some team sports there
are no specific rules against players of the same team
having the same number. So as teams began fielding
athletes with the same number, the use of a textual
graphic became another method to distinguish between
athletes. In addition, these graphics sometimes tend to
include the name or logo of the athletes team.

• Environmental. The physical environments
(courts, fields, etc) in which sports are played serve as
an additional application for visualization. Graphical
symbols and images break a playing area up into
sections. These static graphics constantly communicate
various kinds of information about a sport to the
athletes, judges and spectators alike.
Different environmental symbols in team sports reveal
different information, but ultimately they all visually
represent the strict rules of game-play. Lines around
the perimeter of a playing field represent the
boundaries; locations which if crossed by an athlete
during game-play result in some sort of punishment.
Recurring lines break a playing field up into sections;
dictating locations where certain players can and
cannot enter. While special lines, usually at the two
ends of the field define the goal areas; identifying
locations athletes must reach to score a point. Figure 1
is an example of a common team sports environment.

Figure 1. Common Soccer environment [9]
• Media. A large majority of the innovation and
application of visualization within team sports has
occurred within the area of media, such as: print,
television, radio, and the internet. This area is primarily
targeted at supporting spectators, so can be further
divided into two categories: local and remote.
Screen annotation is one of the most widely
observed cases. This involves the use of superimposed
computer graphics over live sport broadcasts, such as
the virtual line which simulates the current world
record and accompanies athletes during a televised race
(see Figure 2). Virtual Spectator [10] is another
advanced visualization system which allows for dataenhanced replays of entire team sports events for
remote spectators. Similarly, LucentVision [11] tracks
and visualizes the movement data of tennis balls and
athletes in 3D virtual space.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 2. Virtual world-record-line [12]
The early use of scoreboards - devices used to
visually track team sports game activity and running
score - has led to the development of an entire range of
team sports visualizations which display a variety of
statistical information, here named activity history.
These are best described as the graphical representation
of both past and present game-related information of a
sporting event simultaneously. Cases of these are:
performance graphs which report on the physical
activities of an athlete or team throughout an event
[13]; game-flow charts that graph binary data such as
points scored over time; shot charts that map particular
actions to an environmental graphic [14]; and
Sparklines [15] which are small, high-resolution, dataintense graphics that display sports activity over time.

Figure 3. Clockwise from top left: performance
graph [13], game-flow chart, shot chart [14],
and Sparklines [15]
The ability of this kind of visualization to provide a
global overview of a team sports event is highly
favored. Either when team sports are in play or after
they have concluded, the remote participant is often
interested in obtaining only a summary of the game
which highlights key events. Activity history
visualization of team sports has satisfied this need by
providing a means to obtain necessary game

information all-at-once. This is apparent with cases
such as the season statistics system [16] which can
provide entire seasonal NBA data within a single data
visualization. It can also be used to offer specific
judgment support, as is the case with Pierro [17], an
event tracking visualization system for adding tracing
graphics to team sports replays for error detection.
Non-visual cases of visualization have also been
utilized within this media area. For instance, the
Cyclops Auto Serve Line Detector for tennis [18] uses
sound tones to convey judgmental information, as it
detects if the athletes serves are acceptable. Devices
such as these have paved the way for tangible forms of
team sports visualization.
• Wearable Computing. This area refers to more
recent devices which are worn on the body of team
sports participants and are used to deliver or transmit
forms of visualizations. They are usually small and
undetectable technologies, and therefore have been
able to be integrated into many sports with little
change. The tactile vest is one such case of wearable
computing visualization [19]. The vest is fitted to
rowing and skating athletes, and like the Tennis Auto
Serve Line Detector [18] it uses a multi-modal
visualization channel, in this case the sense of touch.
The vest is used to coach and train athletes using
vibration to encode physical performance information.
The majority of these technologies are sensorbased, which allow measurable physical properties to
be visualized in real-time in order to increase
immediate understanding and improve the athlete’s
performance accordingly. Force sensors integrated into
body protectors can detect the amount of force
delivered to an athlete, which is then transmitted and
visualized as point values on a scoring display for more
accurate adjudication of martial arts events [20].
Motion sensors for downhill professional skiers reveal
body movement information which allows athletes and
coaches to optimize their routines for maximum
performance [21]. Tracking sensors are used for
visualizing athlete performance for team sports which
occur over large distances and are difficult to attend.
The Internet-enabled wearable sensor technology
attached to cross country skiers allow officials and
remote spectators to visually observe athlete progress
and body vitals, making such sports more accessible
than ever [22].
Wearable computing for sports purposes includes
technologies which can be carried and worn by
spectators. TennisViewer [23] is portable and handheld
computer device which is able to visualize the data
representing a tennis game, increasing a spectators
understanding.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

3. Team sports visualization model
This conceptual model has taken into account
twenty different cases of team sport visualization
which are utilized during game-play. The goal of this
model is not to be exhaustive, but rather to cover the
most important areas of contemporary team sports data
representations, which in addition showcases a variety
of current applications and research.
This model is designed to allow any team sport
visualization to be described, and so can be used on
past as well as future applications. It has been visually
represented here to obtain a structured breakdown of
its current state and usage.
• Model Outline. The framework outlines four
different visualization classifiers: Data, Form, User,
and Area. Each of these classifiers themselves contains
sub-classifiers:
- Data refers to the abstract quality or quantity that
is being visualized. It includes the sub-classifiers:
identity, rules, performance, and physical activity.
- Form describes the visualization method used,
including the sub-classifiers: identification, textural,
abstract, and scientific.
- User is the participant type for whom the
visualization is intended: athlete-centered, judgmentcentered, local or remote spectator-centered.
- Area refers to the four areas within team sport in
which visualization can occur. These are: clothing,
environment, media, and wearable computing.
• Model Presentation. Each team sports
visualization case is added to the model based on its
applicable classifiers. Through populating this model, a
means is provided by which to compare a large number
of these cases based on a common framework. This
can allow similarities and gaps within this field to be
identified. The model is represented by a 3D ‘loaf’
consisting of four different slices, within which each
case is plotted (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. 3D loaf model

The user classifier is mapped onto the front face of
the cube (X and Z-axis). Each corner of the face
denotes one of the four user sub-classifiers. A Distance
from Game-play value is measured along the length of
the cube (Y-axis). The data/form classifiers, which go
hand-in-hand, are merged and mapped to color, as
specified by the legend in Figure 5. Similarly the area
classifier is denoted by pictograms, also in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Model legend
• Model Population. Individual cases are plotted
within the multi-dimensional front view, which is
divided into four quarter-circle zones. Each zone refers
to the predominant user classifier of that zone, and so
each case is placed in a corner based on its primary
user. The cases are then moved around within these
zones depending on their relationship with surrounding
zones; with the centre zone, labeled as the all
participants zone, containing cases applicable to all
users (see Figure 6). The values of these relationships
were determined based on a similarity matrix of all
cases, which took into account measurements of the
distance and usage-time of every case from the
perspective of each user.

Figure 6. Front view

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

One can perceive four distinct perception slices.
Within the side view (see Figure 7), Four different
slices along the Y-axis refer to how information is
recognized and extracted from the visualizations in
order to be understood. The peripheral slice refers to
cases that are sensed immediately, without the need for
direct attention; direct refers to those which must be
viewed directly for understanding; pattern refers to
those cases understood via the recognition of certain
patterns; and cases in the time slice are those
recognized only after comparing or placing them
within a historical context.

Figure 7. Side view

4. Discussion
The front and side views of the conceptual model
allowed certain visualization trends and gaps within
team sports to be identified. Firstly, from the front
view clustering is clearly evident within the five zones.
It can also be perceived that there are very few cases
which directly support the athlete. Those cases which
do appear in the athlete zone, the Tactile Vest [18] and
Movement Sensors [20], are training visualization
tools, and cannot be used within game-play. The cases
which an athlete can use within game-play all appear
within the All Participants Zone, indicating that they
are equally supportive to all team sports participants.
These cases are also mostly wearable (clothing)
visualizations. It is hence found that any visualization
which occurs at the centre of game-play needs to be
not only athlete-centered, but judgment and spectator
centered. However, as color denotes the kind of
information shown, and they are primarily blue, it is
apparent that this zone is lacking visualization cases
both in terms of data type and form.

From the side view, it is found that visualizations
which occur close within the vicinity of game-play
usually convey information needed for success, such as
rules and identity, and hence need to be understood
quickly. These cases can be experienced peripherally.
However, such visualizations which make use of ones
peripheral understanding are currently lacking in team
sports, both in information and quantity. The majority
of cases occur within the pattern and time slices;
however these cases remain inaccessible to athletes.
Many researchers have outlined the acceptance of
new technologies within the sporting as always being a
complicated process [20], [24], [25], [26]. Particularly
with visualization technologies, concerns arise such as:
what information is represented, how it is presented,
and who it is presented to. Using this model, the state
of visualization in team sports was able to be assessed.
- Relationships identified. The model provides a
visual analysis of the interrelationships between
currently established team sports visualizations,
allowing trends regarding the use of visualization in
team sports to be seen. Four distinct participant zones
reveal which visualizations target which users and by
what means. Another four perception slices group the
cases based on how they are perceived by these users.
- Gaps identified. Primarily almost all the cases of
team sport visualization are media related and focus on
supporting the remote spectator. None at all
specifically support the athletes themselves, and few
support judges and local spectators. Remote
participants receive vast information on the
performance and physical activities of team sports
games; information which is often hidden from the
athletes, judges and local spectators. The domain is
therefore currently lacking in visualization cases which
target primary participants such as athletes and judges.
Those cases which do exist are ‘information weak’,
introducing no new information to these participants.
- Future applications. Different areas for potential
future uses of team sport visualization are recognized.
Firstly, the gaps, or zones, in which cases have not
been applied or are lacking, are identified as suitable
areas for future research. Secondly, wearable
visualizations such as clothing and field symbols are
among the most successful within team sports. Not
only are they targeted at all sports participants, they are
able to be recognized via ones peripheral vision; thus
understood quickly and easily.
There is observable success resulting from the
application of visualization within team sports, as is
evident from the numerous cases discussed by this
research. With these results, specific progress can be
made by investigating whether there is an actual need
for filling the gaps that were identified in ‘future
applications’. For instance, surveys could determine

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

whether team sports players feel that visualization
could augment game-play in some significant way.
[8]

5. Conclusions
A review of visualization within team sports was
presented. This included past and present applications
as well as more recent research endeavors by various
researchers in multiple scientific fields. Using the
information obtained from this review, a model was
formulated to quantify these visualizations in terms of
their data, form, end-users, and area of application.
This model represents a current understanding of team
sports visualization, and has been used to show
significant and meaningful dense clusters and gaps,
revealing potentially future research directions.
Future work in this area could extend this model
outside of a sports context, to classify and discover
uses of visualization within other suitable team-based
fields such as business, education, or media.
Visualization is a successful and widely used
method for increasing human understanding of various
datasets in team sports. As its use continues to evolve,
new and interesting applications will emerge within
new and different areas. These must continue to
support participants and never offer an unfair
advantage or hinder safety. If team sports visualization
continues to embrace the performance of human talent
that is core to team sports, its applications will become
more successful and be embraced by more people.

6. References
[1] S. Bryson. Virtual Reality in Scientific Visualization. In
Communications of ACM 39(5). 62-71. 1996.
[2] S. Card, J. Mackinlay and B. Shneiderman. Information
Visualization. In Information Visualization: Using
Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufman. 1-34. 1999.
[3] X. Fu and D. Li. Haptic Shoes: Representing
Information by Vibration. In Proceedings of the 2005
Asia-Pacific Symposium on Information Visualisation.
Australian Computer Society. 47-50. 2005.
[4] R. Harris. Information Graphics: A Comprehensive
Illustrated Reference. Oxford University Press US. 2000.
[5] R. Horn. Information Design: Emergence of a New
Profession. In R. Jacobson (Ed.), Information Design,
Cambridge, MIT Press. 15-33. 1999.
[6] J. Carosi. The Numbers Game. In The Corsham Referee
Newsletter 15. URL: http://www.corshamref.net.
Accessed 29 Sep 2005.
[7] A. Allegos and H. Allegos. Color Does Matter! An
Investigation
of
Color
in
Sport.
URL:

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

http://www.ausport.gov.au/fulltext/1999/cjsm/v3n2/alle
gos32.htm. Accessed 29 Sep 2005.
R. Hill and R. Barton. Psychology: Red Enhances
Human Performance in Contests, In Nature 435(7040).
293. 2005.
United States Soccer Federation Inc. Laws of the Game.
In Fédération Internationale de Football Assoc. 2005.
Virtual Spectator URL: http://www.virtualspectator.com/.
Accessed 5 October 2005.
G. Pingali, A. Opalach, and Y. Jean. Ball Tracking and
Virtual Replays for Innovative Tennis Broadcasts. In
Proceedings of 15th International Conference on
Pattern Recognition. 152-156. 2000.
Orad URL: http://www.orad.tv/. Accessed 2 Oct 2005.
Virtual Spectator. Cricket Super Score. URL:
http://www.pineapplehead.com.au/. Accessed 5 Oct 2005.
ESPN URL: http://sports.espn.go.com/nba. Accessed 5
Oct 2005.
E. Tufte. Beautiful Evidence. Cheshire, CT, Graphics
Press. 2005.
D. Turo. Hierarchical Visualization with Treemaps:
Making Sense of Pro Basketball Data. In Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 441-442. 1994.
BBC. Virtual Cameras and Tied to Field Graphics.
URL:
http://www.bbcbroadcast.com/designsystems/.
Accessed 6 Oct 2005.
L. Hibbert. Decisions You Can’t Argue With. In
Professional Engineering 12(13). Bury St. Edmunds.
26-27. 1999
R. Vannieuwland. Tactile Technology: The Skin as
Untapped Sense, In TNO Magazine September 2005,
20-21. 2005.
E. Chi. Introducing Wearable Force Sensors in Martial
Arts, In IEEE Pervasive Computing 4(3). 47-53. 2005.
F. Michahelles and B. Schiele. Sensing and Monitoring
Professional Skiers. In IEEE Pervasive Computing 4(3)
2005. 40-46. 2005.
J. Hallberg, S. Svensson, A. Ostmark, P. Lindgren, K.
Synnes, and J. Delsing. Enriched Media-Experience of
Sport Events. In Sixth IEEE Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications. 2-9. 2004.
L. Jin and D. Banks. TennisViewer: A Browser for
Competition Trees. In IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications 17(4). 63-65. 1997.
A. Miah. From Anti-doping to a ‘Performance Policy’
Sport Technology, Being human, and Doing Ethics. In
European Journal of Sport Science 5(1). Taylor and
Francis. 51-57. 2005
A. Miah and S. Eassom. Sport Technology: History,
Philosophy and Policy. In C Mitcham (Ed.), Research in
Philosophy and Technology 21. Elsevier. 1-27. 2002.
SH. Kalisvaart, EMC. Garcia Lechner, and FJ. Lefeber.
System for Monitoring and Coaching of Sportsmen. In
Proceedings of 2nd European Symposium on Ambient
Intelligence. Springer-Verlag. 89-91. 2004.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

