A Study for Parametric Morpho-Semantic Operators to Assist Architectural
Conception at the Drafting Stage
Jean-Paul Wetzel
CRAI (Centre de Recherche en Architecture et Ingénierie) UMR M.A.P. CNRS, N°694
Architecture School of Strasbourg, 8 Boulevard du président Wilson, 67000 Strasbourg, France,
Phone : +33.3.88.32.25.35 ; fax : +33.3.88.32.82.41
Salim Belblidia, Jean-Claude Bignon
CRAI (Centre de Recherche en Architecture et Ingénierie) UMR M.A.P. CNRS, N°694
Architecture School of Nancy, 2 rue Bastien Lepage, 54000 Nancy, France,
Phone : +33.3.83.40.81.34 ; fax : +33.3.83.40.81.30
{wetzel@crai.archi.fr, belblidia@crai.archi.fr, bignon@crai.archi.fr}

Abstract
In this paper, we make the assumption that a shape
modelling process can rely on the application of a set
of morpho-semantic operators to initial shapes. In this
paper, we will refer to several researches which have
attempted to identify such operators.
We will attempt to validate this concept through the
analysis of some “innovative” buildings. Thus, in
different projects of contemporary architects, we can
find the trace of some transformations (e.g. “twist”,
“merge”, “overlay”, etc.) recorded in the final
geometry. These transformations have a symbolic
representation. A design system based on the
combination of these operators could enable the
designer to quickly explore a great number of spatial
solutions.
Keywords : morpho-semantic operator, modifier,
modelling.

1. Introduction
Since the early 80’s, CAD tools have provided us
with new means of graphic representation in
architecture. Contrarily to the usual manner in which
spatial forms are represented in a 2D “glance” [in
sections, elevations and plans], by using this 3D
drawing software, one is provided directly with a
virtual 3D model “constructed” by the computer.
Admitting that graphic figuration plays a key role in
architecture [1][2][3] these recent developments
constitute an important milestone in the practice of

conceptualization. In fact today's computer techniques
provide architecture with a unique opportunity for “retooling” and “re-thinking” its methodologies just as it
happened with the arrival of perspectives and
stereometric projections. 3D modelling software
[Catia, Maya, etc.] are particularly applicable for
conceiving
enclosed
spaces
with
complex
morphologies. The Guggenheim museum of F.O.Gehry
is probably the most emblematic example of this novel
approach.
Even though the computer is nowadays used as a
tool for shape design, it still provides only basic
assistance, mainly mathematical transformations.
Geometrical modelers use operators (to turn, translate,
) which are still poorly adapted to the work of the
architect whose conceptual activities rely on
morphological transformations with an architectural
sense (such as stretching a partition, undulating a
corridor…) [4].
The development of the “object” concept in the 80’s
gave rise to “professional modelers” that take better
handle architectural concepts and entities. The
originator does not deal only with lines, surfaces or
prisms, but with walls, floors and windows. This
encapsulates the features of a craft within one object
class that provides the possibility to increase a
qualitative development of modelers by conferring on
them a part of the building semantic.
Yet, , this genuine progress had a counterproductive
effect: it limited the formal inventiveness of the
originator within models of form. It is revealing that
the most innovative recent buildings have been
designed with software that are not specifically
intended for building domain or are the result of

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

methods combining shape search through models and
numeric representations.
Another direction seems to be possible today: the
one opened by “morpho-semantic operators”, with an
architectural sense, at the level of operations dealing
with shape transformations. In such an approach, the
aim is to define operators able to integrate geometric
transformations in a concept with an architectural
view. We call them morpho-semantic operators.
From Ph. Boudon's postulation that “The process of
conception is a diachronical one that implies a
progressive transformation of what a project is” [5], we
can hypothesize that the procedures that lead to the
production of forms issue from the application of
semantic operators on “seed” elements that give rise to
“goal” forms.
In this article we will at first present different
research works which attempted to identitify such
operators. In addition, in the analysis of early drafts of
a range of “non-standard” buildings, we will show how
such operators can open the way to innovative
practices in the process of shape creation. We will then
outline a rough typology of operators.
Finally we will an example of modeling process
with some of these operators.

Going back to one of the first hypotheses of Herbert A.
Simon on the solving of problems [9] he suggests that
the description of these transformations calls for
another class of operators. These could be schemes if
one means the class of prototypical actions which can
be expressed through basic verbs like to open, close,
cut, link, etc.
From an empirical analysis of a sample of 162
architectural projects representative of the history of
architecture from antiquity to the present times,
Raynaud describes the transition from a symbolic
representation - which can be a text as well as an image
or an idea - to the formal translation into a project. He
thus defines 20 schemes which are: to contain, turn, go
up, radiate, cover, go through, open, begin, cut,
descend, wave , unite, enclose, go out, link, repeat,
end, surround, diminish, cross, battle, grow up.
In his work on the development of a parametric
model which allows to generate complex forms, Carlos
Barrios [10] uses similar concepts. He identifies shape
operators such as "torsion" and "intersection". Working
from the analysis of a column of the side-nave of the
Sagrada Familia by the architect Antoni Gaudi, he also
shows the combination of those operators and defines a
parametric model and generates an architectonic
portion of the cathedral.

2.
Morpho-semantic
architecture

Finally we will refer to the research work by John
Frazer about evolutionary generative architecture
which indicates the use of a genetic code to describe
the themes of the project [11]. According to an
approach close to the one used with genetic algorithms,
the project evolves along internal rules confronted to
demands imposed by the architect. In this model of
morphogenesis multiple mutations will arise, one or
several stable phenotypes of the project. This principle
of a genetic code in which the future mutations or
transformations would be present draws nearer to our
own hypothesis about the presence of an ensemble of
form operators in the architectural conception.

operators

in

Several research works have focused on the analysis
of the documents produced during a project process in
order to identify the different phases and changes. In a
study realized on a collection of drawings made for the
conception of a bungalow by the architect Neimann,
Ellen Do and et al. have demonstrated a classification
of elements, transformations, localization and also
colors of elements [6]. This classification allowed to
describe the variations that occurred between sketches.
The authors were able to identify the transformations
but these remain simple ones : rotation, translation or
symmetry.
In his work, Philippe Boudon aimed at getting
beyond mere geometric operators and to model a
whole range of state transformations which appear
during the design process [7]. He thus proposes to
describe through scales how the architect applies
measures to an edifice through design operations.
However, these scales do not include information
about the morphological operations themselves.
Dominique Raynaud in a study about architectural
design [8] has shown that when changes of the state
result in the transformation of the actual structure of a
morphological model, the description through scales
belonging to the architecturology is barely obvious.

3. Morpho-semantic
through a few examples

operators

seen

The study of the architectural practices represents a
useful device for the identification of operators. We
privileged the corpus of "non-standard" architecture.
Independently of all doctrinal debates on its relevance,
the productions concerned with these doctrines give a
broad place to an autonomous work on the form which
allows us a strong identification of the operations of
morphological transformation.
In this "plastic" step of creation, they are not the
models of forms but the models of gestures which

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

make it possible "to carve" the project. According to S.
Porada [12], in the sculptural approach, the space
concept is dominated by the operational concept.
The recent works of Frank Gehry [Los Angeles
Walt Disney Concert Hall, Bilbao Guggenheim
Museum, Seattle Experience Music project] [13], those
of Greg Lynn or Santiago Calatrava testify, on the one
hand, of the possibility of using new forms in
architecture, containing deformable surfaces, until
rather reserved there for the fields of furniture, of the
car and aeronautics. They testify in addition to the
interest to use suitable tools as well. It is obvious that
such forms would be difficult to create without the use
of a computer.

3.1. Frank Gehry
The process of formal research with Gehry is based
on an iterative approach on various supports. After the
first sketches of conception, the materialization of form
is tackled on preliminary models, then refined with the
help of the informatics tool (Catia, Dassault Systèmes)
before being tested in models of verification on a
bigger scale.
Thus the process of formalization is conducted by
Gehry mainly through the model. It starts with a first
specialization based on primitive geometrical forms
which take into account the functional demands. It then
goes through a whole range of morpho-semantic
operations: to blend, press, stretch, polish, etc.

Such an approach shows us that it would be
particularly interesting to model the process of
morphological transformation so that it could be
implemented with the help of the informatics tool and
no longer with real models.

3.2. Greg Lynn
Greg Lynn has largely used the faculties of the 3D
modelers in order to create innovating forms in the
field of design as well as for interior architecture or the
conception of edifices. Through his realizations and in
his numerous projects for contests, Greg Lynn bases
his creative activity on the use of the properties of
surfaces and particularly the topological "events" they
can generate. Those patterns named folds, knots,
buckles, flowers, etc. become elements of a vocabulary
which translates itself in architectural terms to become
spaces, limits, openings and other spatial elements
[14].
The second characteristic of Greg Lynn's work is
his recourse to computer software in order to give life
to the initial forms. The volumes are modified under
the appliance of forces which transform their
geometry. Animation is used here as a mean to reveal
the volume even better and to suggest variants which
maybe were not even obvious to the originator.

Figure 2. The embryonic house

Figure 1. Nationale Nederlanden Building,
Praha
The uses of a 3D modelling software intervenes in a
second phase, allowing a more rigorous and exact
definition of the volumes, and the preservation of the
various creative stages, as well as the taping of
geometrical parameters in view of a transfer to a
CFAO process.

The example of the embryonic house (Figure 2)
shows the various stages of a morphogenesis and
underlines the use of morph-semantics operators in a
conceptual approach

3.3. Santiago CALATRAVA
S. Calatrava inscribes movement in his projects
through a synthetic and technical representation (Levin
2003) [15]. The most striking example of this is the
TGV station in Lyon. The roof of the building

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

symbolizes in a very ethereal way the wings of a bird.
The project “Turning Torso” is of particular interest for
our analysis. In this example, the original idea is based
on the rotation of a torso (Figure 3).
We are entitled to think that a “torsion” operator is
dominating (Figure3) and that it illustrates in an ideal
way the architect’s purpose to make a tower according
to this formal scheme. This operator is even
crystallized in the name of the building.

Figure 3. “Turning Torso” Building, Malmö
A deeper analysis will allow us to uncover other
operators which can intervene in a more punctual
manner. Among these, we may quote as an example
the “bulge” operator which at the level of the façade
brings an architectonic trimming to the general
movement of torsion.
These examples back our hypothesis about the part
played by morpho-semantic operators in architecture.
But these few operators could not possibly be enough.
Other operators or combinations of operators are
possible. But at this stage of our work we are not
aiming to be complete in this matter.

4. Interpretation and installation of a
model
These scheme-operators differ from the geometric
functions of a modeler because of the architectural
meaning they carry. Thus, research for a spatial effect
on a volume or a space is at the origin of each action of
transformation, the user being the outside observer of a
spatial composition, or traveling in a three-dimensional
space.
In order to apply those operators, we have first
modeled the identification of handled object operator
classes and action parameters.

easily, one needs to be able to manipulate curves and
surfaces NURBS (Non-Uniform Rational B-splines)
with the modelers.
In a three-dimensional model based on NURBS, it
will be possible to handle points (and their tangents),
curves, surfaces or solids, ensembles of surfaces
including a continuous space. This geometrical
hierarchy, a variant of the polygonal representation
through frontiers (B-rep), hints at geometrical concepts
such as inclusion, incidence, adjacency, etc. It implies
that there is a continuity and interdependence of the
elements; this provokes series of transformations
which preserve the geometrical coherence of the
models and therefore the strength of the architectural
concept.
Each of the elements in this hierarchy can undergo a
transformation. It will be possible, for example, to
move a summit, undulate a curve, swell a surface or
thin out a solid. Moreover, the same transformation can
be expressed through various ways: torsion of a solid
may be equivalent to the rotation of one of its surfaces,
while respecting the properties of continuity of this
solid.
It is true, nevertheless, that the solid (or ensemble of
surfaces) is the level favored to work on as it relates to
the architectural concepts of form, which can be
individually identified, and to the notion of interior
space delimited by an ensemble of surfaces. This is
why we will mostly refer here to operations on solids.

4.2. Operator Classes
The work by Francis DK Ching [16] on the
conception of forms in architecture allows us to
identify two main strategies of form productions and,
potentially, two main operator classes.
The first strategy is metaphorically represented by a
lobster and consists in creating forms through
adjustment and combination. The seed form is made of
unitary forms that we are going, for example, to add,
juxtapose, superimpose. We will refer to this as
"transformation by composition"
In the second strategy identified by a slug, the seed
form will undergo morphological but not topological
modifications with operators such as twist, stretch or
pinch. We will refer to this as "transformation through
metamorphosis".

4.1. Handled objects
In the above examples, and in a general manner in
architectural works considered as non-standard, the
approach in the project focuses formally and mainly on
the envelopment of the building. In order to create
envelopes with fluid shapes that can be modified

Figure 4. The lobster and the slug

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

One must point out that if some buildings are more
concerned by one or the other of these strategies, the
two methods of producing form are not in competition
and can be used simultaneously.
These two strategies have lead us to distinguish
between two classes of morpho-semantic operators on
objects: unary operators that act upon one single object
and binary ones (or n-nary, in general) which confront
two or several forms.
The unary operators cover isometries (translation,
rotation, symmetry), homothety and, consequently, all
the similarities which are their compounds.
One will also find among them, transformations on
a higher scale known in modellers under the name of
“deformations”, or “modifiers”: swelling, compression,
curving, thinning out, inclining, undulating, torsion,
folding, (fig. 5). These transformations that deeply
modify the morphology of the various objects can be
clearly identified and may carry a symbolical meaning.
In that way, they are metamorphosis operators.
From a purely geometrical approach, these
operators resort to methods of free-form deformation
which are used by modelers.

Figure 6. Binary operators
Variants of the subtraction operators allow us to
modify a target-object under the effect of a sourceobject and to obtain “machining” effects by applying a
movement to the subtracted object or to a print by
working on the size of the subtracted object.
It appears that among these transformations, some
give rise to a new object conceived from two operant
objects playing equivalent parts, while others
singularize one of the objects as operator and the other
one as operant. In this last example, the operator-object
can be either suppressed (machining) or kept (print).

Figure 5. Unary operators
Binary
operators
link
several
objects.
Transformations such as superposition, juxtaposition
and other alignment operations which we will refer to
by the generic name of wedging. Those operations
contrarily to the following ones, act only upon the
position of the objects but do not modify their
geometry.
Among the composition operators, one can also find
the main Boolean operations (union, intersection,
subtraction) as well as an operator called fusion, a
variant of union which allows a progressive transition
between two objects while preserving the continuity of
their surfaces.

Figure 7. Morpho-semantic operators on
solids

4.3. Action parameters
The morphological result when using an operator
generally depends on several parameters. Our work has
enabled us to identify a first series of parameters which
are linked not to the operator itself but to its
relationship with geometry: the place where it

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

intervenes, its limits, the intensity, the type of
propagation and attenuation, etc.
We are presently studying the behavior of each
operator in order to establish an exhaustive list of its
parameters. As an example, we define the operator
“fold” from the following operations:
- the solid to be folded
- the reference plan (invariant in the operation)
- the folding angle showing the maximum rotation
of the various points of the object
- the range expressed through a distance to the
reference plan
Figure 8 shows two different forms conceived by
two range values.

parametrizable nature will permit development of
different spatial solutions.

5.1. Modelisation of Newson’s “chair of pod”
5.1.1. Modelling by splines

Figure 9. Modelling process of Newson’s chair
by splines

Figure 8. The “Folding” operator with different
range values

5.
Examples
of
transformation process

5.1.2.
Modelling
operators

by

morpho-semantics

morphological

In order to prove our general hypothesis concerning
the interest of morpho-semantic operators, we have
simulated a formal conceptual approach of two
projects: the chair “Chair for Pod” by the designer
Newson (Figures 9 and 10) and the building “Turning
Torso” by the architect S. Calatrava (Figures 11 and
12). For each project, we compared two modelling
methods: with splines and with morpho-semantic
operators.
This comparison shows that the first method of
modelling needs to construct the object from basic
geometric objects: point, curve, surface. This implies a
preliminary knowledge of the geometry of the object
which is to be designed. This is not compatible with a
conceptual approach which is inherently iterative and
must allow reversals and adjustments. It thus appears
to us that the second method is more adapted to the
conceptual approach since the operators can be easily
identified in a modelling process and their

Figure 10. Modelling process of Newson’s
chair by morpho-semantics operators

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

5.2. Modelling of
« Turning Torso »

Calatrava’s

building

role of the computer as an “accelerator for exploring
solutions” [17].
A first model has been sketched and concerns two
main classes of model operators. The installation of a
precise experimental process should enable us to more
accurately define these operators and their parameters
to model a defined range.
This step will allow us to design an intuitive 3D
modelling method which will enable us to explore new
morphological expressions.

References
[1]

Figure 11. Modelling process of Calatrava’s
building by splines

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

Figure 12. Modelling process of Calatrava’s
building by morpho-semantics operators

[9]

[10]

Conclusions
In this paper, we have attempted to demonstrate the
pertinence of the concept of morpho-semantic
operators and its role in the process of creating forms.
Those operators will allow transformation of forms
while carrying an architectural meaning: The variation
of their parameters is a help in the process of formal
research.
This first work gives us some idea of all the new
ways of creating forms which would proceed from an
iterative approach of transformation of seed-forms that
could be geometric primitives as well as organic forms.
Resorting to morpho-semantic operators in an
interactive or algorithmic manner should make us
aware of numerous new possibilities, and justify the

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]

Boudon, P. and F. Pousin (1989). Figures de la
conception architecturale. Paris, Dunod.
Lebahar, J.-C. (1983). Le dessin d'architecte simulation graphique et réduction d'incertitude.
Marseille, Editions Parenthèses.
Laseau, P. (2001). Graphic thinking for architects and
designers New York, Wiley.
Aoki, Y. and M. Inage (2000). Linguistic Operation
System for Design of Architectural Form. Fifth Design
and Decision Support Systems in Architecture and
Urban Planning, Nijkerk, The Netherlands.
Boudon, P. (1994). Existe-t-il des opérations de
conception architecturale ? Paris, L’Harmattan.
Do, E. Y.-L., M. D. Gross, et al. (1999). Sketches and
their functions in early design – A retrospective
analyses of a Pavillion House. 4th Design Thinking
Research Symposium 1999, University of Colorado.
Boudon, P. (2002). Echelles. Paris, Anthropos.
Raynaud, D. (1998). Architectures comparées : Essai
sur la dynamique des formes. Marseille, Editions
Parenthèses.
Simon, H. A. (1966). Scientific Discovery and the
Psychology of Problem Solving. Mind and Cosmos:
pp. 22-40.
Barrios, C. (2005). Transformations on Parametric
Design Models Computer Aided Architectural Design
Futures '2005, Vienna (Austria).
Frazer, J., X. Liu, et al. (2002). Generative and
Evolutionary Techniques for Building Envelope
Design. International Conference on Generative Art,
Milan.
Porada, S. (2005). L’instrumentation de la création
architecturale Scan'05, Paris.
Van Bruggen, C. (1998). Frank O. Gehry Guggenheim
Museum Bilbao, Harry N. Abrams.
Lynn, G. (1998). Embryological Housing. Any
Magazine. 23.
Levin, M. (2003). Santiago Calatrava : the artworks : a
laboratory of ideas, forms and structures. Basel,
Birkhäuser.
Ching, F. D. K. (1996). Architecture : From, Space &
Order. New-York, Van Nostrand Reinholds.
Frazer, J., X. Liu, et al. (2002). A generative design
system based on evolutionary and mathematical

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

functions. International Conference on Generative Art,

Milan.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

