Frequency-Domain Algorithms for Visual Analysis on
Genomic Structures in Prokaryotes
Lee Sing CHEONG1, Feng LIN2, Hock Soon SEAH2
Bioinformatics Research Centre, 2School of computer Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
lscheong@pmail.ntu.edu.sg, asflin@ntu.edu.sg, ashsseah@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Frequency-domain algorithms are studied to
provide the composition of each nucleic acid base
simultaneously across numerous frequencies and along
the base-positions, through Fourier transformation
and color mapping of the bases. And also, composite
colored scalograms are constructed by continuous
wavelet transformation to provide their individual
localized time and periodic energy content in a single
figure. The visualization of three-dimensional
information in the forms of bases, frequencies and
base-positions allows visual analysis of correlated
structural and genomic information, which can hardly
be obtained from the conventional character string
analysis. Significant features of the studied prokaryotic
genomes were revealed by the use of the programs
developed.

1. Introduction
A genome sequence is defined by a series of the
bases adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C) and
guanine (G). Within the genomic sequence, patterns
can occur due to the statistical regularities of the
structural features or the repetition of the features. The
position of the origin of replication, for example, can
be mapped by autoradiography, an in vitro method
which detects the electrophoretic migration of the
replicating restriction fragment [1]. However, as in
vitro experiments require considerable expertise, time
and resources, they are rarely conducted, and instead,
in silico predictions are proposed.
Previous in silico predictions [2-3] used calculation
methods such as GC skews defined as (G-C)/(G+C),
purine skews (G,A vs. C,T), keto skew (G,T vs. A,C),
Z-curve using a combination of skews, and skewed
octamers. They are usually presented as an individual
plot, without considering the trend at other periodicity.
These methods therefore lack the all-rounded

visualization functions at various periodicity, and they
are not productive in the whole genome analyses.
Gene identification techniques such as variants of
Markov model and Artificial Neural Network were
also reported based on known biological features and
training data set [4]. But these techniques are limited to
well-defined known features, and are unable to provide
comprehensive coverage of all features.
In the analysis of genomic sequence, calculation
methods using wavelet analysis were used in prediction
of the location of biological significant features, such
as the isochore [5], CpG islands, exons, introns [6] and
nucleosome [7] that are present in eukaryotes.
However, previous research was limited to allocation
of just a particular individual feature, which does not
allow the relationship among the various features to be
revealed.
Therefore, we are interested in the visualization of
all the patterns within the genomic sequence. This
visualization will provide a comprehensive view of all
the features, including known biological features and
the unknown with potential significance. We propose
the use of digital signal processing (DSP) technologies
to implement frequency-domain algorithms to visualize
the composition of each base simultaneously across
numerous frequencies and along the base-positions, for
efficient genomic structure analysis, such as
identification of patterns suggestive of the gene
function category, repetitive nature of subsequences,
and other unknown structures with potential
significance.
The tool is to handle complex structures exhibited
in all genome sequences. It is known that the double
helical shape allows DNA to be twisted such that
approximately 10.5 bases form a 360-degree turn. In
prokaryotes, the helix is further condensed by negative
supercoiling [8]. This compact negative supercoiling
forms independent domains, each consisting of a loop
that is associated with proteins that have not been
identified. Furthermore, DNA twist is not perfectly
regular. The precise rotation per base pair is not a

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

constant, resulting in the variation of the width of the
major and minor grooves. Their exact conformation
(A-form, B-form and Z-form) and variation depend on
the base pair present at each position along the double
helix, their neighboring base pairs and conformation
pressure from supercoiling.
It has also been observed that a small number of
tandem repeats can be found in Prokaryotes. Their
function within putative genes requires further
investigation.
In short, due to the limitation enforced by complex
factors - evolution, functional roles, and physical-space
structure, the task to simultaneously reveal the
structural features and patterns within the genome is
extremely challenging. The current microscopy
technology is unable to visualize the exact
conformation along the DNA. We need to design novel
in silico methods and processes. For that purpose, we
devised the algorithms for visualization of threedimensional information in the forms of bases,
frequencies and base-positions, which allow visual
analysis on correlated structural and genomic
information. The algorithms are packaged in a tool and
implemented as a Matlab program.

2. Visual Analysis with Frequency and
Base-position Specific Composition
In the DSP based analysis of a genomic sequence,
the visual inspection of its spectrogram can provide
many distinct visual patterns that correspond to
structures and features of the inspected genome. The
genomic sequence is first converted into four indicator
sequences {a(n), t(n), c(n), g(n)} where the value at
each location n of the indicator sequence represents the
presence (value of 1) or absence (value of 0) of its
respective base A, T, C and G at the corresponding
position in the genomic sequence.
We display the magnitude of the frequency and
base-position specific composition for each of the four
bases A, T, C and G simultaneously by
superpositioning their corresponding intensity onto a
Cartesian plane, using the respective colors blue, red,
green and yellow. The grayscale intensity of this color
code correlates with the Giemsa staining, in which ATrich regions produce dark regions and CG-rich regions
produce light regions.
The RGB color space representation of the four
colors represents frequency and base-position specific
composition. They are mapped using the following
equation:
Xcolor(f,k) = ΣB=A,T,C,G (ccolorbase)*B(f,k) ,

(1)

where f is the frequency, k is the window index,
ccolorbase are the RGB color mapping coefficients, and
B(f,k)={A(f,k), T(f,k), C(f,k), G(f,k)} are the frequency
and base-position specific composition. In this way, we
get
the
RGB
color
space
representation
Xcolor(f,k)={XRed(f,k), XGreen(f,k), XBlue(f,k)}.
The frequency and base-position specific
composition A(f,k), T(f,k), C(f,k), G(f,k) can be
obtained by short-time Fourier transformation of their
respective indicator sequences a(n), t(n), c(n) and g(n),
using the following Fourier transformation equation:
B(f,k) = Σn=base-positions in k window b(n) e(-j2πfn/N) ,

(2)

where n is the base position, N is the window length,
B(f,k)={A(f,k),T(f,k),C(f,k),G(f,k)}
represents
the
frequency and base-position specific composition of
the respective transformed indicator sequence and
b(n)={a(n),t(n),c(n),g(n)} represents the indicator
sequence of the bases.
Two optional graphs provide the average magnitude
of the composition for each of the bases along the
frequencies and along the base-positions respectively.
The average magnitude of the composition along the
frequencies is obtained by averaging the magnitude at
all base-positions using the following equation:
B(f) = Σall values of k |B(f,k)| / nw ,

(3)

where nw is the number of windows and
B(f)={A(f),T(f),C(f),G(f)} represents the average
magnitude of the composition for the respective base at
frequency f and window index k.
The average magnitude of the composition along
the base-positions is obtained by averaging the
magnitude at all the frequencies except frequency zero
using the following equation:
B(k) = Σall values of f, where f≠0 |B(f,k)| / (nf – 1) ,

(4)

where nf is the number of frequencies and
B(k)={A(k),T(k),C(k),G(k)} represents the average of
the magnitudes at all the frequencies except frequency
zero for the kth window.

2.1. Origin of Replication
We applied the visualization algorithms discussed
in the last section to the investigation of the bacteria
genome sequences and obtained interesting findings.
As illustrated in Figure 1, it was found that 12
bacteria (7 unique species) from the Bacillus family
show two regions of different composition, which are
represented by higher intensity of reddish-purple for

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

one region and a higher bluish-purple for the other
region. The two regions of different colors extend from
low frequencies till the maximum frequency
investigated, including the frequency corresponding to
period-3. The base-composition of these two regions is
asymmetry for base A with T and base C with G. The
reddish-purple region has higher intensity of base T
over base A and higher intensity of base G over base C.

It was also observed that 4 bacteria (3 unique
species) from the Chlamydia family show different GC
base-composition asymmetry and at a lesser degree, AT
base-composition asymmetry.
This variation of strength in base-composition
asymmetry depends on the variation of bacteria and the
frequencies under inspection. Thus, the visualization of
the base-composition asymmetry at all different
frequencies, allows the bias to be extracted at the most
suitable frequencies.

2.2. Patterns of Structural Significance

(a) Frequency and base-position specific composition

(b) Average magnitude of the composition

Figure 1: Display of the base-composition
asymmetry in the B. cereus E33L (ZK) genome
The GC base-composition asymmetry correlates
with the strand direction of the replication forks in
bacteria. The leading strand has a preference of base G
over base C, while the lagging strand has a preference
of base C over base G. The differences in the synthesis
of the two strands, where the leading strand is being
synthesized continuously, while the lagging strand is
being synthesized discontinuously by the use of
Okazak fragments, cause bias pressure which lead to
the GC base-composition asymmetry [9-10].
The AT base-composition asymmetry correlates
with the type of polymerase-α subunit that replicates
the leading strand in different bacteria. The intersection
points of the GC base-composition asymmetry or the
AT base-composition asymmetry indicate the position
of the origin and terminus of replication.

Our next experiment focuses on changes of
frequency throughout a whole genome sequence. In
structural genomics study, bacterium genome is
characterized as compact clump or series of clumps,
condensed by unidentified proteins. It is suggested that
the genome is supercoiled into many independent
domains, with each domain consisting of a loop
secured by the unidentified proteins. Although the
genome structure is organized into definite packages, it
does not display the eukaryotic chromosomal
distinctive morphological features. Thus, it is
interesting to find feature which aid in the
understanding of the organization of the bacteria
genome.
10 bacteria (6 unique species) were placed under
close examination. As illustrated in Figure 2, we
observed the base-composition pattern consisting of a
shift in color from green at higher frequency to purple
at low frequency throughout their genome sequences.
The green color represents region rich in bases G and
C, while the purple color represents region rich in
bases A and T. This shift in the color occurs
throughout the entire genome, indicating that the
characteristic is prevalent genome-wide.
The intersection frequency of the change in the
composition corresponds to around period-6. It is noted
that period-6 corresponds approximately to a 180
degree turn of the Z-form double helix, and period-6 is
also twice the length of a codon. As the characteristic
is prevalent genome-wide, this pattern might influence
the chromosomal structure, affecting the DNA doublehelix conformation and the supercoiling. The exact
conformation along the DNA is extremely important,
as the width of the major and minor grooves can
influence the attachment of binding factors to the
DNA.
It is noted that five of the six unique species belongs
to Proteobacteria, and one of the species belong to
Chlorobi. Thus, study of this phenomenon is not
limited to Proteobacteria.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

(a) Frequency and base-position specific composition

Figure 3: Repeat at 2383601 – 2384100
nucleotide in E. coli O157:H7 EDL933
Intergenic tandem repeats are associated with
regulatory mechanism, and as a source of genome
instability, they can be used in genomic fingerprinting
of different strains. A tandem repeat found within
putative protein may have resulted in either a gain or
loss of gene function of the protein through frameshift
during the formation of the repeat [11].

3. Wavelet Analysis

(b) Average magnitude of the composition

Figure 2: Structural significant pattern in the
E. coli K12-MG1655 genome

2.3. Adjacent Repetitive Sequences
A distinct pattern which represents adjacent
repetitive sequences can be observed. This pattern is
shown as highly similar columns.
A scan through the E. coli O157:H7 EDL933
complete genome shows a number of such repeats.
Some of the repeats are found within Open Reading
Frame (ORF), which are putative proteins, while others
partially span or encompass ORF and the adjacent
intergenic regions. One repeat found in the ORF is
shown in Figure 3.
In the figure, the tandem repeats consisting of
approximately 500 nucleotides is part of the putative
membrane protein (primary locus: Z2636, from
2,381,838-2,384,060 nucleotide), located near the 3’
end.

Wavelet analysis is a multiresolution analysis
method, allowing both the frequency and time
localization information to be simultaneously extracted
from an aperiodic signal. It provides information that is
different from the Fourier analysis which provides the
total spectrum content.
Starting with the indicator sequences {a(n), t(n),
c(n), g(n)}, we apply continuous wavelet
transformation to each of them, and their results are
combined into a composite colored scalogram in order
to provide an additional dimension on top of the
traditional pseudo-colored scalogram.
The localized time and periodic energy content
A(j,k), T(j,k), C(j,k), G(j,k) can be obtained by
continuous wavelet transformation of their respective
indicator sequences a(n), t(n), c(n) and g(n).
By using the Morlet wavelet ψ(n) as the analyzing
wavelet, we have the following transformation
equation:
B(j,k) = |Σn b(n)ψj,k(n)|2 ,

(5)

where n is the base position, ψj,k(n) = (1/√j)ψ((n-j)/k)
are the dilated and translated wavelet functions of the
analyzing wavelet, and b(n)={a(n),t(n),c(n),g(n)}
represents the indicator sequence of the bases. In this

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

way, we obtain B(j,k)={A(j,k),T(j,k),C(j,k),G(j,k)}
representing the localized time and periodic energy
content of the respective transformed indicator
sequence.
The localized time and periodic energy content
B(j,k) tends to show high intensity, which is
correspondingly shown as a superposition of the basecomposition color in the image of constructed
scalogram, when the stretch of sequence of length j,
with position centralized at location k, reasonably
coincide with the dilated and translated wavelet
function ψj,k(n). The recognizable patterns of the high
intensity are therefore a visual indicator of a structure
found. For example, the pattern of similar colors at
regular interval is indicative of regions containing
repeats. Depending on the number and length of the
repeating units, repeats can be categorized into simple
sequence repeats, micro satellites, mini satellites and
repetitive motifs.
The wavelet analysis can be applied to the
investigation of the smallest known autonomous
replicating genetic units - viroids. We use the
developed composite color scalogram analysis
programs for the genome-wide similarity comparison.
The investigation on host interaction based on the
understanding of possible structural conformations of
viroid during interaction, with insights provided by
their scalogram, will provide further understanding on
how minimal RNAs can elicit disease.
Using our visualization tool, all the 36 completed
sequenced species of viroids that are currently
available at the NCBI database are examined. In their
genome scalograms constructed by continuous wavelet
transformation, we find that each of the viroids
contains high base-position localized energy content at
regular base positions and at different scale length, as
illustrated in Figure 4. This pattern corresponds to the
biological structure of sequence repeats generated by
sequence duplication and deletions [12].
It is interesting that each of the viroids also displays
distinctive curve-like high energy content at the lower
scales. This profile may be related to the difference in
their specific sequences, and may have potential
significance. It is also observed that some viroids share
similar localized energy content at various scale level.
The similar localized energy content at lower scale
level may correspond to the result of recombination
among the different species. It provides us with
important clues to the evolution of the different
species.
In the structural genomics, the composite color
spectrogram of these viroids plays a key role in
elucidation of the possible conformations and
interaction it may assume with the host.

Figure 4: Composite Color Scalogram of the
Coleus Blumei viroid genome
Diseases are also caused by other pathogenic agents,
such as virus and bacteria. In our experiments with E.
coli, it is noticed that many distinctive features can be
identified on the color composite spectrogram.

4. Discussions and Conclusions
The proposed frequency-domain algorithms provide
visualization of whole prokaryotic genome and allow
structural and genomic analysis. The prokaryotes have
been shown that their base-composition asymmetries
can be visualized at various frequencies. The
intersection of the asymmetry can be used to identify
the origin and terminus of replication, which have
various applications in genomic study. Identification of
the origin of replication provides a landmark to align
and locate organizational features using methods such
as gene order, thus narrowing the amount of sequence
to search. It is also known that most active
transcription units are orientated in the same direction
as the replication fork, and elements such as DnaA
boxes are located near the origin. The origin of
replication and its associated trans-acting factors may
also be used as drug targets, as competitive binding to
them may block the process of replication by depriving
access to the origin site and preventing the trans-acting
factors from binding to the origin.
Our preliminary study using the tool shows that
base-composition asymmetry might also be observed
in other bacteria families. In fact, this characteristic has
also been reported in other literatures [2-3] as a general
feature among bacteria with circular chromosome, and
the tool we developed will be greatly helpful in the
allocation of the position of origin and terminus of
replication and other applications.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

The
revealed
base-composition
shift
in
Proteobacteria and a Chlorobi is prevalent genomewide. It helps us understand how the exact
conformation along the DNA and the supercoiling of
the chromosome is influenced.
Several tandem repeats have been successfully
found in E. Coli, either within ORF or encompassing
ORF and adjacent intergenic regions. The tandem
repeats found within putative protein may have
resulted in either a gain or loss of gene function of the
protein through frameshift during the formation of the
tandem repeat [11].
The composite color scalogram allows genomic
information to be visualized. The viroids have been
shown that their repetitive structures can be visualized
as high base-position localized energy content at
regular base positions and at different scale length.
This pattern corresponds to the biological structure of
sequence repeats generated by sequence duplication
and deletions. Similar patterns among the viroids are
also observed, and may correspond to the
recombination among the different species. Distinct
patterns at lower scale, is indicative of their difference
at the sequence level.
In conclusion, frequency-domain algorithms are
studied to provide the composition of each nucleic acid
base simultaneously across numerous frequencies and
along
the
base-positions,
through
Fourier
transformation and color mapping of the bases. And
also, composite colored scalograms are constructed by
continuous wavelet transformation to provide their
individual localized time and periodic energy content
in a single figure. The visualization of threedimensional information in the forms of bases,
frequencies and base-positions allows visual analysis
of correlated structural and genomic information,
which can hardly be obtained from the conventional
character string analysis. Significant features of the
studied prokaryotic genomes have been revealed by the
use of the tool.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

their Strengths and Weaknesses, Nucleic Acids
Research, v.30(19), pp. 4103-4117, August 2002.
Lio P., Vannucci M., Finding pathogenicity islands and
gene transfer events in genome data, Bioinformatics,
v.16(10), pp. 932-940, October 2000.
Arnéodo A., D'Aubenton-Carafa Y., Audit B., Bacry E.,
Muzy J.F., Thermes C., Nucleotide composition effects
on the long-range correlations in human genes, The
European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter,
v.1(2), pp. 259-263, February 1998.
Audit B., Vaillant C., Arneodo A., D'Aubenton-Carafa
Y., Thermes C., Wavelet analysis of DNA bending
profiles reveals structural constraints on the evolution of
genomic sequences, Journal of Biological Physics, vol.
30, no. 1, pp.33-81, 2004.
James D. Watson, Tania A. Baker, Stephen P. Bell,
Alexander Gann, Michael Levine, Richard Losick, "The
Structures of DNA and RNA", Molecular Biology of the
Gene, Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco, 2003.
Eduardo P.C. Rocha, The Replication-Related
Organization of Bacterial Genomes, Microbiology,
v.150, pp. 1609-1627, 2004.
Pilar M. Francino and Howard Ochman, Deamination as
the Basis of Strand-Asymmetric Evolution in
Transcribed Escherichia coli Sequences, Molecular
Biology and Evolution, v.18(6), pp. 1147-1150, June
2001.
You-Chun Li, Abraham B. Korol, Tzion Fahima and
Eviatar Nevo, Microsatellites Within Genes: Structure,
Function, and Evolution, Molecular Biology and
Evolution, v.21(6), pp. 991-1007, February 2004.
Ricardo Flores, Randles J.W., Bar-Joseph M., Diener
T.O., A Proposed Scheme for Viroid Classification and
Nomenclature, Archives of Virology, v.143(3), pp. 623629, 1998.

References
[1] Benjamin Lewin, “The Replicon”, Genes VIII, Pearson
Education International, New Jersey, 2004.
[2] Peder Worning, Lars J. Jensen, Peter F. Hallin, HansHenrik Staerfeldt and David W. Ussery, Origin of
Replication in Circular Prokaryotic Chromosomes,
Environmental Microbiology, v.8(2), pp. 353-361, 2006.
[3] Pawel Mackiewicz, Jolanta Zakrzewska-Czerwinska,
Anna Zawilak, Miroslaw R. Dudek and Stanislaw
Cebrat, Where does Bacterial Replication Start? Rules
for Predicting the oriC Region, Nucleic Acids Research,
v.32(13), pp. 3781-3791, July 2004.
[4] Catherine Mathe, Marie-France Sagot, Thomas Schiex
and Pierre Rouze, Current Methods of Gene Prediction,

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

