A Visualization Model for Web Sitemaps

1

Quang Vinh Nguyen1, Mao Lin Huang1, Kang Zhang2, I-Ling Yen2
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas, Texas, USA
{quvnguye, maolin}@it.uts.edu.au, {kzhang, ilyen}@utdallas.edu
Abstract

This paper describes a space-efficient visualization
model that automatically crawls through a website and
visualizes its sitemap. This model can be used especially
for displaying and navigating a very large website in a
two-dimensional (2D) plane and/or a three-dimensional
(3D) space. The 2D visualization employs EncCon layout
algorithm to effectively visualize a very large number of
pages and relations at once in which it utilizes the space
to display more information. This technique also employs
a focus+context navigation method to enable the
exploration of large sites. Animation is provided to
preserve the user’s mental map while exploring the
website hierarchy. The 3D visualization extends the 2D
EncCon layout algorithm to a three-dimensional space
which aims to provide a more realistic look and feel of
the information.

1. Introduction
With the fast growth of information on the Internet,
current websites have become much larger and more
complex. A typical website can contain thousands of
pages and interrelation links between these pages.
Because of the limited number of available access
methods, an Internet user often suffers from being lost in
the hyperspace of vast amount of information. There are
two traits of this syndrome: disorientation and cognitive
overload. There are two categories of the solution to the
above problem, including search paradigm and browse
paradigm. The search paradigm is based on search
engines to find information while the browsing paradigm
allows users to navigate the document space by
triggering links via visual features on web pages. One of
the effective techniques in the browsing paradigm is web
site mapping which helps the user to analyze and
navigate through a website.
Available web site mapping techniques can be
summarized into three categories, including hierarchical
mapping, graphical or mesh mapping, and 3D mapping
[1].

Hierarchical mapping uses parent-child format to
show a site’s structure. In short, a lower hierarchical
node displays further detailed information of the parent
node. This approach is simple, natural and easy to
understand, and thus is widely used. Some typical
techniques in this approach are SiteTree [2], MAPA or
WebAnalyzer Ring Map [3].
Graphical or mesh mapping organizes the contents
of a website in a 2D space using a graph visualization
technique. Typically, a web-page is represented as a
node and a relationship of two web-pages is represented
as an edge. Some of the graph drawing techniques for
website mapping are Radial View [4], Hyperbolic
Browser [5], WebOFDAV [6], Space-Optimized Tree [7].
Three-dimensional mapping uses a 3D graph
visualization technique to display the structure of a
website. This approach aims to take advantages of 3D,
such as more realistic look and feel of the space, and
more display space. However, 3D visualization
techniques require more computation power and
resources which sometimes make it unsuitable for a webbrowser. A typical 3D web site mapping technique is
Cone Tree [8].
This paper presents a space-efficient visualization
model that automatically retrieves relational links from a
website and then visualizes its sitemap. This model
employs either a 2D space-efficient algorithm or a 3D
method in its visualization. The system first crawls
automatically through a website in order to extract the
relational links from the visited pages. The information is
then organized as a relational and hierarchical manner
and is fed into a visualization program. The produced
visualization provides an interactive view of the entire
web site mapping or a particular sub-structure. In the
scope of this paper, we only concern of the visualization
section and the visualization only displays the web
sitemaps as a tree structure.
Section 2 presents a model for the visualization of
web sitemaps. Section 3 describes the web site mapping
visualization technique in 2D, including a layout
algorithm and a navigation and interaction. Section 4
describes a 3D visualization for web site mapping.
Section 5 concludes our visualization model for web
sitemaps.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 1. A visualization model for web sitemaps.

Figure 2. A navigation and interaction model.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

2. A Visualization Model for Web Sitemaps

3.1 Layout

The visualization model for web sitemaps includes
several components which are illustrated at Figure 1.
The Data Transformation process is responsible for
collecting web pages’ data from a given website. From
the main page of the website, a program automatically
crawls through the site and extracts inter-relational links
among web-pages. The retrieved information is then
organized as Graph/Tree Formatted Data that a
visualization program can read. A page is mapped as
node and a relational link as an edge. On the other hand,
another program might access the system to retrieve
Attributed Data of each page and relation, such as user
access frequencies, size of pages, and others. Attributed
properties can be also associated with nodes and edges.
Graph/Tree Formatted Data is then used by a
Layout Algorithm which is a process of defining the
graph or tree layout using a 2D or 3D graph/tree
visualization technique. Although there are several
available graph/tree algorithms, we applied the EncCon
[9] and a 3D layout technique in our prototype system.
EncCon is a very space-efficient and fast technique for
visualizing very large web structures. The 3D algorithm
aims to provide a more realistic look and feel of the web
structure.
The final view is produced by the combination of
both Navigation Transformation and Attributed
Transformation. The Attributed Transformation is also
used to map node and edge attributes to the Final View
of the web sitemap’s visualization. The Navigation
Transformation is the interactive process which allows
the user to navigate, zoom, filter, shift, rotate, etc to
achieve the expected visualization.
When a user requests a new view, the Navigation
and Interaction Controller updates its navigational
property and requests a corresponding view from
Navigation Algorithms. The Navigation Algorithms
selects a suitable navigation algorithm to produce this
new view. The navigation algorithm might use a layout
algorithm in its geometry-computation algorithm. Then,
the Navigational and Interaction Controller retrieves the
attributed property from the Attributed Transformation.
Finally, the new view is created from the navigation
algorithm and attributed property (see Figure 2).

EncCon is an enclosure+connection approach for
visualizing and navigating large hierarchical information
in a two-dimensional space. The layout algorithm
maximizes the utilization of display space by using
enclosure partitioning approach. EncCon uses a
rectangular division method to partition the layout so that
it provides the user a more straightforward way to
perceive the relational information. The partitioning
ensures each vertex to be bounded by a rectangular local
region. The area of each local region of a vertex is equal
to the sum of the local region areas of all its child
vertices. Thus, the value of a vertex’s local region area is
proportional to the number of the vertex’s descendants.
A sub-hierarchy is drawn within the rectangular
boundary of the sub-root vertex. The local regions
produced by the EncCon layout algorithm are square-like
rectangles. More description about EncCon technique
can be found at [9].
At any time, the EncCon layout algorithm ensures
the maximum area utilization which makes it effective to
visualize not only very large relational structure but also
a small portion of substructure. Figure 3 shows an
example of a web site mapping of the entire University
of Texas at Dallas [10] at top five levels (approximately
8,115 pages). This visualization provides an informative
abstract view of the site and the inter-relationships
among its web-pages. Thus, a web administrator can
easily identify the structural behavior of the site. For
example, this visualization immediately shows that the
pages “search” and “current students” at the top-left and
top-right contains the largest numbers of sub-pages.

3. 2D Visualization
The 2D visualization uses EncCon algorithms [9] to
efficiently visualize and navigate large web site mapping
of thousands of pages at a limited display space and
reasonable speed. This technique lays out a web site
mapping using an area partitioning algorithm to ensure
the maximum utilization of display space while it also
uses node-link diagrams to show the interrelation among
web-pages. The user can also interactively navigate
through a structure thanks to a focus+context navigation
technique, called layering. We next describe the layout
and navigation in more details.

Figure 3. An example of visualizing the entire
University of Texas at Dallas’s web sitemap.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

3.2 Navigation and Interaction
Although the layout technique provides an effective
abstract view of a web site mapping, navigation via
interaction is also an important task for exploring and
analyzing a focus sub-page. This is because even if the
layout algorithm is able to geometrically place and
display large numbers of pages and links on the screen,
the retrieval of actual data items through this
visualization would still be impossible unless an
effective navigation mechanism is provided. For
example, without navigation how could we find a
particular data item at level 4 from Figure 3?
This section describes a zooming+layering
navigation approach which can achieve the
focus+context visualization by providing an enlarged
focus view and a context view. Technically, it employs a
semi-transparent graphical technique to achieve the
visualization of two layers of information at the same
display space. This allows both context view and focus
view to be drawn at two separate layers in an overlapped
manner on the same physical screen space. In the default
mode, the focus view occupies the entire display area
with highlighted full colors, while the global view is
visualized within a smaller rectangle area at the center in
semi-transparent manner. The purpose of this
arrangement is to reduce the distraction between two
views. The distraction might happen when too much
overlaps among nodes between the context-view and the
focus-view. This technique always keeps one view
highlighted and another not highlighted (see Figures 4b
and 5a). The size of the context-view area can
interactively be adjusted to suit the user’s preference.
The selection of a visual object is the main
interaction by the user during navigation. This
interaction can be applied to any visible nodes at the
focus view or at context view to zoom in the subhierarchy of the selected nodes. The system can also
bring back the context view to the front with highlight
when a right mouse-button is clicked on the display area
of the detail view. All of the interactions are animated,
including smooth moving, fade in, and fade out, in order
to preserve the mental map during navigation.
Figure 4a is an example when a user is selecting the
page “visistor-index.html”. Figure 4b shows that the substructure from the page “visistor-index.html” is enlarged
while the previous context is display transparently at the
background. In Figure 5a, the user is selecting another
page from the context view to view in detail. Figure 5b
displays the selected sub-structure from Figure 5a.

4. 3D Visualization
Section 3 has presented a two-dimensional
visualization technique for web site mapping. This
technique optimizes the space to display a large number
of web-pages and their inter-relations. The success of

these layout algorithms motivates us to investigate the
feasibility of extending this algorithm to threedimensional space. The technique modifies the above 2D
layout algorithm to display relational web site maps in
3D where nodes at the same level are projected onto the
same plane. We aim to provide not only an alternative
approach to the visualization, but also a more realistic
look to the three-dimensional model as well as a possible
improvement of the clarity in layout.

4.1 Layout
The 3D layout algorithm is a generalization of
EncCon algorithm. This algorithm is described as the
following:
First, the x-, and y-coordinate values of every node
are calculated using the 2D EncCon layout algorithm. In
this partitioning process, the width and height of the
display are normalized to a 1x1 unit. This step ensures
the utilization of the display space when the layout is
projected onto a plane.
Next, the z-coordinate value of each node is
calculated based on its level that nodes with the same
level have the same z-coordinate value. This step is
formalized as a projection of the entire hierarchy on
different planes. The number of planes equals to the
number of levels of the hierarchy. These planes are
placed along the z-axis. Although the distance between
two planes can be adjusted and varied for each level, this
prototype only applies the same distance between each
two planes.
Finally, the coordinates of every node are
recalculated from the normalized coordinate system to
the physical display system.
Although the 3D visualization performs reasonably
well on this website, the overcrowded look of edges
could reduce the visualization quality. This problem
normally occurs with large datasets that a node might
have several child nodes. To overcome this limitation,
we modify the representation of edges by replacing
straight-line links with bended links. Technically, an
edge is not drawn directly from a parent node to a child
node through a straight-line link, but as a bended link
that includes two segments. The first segment is drawn
from this node to the center of the rectangular local area
of its child nodes. The second segment is drawn from
this centre point to a child node. Figure 7 shows an
example of the 3D visualization of the University of
Texas at Dallas website, with the same dataset as for
Figure 3.
The interactive navigation uses standard threedimensional viewing techniques including view
transformation, rotation and zoom. The user can
interactively drag the display to a desirable location,
rotate the view and enlarge a portion of sub-structure.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. A Navigation example; (a) a user is selecting the page “visistor-index.html”, and (b) the subcontent from the page “visistor-index.html” is enlarged.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. A navigation from the context view; (a) the context view is focused and the page
“giveopp.html” is selected, and (b) the sub-content from the page “giveopp.html” is enlarged.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

References
[1] M.L. Huang, Information Visualization in Web Site
Mapping: a Survey. In Proceedings of World
Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics, and
Informatics, (SCI 2000) (Orlando, Florida). 2000, 390395.
[2] C. I. Pilgrim, C. I., and Y. Leung. Design WWW Site Map
Systems. In Proceedings of 10th International Workshop
on Database & Expert Systems Applications (Florence,
Italy). IEEE, pp. 253-258, 1999.
[3] M. Walter. MAPA Product Overview – Full Strength
Mapping for the World Wide Web. In Proceedings of
Seybold Report on Internet Publishing. 1997.

Figure 6. The same visualization as Figure 8
with a modification in edge’s drawing.

5. Conclusion
We have presented a new visualization model for
web sitemaps. This model uses either 2D or 3D
techniques to visualize large websites with thousands of
pages. The 2D visualization technique employs an
enclosure+connection algorithm to utilize the space
while keeping the clarity of the display. The navigation
is achieved by using the layering focus+context method
in which context view and focus view are displayed
concurrently at the same display space using
transparency. The 3D technique extends the 2D EncCon
layout algorithm to a 3D space which aims to provide a
more realistic look and feel of the web sitemap
visualization.

[4] P. Eades. Drawing free trees. In Proceedings of Bulleting
of the Institute for Combinatorics and its Applications. pp.
10-36, 1992.
[5] J. Lamping, and R. Rao. The Hyperbolic Browser: a
Focus+Context Technique for Visualizing Large
Hierarchies. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing,
7(1), pp. 33-55, 1995.
[6] M.L. Huang, P. Eades, and R.F. Cohen. WebOFDAV –
Navigating and Visualizing the Web On-Line with
Animated Context Wwapping. In Proceedings of the 7th
International World Wide Web Conference (Brisbane,
Australia). pp. 638-642, 1998.
[7] Q.V. Nguyen, and M.L. Huang. Space-Optimized Tree: a
Connection+Enclosure Approach for the Visualization of
Large Hierarchies. Information Visualization Journal,
2(1), pp. 3-15, 2003.
[8] G.G. Robertson, J.D. Mackinglay, and S.K. Card. Cone
Tree: Animated 3D Visualizations of Hierarchical
Information. In Proceedings of Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI’91). pp.189-194, 1991.
[9] Q.V. Nguyen, and M.L. Huang. EncCon: An Approach to
Constructing Interactive Visualization of Large
Hierarchical Data. Information Visualization Journal,
4(1), pp.1-21, 2005.
[10] The University of Texas at Dallas website,
http://www.utdallas.edu (accessed June 14th 2005).

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

