3D Archaeological Reconstruction and Visualisation: An Artificial Life Model
for Determining Vegetation Dispersal Patterns in Ancient Landscapes
Eugene Ch’ng and Robert J. Stone
Human Interface Technologies Team
Department of Electronic, Electrical & Computer Engineering, School of Engineering
The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
exc390@bham.ac.uk, r.j.stone@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper describes a methodology and software
engine for generating dynamic vegetation models for
archaeological
reconstruction and
interactive
visualisation, integrating the disciplines of Artificial
Life (Alife) and Virtual Reality. The engine, based on
the concept of emergence (a phenomenon in complex
Alife systems), uses real botanical parameters,
channelled through simple rules, in order to synthesise
the dispersal patterns of natural vegetation
communities as they grow, reproduce, and compete for
resources. The foci for the development and evaluation
of the Alife engine described relate to different
scenarios in nature as may have existed during the
Mesolithic period. Results from the study showed
evidence of correlations between the artificial
vegetation
and
their
natural
counterparts,
demonstrating the feasibility of using such models in
historical landscape reconstructions.

1.

Introduction

Virtual Reality (VR) and Interactive 3D (i3D)
technologies have benefited the scientific community
in both simulation and scientific visualisation,
empowering users with intuitive tools for investigating
complex spatial and temporal databases and physical
processes, both on- and off-line [1, 2]. In recent
endeavours, researchers in archaeology and those
involved in heritage conservation have adopted VR to
excellent effect, applying and utilising the technology
for education, interpretation and preservation of
cultural and natural heritage [3]. The growing
population of researchers in the Virtual Heritage
Network, for example, [4] has witnessed many creative
examples in the use of VR and i3D as tools purely for
visualisation. In addition there have been a number of

engaging attempts [5-7] at enhancing i3D creations
with techniques from interdisciplinary research areas
such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Artificial Life
(Alife). In particular, the use of Alife techniques in
virtual environments has provided a valuable and
effective way for research within specific application
areas where some researchers in the field of computer
graphics seek to progress beyond visually compelling
but essentially empty virtual environments to
incorporate other aspects of physical reality that
require intelligence or agents with characteristics of
life [8].
In this study, we present a potential model for
determining the spatial and temporal distribution of
dominant vegetation types via the fusion of VR and
Alife, focusing on modelling of Alife vegetation as an
underlying technique with VR as a tool for visualising
simulated data in a controlled virtual ecosystem. The
study aims to explore new methods for archaeological
landscape reconstruction and visualisation by
experimenting with the concept of emergence
associated with Alife [9, 10] and by addressing certain
issues related to traditional methods utilizing
Geographical Information System (GIS).
The target area of our study is a submerged ancient
river valley in the Southern Basin of the North Sea (to
the east of the United Kingdom) which, during the
timeframe 10,000 to 7,000 years before present, was a
land corridor connecting the British Isles to continental
Europe. At this time, flora and fauna thrived in a
landscape untouched by the southerly extent of
glaciation, but one which would, in time, become
submerged as the ice retreated. Recent (2003) seismic
datasets have identified features of this landscape,
including a significant river valley; these have been
processed and static 3D reconstruction comprising
high-quality digital renderings and interactive
walkthroughs created for the purpose of visualisation
and exploration [11]. Although the reconstructions

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 1. A generic vegetation model
have provided a simple portrait of what the landscape
might have looked like over 10,000 years ago, a
credible and scientific representation of the different
types of vegetation and their geographical evolution on
the landscape has been elusive. In the early VR
models, 3D library models of different plants were
manually positioned on the terrain in accordance to
subject matter experts in landscape archaeology and
geo-archaeology. A more scientific approach would be
to allow the different types of virtual vegetation, and
their “communities”, to evolve, based on software tools
that exploit a range of known biological, geological
and environmental (climatic) parameters.
The
identification of Alife as an appropriate technique for
such dynamic reconstruction exercises have led to the
creation of the SeederEngine [12], a framework
integrating both Virtual Reality and Artificial Life.
Early evaluations [13, 14] of the framework and
exercises conducted in researching how vegetation can
be modelled as Alife entities have shown feasibility in
its application for landscape reconstructions. Further
experimentations with the model have not only
demonstrated evidence of correlations between the
model and natural vegetation patterns forming on
landscapes, but have also provided an appropriate
framework from which we can reconstruct a credible
historical representation of the river valley discovered
during the early analysis of the seismic data described
earlier, and today referred to as the Shotton River
Valley, after a famous British geologist.
The following section summarises some of the
historical research related to this field of endeavour. In
Part 3, the methodology of modelling artificial life

vegetation agent and its ecology is presented. Part 4
evaluates the outcome of the model and finally, we
conclude with the contribution and future directions of
research including the extension of the model into the
new domain of Serious Gaming [15] in marine life for
scientific research, discovery, and visualisation.

2.

Related Research

The integration of what Chapman and Gearey call
a ‘processual’ and ‘sensual/experiential’ approach in
the study of prehistoric sites and landscapes is
uncommon and, therefore, the potential synergy that
might result from closer integration often remains
unrealised [16, 17]. Whilst a scientific approach,
incorporating geological and ecological variables, is
indispensable, it has become recognised that the
subtleties of embodied space, essentially the
experience of ‘being in the world’, is important in the
interpretation of the spatial relationships between
monuments, spaces between monuments and the routes
that connect them [18]. The culmination of research
efforts in computer graphics and VR over the years
have addressed issues relating to various aspects of
information visualisation, namely the interactivity and
dynamics of visual representation of simulated data,
enabling researchers to interact with data in 3D space
by ‘being there’, thus augmenting the real-time
experience and, it is claimed, the ‘believability’.
Although i3D technologies have evolved in recent
years to become both affordable and accessible [15],
conventional methods in the interpretation of
prehistoric landscapes [17, 19] or the prediction of

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 2. Information visualisation in the
SeederEngine viewport showing individual
plant conditions.
current or future ‘natural potential vegetation’ [20, 21],
although useful, remain largely a process of assessing
visual patterns in statistical visuals of two-dimensional
space. Furthermore, these approaches, typically hosted
in a Geographical Information System (GIS), generally
do not take into account the dynamics of the lifecycles
of plants (i.e. growth, competition, reproduction and
seed germination of the individual species of plants).
Over the past decade, scientists’ perceptions of
complexity in global systems have changed [9, 22-24].
Moreso than ever before, scientists are using
decentralised models, self-organisation, self-assembly
and other metaphors to describe the phenomena they
observe in the sophisticated world. It is well known
that many complex matters or behaviours emerge from
the local interaction of simple entities or rules. For
example, most people assume that birds follow a leader
in the flock. However, “there is no special ‘leader
bird’. Rather, the flock is an example of ‘selforganisation’. Each bird in the flock follows a set of
simple rules, reacting to the movements of the birds
nearby. Orderly flock patterns arise from these simple,
local interaction” [24]. In a simulation [25], flocking
behaviour emerges from three sets of simple rules –
separation, alignment and cohesion. In another study
[26], slime mould, composed of distinct, separate
single-celled units, was found to be capable of finding
the shortest possible way through a maze via collective
behaviour. Already, researchers have started using the
simple rules in nature to solve problems, such as those
inspired from insect swarms [27]. The science of
Artificial Life [10] aspires to investigate these
complexities in order to understand and, perhaps via
the knowledge acquired from the studies, ‘extract the
regularities from incidental and irrelevant details’ [9]
in order to synthesise natural life, or apply the distilled
principles for problem solving.

Figure 3. An outcome of a landscape is
determined by the local interaction of
vegetation communities
One of the fundamental concepts in Alife is
emergence [9]. Mihata [28] defined emergence as “the
process by which patterns or global-level structures
arise from interactive local-level processes.”, and “this
‘structure’ or ‘pattern’ cannot be understood or
predicted from the behaviour or properties of the
component units alone.” The natural distribution of
vegetation communities on landscapes cannot be
understood by studying individual plants. It is the
local interaction of many species of plants with the
extra-local ecological factors that determines the
formation of landscapes. It is this concept that we aim
to explore in modelling vegetation for the
reconstruction of ancient landscapes.
Literature in vegetation modelling related to Alife
is scarce. A survey revealed only a handful of articles
[29-31] of which only several [32, 33] are useful for
simulation in large landscapes. This is, of course, to be
expected as the science of Alife is relatively new for
addressing our particular direction of research. A
related model [32], whilst claiming to exhibit
properties of growth, decay, and energy transfer
reminiscent of a simple ecosystem, presents a
somewhat primitive solution from an Alife perspective
since it does not support plant growth or interaction
between plants and the environment [8]. A closer
model is Lange et al’s [33] approach, which uses a
growth simulator within an abiotic environment with
only two input fluxes, such as energy and a growthlimiting nutrient. The actual growth of each tree in
Lange et al.’s method is derived from local
competition for energy and nutrients. Evolutionary
effects are included by random mutations of
parameters related to height growth strategies of
individual trees. Our model contrasts with Lange’s
approach in the inclusion of a generic model of
customisable vegetation lifecycle that corresponds to
different vegetation types (trees, shrubs, herbs, grass,

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

etc.) with seasonal differences (evergreen, deciduous).
Competitions amongst plants for resources are
determined by their canopy, density of leaves, height,
and vegetation types. Furthermore, adaptable
ecological factors and resources (sunlight, temperature,
carbon dioxide, altitude, soil, hydrology, etc.) other
than the two input fluxes described in Lange et al.’s
model are important determinants for vegetation
communities in an ecosystem [34] and should be taken
into account. We also address the visualisation aspect
of plants in their five stages of appearance (seed –
seedling – young – mature – old) with an indicator for
fitness, effective resource and ecological usage,
providing a clearer picture of plants in their various
stages of growth in a competitive landscape.

3.

Methodology

In the artificial life context, there are at least three
methods for modelling vegetation using the bottom-up,
decentralised approach. One method is to model the
plant from the interacting cells forming its structures;
another [29-31] is to model the intermediate plant’s
vascular architecture and its growth and interaction
within a localised position. The third approach is to
model the plant as a reactive agent - a complete unit
that responds to ecological factors in order to
determine the local and global patterns the plants form
in landscapes. In this research, we evaluate the third
approach as it is more suited to our problem domain.
We illustrate a generic model of vegetation used in
our study in Figure 1. The artificial plant is modelled
based on the characteristics of its natural counterpart,
germinating from a seed before beginning its lifecycle
of growth, competition, reproduction, and death. The
Alife entity possesses sensors for sensing ecological
and seasonal changes, both reacting and adapting to
variations based on customisable properties and
preferences stored as XML structures (which includes
seed germination and adaptability information of the
plant towards different environmental conditions [13]).
In the series of discreet time steps running from a
calculated monthly average of ecological factors, each
plant senses its environment and identifies plants in
close proximity for competition. The competition is
local and based the competing plants’ canopy, leaf
density, height, and vegetation types. The form of the
plant (trees, bushes, and undergrowth) and the
distances between them is taken into account. The
following rules describe the synthesis of plant life:
1.
2.

Plants reproduce in their assigned season.
Seeds are dispersed in different directions and dispersal
agents are simulated by dispersing the seeds further.

3.

4.

5.

Seeds have a period of dormancy before suitable
environmental conditions cause it to germinate; seeds
expire if they do not germinate within an assigned
period of time.
Plant tolerance/adaptation to ecosystem factors is based
on an upper, ideal and lower value [13]. Different
plants have different adaptations.
Plants compete for availability of sunlight, space and
nutrients based on environmental conditions and the
sizes and shapes of competing plants.

The individual fitness of plants can be studied via
a plant indicator in the virtual environment revealing
information at the local plant level relating to effective
sunlight, nutrient, altitude, and so on (Figure 2).
Synthesising dispersal patterns of vegetation also
requires knowledge pertaining to the environment in
the target landscape in order to provide equal
opportunities for plants suited to different habitats to
thrive and compete. Conditions for simulating the
British Mesolithic landscape are readily obtainable [35,
36]:
1.

2.
3.
4.

The global environment conditions of the landscape –
sunlight, temperature, moisture, nutrients, elevation and
carbon dioxide.
The local environment conditions affected by plants in
close proximity – effective sunlight, moisture and
availability of space.
Temperature-elevation ratio.
Hydrology.

In accordance with the concept of emergence
(Figure 3), we model the formation of communities of
vegetation on the landscape based on the local
interaction of species affected by ecological variables.
The following section describes the outcome of our
studies.

4.

Experimental Observations

A simulation of climatic changes affecting
vegetation distribution and migration patterns using the
Alife model has been demonstrated [14]. Using the
same model, the reproduction, distribution, and
competition of vegetation species in compact
landscapes has also been studied [13]. The experiments
covered in this section further demonstrate the
preferences of different vegetation species in relation
to resource availability in the ecosystem and
dominance of vegetation types over a span of 500
years.
A terrain measuring 150m² and 50m at the highest
point of the landscape relative to the river was
“sampled” from the Shotton River Valley virtual
environment. Equal numbers of seeds belonging to

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 4. Experimental scenario – a Mesolithic landscape
three species of vegetation – Pine, Hazel, and Willow were equally distributed across the landscape. The
environmental setting simulates a typical Mesolithic
landscape in the North Sea region. Virtual time is
discrete and runs in sequences of months with seasonal
changes and ecological variations. In the simulation
(Figure 4), as the virtual years progress, seedlings
belonging to the species begin germinating and
growing. At year 71 the landscape has a healthy

population. Willows began forming near the river bank
where the hydrology is ideal. This reflects the Willow
tree’s preference in the natural world. Pine and Hazel
appear to have an equal distribution across the
landscape. From years 116 through to 179, the Pine
and Hazel begin occupying most of the spaces,
‘herding’ the Willow towards the lower right corner of
the river bank. At year 250 the Willow species
disappeared entirely from the terrain. At year 500, the

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Pine species dominates the landscape. As observed,
each species’ characteristics and their strength and
preferences towards a typical environmental setting is
apparent. The preference of the Willow tree is
observable near the river banks. The Hazel appeared to
spread across the landscape faster than the other
species, occupying spaces and competing with other
plants. The Pine is a naturally slow-growing tree, even
though its growth timeframe is lengthy, spanning
hundreds of years, its characteristics, adaptability, and
height makes it the dominant species in the later stages
of this particular landscape setting.
An observation of the same landscape planted only
with the Willow species is drawn with a red border. In
comparison with previous observations, at year 282 the
Willow species has a healthy population near the river
banks without competition from Pines and Hazels.

5.

webcams or regular dives on the reef using remotely
operated or manned submersibles).
Currently, an optimised low polygon 3D model of
the Scylla has been created (Figure 6) and algorithms
are being developed from extensions of the
SeederEngine to accommodate artificial marine life
forms. At present, data is being gathered for an early
investigation to visualise the outcome in a real-time
virtual environment.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Prof. Vince Gaffney, Director of
the Institute of Archaeology and Antiquity, The
University of Birmingham for his assistance in
providing the original seismic datasets of the Shotton
River for our study.

Conclusions and Future Work

In this article, we attempted landscape
archaeological reconstruction and visualisation with
what we believe to be a novel approach. We have
attempted to integrate the new science of Artificial Life
with virtual reality to produce a dynamic, visually-rich
tool for investigating the principles of emergence in
nature and generating digital solutions for predicting
vegetation terrain colonisation. By using VR and i3D
technologies, we extend the information visualisation
capability of the landscape reconstructions that will
enable an enhanced environment for archaeological
investigation and interpretation. Thus far, the model
has demonstrated its potentials in various studies,
mimicking its natural counterparts with real botanical
properties channelled through simple sets of rules.
Our future research plans aim to apply the research
described above to a more modern-day scenario – the
colonisation of artificial subsea reefs by marine life. In
support of this, and in collaboration with the UK’s
National Marine Aquarium (NMA), we are currently
extending and modifying the SeederEngine research to
provide predictive visualisations of what one particular
reef (the scuttled Royal Navy vessel, HMS Scylla,
Figure 5) might look like tens of years (and longer)
into the future. It is our eventual aim to assess the
impact of possible global climate changes on the sea
and to model other factors, such as the effects of
pollution or other short-term environmental variations.
The project involves NMA subject matter experts,
particularly in respect of the marine flora and fauna
that will eventually inhabit the reef, their growth and
reproduction patterns, their responses to subsea
environmental changes (pollution, temperature,
etc.). It will be possible to collect regular validational
information from the reef over time (via subsea

Figure 5. The scuttling of HMS Scylla –
Europe’s first artificial reef (Source of Images:
http://www.navyphotos.co.uk/scylla.htm)

Figure 6. The 3D model of HMS Scylla

References
[1] R.J. Stone, Virtual and Synthetic Environments:
Technologies and Applications, in International
Encyclopaedia of Ergonomics and Human Factors, W.
Karwowski, Editor. 2001, Taylor & Francis.
[2] R.J. Stone, Whatever Happened to Virtual Reality?
Information Professional, IEE, 2004. October/November
2004: p. 12-15.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

[3] R.J. Stone, Virtual Heritage: "The willing suspension of
disbelief for the moment..." UNESCO World Heritage
Review, 1999.
[4]
VHN,
Virtual
Heritage
Network.
2006,
http://www.virtualheritage.net.
[5] S.T. Refsland, et al., Virtual Heritage: Breathing New
Life into Our Ancient Past. IEEE Multimedia, 2000.
7(2).
[6] V. DeLeon and R. Berry. Virtual Florida Everglades. in
VSMM98 - Future Fusion: Application Realities for the
Virtual Age. 1998. Gifu, Japan. p.458-463.
[7] U. Yoshiyuki, Saburo, H., Inaba, S., Kitaoka, M.
Reconstruction of Extinct Animals in the Computer. in
Artificial Life VI: Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference on Artificial Life. 1998: The MIT Press,
Cambridge.
[8] M. Luck and R. Aylett, Applying Artificial Intelligence to
Virtual Reality: Intelligent Virtual Environments.
Applied Artificial Intelligence, 2000. 14: p. 3-32.
[9] J.H. Holland, Emergence from Chaos to order. 1998,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[10] C.G. Langton, ed. Artificial Life: An Overview. 1995,
MIT Press: Cambridge.
[11] E. Ch'ng, R.J. Stone, and T.N. Arvanitis. The Shotton
River and Mesolithic Dwellings: Recreating the Past
from Geo-Seismic Data Sources. in The 5th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality,
Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, VAST04:
Interdisciplinarity or “The Best of Both Worlds”: The
Grand Challenge for Cultural Heritage Informatics in the
21st Century. 2004. Brussels, Belgium: The
Eurographics Association. p.125-134.
[12] E. Ch'ng, R.J. Stone, and T.N. Arvanitis. A Virtual
Reality Archaeological Framework for the Investigation
and Interpretation of Ancient Landscapes. in Internet
and Multimedia Systems and Applications, EuroIMSA
2005. 2005. Grindelwald, Switzerland: IASTED.
[13] E. Ch'ng and R.J. Stone, Enhancing Virtual Reality with
Artificial Life: Reconstructing a Flooded European
Mesolithic Landscape. Presence: Teleoperators and
Virtual Environments, 2006. 15(3).
[14] E. Ch'ng, R.J. Stone, and T.N. Arvanitis. Evaluating
Artificial Life-based Vegetation Dynamics in the
Context of a Virtual Reality Representation of Ancient
Landscapes. in Virtual Systems and Multimedia. 2005.
Ghent, Belgium: VSMM.
[15] R.J. Stone. Serious Gaming - Virtual Reality's Saviour?
in Proceedings of VSMM 2005 (invited keynote). 2005.
Ghent, Belgium: VSMM. p.773-786.
[16] H.P. Chapman and B.R. Gearey, Palaeoecology and the
perception of prehistoric landscapes: some comments on
visual approaches to phenomenology. Antiquity, 2000.
74: p. 316-319.
[17] B.R. Gearey and H.P. Chapman, Digital Gardening: An
approach to simulating elements of palaeovegetation and
some implications for the interpretation of prehistoric
sites and landscapes, in Digital Archaeology: Bridging
Method and Theory, P. Daly, Editor. 2005, Routledge.
[18] C.Y. Tilley, A Phenomenology of Landscape: Places,
Paths and Monuments. 1994, Oxford: Oxford: Berg.

[19] P. Spikins, Mesolithic Northern England: Environment,
Population and Settlement. BAR British Series. Vol.
283. 1999, England: Basingstoke Press.
[20] F.W. Davis, Goetz, S., Modelling vegetation pattern
using digital terrain data. Landscape Ecology, 1990. 4:
p. 69-80.
[21] B. Brzeziecki, Klenast, F., Wildi, O., A simulated map
of the potential natural forest vegetation of Switzerland.
Journal of Vegetation Science, 1993. 4: p. 499-508.
[22] S. Kauffman, At Home in the Universe: The search for
laws of complexity. 1996, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
[23] J.H. Holland, Hidden Order: How adaptation builds
complexity. 1995: Helix Books, Addison-Wesley
Publishing.
[24] M. Resnick, Turtles, Termites, and Traffic Jams:
Explorations in Massively Parallel Microworlds. 1994,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 163.
[25] C.W. Reynolds. Flocks, Herds, and Schools: A
Distributed Behavioral Model. in Computer Graphics,
Siggraph '87 Conference Proceedings. 1987. p.25-34.
[26] T. Nakagaki, Maze-solving by an amoeboid organism.
Nature, 2000. 407: p. 470.
[27] E. Bonabeau, Theraulaz, G., Swarm Smarts. Scientific
American, 2000. 282: p. 72-79.
[28] K. Mihata, The Persistence of 'Emergence', in Chaos,
Complexity & Sociology: Myths, Models & Theories,
A.E. Raymond, Horsfall, S., Lee., M.E., Editor. 1997,
Thousand Oaks: California: Sage. p. 30-38.
[29] P. Prusinkiewicz, et al. The Artificial Life of Plants. in
Artificial life for Graphics, Animation, and Virtual
Reality Siggraph '95 Course Notes. 1995: CSIRO. p.138.
[30] R. Mech, Prusinkiewicz, P. Visual models of plants
interacting with their environment. in SIGGRAPH,
Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques. 1996: ACM
Publications. p.397-410.
[31] J. Hanan. Virtual Plants - Integrating architectural and
physiological plant models. in ModSim 95. 1995. Perth,
Australia: The Modelling and Simulation Society of
Australia. p.44-50.
[32] B. Damer, Marcelo, K., Revi, F. Nerve Garden: A public
terrarium in cyberspace. in Proceedings of Virtual
Worlds and Simulation Conference (VWSIM '99). 1998:
SCS (Society for Computer Simulation) Simulation
Series. p.177-185.
[33] H. Lange, et al. Investigating Forest Growth Model
Results on Evolutionary Time Scales. in Artificial Life
VI: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Artificial Life. 1998: The MIT Press, Cambridge.
[34] J.P. Grime, J.G. Hodgson, and R. Hunt, Comparative
Plant Ecology: A functional approach to common
British species. 1988, London: Unwin Hyman Ltd.
[35] T.C. Atkinson, K.R. Briffa, and G.R. Coope, Seasonal
Temperatures in Britain during the past 22,000 years,
reconstructed using beetle remains. Nature, 1987.
325(12): p. 587-592.
[36] K.R. Briffa and T.C. Atkinson, Reconstructing LateGlacial and Holocene Climates, in Climates of the
British Isles: Present, Past and Future, E. Barrow,
Editor. 1997, Routledge: London. p. 84-111.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

