PathBank: Web-based Querying and Visualziation of an Integrated Biological
Pathway Database
Joshua Wing Kei Ho

Tristan Manwaring
Seok-Hee Hong
Uwe Roehm
School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney, Australia
{joho4868,tman0127,shhong,uroehm,dfun2647}@usyd.edu.au

Kai Xu
NICTA (National ICT Australia)
Sydney, Australia
Kai.Xu@nicta.com.au

Tim Kraska
University of M¨unster
M¨unster, Germany
tim.kraska@uni-muenster.de

Abstract
PathBank is a web-based query and visualization system for biological pathways using an integrated pathway
database. To address the needs for biologists to visualize
and analyze biological pathways, PathBank is designed to
be user-friendly, ﬂexible and extensible. It is, to the best
of our knowledge, the ﬁrst web-based system that allows
biological pathways to be visualized in three dimensions.
PathBank demonstrates the ability to automatically generate and layout biological pathways in response to webbased database query about proteins, genes, gene ontology and small molecules. Using a novel OWL-to-relational
database schema generation approach, it can automatically
integrate biological data from different sources that support the BioPAX exchange format (e.g. KEGG, Bio- Cyc).
The systems web interface allows both simple keyword and
complex query-based searches in the database. The pathway visualization component provides fast and interactive
data access by using asynchronous data retrieval. Due to
its modular implementation, it can be easily extended with
new visualization algorithms.

1

Introduction

Large amounts of biological data are available from
the public domain. Storing, mining and visualizing these
data present great challenges and opportunities to the life
science research and bioinformatics communities. With
the emergence of Systems Biology [11], scientists are increasingly interested in studying the large-scale interactions
between genes, RNA, proteins, and other biomolecules.

David Cho Yau Fung

David Hart
Axogenic Pty Ltd
Sydney, Australia
dhart@axogenic.com

Through modeling and simulating these molecular interactions, we start to gain an understanding of complex cellular
behaviours.
Molecular interactions are most commonly modeled as
networks [6], in which nodes represent biomolecules and
edges represent reactions or interactions. Examples include
metabolic networks, gene regulatory networks, proteinprotein interaction networks, and signal-transduction networks. By analyzing the the topology of these networks,
functional and evolutionary information can be gained. Further, by measuring the topological features (e.g. average
path length, clustering coefﬁcient and node degree distribution) in different cellular states, we are able to unravel the
molecular network dynamics behind a certain cellular behaviour [14].
To fully understand the biological processes underlying
these networks, visualization can be a good analysis tool.
Visualization provides an intuitive means for biologists to
explore biological pathways of their interest [15]. Good
visualization reveals the underlying network topology and
hence provides biological insight. Currently, a number of
bioinformatics tools are available for pathway visualization,
including BioPath [16, 7], Cytoscape [17], Osprey [2], BioTapestry [13], VisANT [9] and PATIKAweb [4]. These similar tools differ in the variety of graph layout options and the
analytical tools provided. A number of biological pathway
visualization systems are evaluated in [15].
While these tools provide a large number of methods
for pathway visualization and analysis, learning to use
them requires steep learning curve. Constructing complex
query, and conﬁguring large number of options for visualization may not be familiar to biologists. In particular, their
database query interfaces are usually not easy to learn and

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 1. Query view of PathBank. The home page (left) of PathBank is designed to be Google -like.
Query results (right) are displayed in a tree-like hierarchy. Additional details of pathways are shown
in a ﬂoating window on mouse-over.

use. Our target users are biologists who are primarily interested in accessing pathway data from existing databases,
and visually analyze these pathways. They require simple
and intuitive interface with fast and reliable results from the
system. Motivated by the need to ﬁll the gap between the
user requirements and existing tools, we developed PathBank. We envisage PathBank to be a tool in which Biologists can simply type the search word and quickly retreive
all matching data (e.g. protein, gene, small molecules) and
view their associated pathways.
PathBank features an intuitive Google-like interface for
database query, browsing, and pathway visualization (see
Figure 1). Search modiﬁers and boolean operators are allowed for complex searches. Query results are displayed
dynamically using AJAX technology. A Java applet is used
for pathway visualization (see Figure 2). Different layout
styles can be chosen to suit user’s need.
The main contributions of this paper include (1) a simple,
user-friendly web-based system for biological data querying and visualization system, (2) integration of different
biological data sources using a novel OWL-to-relational
database schema generation approach, and (3) a ﬂexible
system design that allows pathway to be visualized in twoor three- dimensions.
This paper ﬁrst surveys the related work on biological
pathway query and visualization in section 2. Then, we
present our approach on pathway visualization and database
integration in sections 3 and 4, followed by system features
in section 5. System design and implementation are discussed in section 6. We conclude in section 7.

2

Related Work

The number of systems designed for pathway visualization is increasing quickly. In this section, we survey some
of them that generate visualization automatically. Therefore, we do not include systems that rely on manuallyproduced visualization such as KEGG [10] and BioCarta
(www.biocarta.com). Given the large number of available
systems, we selectively cover several of them according to
availability, popularity and relevance to PathBank. Namely,
they are BioPath [16, 7], Cytoscape [17], Osprey [2], BioTapestry [13], VisANT [9], and PATIKAweb [4]. Some of
these are designed for speciﬁc network type, while others
support general biological networks.
BioPath [16, 7] is designed speciﬁcally for biochemical
pathway visualization. It modiﬁes the traditional layereddrawing algorithm — the Sugiyama method [18] — to
follow some of the conventions commonly used in handmade drawings, so it will be easier for biologists to understand. BioPath also provides various search functions that
include: search substances, search pathways and reactions,
and search for a reaction net between two substances.
Cytoscape [17] provides visualization of molecular interaction networks and related information, such as expression
proﬁle and phenotypes. The layouts provided are forcedirected methods and a circular layout, however in two dimensions only. It supports overlaying related data on the
graph by mapping them to node/edge visual attributes such
as size and color. Its visualization and analysis capabilities
can be extended by adding new plug-ins.
Osprey [2] provides visualization of general biological
network and supports comparison between networks. The
visualization method is two dimensional and the available

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 2. Pathway visualization in PathBank: Selected pathway can be visualized in 3D (left) or 2D
(right).

layout methods are circular layout and its few variations. It
allows text search such as gene names and uses color to map
related data. The users can also load a few networks and
perform analysis such as ﬁnding the common part between
them.
BioTapestry [13] is a visualization tool designed mainly
for genetic regulatory network. Grid drawing algorithm
is used to compute graph layout in two dimensions. BioTapestry also supports visualization of network changes
over time. Users have the option to view the given network
at a speciﬁc time using a time slider.
VisANT [9] is a system designed to visualize general
biological networks. Besides the 2D graph visualization
methods similar to previous systems, it also provides a few
statistical analysis methods such as the node degree and
clustering coefﬁcients distribution, which can be shown in
separate scatter plot. VisANT also adopts a plug-in framework so that new functions can be added easily.
PATIKAweb [4] is a web inferface for retrieving and analyzing biological pathways. It supports automatic pathway generation, and pathway layout using a force-directed
method. It imports and exports BioPAX and SBML ﬁles.

3

Network Visualization

Network visualization concerns two main aspects: the
visual representation of nodes and edges, and the layout of
the underlying graph. The visual representation (e.g. the
size, colour and shape) of nodes and edges is useful for
conveying certain information about the pathway. On the
other hand, the layout of the graph is important to reveal
the underlying topology of the network. In our work, we
concentrate on the layout of the network.

In the past decade, a large number of graph drawing algorithms and methods are invented to automatically layout
node-edge diagrams [3]. Well known algorithms include
tree drawing algorithms, force directed methods, Sugiyama
method, multi-dimensional scaling methods and spectral
graph drawing methods. For the details, see the recent proceedings of Graph Drawing and Information Visualization
conferences.
There are a number of layout algorithms speciﬁcally designed for biological pathways (e.g. [1] and [20]). These
graph layout methods vary in their ability in highlighting
underlying network topology. Users may be more accustomed to a certain kind of layout style, and hence allowing
user to choose the layout style is important.
One of the main advantages of PathBank is that user can
choose from a variety of graph layouts. Currently, users
can choose from either force-directed layout, both in two
and three dimensions, or circular layout, while the forcedirected 2D layout is the default visualization (see Figure 3).
Metabolic network is often modeled as a hypergraph,
where each node represents a collection of metabolites or
enzymes. In order to reduce the complexity of the model,
hypernodes are concatenated by considering the collection
of biomolecules as one node (see Figure 3). As a result, a
hypergraph can be represented by a simple directed graph.
PathBank, to the best of our knowledge, is the ﬁrst webbased visualization tool that draws biological pathway in
three dimensions interactively. Note that HCI research suggested that visualization in three dimensions can be more
effective in conveying complex information, such as networks [19]. Recently, three dimensional visualization of
biological pathway using virtual reality has been suggested
in [20].

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 3. Visualization of Biological Pathway. A Java applet is embedded in the web page. The
pathway can be interacted using mouse. Layout style (left) and chemicals to be ﬁltered (right) can
be controlled from a separate panel.

4

Database Integration

PathBank relies on relational database technology in its
backend system; we use PostgreSQL 8 in our current prototype, but PathBank in fact supports any JDBC-compliant
relational database. The pathway database is optimized
for fast browsing, querying, and graph visualization. We
achieve this by using appropriate indexes and a layer of relational views that provide fast access to all data needed for
visualizing a biological pathway; this way, the visualization component can fetch a complete pathway with just one
database access.
An important design goal was the capability to integrate
biological data from different sources. We have developed a
novel storage approach for biological pathway data, called
Genea, that allows to automatically convert pathway data,
given in BioPAX format, into a corresponding relational
schema [12]. Our approach is very generic. It is capable
of mapping any given OWL ontology (OWL: Web Ontology Language), e.g. the BioPAX format, into a humanreadable relational schema, and it also can automatically
load corresponding OWL instance data. Because part of the
reasoning over the ontology is done during those schemageneration and instance-data-loading phases, most searches
on the backend database can be answered with simple and
hence fast SQL queries. This perfectly integrates with the
web-frontend and the graph visualization, providing quick
interactive response time and good scalability.
Our automatic relational schema generation approach
is essential when integrating various data sources using
BioPAX format, in which the ontology is constantly updating.

5

Features

In the following, we give a brief overview of the main
features and capabilities of the PathBank system that aid
the understanding of biological pathways:
• An intuitive ’Google-like’ web search interface allows for simple and fast keyword-based searches in the
whole database.
• Alternatively,
PathBank
supports
complex
boolean queries with several search entities (e.g.
PID:name:kinase for all proteins which have a name
containing kinase); the web-frontend provides a search
assistant to easily construct such complex queries.
• Expandable search result page: matching entities can
be grouped by their type (e.g. protein, gene, gene ontology, small molecule). AJAX technology is used for
fast, asynchronous data access.
• Selected pathways can be automatically visualized in
two or three dimensions, allowing direct user interaction (zoom, pan, rotate, drag)
• A ﬁltering possibility allows to hide commonly occurring small molecules such as (such as H2 O, H+ ,
NADP, ATP, and Acetyl-CoA) to reduce the visual
complexity.
• New visualisation and analysis modules can be
plugged into the visualisation applet; it provides a
number of well known graph layout styles.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

• Integrated relational database based on BioPAX standard with optimizations for fast, interactive web access.

6

System Design and Implementation

The targeted users of PathBank are mainly biologists
who may not have much experience in complex bioinformatics tools. These users prefer simple user interface that
allows searches to be performed quickly and reliably. As
PathBank is currently a proof of concept, research prototype
system, features offered by PathBank are still limited. However, we envisage this web tool to incorporate data mining
and network analysis capabilities in the future. As a result,
the main design goals of PathBank are user-friendliness,
ﬂexibility and extensibility. Open source technologies are
used extensively in order to meet short development time
and low cost. The overall three-tier architecture is illustrated in Figure 4.
All pathway data is stored in a backend relational
database system (currently: PostgreSQL 8, but any JDBCcompliant database is supported). Pathways are represented
as a collection of reactions, and each reaction is related to
two sets of chemicals (i.e. reactant and products). Materialized views are constructed to aid fast database access from
the API. The schema is automatically determined from the
input data that is provided in the BioPAX data exchange format (version 1.4). For this purpose, we developed a generic
mapping tool that generates schema and loads relational
data from data described in the Web Ontology Language
(OWL), which is used by the BioPAX standard. This ability
to automatically generate a relational schema is a great advantage of PathBank, as it enables the system to handle the
rapidly changing BioPAX standard.
The application programming interface (API) acts as a
central access point to the database. The API is written in
Java and is further divided into the server-side and clientside components. The server-side component is responsible
for validating queries, processing queries (i.e. decomposing complex queries), constructing SQL statements, processing returned results, and generating pathway graphs.
Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) and Apache Common
DBCP are used to implement connection pooling between
API and the database. The client-side carries out simple
query validation, and acts as a wrapper for the underlying
communication channel to the server-side component. Java
Remote Method Invocation (RMI) is used for communication between server- and client-side components.
In our relational database, pathways are represented as a
collection of chemical reactions, and each reaction is related
to two sets of chemicals (i.e. reactants and products). By
joining related reactions together, we are able to generate
biological pathway from relational data.

The web-frontend is implemented using a Model-ViewController (MVC) architecture. It makes use of the
JavaServer Pages (JSP) and Apache Struts framework. The
advantage of using MVC is to allow the web-frontend to be
extended easily in the future to incorporate new pages and
functionalities. The web application is currently deployed
on an Apache Tomcat server. In addition, we also make extensive use of the web-browser power to implement the dynamic behaviour of our system. In particular, dynamic data
fetching is implemented by using Asynchronous JavaScript
and XML (AJAX) technology. It enables query result tree
to be retrieved at a level-by-level basis. This avoids the long
loading time for large amounts of results. DHTML and
JavaScript are used to build the search assistant. Layout
of the web pages are controlled by a cascading style sheet
(CSS).
The visualization engine of PathBank is implemented as
Java applet. This engine allows visualization libraries and
layout styles to be added to the system as plug-ins. We make
use of two open source visualization libraries, prefuse [8]
for 2D visualization and WilmaScope [5] for 3D visualization. This allows high quality interactive visualization to
be incorporated into the system in the least amount of time.
Our system makes use of the applet caching mechanism to
ensure the applet is preloaded and is only reloaded if there
is an update.
An example of a movie which shows the functionalities of PathBank system is available from
http://www.ug.it.usyd.edu.au/∼tman0127/PathBank/doc/.

7

Conclusions and Future Work

PathBank is a web-based biological pathway query and
visualization system using an integrated database that supports systems-level investigation of biological data.
The backend uses relational database technology to provide fast and efﬁcient access to pathway data. It supports the
integration of different biological sources, such as KEGG or
BioCyc, that provide data in the ontology-based BioPAX
exchange format. For this purpose, we have developed
a database creation tool, called Genea, that automatically
maps and loads ontology data into a relational database
based on generic mapping rules.
PathBank provides an intuitive Google-like web interface for database querying and browsing. The pathway visualization capability is embedded in a Java applet. PathBank makes extensive use of client side technology to reduce computational load of the server. It also makes extensive use of open-source technology. PathBank can be
extended by adding new visualization and network analysis
plugins to the system. Network analysis and data mining
tools can be added to the system, to complement the pathway visualization.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 4. System architecture of PathBank. The schema of the relational database at the backend
is automatically generated from the BioPAX OWL. It stores data imported from multiple sources via
the BioPAX format. Access to the database is managed by an Application Programming Interface
(API) at the middle tier. The web server generates web pages that embeds a Java applet for pathway
visualization. The Java applet directly communicate with the API to gain access to the pathway
graph from the database.

References
[1] M. Becker and I. Rojas. A graph layout algorithm for drawing metabolic pathways. Bioinformatics, 17:461–464, 2001.
[2] B. Breitkreutz, C. Stark, and M. Tyers. Osprey: a network
visualization system. Genome Biology, 4:R22, 2003.
[3] G. Di Battisa, P. Eades, I. Tamassia, and I. Tollis. Graph
Drawing: Algorithms for the visualization of graphs. Prentice Hall, 1999.
[4] U. Dogrusoz, E. Erson, E. Giral, E. Demir, O. Babur,
A. Cetintas, and R. Colak. Patikaweb:a web interface for
analyzing biological pathways through advanced querying
and visualization. Bioinformatics, 22:374–375, 2006.
[5] T. Dwyer and P. Eckersley. WILMASCOPE - a 3D graph visualization system in Graph Drawing Software, Mathemetics and Visualization. 2003.
[6] D. Endy and R. Brent. Modelling cellular behaviour. Nature,
409:391–395, 2001.
[7] M. Forster, A. Pick, M. Raitner, F. Schreiber, and F. Brandenburg. The system architecture of the biopath system. In
Silico Biology, 2(3):415426, 2002.
[8] J. Heer, S. Card, and J. Landay. prefuse:a toolkit for interactive information visualization. CHI2005 ,Oregon, USA,
2005.
[9] Z. Hu, J. Mellor, T. Yamada, D. Holloway, and D. C.
Visant: data-integrating visual framework for biological networks and modules.
Nucleic Acids Research,
33:doi:10.1093/nar/gki431, 2005.
[10] M. Kanehisa and S. Goto. Kegg: Kyoto encyclopedia of
genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Research, 28:27–30,
2000.
[11] H. Kitano. Computational systems biology. Nature,
420:206–210, 2002.

[12] T. Kraska and U. Roehm. Genea: Automated mapping of
ontologies into relational schema. submitted for publication,
2006.
[13] W. Longabaugh, E. Davidson, and B. H. Computational representation of developmental genetic regulatory networks.
Developmental Biology, 283:1–16, 2005.
[14] N. Luscombe, M. Babu, H. Yu, M. Snyder, S. Teichmann,
and G. M. Genomic analysis of regulatory network dynamics reveals large topological changes. Nature, 431:308–312,
2004.
[15] P. Saraiya, C. North, and K. Duca. Visualizaing biological
pathways: requirements analysis, systems evaluation and research agenda. Informationa Visualization, advanced online
publication:doi:10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500102, 2005.
[16] F. Schreiber. High quality visualization of biochemical pathways in biopath. In Silico Biology, 2(2):59–73, 2002.
[17] B. Schwikowski, T. Ideker, P. Shannon, A. Markiel,
O. Ozier, N. Baliga, J. Wang, D. Ramage, and N. Amin. A
software environment for integrated models of biomolecular
interaction networks. Genomoe Research, 13:2498–2504,
2003.
[18] K. Sugiyama, S. Tagawa, and M. Toda. Methods for visual understanding of hierarchical system structures. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 11(2):109–
125, 1981.
[19] C. Ware and G. Franck. Viewing a graph in a virtual reality display is three times as good as a 2-d diagram. IEEE
Conference on Visual Languages, 1994.
[20] Y. Yang, L. Engin, E. Wurtele, C. Cruz-Neira, and J. Dickerson. Integration of metabolic networks and gene expression
in virtual reality. Bioinformatics, 21:3645–3650, 2005.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

