Human-Focused Computer Vision Applications
Massimo Piccardi
Department of Computer Systems, Faculty of IT
University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
e-mail: massimo@it.uts.edu.au
Proposed abstract: Recent years have seen an increasing number of computer vision applications focusing on
humans as their objects of interest. Such applications include video surveillance, domotics, multimedia semantic
annotation and indexing, human-computer interfaces, affective computing, just to cite a few. What exactly are their
“objects of interest”? A broad range of human-related features: motion, gestures, actions, interactions, activities,
attitudes, behaviours, identity. This keynote will offer a survey of this field and present some current work from the
speaker and his collaborators in the areas of emotion recognition and people tracking within camera networks.
Biography
Dr Massimo Piccardi, PhD (Italian Ministry for the University and Scientific Research and University of
Bologna, Italy), is an associate professor with the Faculty of Information Technology, University of Technology,
Sydney (UTS). He has been active in research in the areas of computer vision, pattern recognition, image analysis
and processing and video processing for over fifteen years to date. He is the author of more than ninety scientific
papers on international journals and peer-reviewed conferences, including IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence and on Multimedia. He is been a reviewer for several IEEE Transactions and other
journals and a program committee member for various conferences including the IEEE Int. Conf. on Image
Processing and the IEEE Int. Conf. on Multimedia and Expo. He is the nominated conference chair for the IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal-Based Surveillance 2006 (AVSS 2006), the most important
scientific conference in this field.
He is the director of the UTS Computer Vision Research Group, an official research strength of the University of
Technology, Sydney (http://research.it.uts.edu.au/cvrg/). Massimo Piccardi has been the recipient and co-recipient of
several research grants. In particular, since he joined UTS in 2002, he has been the first chief investigator in an ARC
Discovery grant, an AusIndustry grant jointly with an industry partner, a UTS Research Excellence grant and a UTS
University Research Group grant, all for video surveillance projects. He is a Senior Member of the IEEE and a
member of the IEEE Computer Society and the International Association for Pattern Recognition.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

