2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Large Scale Network Analysis with Interactive Visualisation
Quang Vinh Nguyen1, Mao Lin Huang 2
School of Computing & Mathematics, University of Western Sydney
2
Faculty of Engineering & Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney
{vinh@scm.uws.edu.au, maolin@it.uts.edu.au}
1

These heterogeneous networks present big challenges on
how to discover reliable and significant patterns and
irregularities within them? How do we holistically make
sense of these discoveries and their network models?
How do we harness these data at different levels of
granularity in collective decision making processes? The
challenge - and the fundamental focus of this project resides in creating a fast and effective platform in which
analysts quickly analyse huge amount of data as well as
share their insights and knowledge.
Network analysis brings a lot of benefits in a wide
range of application domains, such as economics/finance
analysis [4], homeland defence [5], and knowledge
management, organisation development, social science,
health informatics (see [6]). For example, analysing a
terrorism network can help to understand the roles and
relational structures among terrorists, their organisations,
the associated events and other information that could
reveal the potential vulnerabilities and identify any
potential attack before it occurs. Another example is that
the social network analysis for large cooperate
organisations could identify the unofficial organisational
roles, such as central connector, boundary spanner,
information broker and peripheral specialists. The
analysis of social network in organisations can provide
business benefits including 1) identify and retention with
vital knowledge and connections, 2) improvement of
innovation, productivity and responsiveness, 3) lead to
better decisions about organisational changes and
establishment of key knowledge roles, and 4) insight into
challenges of knowledge transfer and integration
following restructuring, merges or acquisitions.
As a result, large networks visualization has recently
received a lot of attention of researchers in supporting
the visual analytics. There are a number of good
techniques that are quite capable of visualizing large
graphs of thousands to hundred thousands of nodes and
edges, named a few [8-11]. Research in how to
effectively integrating interactive visualisations with
sense-making sequence (see Figure 1) is still one of the
open topics in visual analytics.
The interactive visualisation helps the analyst to
gain knowledge of the data through our powerful human
visual perception, ideally driving the system toward

Abstract
This paper proposes a new interactive visualisation
for analysing large hierarchical structures and networks.
The technique combines of different graph layout
methods with a layout refinement process, an interactive
navigation mechanism and clustering algorithms. The
integration of these components makes it flexible in
dealing with a variety of graph and hierarchical
structures. Interactive exploration is enabled with chaincontext view. We aim to provide user with an effective
mechanism for understanding of the nature of various
networks. This could lead to the discovering and
revealing of the hidden structures and relationships
among elements as well as relationships associated with
the elements.
Keywords--- Networks, Information Visualisation,
Interaction, Visual Analytics.

1. Introduction
Our
knowledge-driven
technology-mediated
environments generate more than 5 exabytes (5x1018
bytes) of new information each year [1]. Much of this
information reflects the complex interconnected
processes and systems that operate in these environments
that span across ecological micro- and macro-systems to
interconnected financial markets. A network, such as a
social network, can be defined as the information
associated with and the relationships between actors
which are elements in the network, such as people,
groups, corporate organisations, business partners, and
others. Considering such systems in isolation is not
longer feasible. For the last decade, there has been a
rapidly increasing interest in modelling and
understanding such systems and processes through
network models [2]. Real world networks are often very
large with thousands or even millions of elements and
relationships. Examples of such networks range from
biological and ecological networks through to sociotechnological networks, such as telephone call graphs
and the underlying interaction graphs on the Internet [3].
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.42

467

Data Mining and Clustering – This process analyses
structures of networks and finds the clusters of similarity
and connection based on algorithms. At the current
progress of this project, we only use clustering to
discover similar structures in the networks. We use a
graph clustering method which can quickly discover the
community structures embedded in large graphs and
divide the graph into densely connected sub-graphs. The
graph clustering algorithm divides the graphs into
smaller and smaller sub-graphs based on the density of
connection within and between subgroups. Although this
process does not require a very fast algorithm, it should
be able to run on a workstation within a reasonable time
The computational cost of the clustering algorithm
should be controlled with the worst-case running time
O(n2) or faster on a sparse graph to ensure its capability
of handling hundreds thousands of items within a few
hours by using a ordinary personal computer.
This project used both fast graph clustering methods
[13, 14] which can quickly discover the community
structure embedded in large graphs and divide the graph
into densely connected sub-graphs. Algorithm in [13]
can also achieve a consistent partitioning result in which
a graph is divided into a set of clusters of the similar size
while algorithm in [14] can be used to discover
communities with various size. The clustering process
works independently with the visualisation so that the
finding can be updated as well as receiving feedback
from visualisation.

more focused and more adequate analytical techniques.
Visualisation should provide not only the simplified
abstract view of the entire network, but it also display in
detail information at a particular focus point. Dually, the
visualization should also allow analysts to interact and
explore to make further discovery of and insight into the
information; from which they can obtain a better
understanding of the data and structures. From the new
knowledge and discovery, the analysts can evaluate and
refine automated analysis as well as interactive
visualisation processes (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. The process sequence of Visual
Analytics based on sense-making loop
(Adapted from [12])
This paper presents an ongoing research work for
interactively visualising various large graphs and
networks. The visualisation is integrated at the sensemaking loop to enable the visual analytics of large data
sets.

2. The Architecture of Visualisation

Visualisation - the visualization interface allows users to
view, interact and choose different layout algorithms. A
combination of a number of layout algorithms is
employed to draw different clusters which aims to
optimize the geometrical space and so that a large
network with multiple clusters can be drawn at a normal
screen size. This interactive interface is able to not only
show the abstract view of the entire network with its
clustering property and relationships but also display the
detail view of any particular group, item and their
associate connections and properties.
During the navigation, we allow users to
interactively adjust views, and layouts of the network to
reach an optimized representation of the graph; from
which users can obtain the best understanding of the data
and structures they are currently viewing. The
visualization involves the real time human-computer
interaction, fast graph layout and navigation algorithms
for visual processing of hundred thousands of items
within minutes or seconds using a personal computer
with limited display space and computational power.
The final display is created through the view
navigation and graphical attributing. We use rich graphic
attributes to assist viewers to quickly identify the domain
specific properties associated with data items.

Figure 2. The architecture of Visualisation
The visualisation system includes three main
components including data conversion, data clustering
and data mining, and interactive visualization (see
Figure 2). The three components are briefly described as
below.
Collection and conversion – We collect data from a
variety of sources, such as email networks, protein
networks, citation networks, and others. This process is
responsible for converting data from different format into
uniform XML format for further analysis and
visualisation.

3. Graph Visualisation
We have utilised a number of layout algorithms to
produce the effective visualisation of large graphs with
468

several thousands of nodes and edges. At the current
stage, two layout algorithms are applied in our
implementation including an adapted algorithm
described in [15] and a circular drawing.

3.1. Layout algorithms
We apply an enclosure partitioning algorithm, which is
similar to the algorithm described in [15], to the drawing
of those non-leaf sub-graphs, while a modified Spring
Embedder algorithm [16] is applied to the drawing of
leaf sub-graphs. This is because the space utilisation and
the computational cost issues are crucial when displaying
large email networks with thousands or even hundred
thousands of nodes and edges in conjunction with the
limitation of screen pixels. On the other hand, those leaf
sub-structures contain only a small number of nodes so
that the space utilization issue becomes less important.
Therefore, the aesthetic niceness and flexibility issues
need to be more considered. The visualization also
displays a high-level node-link diagram to present the
overall clustering structure explicitly.
A view refinement process is then applied onto the
display to enhance the quality of views, such as the
aesthetical niceness and the clearity of cluster properties.
The first step is to use a modified Spring Embedder
algorithm to refine the layout. This enhances the
distribution of nodes based on their local layout and
inter-connection with other nodes from other clusters.
The second step is to reduce the overlapping among
nodes. This works by moving overlapped nodes slightly
in the vertical or horizontal directions.
Figure 3 shows an example of the visualization of
the entire Enron e-mail network which is the dataset
collected from the University of Southern California
(including 252,759 messages, 151 employees, 2,064,442
recipients with 500MB of text). Filtering technique has
been applied to simplify the overcrowded display. Figure
4 is an example of a substructure of a protein network
where (a) shows the original layout and (b) shows the
layout after the view refinement process. This figure
indicates that nodes are better distributed in (b) in terms
of their connectivity compared to (a). Figure 5 presents
the display of a network associated with a selected item
whose layout has been refined to reduce node
overlapping.
During the exploration, user can switch between
different layouts and vice versa. At this stage, we are
currently providing two layouts in which user can switch
between a typical layout and circular layout. Figure 6
shows the display of the same structure as shown in
Figure 4. This is an initial step for a further
enhancement. The future implementation aims to provide
users with an intelligent visualization that can produce
the most suitable displays by interactively providing
corresponding layouts and interactions based on the
nature of applications, data sets, analyst preference and
underline sense-making rules. The visualisation can be
adjusted via analyst’s feedbacks during the interaction.

Figure 3. An example of an entire email network
visualization of the company: Enron Copus.

(a)

(b)
Figure 4. An example of visualizing a
substructure of the protein network, where a)
the layout before the view refinement and b) the
layout after the view refinement

4. Interactive Exploration
There is no pure visualization technique that could assist
data retrieval without providing users with an associate
navigation mechanism in graphic user interface design.

469

In our visualisation, during the navigation user can

interactively adjust the views to reach an optimised

Figure 5. The visualization of a network with
reduced node overlaps

Figure 6. A circular display of the entire email
network collected from Enron Copus (same as
Figure 3).

representation of the graph; from which user can obtain
the best understanding of the data and its relational
structures he/she are currently interesting in.
We use an efficient interaction method called chaincontext view [18] for the navigation of large structures.
Instead of displaying a single or small number of context
views as in traditional approaches, we provide user with
the display of a progressive sequence of context views.
This approach aims to maintain all contextual
information during the navigation. The display of rich
context information produced in the exploration path
could greatly increase the accuracy of user decisions and
reduce the unsuccessful trips and unnecessary views
during visual exploration of large hierarchies. This also
allows user to trace each step of his/her interaction and
makes it easy to jump or return to any level of the
hierarchy that he/she has already visited. The latest
development is that we produced a fisheye interaction
technique, as an alternative approach, for users to browse
through the chain-context view. The user is now enabled
to enlarge the size of any context view in the chain
dynamically to see the detail. Fish-eye is applied to allow
a quick browse and enlarge to show the detail of any
focus views at any context level. A focus section is
defined at a current mouse pointer in which the position
and size of all context views in the chain are then
adjusted accordingly.
Figure 7 shows an example of the visualisation at a
particular stage of the exploration. The left-panel
displays the sequence of all context views in which the
current focus view is high-lighted for further analysis or
return back to that point. The right-panel displays the
focus sub-network associated with a person named “Jeff
Dasovich”.

properties of data, social relationships and the cluster
structure.
First, background colours were used to assist
viewers to quickly identify the hierarchical structure of
the clusters. In our prototype, the local regions of nodes
at different levels are painted with a same colour but at
different brightness (see Figures 3 and 4). This drawing
property aims to provide a pleased view while retaining
the clarity between sub-clusters.
Node and edge attributes are used to illustrate the
property of the elements and their connections. For
example, figure 7 shows a network associated with the
employee “Jeff Dasovich”. The edge thickness represents
the proportional strength of sending and receiving emails
between employees. The edges representing “sendemails” are painted with violet colour while the edges
representing “receive-emails” are painted with darkgreen colour. Arrows can be used to indicate the
direction of the connection when required.

6. Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented an ongoing technique for the
interactive visualization of large networks. Our technique
is quite capable of not only displaying the whole network
but also allowing users to navigate for further analysis of
the sub-networks associated with particular elements
from the network. The visual analysis would improve the
user understanding of networked data. We believe that
this technique will be a promising tool for visual network
analysis.
Next, we will improve our visualization system by
fully integrating the data mining algorithms into the
visualization so that the automated analysis can interact
with the visualization and vice versa. An intelligent
visualizations is a crucial for future development because
it can produce the most suitable display by interactively
providing corresponding layouts and interactions based
on the nature of applications, data sets, analyst
preference and underline sense-making rules. The

5. Attributed Visualisation
Rich graphical attributes are also employed to assist
viewers to quickly identify the domain specific

470

visualisation can also be adjusted via analyst’s feedbacks
during the interaction.

Figure 7. An example of the display at a particular stage during the visual exploration, and we can see
that the context-Chain is displayed
[8]

Auber D., “Tulip: a Huge Graph Visualization
Framework, Graph Drawing Software”, Mathematics
and Visualization, 2003, pp. 105-126.
[9] Harel D, Koren Y., “Graph Drawing by HighDimensional Embedding”, Journal of Graph Algorithms
and Applications, 2004, 8(2): 195-214.
[10] Walshaw C., “A Multilevel Algorithm for ForceDirected Graph Drawing”, Mathematics Research Report
00/IM/60, University of Greenwich, 2000.
[11] Abello J, van Ham F, Krishnan N., “ASK-GraphView: a
Large Scale Graph Visualization System”, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
2006, 12(5).
[12] Keim D. et al, “Visual Analytics: Definition,

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

Lyman P, Varian HR, “How Much Information?”
University
of
California
at
Berkeley.
http://www2.sims.berkeley.edu/research/projects/howmuch-info-2003/. (Accessed 20 Dec 2008)
Newman, M. Watts, D., Barabási A.-L. The Structure
and Dynamics of Networks, Princeton University Press,
2006.
Almaas, E. and Barabási A.-L., “The Architecture of
Complexity: From the WWW to Cellular Metabolism”,
In Proc. Dynamics of Complex Interconnected Systems:
Networks and Bioprocesses. NATO Sciences Series,
2006.
Malhotra, Y., “Enabling Knowledge Exchanges for EBusiness Communities”, Information Strategy: The
Executive's Journal, 2005, pp. 26-31.
Ressler, S., “Social Network Analysis as an Approach to
Combat Terrorism: Past, Present, and Future Research”,
Homeland Security Affairs, 2(2), 2006.
Patton, S., “Social Network Analysis Helps Maximize
Collective
Smarts”,
http://www.cio.com/article/print/6956., 2005 (Accessed
20 Dec 2008).
Shen, Z., Ma, K.L. and Eliassi-Rad, T., “Visual Analysis
of Large Heterogeneous Social Networks by Semantic
and Structural Abstraction”, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(6), 2006, pp.
1427-1439.

Process,
and
Challenges
Information
Visualization”. LNCS 4950, pp. 154–175, 2008.
[13] Huang M.L. and Nguyen Q.V., “A Fast Algorithm for
Balanced Graph Clustering”, in Proc. 11th Int’l. Conf. on
Information Visualisation (IV'07), IEEE, 2007, 46-52.
[14] Newman M.E.J., Girvan M., “Finding and Evaluating
Community Structure in Networks”, Physical Review E
2004 69:026113.
[15] Huang, M. L. and Nguyen, Q. V. "Large Graph
Visualization by Hierarchical Clustering", Journal of
Software, 19(8), 2008, pp. 1933-1946.
[16] Eades, P., “A heuristic for graph drawing”, Congressus
Numerantium, Vol 42, pp. 149-160, 1984.

471

[17] Heer, J. “Exploring Enron: Visual Data Mining of

E-mail”, http://jheer.org/enron/ (accessed 20 Dec
2008).
[18] Huang, M. L., Nguyen, Q. V., "Space-Filling Interaction
with Chain-Context View", IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization 2008 (InfoVis 2008) - Poster
Section, IEEE, Columbus, Ohio, October 2008.

472

