2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

A Study on the Visual Styles of Wayang Kulit Kelantan and Its Capturing Methods
Khor Kheng Kia

Yuen May Chan

Faculty of Arts, Media, Design & Animation,
Legenda Education Group, Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia.
khengkia@yahoo.com

Faculty of Creative Multimedia, Multimedia University,
Cyberjaya, Malaysia.
mcyuen@mmu.edu.my

Abstract— In the attempt to preserve and safeguard the
unique traditional Wayang Kulit (Shadow Play),
UNESCO has designated it as a Masterpiece of Oral and
Intangible Heritage of Humanity on 7th November 2003.
This paper reviews the critical situation of Wayang Kulit
Kelantan in Malaysia. The visual styles of Wayang Kulit
Kelantan was described into four major aspect, which
are the puppets, shadows, screen for shadow projection
(Kelir) and its light source. It also reviews the methods
and techniques used to capture the visual styles of
Wayang Kulit in animations, films, artworks, comics
and video documentation. This is followed by the study
of the use of modern technology including Computer
Graphics (CG) to capture the traditional Wayang Kulit
play.

Figure 1. Wayang Kulit Kelantan Performance.

It is clear that with the current situation and the level of
support in Malaysia, Wayang Kulit Kelantan is unlikely to
last long without some kind of strong official support [6].
Hence, there is an urgent need to preserve this art form from
dying out. Some researchers suggested that in order to
survive in the era of globalization, Wayang Kulit need a new
face, to be digitalized into the cyber world and to be watched
on the computer screen [7].
This paper describes the visual styles of Wayang Kulit
Kelantan focusing on the four major aspects, which are the
puppets, shadows, screen for shadow projection (Kelir) and
its light source. In order to understand the extent of
capturing methods and techniques that is useful and effective
in preserving the Wayang Kulit Kelantan visual style, this
paper further reviews methods and attempts of researchers
and designers in capturing and re-creating the shadow play
or silhouette techniques in visual arts.

Keywords-wayang kuliy, shadow play, capturing technique,
visual style, Wayang Kulit Kelantan

I.

INTRODUCTION

This study focused on Wayang Kulit Kelantan, one of the
four main forms of Wayang Kulit in Malaysia. Wayang Kulit
Kelantan is the pre-eminent form of shadow puppet theatre
in Malaysia and the stylistic differences seem to be
particularly evident [1]. Internal evidence suggests that the
Wayang Kulit is possibly introduced into Kelantan from
Hindu-ised Java during 1293 - 1520 [2]. In the beginning,
the genres, shapes of the figures, puppets remained its
originality and influences but with the funny agenda “comic relief” which was incorporated together with the
development of this cultural performance; Wayang Kulit
Kelantan today distinctively reflects the Malaysian culture
from its linguistic and the shown elements [3].
Wayang Kulit Kelantan in Malaysia is threatened with
imminent extinction. It was one time fairly widespread and
popular in Kelantan which according to Amin Sweeney’s
research in the late 1960’s confirmed the existence of more
than 300 Dalangs (shadow puppeteer and narrator) [4].
However, the number decreased to 37 in 1982 and 11 in
1999 [5]. One of the declination factors of this traditional
culture is the process of modernization that has virtually
brought cinemas and videotape recorders to villages [1]. The
banning of Wayang Kulit performances (Fig.1) in Kelantan
for its un-Islamic elements by Parti SeIslam Malaysia (PAS)
in 1991 further worsened the situation.
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.37

II.

THE VISUAL STYLES OF WAYANG KULIT KELANTAN

Firstly, the author started the descriptive studies on the
visual styles of Wayang Kulit Kelantan (as shown in Fig. 2)
by discussing on the four major elements, which are its
puppets, shadows, Kelir (screen) and light source.

423

Figure 2. The visual of Wayang Kulit Kelantan.
Figure 3. Characters in Wayang Kulit Kelantan (from Left: Rawana, Siti
Dewi & Seri Rama).

A. The Puppets
A basic Wayang Kulit Kelantan set consists of 65 - 120
puppets representing the principal characters from the
Ramayana [8]. The puppets are carved out of cleaned and
dried cow skin. They are different in size; the shorter ones
stand about six to nine inches in height while taller one can
be up to 36 inches high. Typically, the figure of noble or
refine characters such as heroes and heroines (Seri Rama,
Laksamana, Siti Dewi, Sirat Maharaja etc.) are slim and tall
whereas those of the rougher or coarser characters such as
the villain Rawana, Indrajit and the ogre characters are large
and bulky.
Colour symbolism is used within the puppet design,
especially in the case of noble characters: - Seri Rama is
always painted in green; Laksamana pink or orange; Sirat
Maharaja is yellow while Hanuman is white. These colours
are derived from Hindu religious symbolism [9]. The
principal noble characters are carved so that they stand upon
a boat-or-dragon-shaped “vehicle”.
The ogres are usually painted with red faces based on a
belief derived from the Holy Quran, that giants or ogres
(jinn) have their origins in fire [9]. Apart from their size or
bulk, refined or coarse characters are identifiable from the
shapes and sizes of their nose and mouth, eye, the length of
their fingernails and their overall stances. Both feet of each
character point in the same direction. Most Wayang Kulit
Kelantan characters have a single articulated arm especially
for the main figures such as Seri Rama, Laksamana, Siti
Dewi and Sirat Maharaja (Fig. 3). However, comic
characters such as Pak Dogol and Wak Long have both
articulated arms, and some have movable legs, jaws and
eyebrows.

B. The Shadow
The puppets of Wayang Kulit Kelantan today are
distinctively different from the puppets in the late 19th
century. Skeat’s 149 Dalang Abas’ puppets which are
currently kept in the University of Cambridge (collected
between 1891 and 1900) were simpler in design and casted
only black shadows on the Kelir due to the thick cow skin
used [10]. Nowadays, the Wayang Kulit Kelantan puppets
are carved out of thinner cow skins and are painted with
batik colours thus able to cast colourful shadows on screen
[9]. These colourful shadows are only noticeable in Wayang
Kulit Kelantan, Wayang Kulit Gedek and Chinese shadow
play.
Distinctive shadow distortions is visible (refer to Fig.4)
in many scenes especially during the Dalang Muda Episode
and in fighting scenes. This is not much seen in other
Wayang Kulit performances.

Figure 4. The Shadow Distortion of Wayang Kulit Kelantan.

C. The Kelir
The Dalang projects the shadow of his puppets on the
Kelir (Screen) during a performance. This Kelir is mounted
on a wooden or metal frame in such a manner that it tilts
inwards slightly, facing downwards to the Dalang. The Kelir
is usually completed with a decorated border, tassels or other
decorative features. According to the interview with Dalang
Pak Nasir in ASWARA on January 2009, the Kelir is a
symbol for the World. It should only be touched by pressing
the puppets towards it during fighting scenes in order to
show the fighting effects and remain flat and calm
throughout other scenes with mild occasional touches. The

424

similar visual effect is not common with other Wayang Kulit
forms.

hers were animated frame by frame, not manipulated in live
action).

D. The Light Source
The light source is a lamp suspended from the top
roughly at the centre of screen reaching to about the height
of the Dalang’s face when he is doing his performance in his
cross-legged sitting position. In the past oil or paraffin lamps
were used, but today these are replaced by electric bulbs [2].
The lamp was hold in position by a decorative wooden frame
which was hanged by a string attached to the top of the
border frame of the Kelir. The wooden frame also acted as a
shield to prevent the direct glare and heat of the lamp falling
onto the Dalang’s face. Veteran observers of the shadow
play think that the effect created by the oil lamp was
aesthetically superior [2]. It not only gives the softer edged
shadows to the Kelir but its gentle movements on the Kelir in
concert with the flicker of the flame provided an altogether
more pleasing appearance. The Dalang Pak Nasir said during
an interview with the author that the light source should only
be moved purposely when there are no movements of the
actual puppets during the performance, where some of the
puppets are only placed slanting on the Kelir. The movement
of light source will give an impression of very diminutive
movements of the characters which was placed on the Kelir
from the audiences’ view. This visual style is also not seen in
other Wayang Kulit forms.
III.

Figure 5. Snapshots from “The Adventure of Prince Achmed”, image
courtesy of Comenius-Film GmbH.

In France, animation director Michael Ocelot adapted the
Wayang Kulit visual style into the creation of “Princes et
Princesses”. The series was produced across two years
starting in 1987, with animation done at La Fabrique in
Saint-Laurent-le-Minier during the summer and postproduction done in Paris during winters. It was premiered at
animation festivals in 1989, receiving critical acclaim and
awards for best anthology series at Annecy and best
children's series at Ottawa [12].
Anthony Lucas in Australia produced his Award-winning
animation short entitled “The Mysterious Geographic
Explorations of Jasper Morello” in 2005 which combined the
use of shadow puppets, object animation and computer
graphics. The 2-D silhouette characters were animated in a
malevolent gothic 3-D rendered world. It is an interpretation
of the multiple genres that make up the steampunk genre,
combining the old with the new [14].
Chris Do with his team in Blind Inc, a multi-disciplinary
motion graphics design studio located in Santa Monica and
New York city created a video entitled “Black and White”
for Danish post-punk duo Sune Rose Wagner and Sharin
Foo, better known as The Raveonettes using the visual styles
of Wayang Kulit in 2008 [15]. The video showed an
innovation mix of shadow puppetry and animation, as twodimensional characters come alive in a colourless world. A
majority of the elements used in the video were shot incamera, and puppeteers’ hands and rigging are often left in
the shots.
Grabarz and partner Werbeagentur, an advertising agency
in Hamburg, Germany produced their Gold winning TV spot
of International Advertising Awards 2007 for the
Volkswagen Phaeton with the visual styles of Wayang Kulit
[16]. This commercial, filmed in black and white used
silhouettes of hands to create an otherworldly universe of
swans, blooming plants and other ethereal creatures. The
montage clears back to a simple shadow of hands to reveal
the question “Isn’t It Beautiful What Hands Can Do?” The
hands then close in on the phrase and open up to reveal the
Volkswagen Phaeton car and the text “Phaeton. Hand Made
Perfection.”
Themes of Wayang Kulit had been explored several
times by the Indonesia film director D.Djajakusuma. Two of
his films are Lahirnya Gatutkaca (The Birth of Gatotkaca,
1960) and Bimo Kroda (The Anger of Bima, 1967). Some
Indonesia animators have presented Wayang characters; for
example, Sepasang Tanduk (A pair of horns, 1976) by Gotot
Prakosa and Burisrawa (1983) by Nurliswandi Piliang.
Bambang Gunawan produced an animated series based on
the characters and story in Wayang Kulit themes called

THE CAPTURING OF THE VISUAL STYLES OF WAYANG
KULIT

Many attempts to capture and reproduce the visual styles
of Wayang Kulit are in the forms of animations and films,
artworks and comics of which most gained critical
acclamations. Researchers also attempted to capture the
Wayang Kulit visual style using video documentations and
modern computer technologies.
A. The Capturing of the Visual Styles of Wayang Kulit in
Animations & Films
During Festival Film Animation Indonesia 2003 at
Jakarta, Gotot Prakosa, Indonesia's leading experimental
short filmmaker claimed that some World-class experts in
animation admitted that the culture of animation was inspired
by Wayang Kulit. Furthermore, Wayang Kulit can be seen as
the origin of animation and Walt Disney learnt from Wayang
Kulit before he made animation [11]. He also gave example
of Lotte Reineger’s animation which showed distinctive
Wayang Kulit influences from Indonesian and Chinese
Wayang Kulit.
Back in the year 1926, Lotte Reiniger, a German
animator created the first feature film called “The
Adventures of Prince Achmed” using the visual styles of
Wayang Kulit as shown in Fig. 5. It was made using the
silhouette technique she invented. Reiniger manipulated cutouts made from cardboard and thin sheets of lead under the
camera to create an Arabian Nights world of delicate, filigree
backgrounds and intricately jointed figures. The technique
she used for the camera is similar to Wayang Kulit (though

425

Anoman episode and it won first prize in the 2004 Indonesia
Animation Film Festival. However, none of Indonesian
animators has yet made a complete Wayang scenario into an
animated film [13].
According to Prof. John A. Lent (2009) who is a
Professor of Communications in Temple University,
Philadelphia and the author of Animation in Asia and the
Pacific, there is very limited animation in Asia that shows
the visual styles of Wayang Kulit. In 2008, the first Wayang
Kulit Kelantan animation entitled “Jala Emas Jala Perak”
was produced by ArtMedia Production in Kota Bharu,
Malaysia. However it only captured the narration (voice
over) recorded from Dalang Saupi and the story which was
originated from Ramayana epic in Wayang Kulit Kelantan.
The overall animation lacked the visual styles of Wayang
Kulit.

digital imaging, music, sound art, video, remote webstreaming, and installation during his residency at Western
Front, November 29, 2006. According to the artist, the idea
of the “contemporary digital Wayang” refers to the merging
of traditional forms with new paradigms – both sociopolitical and technological.
His “digital Wayang”
reinterprets the traditional form of Wayang Kulit into an
interactive digital environment within a globalized, post-9/11
social context [19].
According to Marcel Bonneff, Wayang Comics are the
original types of comic of Indonesia [13]. Ardisoma was the
first modern artist who made Wayang Purwa into comic
series of 22 volumes each of 42 pages. In 1955-1960, R.A.
Kosasih made Ramayana and Mahabrata comics. Before this,
there was an artist, Indrii S. who made a humorous series of
comic based on the clown characters in Wayang Kulit Purwa
– Petruk, Gareng and Bagong.

B. The Capturing of the Visual Styles of Wayang Kulit in
Artworks & Comics
In contrary to local animation, many attempts have been
done by modern artists in Malaysia on the use of the visual
styles of Wayang Kulit. Nik Zainal Abidin Salleh (19311993) was amongst the first modern local artist who drew
inspiration from the Wayang Kulit tradition [17]. As shown
in Fig. 6, he utilized the highly stylized shadow puppets and
rearranged colourful and dramatic forms within a flattened
pictorial format that draws parallels with the highly
cultivated South East Asian tradition and art form in the
context of modern artistic creativity. His efforts to draw
motifs and themes directly from Wayang Kulit Kelantan
resulted in a highly distinctive approach toward creativity
which he maintained throughout his life.

C. The Video Capturing of Wayang Kulit Kelantan Shows
Normally the Wayang Kulit Kelantan shows were
recorded by using video cameras. This method can capture
all of its visual styles which comprised of shadow shades,
distortions, colours, movement, textures, flipping and
overlapping of the puppets. One of the examples of this
video capture is the Wayang Kulit Siam documentary movie
produced by Ghulam in 1999.
However, some might be interested in watching the
Wayang Kulit Kelantan shows in different angles and views;
especially in the back stage where one can see the Dalang
showing off his skills in moving the puppets and the
musicians playing the traditional music instruments. Hence,
in Wayang Kulit Kelantan DVD series (Dewi Siti Diculik,
Kosi & Serawi and Dewek) published by ASWARA in 2002,
some of the scenes show only the backstage scenario and
some of the screen was split into half where the top portion
of the screen shows the backstage scenario and bottom
portion shows the Wayang Kulit show (Fig.7).

Figure 7. Screenshots of “Dewi Siti Diculik”, image courtesy of
ASWARA.

It is very difficult to amend the content of the video since
it was recorded in live-action. Thus, different methods were
explored and invented by artists and animators to simulate
and capture the Wayang Kulit visual styles.

Figure 6. Nik Zainal Abidin’s Kelantanese Shadow Puppet (1959).

Among the other artworks that utilized the Wayang Kulit
visual elements are Yusoff Haji Abdullah (1926-2006)’s
“Wayang Kulit (1960)”, Romli Bin Mahmud’s “Akhirnya ke
Kamar Jua II (1986)”, Termizie Mukhtar’s “Wak Long
Menjadi Raja” and Hasnul Jamal Saidun’s “Borrower of
Lights” in 2003 [18].
A foremost Indonesia contemporary artist – Heri Dono
(1960) had developed a contemporary digital Wayang using

D. The Capturing of Wayang Kulit with Modern
Technology
Some attempts have been done on the use of modern
technology to capture the Wayang Kulit play. In China,
researchers in Fudan University have digitalized the
traditional Chinese Shadow Play by creating computer
models and developing a rendering technique based on the

426

photon method (2003). Shu-Wei Hsu and Tsai-Yen Li from
National Chengchi University presented their Motion
Planning Techniques to generate the secondary motions in
shadow play animations in ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 (refer to
Fig.8). Suzung Kim from Korea National University of Arts
created interactive puppet theatre that makes users control
digital puppet on the screen using their own hands (2001).

shadow distortions amplified by the movement of the light
source and the touching of the Kelir.
It is found that the visual styles of Wayang Kulit have
been an inspiration to artists, animators and film makers
alike of which the concept of shadow play and silhouette
techniques are infused into many aspects of the visual arts.
Though many efforts have been done to capture and
incorporate these unique visual styles using both the
traditional and modern methods, there is very limited attempt
on the capturing and reproduction of the original visual style
of the Wayang Kulit Kelantan. Video capturing, virtual
wayang and other motion capture techniques were able to
capture the movement of the puppets but did not focus on the
capturing of the visual styles.
According to the statements made by the local
researchers (Ghulam and Dorothy) and Dalangs (Pak Nasir
and Kamrul) during the interview sessions with the author,
preservation of the Wayang Kulit Kelantan is focused more
on the performance music rather than the visual styles of the
art itself. Should the Wayang Kulit Kelantan face extinction
as forecasted by the researchers, our future generations will
only be able to see this traditional art form from videos and
other documentaries.
With hope for the future, designers are encouraged to
incorporate Wayang Kulit Kelantan visuals style into their
design to preserve this art form and researchers seek methods
and techniques to enhance the capturing of this endangered
art form.

Figure 8. Examples of secondary motions generated by the system created
by Shu-Wei Hsu and Tsai-Yen Li, 2005.

In 1996, under Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, a research
project known as ‘Wayang Virtual’ was established as an
experimental version of the traditional Wayang Kulit from
the technological perspectives. The ‘virtual’ version of the
traditional puppet or ‘shadow’ are combined together with a
3D animated figure and controlled by the Dalang using a
mouse on a SGI machine where the visuals were projected
onto a white screen. This project has successfully combined
arts and multimedia technology. It was presented to the
public at the National Art Gallery, Kuala Lumpur in 1997.
During the “Of Shadows and Images” art exhibition at
the Malmo Konstmuseum in Sweden 2003, a multimedia
experiment entitled “Borrower of Light” which was
undertaken by University Sains Malaysia, with Hasnul Jamal
Saidon at the helm incorporated new edge cyberpunk,
science fiction with Malay tradition- Wayang Kulit
Kelantan.
Tan, Abdullah Zawawi and Mohd. Azam described a
method of modelling a Wayang Kulit puppet using
sophisticated computer graphics techniques available in
OpenGL in order to allow interactive play in real-time
environment as well as producing realistic Wayang Kulit
animation. It proposed a novel real-time method that allows
interactive play of virtual Wayang Kulit using texture
mapping and blending techniques. Special effects such as
lighting and blurring effects for virtual Wayang Kulit
environment were also developed [20].
IV.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge and thank Professor
Ghulam Sarwar-Yousof, Professor John A. Lent, Mdm.
Duratul Ain Dorothy Jonathan Linggang (Dorothy), En. Che
Mohd. Nasir Yussof (Pak Nasir) and En. Mohd. Kamrulbahri
Hussin (Kamrul) for accepting interviews between
December 2008 and March 2009 which have been used in
the preparation of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1]

Patricia Matusky. Malaysian Shadow Play and Music- Continuity of
an Oral Tradition. The Asian Centre. 1997
[2] Ghulam-Sarwar Yousof. The Malay Shadow Play. The Asian Centre.
1997
[3] Wayang Kulit. Ministry of Culture, Arts and Tourism, Malaysia.
2003
[4] Malay Shadow Puppets. Amin Sweeney. The Trustees of the British
Museum. 1972
[5] DBP Malaysia 2009 url: http://dbp.gov.my/lamandbp/main.php?
Content=articles&ArticleID=1400
[6] Ghulam-Sarwar Yousof. The Malay Shadow Play as a Continuing,
Changing Tradition, Dimensions of Shadow Play in Malay
Civilization. UiTM, Malaysia. 2006
[7] Mohd Ghouse Nasaruddin. Wayang Kulit Dalam Era Globalisasi,
Wayang Dalam Bayang. USM, Malaysia, 2001
[8] Ghulam-Sarwar Yousof, Syed Ahmad Jamal. The Encyclopedia of
Malaysia- Crafts and the Visual Arts. Archipelago, Singapore. 2007
[9] Ghulam-Sarwar Yousof. Panggung Inu- Essays on Traditional Malay
Theatre. National University of Singapore. 2004
[10] Mohamed Najib Ahmad Dawa. Susur Masa. National Art Gallery
Malaysia BSLN. 2008

CONCLUSION

From this study, the visual styles of Wayang Kulit
Kelantan are identified in term of puppets design, lighting
effect and shadow projection. The puppets of Wayang Kulit
Kelantan have Hinduism and Islamic influence on the colour
design. Puppets of refined characters are tall and slim with
more refine features as compared to the coarser characters
which are large and bulky. The puppets are designed mainly
with limited movement of one articulated arm, except for
comic characters that have two articulated arms, some with
moveable legs, jaw and eyebrow. Wayang Kulit Kelantan
puppets not only cast colourful shadows but also produce

427

[11] Compass
2009.
url:
http://www2.kompas.com/kompascetak/0311/09/seni/677872.htm
[12] Wikipedia2009 url http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Princes_et_princesses
[13] The Development of Wayang Indonesia as a Humanistic Cultural
Heritage (Catalogue). Indonesian Wayang National Secretariat SENA
WANGI. 2004
[14] Gothia Gazette 2009 url: http://www.jaspermorello.com/gazette/
[15] Blind 2009 url: http://www.blind.com/work/music-video/gap-soundof-color-bw/
[16] Design Taxi 2009 url: http://designtaxi.com/news.jsp

?id=9803&monthview=1&month=9&year=2003
[17] T.K. Sabapathy. Vision and Idea- Relooking Modern Malaysian Art.
National Art Gallery (BSLN). 1994
[18] Hireen Naziree. Of shadows and images. National Art Gallery
Malaysia (BSLN). 2003
[19] Western Font 2009 url: http://front.bc.ca/mediaarts/events/3124
[20] Tan Kian Lam, Abdullah Zawawi bin Haji Talib and Mohd. Azam
Osman. Real-Time Simulation and Interactive Animation of Shadow
Play Puppets using OpenGL. 2008

428

