Architectural Illustration: The Advancement of Light, Shade,
and Shadows Knowledge with 3D Digital Technology
Clark A. Cory, Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Graphics
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
E-mail: cacory@tech.purdue.edu
provided the student was creative, artistic, and a
strong work ethic.
Instead of opting to replicate traditional 2D
methods and techniques via digital means, faculty
within the Department opted to create a
technologically progressive method of incorporating
traditional content with emerging 3D modeling,
lighting, and rendering techniques. This became
immediately problematic due to the highly differing
techniques and knowledge base required.

Abstract
The transition from traditional graphics into
computer graphics over the past decade has brought
about a multitude of changes that graphics educators
and other graphics professionals have had to address
and incorporate. The ever evolving integration of
Computer Aided Design (CAD) in architecture and
engineering have revolutionized the design and
documentation
process.
In
the
graphic
communication area, changes @om layout and design
to desk-top publishing and interactive ‘new media’
design f o r CD-ROM and Web distribution are but a
few of the changes graphic educators have to keep up
with. One problem with new technology is computer
graphics encompasses several components and
areas, and some of these areas are not able to
progress into technology as quickly as others. This
paper will give an overview of the Shades, Shadows,
and Perspective course at Purdue University and
how it has evolved into an integrated 2 0 and 3 0
Digital Lighting and Rendering illustration course.

2. Traditional Course
The traditional course was designed with the
concept that each student would generate several
traditionally created projects in a laboratory setting.
The Shades, Shadows, and Perspective course would
start with projects with pencil illustrations in the
development of perspective and shadow knowledge
for the student. The next illustrations continued in
the pencil domain and included the exterior
perspective outline of an architectural structure.
Using the pencil perspective outline of the structure,
the student would then progress to an acrylic
painting. The next project in the course was to
develop an interior marker and colored pencil
rendering of an interior illustration. The course
ended with a traditional pen and ink rendering of the
exterior perspective of a house or commercial
building. All during the creation of each project, the
instructor would introduce and instruct the students
on various types of media to use and which color
combinations will produce the best values in light,
shade and shadowed surfaces.
A problem that existed with the course was that
students really needed inherent artistic ability in order
to effectively create the illustrations presented to
them as projects. There was only one project within
the course, which required little more than
mechanical ability and knowledge of the construction
process to generate a perspective drawing.

1. Introduction
The Department of Computer Graphics Department
at Purdue University has historically required every
student to enroll in a traditional Shade, Shadows, and
Perspective course, otherwise known as Architectural
Illustration. The course was designed to introduce
students to theories in light, shade and shadows by
applying components and concepts through
traditional media (pencil, marker, pen and ink,
watercolor, and acrylic paint) projects [I]. It was
also designed to provide a thorough coverage of
perspective drawing systems by instructing the
theories and procedures for creating perspective
illustrations.
With a thorough knowledge of
perspectives, various media techniques, and the
resulting effects of light on individual surfaces, the
individual could create dazzling illustrations-

0-7695-0743-3100
$10.000 2000 IEEE

461

surfaces, it was difficult to make practical computer
graphic changes. In fact, it was deemed more time
consuming to create architectural illustrations on the
computer. Therefore, the shades, shadows and
perspective course did not see fit to convert to
computer-generated illustrations.
With every area of the department increasingly
involved with computer graphics, instruction in
architectural illustration needed to develop a strategy.
The architectural illustration course went through a
several changes. The first of the changes was to
create perspective illustrations digitally.
These
perspectives were generated in a traditional
perspective construction process using any one of
several CAD programs. Generating the traditionally
constructed perspectives provided students the ability
to create perspectives without the troublesome set-up
and drafting equipment. One of the major reasons for
the traditional 2D construction of perspectives in a
CAD program was 3D modeling of architectural
structures to create a perspective was not yet
accepted as efficient use of time.
The next major transformation was the creation of
exterior illustrations digitally instead of the acrylic
paintings. This task seemed to be more of a
challenge than the creation of the perspectives in
CAD packages. Architectural illustrations had always
been created in a traditional manner and became
more of an art piece than a commodity. The transition
from the art form to digitally created illustrations
from 3D digital models generated a number of
complaints, from of all people - the students. It
seemed that the students actually looked forward to
the traditional Shades, Shadows and Perspective
course. Some of the reasons for the anticipation were
a chance to leam how to paint, use markers, or apply
ink. The overwhelming reason was to have a chance
to get away from the computer and create
illustrations by hand. Eventually, the logic behind
this argument began to fade. Even though the
students were willing and wanted to construct the
manual illustrations, new students in the program
tended to be increasingly technically oriented and
decreasingly artistically oriented. As a result, the
quality of manual work produced by students began
to decline steadily. It was time to completely change
the course into a digital course. The acrylic paintings
were finally retired and the color architectural
illustrations were generated using raster-imaging
software. Examples of traditional acrylic painting as
well as pen and ink architectural illustrations are
shown in figures 1 and 2.

Unfortunately, this project did not account for a large
portion of credit. The largest portion of each
student's grade was contained within the acrylic
painting, the interior marker illustration and the pen
& ink illustration. This was problematic for many
students because some would excel in the acrylic
rendering, while others would be more effective in
marker or pen & ink illustration. It was incredibly
hard for students to master all areas of illustration in
this course sufficiently for commercial work.
However, students would still come away with a
complete understanding of how light affects surfaces
and how to illustrate those planes of a structure in at
least a minimum of one medium.
It was not only the knowledge and ability to apply
different mediums as well as lighting values that the
students were acquiring, but they were also getting a
sense of what should and should not be included in
the illustration, or simply- composition.
Each
illustration would bring an entire laboratory class
designated to structure, layout and composition. The
instructor would indicate key components of the
illustration, items that could be hidden, and most
important, what the viewer should be focusing on
while looking at the illustration. Each student would
be required to provide a freehand sketch of the final
illustration even before one rendered line was
created. This was to provide students with a guide to
creating the final illustration, and it provided the
instructor the ability to ask students important
question over what was the focus for their
illustration. The underlying goal was to instruct
students on the focus and composition of their
illustrations. Due to time and the nature of the
media, the composition was briefly discussed and
critiqued but not really emphasized or broken down
into key elements. As a result of these limitations,
focus and composition were not considered to be of
major importance by students.
All areas of this course were developed from the
concepts in which students would leam about light
values while applying traditional media to their
projects. With the introduction of the computer into
the graphics industry, several areas within the
Department of Computer Graphics, (formerly
Technical Graphics), adopted the computer as the
sole instrument for creating their illustrations. These
areas had several good reasons for change. The
software adopted was just as quick as conventional
drafting, revisions were much easier, and pictorial
technical illustrations were easier to create. In these
cases the computer graphic industry was
accommodating the needs of the manufacturing
graphics area. As for the traditional applications and
the knowledge of shades, shadows, and lighted

462

3. Digital Course -Embracing 3D
The development of the Digital Lighting and
Rendering course was structured around the use of
three-dimensional models. The implementation and
utilization of models, especially architectural, had
become significantly easier and more efficient to
construct and therefore essential to use in the new
course [2]. With 3D models being utilized in
interactive 3D computer programs, the course was
now free to take an analytical focused look at the
fundamentals of lighting, position, intensity, and
composition within the scene.
Principles of
perspective could now begin to blend with cameras,
lens, parallax, and other vision related mechanics [3].
According to Meador (1999):

-

Figure 1. Acrylic Paint Illus. Traditional

This course would merge art and technology
with knowledge of lighting design and architectural
illustration as logical by-products. Though not a
course purely in art, to ignore lighting design and
composition would not only isolate the students
from a discipline that is fundamental to creation of
almost any imagery, but would also make the
instruction obsolete within the next life cycle of the
current software. [4]

-

Figure 2. Pen & Ink Illustration Traditional
The digital illustrations of the architectural
perspectives were initially accomplished in
Photoshop. The vector perspectives were transferred
into Photoshop, placed on an outline layer, and
rendered on multiple layers according to material
type. The students were given information about
construction materials, such as brick, vinyl siding,
stucco, shingles, window types, doors, and
proportional sizes to complete the illustrations. They
were also given procedures for creating the materials
as graphic images in Photoshop to apply to the
perspective. The entire rendering of the structure was
not a problem for the students. The casting of
shadows was the biggest hurdle the students
encountered.
They did not understand the
relationship between the shades & shadows
worksheets they were working on and how to cast the
shadows in the illustration. It was clear after two
semesters that although Photoshop materials were
highly useful, student knowledge and ability to create
shade and shadow correctly on 2D digital illustrations
was very ineffective. Students were still failing to
comprehend and correctly visualize the fundamental
three-dimensional relationships between building
structures, sunlight, shade and shadow. It was time
for a truly monumental change for the course.

This parallels Watson’s (1990) statement that
“Technology is an important tool, and design is the
creative use of that tool, but the progress of the
artistic mastery of light as a design element has
sometimes been almost lost in the welter of
developing technology and craft skills” [SI. It was
the goal of the course to keep some of the creative
skills in the design process while utilizing a different
means to achieve a final illustration.
Initial topics in the revised course deal With camera
position and composition. Most students have a good
background in technology when they enroll in the
Digital Lighting and Rendering course, but are
lacking in modeling composition and placement
knowledge. In the first 4 weeks of class, the students
are exposed to every aspect of imagery composition
as well as components and placement of cameras
within a scene. For most, they have not been exposed
to placing a camera in a scene, but the placement of
the camera is quickly related to the station point in
2D illustrations and most students grasp the concept
without trouble.

463

would again be reduced to just computer rendered
flat illustrations.
From a lighting terminology standpoint, one of the
issues that students had to overcome was the
inconsistency that exists in the vocabulary and
methodologies within lighting design literature as
well as literature that pertain to the composition of
still motion-based imagery.
The course was
structured such that students can compare the
different methodologies and eventually create their
own method. Another complication was variation in
the implementations of lighting and rendering
technologies in 3D software rendering applications.
For every lightning and rendering three-dimensional
(3D) program used, there were just as many
commands and terms defined for the same basic type
of light or rendering algorithm used to give that piece
of software a unique rendering look. It is essential to
introduce the student to as many of the differences as
possible to give them an understanding of the entire
computer graphics process instead of only a onemethod approach. Introducing the students to as
many methods, software programs and terminologies
as possible will better prepare them for their
professional career by allowing them to adapt more
quickly to whatever the industry supplies them.
Toward the end of the course, the students are
required to illustrate one interior scene and one
exterior architectural structure or two interior scenes.
One of the interior scenes is a close-up type scene
and the other interior is an interior of an entire room.
The main goal of this project parallels Smith and
Bertolone’s opinion that there is a need to generate an
understanding of the observer’s perspective of
objects, materials and lighting within the scene [6].
The closer the station point, the more detailed the
illustration. The students are given several scenes to
select from, then after selecting one, create a camera,
apply lights, then create and apply materials to
produce a digital illustration. Figures 3 and 4 show
two examples of exterior and interior architectural
illustrations composed and rendered by students from
3D models.

After the introduction of cameras and composition,
the course discusses lighting design and color. Most
students in the traditional curriculum were only
accustomed to one light source within a scene.
Watson (1990) states “ A thorough understanding of
the aesthetic aspects of lighting is the first stage of
learning about how to light rather than first
understanding the technology and the craft.“ Dealing
with the physics of light in the course introduces the
students to more than just illumination of the objects.
“Learning how to plan the use of light in any field
whether in computer graphics, theatre, film, or
architecture involves the understanding of the
principles of light, designing with light, and the
technology used to employ the light.” (Meador 1999)
Consistent with this point, in depth discussions of
how light rays are affected by changes in media, such
as air, water or glass were included. Additionally,
color properties of light in the mixing of different
colors of lights on objects in a scene become
important. Finally, how these properties work
together to affect all objects in the scene allows
student’s to achieve an increasingly higher level of
understanding and photo-realism in their illustrations.
Another area the course deals with, in conjunction
with lighting, is material creation and application to
objects within the 3D scene. During the lighting
components of the course, the students are introduced
to typical architectural materials. How to create
realistic materials, how to apply the material to
objects within the 3D scene, and how to scale the
materials are just a few of the questions answered
during this section. To achieve the most realistic
illustrations, the student must have an understanding
of material creation, scale, and texture. This was a
valuable lesson learned from our previous
developmental efforts in teaching 2D digital
illustration. Several material examples are brought in
and discussed while students are instructed to look
critically at their surroundings, interior and exterior,
for inspiration in while creating materials for their
illustrations. The introduction and use of texture
mapping within the 3D programs allows the students
the ability to generate the most realistic materials
within the scene by mapping their 2D material
images onto 3D surfaces in the scene. Without the
experience of applying various types of material
images to a model in a scene through diffuse, bump,
reflection or refraction maps; digital illustrations

464

taken for granted in the traditional course are now
driving course content.
It is evident now that the focus of the original
course was more on artistic ability of the student than
interactively understanding the components behind
the illustrations created. Once the students were
introduced and understood the merging of art,
lighting, and rendering with 3D technology, most
were able to produce amazing illustrations. That was
the intended goal, but the course is extremely handson and intense. There is virtually no way to be a
passive by-stander in the new course. Digital
Lighting and Illustration within the Department of
Computer Graphics at Purdue University has
developed into an art, light, color, physics, and
technological course- all delivered in one semester.
To get all components delivered successfully, the
course has focused on the basics and is stresses the
ability of students to utilize practically any 3D
modeling and rendering software package very
quickly. The emphasis of the course is not on
software, but about the knowledge of composition,
lighting, and developing a creative process.

Figure 3. Exterior 30 Rendering by Student

5. References
[l] M., E. Helms, “Perspective Drawing- A Step-by-step
Handbook.” Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1990.
[2] M. Giambruno, “3D Graphics and Animation: From

Start Up to Standing Out”, New Riders Publishing
Indianapolis, IN, 1997.
Figure 4. Interior 3D Rendering by Student

[3] B. DeLeeuw, “Digital Cinematography”, AP
Professional, Boston, MA, 1997.

4. Conclusions

[4] W. S. Meador, “Development of Instruction for Digital
Lighting and Rendering”, Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
Purdue University Press, West Lafayette, IN, 1999.

The original traditional course was designed to
advance the students understanding of Light, Shades
and Shadows through generation of traditional
perspective illustrations in a variety of media. To an
extent, the course developed an understanding within
the student of a single light source, the location of the
observer, and the resulting affect of this on all
elements in an architectural illustration.
The new 3D digital course takes student
understanding of light, shade and shadows to a
different level of experience. In the traditional course,
composition was a bi-product of the course whereas
in the 3D digital course, composition is one of major
focus through arrangement and camera placement.
Not only does composition play an important role in
the c o m e , but also the introduction of lighting
design dictates key components within the sixteenweek curriculum. The artistic components that were

[ 5 ] L. Watson, “Lighting Design Handbook”, McGrawHill, Inc., New York, NY, 1990.

[6] F. K. Smith, & F. J. Bertolone, (Eds), “Bringing
interiors to light: The principles and practices of lighting
design”, Whitney Library of Design, New York, NY, 1986.

465

