Transmitting visual information: Icons become words.
Bernard Champouxl Kazuko Fujisawa'

'

-4

ATR Media Integration & Communication Laboratories

Kyoto, Japan.
bcou@,mic.atr.co.ip
yiwadate@mic.atr.co.jp

Tomoyoshi Inoue3 Yuichi Iwadate4
Communication Disorders Special Education Teacher
kazukofuiisawa@,msn.com
Professor, Department of Education, Doshisha
university
tinoue@mail.doshisha.ac.jp

A logical analogy will show the tools to perform the
action
and a structural analogy will show the
organization of the subject.
When properly used, CAILS produces (( iconic message
objects)) which may be presented to the intended
recipient.

Abstract
This paper presents CAILS, an experimental Computer
Assisted Iconic Language System that deals with three
speclfic areas in communication: Cross-linguistic,
visuaUspatia1 concept representation and visual
educational technique.

Pictograms and graphic symbols are widespread and often
much easier to decode than written messages. We often
remember faces more easily than names. Used, among
other places, on road signs and for advertisements, these
symbols tend to be self-explanatory and visually
appealing.

1. Introduction

The major problem with self-explanatory symbols is that
they are not constrained enough to allow for the
construction of full-fledged linguistic systems. Beyond a
certain level of complexity, more than the mere
juxtaposition of symbols is necessary for expressing
meaning. At the same time, the number of symbols that
can be decoded automatically remains limited. For
expanding pictogram systems into visual languages,
abstract symbols and connectors must be included.

Designed for interpersonal communication, this system
functions with generally comprehensible visual referents.
Each area has some specific syntax that is clear and easy
to leam. CAILS takes advantage of the user's visual
memory. The basic idea of this system is that an
individual can, using basic visual references, compose a
message, represent a concept and teach a rule. The
specificity of the images eliminates ambiguity. For
convenience, we classified visual references or ((words))in
the following categories: Hands, Movements, Expression,
and Pictures.
r m r L "$S

Two previous attempts at expanding pictograms into
iconic languages deserve some particular attention:
Blissymbolic and Elephant memory. The former was
designed as a paper and pen system, rather than using the
graphical power of modern computers and requires much
practice to be useful. The latter was designed as a
metaphor for language and not as a fulfledged
communication tool.

FFjCLUTc"5

iuiri&
c,wrCevkiii
Figure 1. Examples of CAILS categories.
Once classified, we choose the following analogies to
represent the word graphically: A functional analogy will
show the performed action:

Figure 3. Example of visual language: Blissymbolic: ctI lost
my passport while traveling in China,) and Elephant
memory: c( The plane explodes crashing against the
mountain 1).

Figure 2. Example of CAILS analogies.

244
0-7695-0743-3100
$10.000 2000 IEEE
~-

producer and the readers are necessary to express ideas. A
century of modem linguistics provides us with great
knowledge about such rules in natural languages.
However, whereas natural languages are usually based on
hundreds of rules, CAILS restricts itself to only a dozen
easily learnable rules. The grammar of CAILS is
expressed through symbols and connectors. The symbols
appear as the background of the icons and indicate their
grammatical function. The connectors join the
components, either within the proposition or outside it
for introducing relative clauses. Seven cases constitute the
base of CAILS’ grammar: nominative, accusative, dative,
benefactive, ablative, genetive and verb.

2. CAILS: A visual communication system
and tool.
Designed for teaching and communicating purposes, we
have targeted three specific fields of application: Crosslinguistic, visual / spatial representation and visual
educational technique. Here an overview of the three areas
of communication dealt with CAILS:

2.1 Cross-linguistic:
As international communication becomes commonplace,
the need for cross-linguistic facilities becomes greater.
CAILS’ aim is to help meet this need via the internet. It
combines elementary symbols (its grammar) with a
picture (its vocabulary) to produce an understandable icon
(the unit of expression). Users with different languages
are able to exchange basic information without ambiguity.
The effect of this system is to combine images and syntax
to produce messages.

a) Nominative: subject. b) Accusative: object

Figure 4. Structure of CAILS icon in Cross-linguistic.

c) Verb past d) Verb present e) Verb future

Since the computer assists in editing, transmitting and
indexing information in the user’s native language, it
alleviates considerably the burdens associated with
learning and using natural languages. However, it must be
understood that CAILS does not perform machine
translation: despite the indexing, the reciever still directly
accesses what the sender wrote. Ogden’s Basic English is
the basis for the CAILS lexicon. Ogden proposed a list of
850 English words that are assumed to cover basic
communication needs. In CAILS, these words are defined
in a Matrix Dictionary and a specific icon associated with
each of them. The worksheet is a regular two-dimensional
grid where each icon occupies one cell. In
communication, the icons are selected from the lexicon
through the icon browser and assigned to a grammatical
function. Along with grammatical symbols and a picture,
a complete CAILS icon can also include a label to assist
users in the beginner CAILS users. Once assimilated,
labels will no longer be needed. The grammatical system
is the only component of CAILS that the new user has to
study before achieving fluency in reading.

f ) Ablative

g ) Dative

h ) Benefactive

i ) Genetive

Figure 5 . CAILS’s grammar symbols.

2.2 Grammar:
Since mere juxtaposition of icons proved to be
insufficient, some rules previously learned by both the

245

Six conjunctions complete CAILS’s grammar: Standard
complementizer (that), implicative (if), antecessive
(because), concessive (but) and connectives (and / with).

Figure 6. CAILS’s conjunctions symbols.

The boy is reading the girl’s book ))
Figure 9. Example of a representation sentence.

4. Visual educational technique
In this area, CAILS’ aim is to implement a
communication channel for people who otherwise have
none, such as those with autism, mental disorders and
leaming disabilities. CAILS enforces fundamental
consistency by using logical sequences to enhance
communication.

W
<(

The boy is reading the girl’s book M

Figure 7. Example of a cross-linguistic sentence.

3. Visual / spatial concept representation
In this approach, CAILS schematizes visual thinking by
grouping icons to represent concepts that would otherwise
be difficult to explain in words. We remember visually
encoded concepts better than those encoded verbally.
CAILS attempts to establish a clear relationship between
objects and actions by using the analogy of gears. One
gear drives another to create a representation of a
concept.

Figure 10. CAILS’ logical sequence representation.
Through movements such as variation, transformation and
evolution, users are able to acquire and retain knowledge
by viewing animated sequences. This area differs from the
two preceding ones in its use of animated icons. The type
of movement contributes to the accuracy of the message.
These conventions are to some extent, the syntax of the
message. For example, we told a story to children by
giving them two conventions: a continuous line means
the life and dotted line means death. We thus
communicated a concept with some icons and two
conventions.

Figure 8. CAILS’ representation symbols
Gears become, by their layout, catalysts of the concept to
be acquired. We choose gears as a metaphor because they
represent functionality and functional connections are
known as visual referents for functionnality and logic to
comprehension. They clearly show the steps prior to a
result.

Aftenvards,we checked if the contents had been well
retained by presenting the same story, but with a choice
of icons through various stages of the story. Starting from
the same conventions, the children could alter the history.

246

Stage 1: communication

((

Figure 13. CAILS' logical sequence representation of
The Cat that lived a million times )) by Yoko San0 with no
sequences.

Figure 1 1. CAILS' logical sequence representation of
(( The Cat that lived a million times )) by Yoko San0
Stage 2: Interaction

3<'*ail* r 2
I S

rtI

I*,,

Figure 14. CAILS educational training cycle

Figure 12. CAILS's logical sequence representation of
(( The Cat that lived a million times )) by Yoko Sano with
missing icons.
Finally, we proposed the same icons and conventions
without sequences. They created a history in their own
sequence.
In short, starting from icons, conventions (Stage 1) and
sequences (Stage 2), we carried out a transfer of
knowledge to check its acquisition and its possibilities of
creation (Stage 3). We believe that with visual referents
and precise signals (conventions), it is possible to
establish a constant communication.

When a leamer acquires concepts through signals and
visual referents, each icon becomes an interactive stimulus
to foster new concepts. In the long run, we believe it
possible to create a training cvcle where the uarameters
be icons and

4.1 Animated icons
In these same sequences, we also make it possible to add
animated icons by which the function is to prolong the
dynamism of the fixed image and to enhance the
communication and the transfer of knowledge.
In this context, the animated icon is to communication
what the connotation is to the word. A fixed visual
referent conveys only one message but, when it becomes
animated, it suggests a precise connotation. The word

247

and its significance are defined by the form that models
them. For example, the icon representing the verb to eat,
is munched away while you watch.

1

3

%

A,

5

d

Figure 15. Animated icon: verb to eat
In the verb to read, a sequence of continuous lines
indicates to the user not only the action but also the
intensity with which the action is carried out. Animation,
by its rate, rhythm, frequency and movement, serves as a
substitute for the intonation and accents of spoken
language.

1

*

3

i

Figure 18. CAILS's web site interfaces and navigation.

http://www.mic.atr.co.ip/-bcod.
Each option includes an icon bank (lexicon) as well as the
proper symbols and connectors. The site's objective is to
make user able to compose messages, represent concepts
and notions. Also, the user can send and receive
communications, to save and print his material.

6. Tests

5

Figure 16. Animated icon: verb to read

CAILS has been tested among different users who
understood the concept and were able to learn the
grammar quickly. The tests took place at Doshisha
University in Kyoto, Japan. (1 07 participants, average 21
years old) and at Yawata Tyuo elementary school (69
participants,age average: 1 1 years old). Allowed time: 15
minutes with a 10 minutes introduction to CAILS. At
Doshisha university, a class of participants had the icons
meaning and grammar rules. The other class had only the
grammar rules. The test had 15 iconic sentences where
icons were organized in the following way: 5 sentences in
random, 5 Japanese sentences and 5 English sentences.
The participants were Japanese. We note that random
sentences obtained many more answers in all the groups.
The participants who had the icons' meaning answered
much better than those which only had the grammar rules.
(figure 19).

The use of animated icons is adapted to locate the total
context of a communication. It supports not only
comprehension but also long-term training.

x?k!5ULMarrhW~

((

T h e boy is reading the girl's book M

Figure 17. Example of a sentence with animated icons.

5. CAILS' web site
As a tool for training and communication, the internet is
an ideal vehicle for our iconic language. The user is able
to choose the appropriate communication type:
linguistics, concepts or sequences.

Figure 19. Icons meaning and grammar rules.
Elementary school Yawata answers' rate also indicates a
better comprehension of the messages when the
grammatical structure is random (figure 20).

248

interfaces, and the internet, an excellent opportunity has
been created for a computer assisted iconic language
system.
References
S. Tanimoto, ((Representation and leamability in Visual
Languages for Web-based Interpersonal Communication)),
IEEE International Symposium on Visual Language, Capry,
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1997, pp. 2-9

Blissymbolic Communication International,

http://home.istar.ca/-bci/.
Figure 20. Yawata answers' rate
A comparison o f all the participants shows the ease to
understand messages in a random order (figure 21).
nr..n*--

Ogken, C.K, (( Basic English: A General Introduction with
rules and grammar H, Paul Treber Co. Itd
Horton, William K, G The Icon Book:visual symbols for
computer systems and documentation N, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.
Qukau, Philippe, << Metaxu: Theorie de l'art intermediare
collection milieux Champ Vallon.

)),

Queau, Philippe, (( Eloge de la simulation: De la vie des
langages a la synthtse des images )), collection milieux
Champ Vallon
Queau, Philippe, (( Le virtuel, vertus et vertiges
milieux Champ Vallon
Figure 2 1. Comparison of all the participants.
Overall, the test subjects showed a good comprehension
of the grammatical functions o f the symbols. Word order
does not to be crucial in understanding a CAIL message.
We also noted that long sentences were more difficult to
understand for the 11 years old participants. People in
general read short messages in icons. The sentences
distributed on two lines were also difficult to understand.

7. Future direction and conclusion
In the developmental stages, CAILS tests show that we
still have a lot o f work t o do. However, the following
observations will guide our thinking in future research
into computer assisted iconic languages: The iconic
language should convey short sentences. The grammatical
structure must retain its current level of simplicity. Like
any new vocabulary, reading and learning of icons
requires the attention of the learner. A forthcoming
generation o f icons is under development. They will be
centered on fluidity for the eye when are seen as a unit.
CAILS combines plausible visual referents with an easy
to use syntax. With icons, CAILS calls upon the visual
memory of the user to communicate a message or to teach
a concept. With the technological developments of the
last decade, such as more powerful computers, graphical

))

collection

Laurel, Brenda, (< Computers as theater n, Addison-Wesley
Publishing Compagny, Inc.
Arnheim, Rudolf, (< Art and visual perception: A psychology
of the creative eye )), University of California press.

Moles, Abraham A,<(L'image: Communication fonctionnelle,
Collection Synthkses H Contemporaines, Casterman.
Melcuk, Igor, (( Dictionnaire explicatif et combinatoire du
francais contemporain D, Les Presses de I'universitk de
Montreal.
Modley, Rudolf, (( Handbook of pictorial symbols )) Dover
Publications. Inc.
Corbeil, Jean-Claude, (( Color visual dictionnary: Word's
word D, Les editions Quebec Amerique.

Special thanks to:
The students of Yawata Tyuo Elementary School and
Doshisha University in Kyoto, Japan.
Martin David, the idea behind CAILS.

249

