Virtual Reality Used in a Collaborative Architectural Design Process
Peter Frost, Peter Warren
The Interactive Institute/Malmo University College
Space & Virtuality Studio, SE-205 06 Malmo, Sweden
peter.frost@interactiveinstitute. se
peter.warren @ interactiveinstitute.se
http://www. interactivity.se
integrate 3D and VR as a tool in the concept of Process
Architecture.

Abstract
This paper presents a project and where the
possibilities to use Virtual Reality in architectural design
processes are examined. The main goal of the project is to
develop a process f o r collaborative design of laboratory
layouts using VR (Cave-technology) as a tool integrated
into the concepts of Process Architecture. The project has
been carried through in co-operation with the Chemical
Department at Lund Institute of Technology/Lund
University. It is a “real” project integrated in the
University’s programming process. A workshop initiated
the design process and was followed by a series of
different design events, which were arranged with the
participants from one research and one education
laboratory. At these events the participants made several
visits to their future labs in a VR-Cave. The visits were
alternated with more traditional design sessions with
paper and pencils. The results show that the collaborative
design process including VR helped the users by
providing a method with which their ideas could be better
formulated, analyzed, tested and finally realized. The
results from the project have been incorporated into the
building program f o r the new Chemical laboratory
building.

Figure 7. The VR Cave at MediaLab at Chalmers
University of Technology

1.1. Process Architecture
The methodology we are using is based on the
concepts of Process Architecture developed at the Space
Planning and Organization Research Group (SPORG) at
MIT [8]. The approach of Process Architecture is
characterized by a collaborative engagement of all
stakeholders that integrates professional tasks and
architecture. It is concerned with design as collaborative
activities, and with action research as a means of
intervention. The collaborative design process is an
individually designed process for each project and is
based on a series of structured design-events, which
develop the design through collaborative interaction. The

1. VR in Architectural Design Processes
The possibilities of using Virtual Reality (VR) as a
way of visualization in architectural design have earlier
been explored in several different projects [ 3 ] . Many of
these projects have mainly been concerned with VR as a
tool for the architect to better view and understand the
design. In this project our focus is on how new
technology, used in a context together with other design
tools, can be brought into the architectural design process
as tools for collaborative design. We therefore try to

568
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 02000 IEEE

structured events consists of different design tools and
design events, as walkthroughs and design games, which
have been developed with the purpose to promote
creativity and facilitate common understanding of the
design tasks [l]. The concepts of Process Architecture
also aims at incorporating the informal and spontaneous
activities that take place outside the formalized traditional
process

2. Collaborative Design of Chemical
Laboratories
2.1. Introduction
A case study has been carried through in co-operation
with the Chemical Department at Lund Institute of
TechnologyLund University, Sweden [6]. It is an actual
project integrated in the University’s programming
process. The building will be executed during 2000-2001.
We entered the programming process at a very adequate
moment, when all the design tasks and problems still had
to be identified and solutions for the new laboratories had
to be worked out. Consequently, the participants were
very committed and focused on their task. Participants
came from two different institutions at the Chemical
Department; from one research laboratory at Organic
Chemistry and from an educational laboratory at Inorganic
Chemistry. Our process started with a spread out
workshop March and April 1999, aiming at analyzing the
future needs and making actual proposals of how to design
new laboratory work areas. They participated in our
project together with people from the University’s facility
management and administrative staff, architects,
researchers and others. The proposals from the workshop
where then modeled in 3D, simulated with VR software,
and at two different design events, May and June 1999,
brought into a VR Cave at MediaLab at Chalmers
University of Technology, Sweden. The visits in VR were
alternated with more traditional design sessions with paper
and pencils. The proposals from the project have been
incorporated into the building program for the new
Chemical laboratory building.

In the traditional architectural planning process strict
hierarchy between different stakeholders in the process is
maintained in information and design-decisions. The
architect gathers information from the userdfuture
occupants in order to form a ground for design proposals
and decisions taken by the management. Also the
participatory design process is in practice often seen upon
only as a method, which makes it possible to better find
out and fulfil the users requirements about their work
environment. The users are engaged and asked to give
information and demands about their needs. From this
information, the architect still alone makes design
proposals
Contrary, a collaborative design process means that all
stakeholders, including users, architect, project leader,
facility management, work environment specialists,
interior designer and others are engaged together in
chosen parts of the design. The role of the architect is in
that way double. Shehe both has to design the process, be
a Process Architect, and design the actual building. In this
field of powers, especially in cases when the different
roles are played by different players, the roles has to be
carefully developed and made clear.
In this project, we have tried to integrate advanced
visualization (VR) as a tool, and develop it as a structured
design event into the Process Architecture method. In all
architectural design processes, it is difficult to
communicate with clients and users only with architectural
drawings. Some of the participants in the process are not
used to these sorts of representations. This inequality in
the possibilities to grasp and understand the design
proposals which are to be interpreted, creates a situation
where an inequality also are established concerning the
influence different persons has possibility to achieve on
the design process. Other kinds of presentation-tools such
as perspectives, axonometries and scale models are
therefore often used to facilitate understanding and
communication. We think that VR can be an even more
powerful tool in founding a common ground for all
participants in the design process [111.

(The story told in the following about the educational
laboratory is only one among several design stories, which
took place during the workshop and design-events. We
have chosen to focus on this one, because it is a very
evident example of what happened during the process.
Conclusions in the paper are based on this case and what
happened in the common events).

2.2. The Lab Walk-Through
An inquiry and documentation of some lab occupant’s
work-experience initiated the process. The project-team
visited two different laboratories where the workenvironment was photo- and video-documented. The
project team was immediately confronted with the design
issues at stake. In the educational lab, the users already
had ideas about how to organize their lab for teaching. As
it was an ongoing project, the responsible programming
architect had already made a sketch, which appeared as a

569

try to adapt the users ideas to what he thought was the
spatial and technical demands of the building.

[7]. It did not solve the problems with place and access to
the fume hoods. When the group were given the
possibility to design their own layout, the result was an
island of fume hoods in the center of the laboratory. Here
the students could better see from all sides what was going
on inside.

2.3. Workbooks
From the lab walk through the research project-team
produced a photo-documentation, which were presented to
the users as workbooks. These were sent out to the
participants a week before the workshop. At the
workshop, the participants made an evaluation of their
work environment as they worked together with the
workbooks. The participants worked in-groups of two or
three. They made notations in their workbooks of what
they found important, either positively or negatively. One
of the major problems identified was that there gathered
too many students in front of the fume hood during the
lessons. That means that besides that it gets uncomfortable
and crowded it is also difficult for the students to se what
is going on. The safety can also be in danger if the
students by accident push each other while they are
dealing with dangerous chemicals.

2.5. ConcIusionsKonsensus
In the end of the workshop all the participants agreed
upon which of the ideas and proposals that had been
developed in collaboration during the workshop should be
kept during rest of the process and modeled in 3D and
VR. The conclusion was that the idea with a fume hood
island in the middle of the laboratory survived the
evaluation of the participants, but they still observed
problems with the measures and modules of the building.
The architect’s idea was therefore still a realistic
alternative, and the decision from the group was that both
alternatives should be modeled in 3D and VR.

3.3D modeWR simulation
3.1. Specifications
When the proposals from the workshop where brought
into VR cave the 3D-models were built with a standard
PC with ArchiCad Version 6.0 from Graphisoft. The
software VR-simulation program was dVISE from
Division. Two levels of detail were tested [4].At the f i s t
visit the interior walls, glass walls, doors and ceilings
were represented as single colored surfaces. No details
like textures, joinery, fences etc. were represented. Nor
installation equipment, electric fittings, plants or people.
There were directed light but no shadows or reflections.
The building was situated nowhere without surroundings.
The model could therefore be characterized as sketch
model made of cardboard but represented digital. Level-.
and collision detection did not function. On the second
visit two weeks later there were some changes added IO
the model. Characteristic surfaces had mapped on textures
and pictures like carpets, details of cupboards and
blackboards. Through the windows you could see the
actual view outside the building. Level collision detection
functioned this time.

Figure 2. Participants in a Vesign-game”

2.4. Design-game
A “design-game’’ was carried through with the purpose
to identify different possible organization-structures and
communication -processes in a modem lab [10].The
participants were equipped with a set of cartoon pieces in
different colors and sizes. These could represent different
objects and functions and be arranged freely in different
relations with each other. With these cartoon-pieces
different layouts of the future labs were “played” and
designed. It was obvious that the existing sketch from the
architect did not fulfill the users own ideas of a good
functioning educational laboratory. The architect had
proposed a traditional laboratory layout with the benches
and fume hoods arranged in rows parallel with the walls

3.2. Cave design-event 1
Two different design events with two weeks in between
were arranged with the participants from the workshop. At
these events the group made several visits to their future
labs in VR. The visits were alternated with more
traditional design sessions outside the Cave with

570

drawings, paper and pencils. The design-event therefore
consisted of two parts, inside and outside the Cave.

where a major design factor was the students possibility to
actually see what was happening in the fume hoods during
the labs. The architect’s proposal aimed at
accommodating the users ideas to the building and its
technical systems. This would probably have been the
winning altemative, if this project not had taken place.
The collaborative design process, including VR, thus
helped the users by providing a method with which their
ideas could be better formulated, analyzed, tested and
finally realized. The University management and the
architect were where also very pleased with the result.

At this first design-event, the users found out that their
proposal with the fume hood island only could fit into the
modules of the building if they tumed the whole lab 90
degrees. The idea emerged while they were inside the VR
Cave and was developed around the table over the
drawings. The decision by the group was to tum their
island proposal 90 degrees and totally abandon the
altemative derived from the architect’s sketch.

We are convinced that VR has to be placed in a
meaningful context if it shall work as an efficient design
tool. You can not just throw the technology in without
having a natural relation to the phases and tasks of the
design process. That is why we have examined VR as one
of the tools in the concept of collaborative design and
Process Architecture. Otherwise VR runs the risk of being
just an expensive mean of presenting building projects.

4.2. VR helps founding a common ground
The untrained participants see and understand things
they would not have done with traditional presentation
tools. Examples of this are actual volume of spaces, sight
lines, heights of windows and fumiture, elements
overlapping each other etc. The immersive scale 1:l VR
environment also appears to give a good sense of
distances. (But the participants didn’t always trust what
they saw. They were asking the technicians whether they
could relay on the measures as they appeared in the virtual
space. When they wanted to be absolutely sure they
preferred to relay on traditional tools and used the
drawings and a ruler. Maybe this could be replaced by a
possibility to get measures in figures by pointing inside
the Cave). The VR model therefore strongly contributes to
the important step in the design process of forming a
”common ground” for the participants.

Figure 3. An image from inside the VR Cave.

3.3. Cave design-event 2
At the second visit to the Cave, the changes decided in
design-event 1 had been executed and revised in 3D. That
means that the laboratories had been rebuilt with the
island solution tumed 90 degrees. The participants used a
great deal of the time to evaluate this model. They were
much focused on spatial questions as measures and sight
lines. The users idea was confirmed as being the most
effective to fulfill the demands of the education
laboratory.

4.3. It is fun to discover and learn in VR
The conversation inside the Cave is free and creative.
The participants have the possibility to direct the
promenades themselves. That means that instead of being
showed a building project prepared from certain
viewpoints by for example an architect, here the
participants are free to watch what they want, go were
they like in the model. That makes you more active, more
feels like a discoverer. It is fun, stimulating and
fascinating to meet immersive VR-Cave. You are
constantly leaming something [2].

4. Conclusions
4.1. 66Asuccess story”
The case study convinced us that it worked very well to
bring advanced visualization tools into an architectural
design process using the methods of Process Architecture.
The users of the laboratory were successful in convincing
the participants in the collaborative design process,
including the management and architect. They could show
that it would be possible to build a laboratory for leaming

57 1

both methods and tools for the integration of advanced
new technology into the field of early stages of
architectural design, mainly focused on collaborative
design of workplaces and leaming environments.

4.4. From engaged presence to reflective distance
Inside the Cave the environment immerses you. You
get absorbed of what you see and talks about everything
that shows up. The conversation moves between careful
investigations and questions like ”is that distance
enough?” ”Can you see the blackboard from here?” to
rather easy-going, exhilarated conversation, which are
both creative and constructive. Outside the Cave, around a
common worktable, the discussion tums to more
traditional work-mood. You analyze, sketch, measure, and
solve problems. The interaction between these two
different situations constitutes the design-event [ 9 ] .

That endeavor contains a project where we will
develop an interactive “digital design game” and integrate
the tools of workbooks and design games with 3D and VR
visualization. Our specification includes possibilities to be
able to display images from the existing workplace
environment together with scenarios and prototypes of the
new work environment. You should be able to call a
database for different building types, tried solutions and
good examples, and to store comments and notations in a
memory. We will work with a LCV (low cost
visualization) display system where we can project
stereoscopic VR environments on a single flat wall in
scale 1:1.

4.5. Low detailed VR models works well in early
design phases
One of the sub goals of the project was to find methods
for developing time efficient 3D and VR-models, which
have a level of detail coordinated with the phases of the
design process. The applications of VR in the building
sector has until now mainly been focused on the use of
VR as a method of presenting projects with commercial
purposes. The development of VR as a design tool raises
quite different demands. In the design phase there is no
time or resources to build every proposal, idea or step in
the design process as a fully developed VR-model. When
you still are working with the overall structure and volume
of the building, you need a simplified design model,
which is capable of handling details in a different way.
The design decisions have not yet reached the level of
technical details, coatings, colors, furniture and so on [ 5 ] .

The “digital design game” will be built on a modem
Computer Game platform, in order to facilitate some of
the advanced features available in modem Computer
Games:
a
Cheap and easy accessible. Can be used on standard
PC:s or Game consoles like Playstation etc.
a
Advanced 3 D N R representation. Fast interaction
with virtual space.
a
Simple tools for modeling accessible.
a
Technology develops and improves very fast.
a
A variety of interfaces available, different input
devices, some with physical features as force
feedback and level recognition.
a
Bandwidth effective means limited demand for
network performance so it could easily be distributed
via Internet.
a
Can present spaces which are inhabited and where
you can interact with other players.
a
Also possibility to interact with the environment
inside the virtual spacelworld. That means to interact
with doors, furniture, displays etc, in built or present
technology as screens.
a
It is easy to learn.
a
Fun to use, that means stimulates creativity and
leaming.

The participants in the case study did not pay much
attention to the two different levels of detail presented in
Cave visit one and two. They were very focused on their
own design task, they wanted to know exactly how their
laboratories was going to be, and were less observant on
the VR tools as such. You can conclude that in this case,
the simple and low detail performance of the sketch-like
VR models promoted creativity. No bias discussion about
irrelevant information in the models emerged. The
participants felt that it is possible to change the model,
that not everything is finished. These models were not
presentation models.

5. Future Work
The project and case study presented here is an
ongoing project, which is planned to continue for the next
two years. The cooperation between SPORG and
Interactive Institute will continue in developing the
concepts of Process Architecture in several “real life
cases” together with industry. We will go on developing

572

6. Acknowledgements
Inspirator and workshop leader has been Turid Horgen,
Department of Architecture, Design Technology, SPORGgroup, MIT Boston, USA
Tutor in this project has been Thomas Binder, Space
and Virtuality Studio, The Interactive InstituteMalmo
University Collage
Our “door-opener’’ and support conceming VR Cave
has been Hans Lindgren, Department of Architecture,
Chalmers Technical University, Goteborg, Sweden.

[9] Schon D A (1992). Designing as reflective
conversation with the materials of a design situation.
Research and Engineering Design Vol 3, Nr 1 March
1992
[lo] Watanabe H (Editor), (1997) Shuppan M.
Laboratories & Research Facilities : New Concepts in
Architecture & Design Books Nippan
[ l l ] %bel Richard W Jr, Virtual Environments
Laboratory, North Carolina State University, School of
Design; The Representation of Experience in
Architectural Design, Presence, Vol 4, No. 3, summer
1995,254 - 266, MIT

7.References
113 Binder T & Brandt E, Horgen T and Zack G, (1998)
Staging Events of Collaborative Design and Learning. 5th
ISPE
International Conference on
Concurrent
Engineering. Tokyo, Japan
[2] Byrne C (1993). Virtual Reality and Education.
Human Interface Technology Lab. University of
Washington. Technical Report R-93-6
[3] Campbell D A, Wells M, (1994).A Critique of Virtual
Reality in the Architectural Design Process. Hit Lab
University of Washington
[4] Frost P, (1999) Virtual Reality as a design tool for
building design, Poster proceeding, Coop 99 Pittsburgh,
http://space.interactiveinstitute.se/projects/accprof/.

[5] Frost P, Jacobsson J (2000). The Internet as a
communication tool between architect and user, The
Interactive
Institute,
Sweden,
http://space.interactiveinstitute.se/project~accprof/
[6] Frost P, Warren P, (2000). DV-documentation of VR
workshop and design event for Chemical Department,
Lund University, 12 min video. The Interactive Institute,
Sweden.
[7] Griffin B Laboratory Design Guide (1998). For
Clients, Architects and Their Design Team. The
Laboratory Design Process from Start to Finish
Butterworth Architecture. Australia
[8] Horgen T H., Joroff M L., Porter W L. and Schon D
A, (1999) Excellence by Design. Transforming
Workplace and Work Practice. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York

573

