Computer-Based Animation of a Multi-legged Articulated Body
R. Mistry
De Montfort University
Hammerwood Gate, Milton Keynes, England
ramistry @lucent.com

G. Clapworthy
De Montfort University
Hammerwood Gate, Milton Keynes, England
gc@dmu.ac.uk

Abstract

Animation systems based on dynamics [ 111 calculate the
forces and torques evident in the motion to calculate the positions of the joints. Systems based on kinematics use the
positions of the joints at the extremities of the animal and
work backwards to position the other joints [ 131.
Animation systems have been used in film production.
Methods include, using a wireframe model to model the underlying movement in the animation sequence and then using traditional techniques. Advanced techniques use computer modelling techniques to flesh a wireframe model.
The methodology proposed, creates a wireframe model of
a quadruped moving using any of four quadruped gaits and
proposes a gait transition model to simulate the change in
gait.
Work has been carried out in adding behaviour to
computer-based animation systems to try to automatically
create animation sequences where the body being animated
is aware of changes in its environment and is capable of expressing emotions [6, 171.

A methodology for modelling quadruped gaits and gait
transitions based on Fourier series analysis of horse movement is proposed. The resultant model is used to create animated locomotion sequences of a quadruped changing gait.
The dynamic similarity hypothesis is used as a method for
comparing the gaits of different animals.
The fields investigated to provide the background of this
work are Animation, Gait Research, Data Gathering and
Simulation. From these the methodology has been used
to define a generic rotoscoped model for movement, which
ulthough developed from horse movement data, could be
equally applied to any other quadruped.
Keys ideas from biomechanics and gait research have
been incorporated into the gait and gait transition models.
Different gaits have fundamentally different leg movement
patterns, so a locomotion model which models different
gaits must take into account the synchronisation between
the legs during locomotion. Additionally any methodology
used to simulate the transition between gaits must take into
account the phase differences between the legs when simulation a gait transition.
Animation provides techniques to model the visual motion of a nzulti-leggedjigure moving using a number of d$fereiit gaits, the control of movement is determined by the
gait model.

2. Gait Research
During locomotion the legs of an animal undergo a series
of cyclic phases consisting of stance (foot-ground contact)
and swing (foot moving to next ground location). When
considering an animal as a whole the combination of leg
movements for the animal constitute a gait. A gait can be
characterised by the footfall pattern of the animal, the phase
difference between the feet and the duty factor (percentage
of ground contact during a leg cycle).
There are many ways of classifying gaits, for example
by numbers of legs, biped, quadruped and hexapod. The
types of gait seen in animals with different numbers of legs
can be very different. If we only consider quadruped gaits,
these can be classified as reptilian, non-cursorial and cursorial (Figure I ) . The main difference being the positions of
the upper leg limbs in relation to the body of the animal.
Gaits can be classified as symmetric (both legs in a pair
move out of phase) and asymmetric (both legs in a pair

1. Animation
Traditional (manual) animation methods rely on either
rotoscoping real-life animal movement to produce a movement model which is fleshed out using animation techniques, or drawing key-frames in the animation sequence
which are then in-betweened to produce a complete sequence of animation. Computer-based animation systems
take these methods a step further by using mechanical laws
of motion to define how bodies move [ 18, 101.

315
0-7695-0743-3100 $10.00 0 2000 EEE

Figure 1. Different quadruped types. ( A ) Reptilian, ( B ) Non Cursorial, (C) Cursorial. [l]

4. Modelling

move in phase). The determinants of a gait are the duty
factor and phase difference of the feet of an animal. For
example in the horse [ 1.51, the walk and trot are symmetric
gaits whilst the canter and gallop are asymmetric.
Using the dynamic similarity hypothesis [2], the gaits of
animals with similar limb arrangements can be compared.
This determines that animals change gait at similar levels of
a dimensionless parameter called the Froude number, which
can be calculated from velocity, gravity and length characteristic for the animal. Gaits can be further classified as natural and learned, for example gaits used in horse dressage
[12] are mainly taught, whilst those used by animals in the
wild are natural and not tainted by human interference [8].

Modelling the locomotion involved data gathering using
non-contact techniques, normalising the gathered data and
creating a model of animal movement using different gaits.
A number of curve fitting techniques were used to model
the movement of the joints of the animal. Interpolation resulted in curves with lots of maxima and minima and did
not reduce the number of free parameters. Least squares [5J
fitted a tight curve to the data points but the resultant coefficients did not have any relation to the underlying data.
Fourier analysis reduced the number of free parameters, the
resultant coefficients could be used to represent the amplitudes of the underlying frequencies of motion. Using the
Fourier series filtered the noise from the underlying data
whilst keeping the motion intact. Locomotion is cyclic in
nature and as the Fourier series can be used to represent
cyclic data [16] this method was used. The locomotion
model is represented by a Fourier series for each j o i n t in the
animal using a particular gait. The joints were connected by
kinematic chains to a reference point on the animal.
To change from one gait to another, there has to be some
trigger to force the gait to change. In nature, the primary
method for forcing a gait change is the energy expenditure during locomotion [9]. The model uses the change in
Froude number [ 11 as a trigger for a transition. A transition
is modelled by blending from the Fourier series for a joint
in one gait to the Fourier series for the same joint in another
gait. This way the the whole of the animal changes from
one gait to another in a coherent manner rather than as a set
of disjointed limbs. Care needs to be taken when performing the blend. For the legs, the blend can only take place
during the swing phase (when the foot is not in contact with
the ground). As the phase difference of the feet are different a complete transition takes from the liftoff of the first
foot, to the putdown of the last foot. A transition should be
completed within a complete stride for the whole animal,
otherwise the resultant animation can seem disjointed.

3. Data Gathering
Data gathering techniques have been classified into two
categories, contact and non-contact. Contact techniques use
force reading instruments which are activated by a subject
moving and making contact with the measuring devices 171.
The data gathered using these techniques is used to build
a dynamic model of movement by calculating the forces
and torques active in the joints during locomotion. Advantages of contact techniques are the accurate location of
foot/ground contact and liftoff intervals and accurate calculation of the stride length.
Non-contact techniques involve the kinematic analysis of
the subject under locomotion, usually by analysing videotaped or photographic records of movement [14]. Noncontact techniques have the advantage that the photographic
records of movement can be re-sampled, and the kinematic
model, which can be generated, is more simple to model
then an equivalent dynamic model.
When data gathering, a factor which must be taken into
account, is the filtering of noise from the data [3,4]. Whatever method used for modelling must be able to model the
underlying characteristics of motion, especially when applied to a noisy set of data.

316

5. Conclusions

[7] A. Crowe, P. Schiereck, R. de Boer, and W. Keessen. Characterisation of human gait by means of body center of mass
oscillations derived from ground reaction forces. IEEE
Transactions on biomedical engineering, 42(3):293-303,
1995.
[8] A. Dagg. Gaits in mammals. Mammal Rev., 3(4):135-154,
1973.
[9] C. Farley and C. Taylor. A mechanical trigger for the trotgallop transition in horses. Science, 253:30&308, 1991.
[lo] J. Hodgins. Simulation of human running. In Proceedings
of the I994 IEEE intemational conference on robotics and
automation, volume 2, pages 1320-1325, 1994.
[ l l ] H. KO and N. Badler. Animating human locomotion with
inverse dynamics. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 16(2):5&59, 1996.
[12] P. Koenig and G . Bekey. AI and locomotion: Horse kinematics. AI Expert, 9(1):18-27, 1994.
[13] J. Korien and N. Badler. Techniques for generating the goaldirected motion of articulated structures. IEEE Cornputer
Graphics and Applications, 2(9):71-81, 1982.
[ 141 P. Loslever, E. Laassel, and J. Angue. Combined statistical
study of joint angles and ground reaction forces using component and multiple correspondence analysis. IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, 41(12):1160-1167, 1994.
[ 151 E. Muybridge. Animals in motion. Dover Publications, New
York, NY, USA, 1957.
[16] E. Schneider and E. Chao. Fourier analysis of ground reaction forces in normals and patients with knee joint disease.

The model is used to represent the movement of a horse
using a number of different gaits and is based on Fourier
analysis of quadruped movement. The transition between
gaits is performed by blending between the Fourier model
of one gait to the next gait. The dynamic similarity hypothesis can be used to extend this model to other animals with
similar limb arrangements. The methodology for producing
the model can be used to model other animal locomotion
using different gaits and provide a method for simulating
the transition between different gaits for that animal.

References
[l] R. Alexander. The gaits of bipedal and quadrupedal animals.
The International Joumal of Robotics Research, 3(2):49-59,

1984.
[2] R. Alexander and A. Jayes. A dynamic similarity hypothesis
for the gaits of quadrupedal mammals. Journal of Zoology
(London),201:135-152, 1983.
[3] C. Angeloni, P. O.Riley, and D.Krebs. Frequency content
of whole body kinematic data. IEEE Transactionson Rehabilitation Engineering, 2(1):4046, 1994.
[4] A. Cappozzo. The mechanics of human walking. In A. Patla,
editor, Aa'aptabilty for human gait : Implications for the
control of locomotion, number 78 in Advances in Psychology, pages 167-186. North Holland, Amsterdam, NL, 1991.
ISBN : 0-444-88364-9.
[5] S. Chasen. Geometric principals and procedures for computer graphic applications, chapter 2 : Creating a mathematical formulation to match known or desired data constraints,
pages 11-29. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, USA, 1979. ISBN
: 0-13-352559-7.
[6] M. Cohen. Interactive spacetime control for animation.
Computer Graphics,26(2):293-302, 1992. SIGGRAPH '92
conference proceedings, 26-31 July 1992.

Journal of biomechanics, 16(8):591-601, 1983.

[17] D.Thalmann. Human modelling and animation. In EUROGRAPHICS '93: State of the Art Reports, Eurographics
Technical Report Series, chapter 7, pages 1-25. Eurographics, Barcelona, Spain, 6-10 September 1993 1993. EG93
STAR, ISSN 1017-4656.
[18] C. Van Overveld and H. KO. Small steps for mankind: Towards a kinematically driven dynamic simulation of curved
path walking. The journal of visualisation and computer
animation, 5(3):143-165, 1994.

317

