Recording and Retrieving Spatial Information with Video and Images
John Counsel1
Faculty of the Built Environment, University of the West of England, Bristol, England
Telephone 01179656261
Fax
01173443002
Email
John.Counsel1@ uwe.ac .uk

Abstract

translation from one to another because each is easier to use
in one sphere of the whole task than another. A de facto
heterogeneous collection of part-models with abstract links
results, creating significant data management issues.[ I] This
need to simultaneously or successively pass the task in hand
from one CAAD system to another is a strong endorsement
of open standard non-proprietary description of objects and
attributes.

A pilot web site study for comparative exploration of

heritage landscapes and great European gardens has raised
issues about the size and complexity of the datasets and the
need to record locational and other metadata with visual
and aural images. Such multimedia datasets deployed from
spatial databases are likely to become served on demand
with appropriate associated detail and data. Previous work
on the Tower of London and its environs has shown that
similar large complex datasets are increasingly common
during the creation and management of 3 0 models of
buildings and urban areas. Such datasets may also
encompass digital video and high-resolution images,
historical images and data, with maintenance and
management information and record drawings. Little
difference has been found in practice between the data
management and retrieval issues that apply to web-based
multimedia interpretations of historic environments and
those that are particular to large area 30 models. A
common approach may serve an initial web site based
outcome and also assist later development of a virtual
reality 3 0 model. The question of when it is useful to model
and when video or high-resolution images may be equally
or more useful is also examined.

Such heterogeneous models may be created independently,
even to different scales and standards, however this is
sufficiently difficult to manage in practice to justify a
common underlying coordinating geometric structure or
primary model to which all relate or from which all are
initially generated.[2]
While STEP [3] and similar
initiatives define standards for product and process models
there are no matching prevailing standards for urban models
outside the realm of Geographic Information Systems
(GIS).[4] Prevailing GIS standards relate to mapping
objects rather than 3D form. The 3D modeling needs of
architectural practice differ from those of for example:
urban design; planning evaluation; or 3D yellow pages.
Even the Euclidean primitive solid generally used as the
basis for geometric description of CAAD based building
models is less appropriate for either terrain or for the
irregularities of existing building structures based on
measured surveys. Geometric formats which describe
surfaces efficiently are more useful but if used
indiscriminately can create bloated files in VRML. The cost
of keeping CAAD based large area urban models up to date
and in continued use justifies a reappraisal of the breadth of
applications and a broadening of access. Broader access
requires lower access costs for interaction and updating with
the ease of distribution offered by the Web. Little difference
has been found in practice between the datasets with data
management and retrieval issues that apply to web-based

1. Introduction
Staff in the Faculty of the Built Environment at the
University of the West of England (FBEAJWE) have been
involved in the 3D modeling of buildings and urban areas
since 1984. The models have been used for applications
ranging from the automatic co-generation of visualisation,
drawings and schedules to VR and the Web. Since 1984 a
number of different Computer Aided Architectural Design
(CAAD) systems have been used to create these models,
some in succession to others, some in parallel, with

589
0-7695-0743-3\00
$10.000 2000 EEE

multimedia interpretations of historic environments and
those that are particular to large area 3D models. It is
suggested that a common approach may both serve an initial
web site based outcome simultaneously serving a broad

range of purposes and outcomes and also supporting
development of more focused virtual reality 3D model
outputs fitted to specific modeling needs.

-

2. Hortonet A Network of Historic Gardens

3. Recording into a Spatial Database

FBEKJWE have recently worked on a multimedia TransEuropean Telecommunications Networks funded pilot study
to create a network of linked historic gardens and landscape
parks (project ref Ten 45612 FS). Most of the data with
which to create a credible sense of presence have been
digital video, digital panoramic images, and high-resolution
digital photographs, together with associated botanic and
historic information. It has proved possible to capture
sufficient photographic imagery to create a credible sense of
presence for a site with two staff in one day. The same staff
can process and edit the material within a week. However
the on-going data management of a web-site of the
predicted size and complexity would be difficult. One
approach, which was explored, was to create hotspots to
associate relevant information with each image. This was
possible but, given the scale of the project, the number of
images in video and other form involved, the association of
data with overlaid polygonal boundaries has proved
impractical. It is intended to keep adding increasingly
higher resolution imagery to the site, which would entail
regular re-association and resizing of the hotspot polygons.
Conflicts have been found between the boundaries of
information that can be coded onto an image but HTML
does not support multiple levels of detail for hotspots in the
manner supported by VRML. Accurate identification of
botanical information from photographic images alone has
also proved impractical. It is necessary to map botanical and
historical information on site as a separate expert process,
prior to the definition of the hotspot associations.

For these reasons a spatial database approach has been
adopted to recording and retrieving heterogeneous
information and images. Each heritage site requires to be
mapped. In practice few of these gardens have been found
to have existing accurate plans available at scales of better
than 1:1000 which lack sufficient detail to adequately define
plant locations. All images whether new digital photographs
or historic plans, paintings or prints require base locational
metadata such as viewpoint, bearing and field of view. This
may be conceived as a notional horizontally aligned
pyramid of space. The form of this ’pyramid’field of view
may be calculated on demand from the base data. The
image resolution serves to provide a notional cut off plane
thereby defining the base’ of the pyramid. A separate
asynchronous process can then be followed for recording
the location of botanical and any other historic or
management data. A spatial search based on the location of
a plant could then retrieve images that locate the plant
within the pyramid zone of view. An enquiry based on an
image or frame within a video sequence could similarly
retrieve the list of plants potentially visible. The recorded
resolution of each image may also be evaluated to
determine whether the plant is larger than one or more
pixels based on distance from the viewpoint and therefore
visible or not. However this would not determine whether
the plant would in fact be visible or whether intervening
objects or structures would mask it.
The 3D terrain with height and extents of visible foreground
barriers’ including other plants, garden ornaments, walls
and hedges need also to be mapped to determine whether
the plant in question is masked from view. One outcome of
this data entry task would be that a simple VRML geometric
model of the site could be generated from the barrier’
boundary locational data. This model would serve to locate
plants, trees, and built structures in the context of panoramic
images, video footage, with other photographic and historic
images. Such a model might be defined as the lowest
practicable level of detail. The table below shows the
typical locational data required for this purpose. Capturing
this data is not a trivial task. For example a team at Bristol
University have been developing a wearable PC project

1st Figure Chatsworth, England. A
panoramic composite image produced as part of
the Hortonet Project. All three dimensions of
Historic Landscapes need to be recorded.

590

with funding from Hewlett Packard. They have successfully
linked highly portable 'wearable' PCs with Global
Positioning System (GPS) and Electronic Compass and
written the direction and positional data into the headers of
digital images taken using a linked digital camera.[5] There
are however problems of accuracy with existing GPS which
make it less reliable for accurate location of elements as
small as individual plants or groups of plants in an area of
planting such as a flowerbed. Overhanging trees prevail in
historic landscapes but particularly distort satellite signals.
GPS is also less accurate in measuring height than in
latitude and longitude. Interpretation of conventional survey
data from various sources by skilled staff is probably still
the most reliable route. The resulting amalgamations of
locational data from various sources would result in a
composite map or a model with sufficient referents to locate
any plant or object. This map or model might more usefully
be displayed on a 'wearable' PC for logging and locating
features of interest.

4. Modeling the Tower of London
Historic Royal Palaces (HRP) have used for several years
an Oracle based abstract building maintenance management
system which then lacked links to drawings. FBEAJWE
undertook some research with them to evaluate the use of a
GIS to create the links between this data and their digital
survey drawings. There followed in 1996 a commission to
model the environs of the Tower of London to create
illustrative material to support bids for funding to the
Heritage Lottery Commission. The model was then intended
to provide the context for judging the visual impact of each
stage of the increasingly detailed development and
refinement of the designs. Two highly detailed models were
created, both as proposed and as existing, down to street
furniture, railings and kerbs. These models were used to
generate video from a renderfarm, and very high-resolution
still images for presentation material.

Photographs
Record:

video
Record:

Plant identification
Record:

Prints - Paintings
Record:

'

'

'

'

Date &Time
Locationof
Beating
Lens /Field of
View
Resolution o f

Date &Time
Location of
camera for start
& end of each
shot
Beating for start
and end of each

Image

shot

camera

'

'

Date &Time
Name
Nurture
required
Location
Height above
ground
Visible size

Resolution of
video

'
'
'
'

'

Date recorded
Location o f
Easel
Beating
Levelofdetail
of Image
Field of view
Perspective or
other proj eQon
Location of

Historic Texts
Record:
Nature of
reference
Date referred to
Location
referred to
Area referred to
Levelofdetail
of reference
Location of
Original

OriEinal

-

Typical Q u x k s &omDatabase

Typical Queries &omDatabase
' What plants are vlslblein this unage?

'
'

What images is h s plant vlsible
whn?
Where else can this plant be seen in an
hstonc garden7

2nd Figure Table showing some useful
locational metadata to record with images

What Video shows h s
plant / ornament / structure?
What plants / ornaments /
structures are visible in h s
video shot?
What has changed over
time?

There was no single source of data from which the models
could be created. Both models used information extracted
from highly detailed 2D survey drawings of all the
buildings and landscape procured by HRP. But several other

59 1

5. GIs based retrieval of data for 3D
Visualisation and Modelling

bespoke 3D, photographic and video surveys were
necessary. The digital photographic survey alone occupied 6
CD Roms with each image stored at a resolution of 2048 by
1536 pixels. The more distantly viewed background data
was extracted from Ordnance Survey 1:1250 scale maps and
from a photogrammetric 'Cities Revealed' dataset from
GeoInformation Ltd. A further goal of joint research
between HRP and FBERJWE was to develop more effective
approaches to historic building maintenance management,
visitor management and interpretation of historic sites to
visitors. Consequently a wide range of archeological data
was examined in addition with the intention of later
modeling the various historic developments of the site. This
included borehole data to enable reconstruction of the
successive ground levels in conjunction with archaeological
records from digs from which the existence and form of
demolished or altered buildings could be projected. The task
of creating these models was made particularly difficult
both by the limitations of the survey drawings and by the
difficulties of searching for and retrieving and correlating
data from such a wide variety of sources. Data conversion
and amalgamation from all the diverse sources was the
major impediment to effective group working to create the
models. It became apparent that retrieving all the
appropriate data that described the part of the model under
creation would be assisted by a spatial database system
(GIs).

The Tower of London modeling process pinpointed the
desirability of a spatial database to manage the data
available from which to model. It may also be questioned
whether it is necessary to model at a consistent level of
detail. The VRML models in particular and VR in general
lack the animated behaviour of crowd scenes, traffic and
plant movement which give life and credibility to urban
areas or historic landscapes. It is possible to introduce some
of these effects through integration of digital video into the
scenes but this further raises the question of when to model
and when drawing or map, film or image alone may suffice.
Those elements that constitute the broadly available source
data both constrain and help to define the lowest level of
detail achievable. A multimedia application may provide a
credible sense of presence without additional 3D modeling
in the CAD sense as evidenced by the extensive use of
panoramic images to convey urban experiences on the Web.
Experience also shows that increasingly complex web-sites
require an underpinning database management system to
manage pages and links based on metadata such as author
and expiry date. This trend is now being reversed with the

The two models, existing and proposed, shared many
common elements and were in effect two different part
models with a common core. Each model comprised
approximately 100 Mbytes of geometry with 300 Mbytes
plus of bitmaps. Management of two such linked models
and their associated elements in Autocad and 3DS Max
proved difficult with the available CAD tools. It was
therefore possible to predict that management of many more
historic part models stepping back through time and
allowing also for models of different expert interpretations
derived from the same archaeological data to co-exist would
be in itself a major task requiring a spatial database. It was
also concluded that use of such a spatial information system
to locate and manage all the various data sources and
images including drawings would enhance the capacity of
the text based Oracle management system. A specification
for such a heritage site management information system was
subsequently drawn up in conjunction with the then
Surveyor of the Fabric to HRP.

GIS based Bristol Model & Image.
3rd Figure This image shows matching Web Browser viewpoints
in a simple VRML model to the left and a digital photo
image on the right. Both model and image in Frame are
generated from the GIs. Selecting the specific view in
VRML invokes the matching image as an URL. The
reverse is also possible. This is possibly the simplest
way of determining visibility of key features in an
image.
increasing use of active server pages generated on demand
from databases. A variety of multimedia outputs are
increasingly available on demand as active server pages.

592

These considerations led FBE/UWE to start afresh from the
original source data, to explore the use of a collaborative
spatial database (GIs) based approach within which to
integrate models and interventions from various sources and
from which to generate an overall navigable interactive
whole. A succession of beta versions of a 3D VRML
generator called Pavan have been used based on the
Mapinfo 2D GIs, as a collaborative development with the
software author. The 2D plan source data from which both
the Bristol Harbourside and Tower of London models were
generated was entered into Mapinfo.
These GIS Datasets have been used to explore retrieval of
digital still and movie images from the spatial database,
with associated visible features identified. The simplest and
most immediate approach is to enter the field of view
metadata into the database with a hyperlink to the actual
image or clip. Selecting that viewpoint in VRML can then
reveal features with hyperlinked associated information in a
frame alongside the actual image. However GIS contain
special search extensions to the structured query language
(SQL) commonly used for database queries. These can be
scripted in many commercially available GIs, which are
optimised for searching large spatial datasets. In Mapinfo
these SQL expressions include 'Intersects', Contains' and
'Within'. GIS also support 'Buffering' which creates a search
area around point, line or polygonal objects. Several
approaches are being explored using GIs to reduce the
dataset size and VRML to provide the on-demand return of
hot-spot' information. In the GIs the field of view data is
'buffered' to create a triangular or polygonal region within
which to discover if features of interest are 'contained' and
to retrieve information about a feature of interest. Absolute
heights of the features discovered are achieved by adding
them to the height of the terrain at that point. Visibility of
each feature above any intervening barriers or the terrain
itself, is determined by constructing lines between
viewpoint of the image and feature and using the 'intersect'
expression to check their relative height. Trigonometric
calculations can be scripted to provide an additional
'clipping' function, by determining the slope of the notional
pyramid of view, at the distance from the viewer of the
specific feature, to give a top and bottom extent absolute
height. The resolution of the image can be compared to the
recorded visible size of the feature to determine whether it
is actually visible based on an inverse square calculation,
and finally based on visible horizon or dipping distance.[6]

Tvpical SQL scriDts used in MaDinfo
Create Object As Buffer From Selection Width 220.0379 Units
"m" Resolution 12 Into Table TestDataPoint
Select TestDataPoint.obj from TestDataPoint, buffer where
buffer.obj Contains TestDataPoint.obj and
TestDataPoint.Descriotion = "Feature" into Buffer Sort
Select TestDataPoint.obj, Landscape-Featuresobj from
TestDataPoint, barrier, Landscape-Features where barrier.obj
Intersects TestDataPoint.obj And barrier.obj Intersects
Landscape-Featuresobj And
Landscape-Features.Landscape-Feature-Height >
TestDataPoint.Heioht into Barrier Sort
4th Figure -

GIS Based Search & Scripts

searched by outputting and expressing each feature as a
Visibility Sensor node as defined in VRML97 (the IS0
standard). This allows a simple bounding box to return an
exposedField value of true or false depending on whether or
not it is visible within the current field of view of the viewer
position and orientation. This value can then be passed as an
eventout to an external script to modify the information
displayed in a web page alongside the image. An ondemand hotspot image may be created by outputting the
image itself as a backdrop within the VRML scene with
transparent hyperlinked objects expressing features placed
in location between viewpoint and image. It is notable that
Live Picture's Photovista software uses extensions to
VRML both to display the wrapped JPG format panoramic
image and to locate VRML objects in the foreground, which
may act as hot-spot links.[7]

6. Conclusion

Once data has been roughly sorted to discover the
potentially visible it will constitute a smaller and more
manageable subset. This may then be more effectively

Much more metadata requires to be captured and entered
into a database with visual images and information than is

593

ECPPM98. Published by The Building Research Establishment,
UK. pp 151-160
[2]Bourdakis, V.1996 :‘From CAAD to VR, Building a VRML
model of London’s West End’. Proceedings of 3d UK VR-SIG
conference, De Montfort University, Leicester, , full paper
proceedings on-line at htpp:/hww.cms.dmu.ac.uwVRSIG96/
[3] Augenbroe, G., Rombouts, W., Verhoef, M. 1998. ’Product
Data Technology in Integrated A/E/C Systems: Past, Present 8z
Future’. Product and Process Modelling in the Building Industry.
R.Amor Ed. Proceedings of ECPPM98. Published by The
Building Research Establishment, UK. pp 37-45.
[4] Laurini, R. Thompson, D. 1992 : ‘Fundamentals of Spatial
Information Systems’. Academic Press, London.
[5] Further information on the Wearable Computer Project is at:
http://wearables.cs.bris.ac.uW
[6] Phillips,R., Counsell, 3, 1996,’A procedural approach to
simplification of detailed 3D cityscape models for Virtual Reality’
in proceedings of the JEC-GI96 joint european conference on
geographical information, Barcelona, published by 10s Press,
Amsterdam.
[7] Livepicture and Photovista information at:

currently the norm. A spatial database can be used to serve
appropriate information with images or video clips on
demand. There appears little difference between the data
management and retrieval issues that apply to web-based
multimedia interpretations of historic environments and
those that are particular to large area 3D models. A common
approach may serve an initial web site based outcome and
also assist later development of a virtual reality 3D model.
This may also enable effective use to be made of video or
high-resolution images in many instances where resources
are currently put into modeling alone. VRML is a useful de
facto standard both for defining and interacting with such
models, and in enabling the process of selection and
presentation of appropriate information with images to the
viewer.

7. References
[l] Counsell, J. 1998 :Issues in WWW Management and Delivery
of Libraries of 3D CAD Components’. Product and Process
Modelling in the Building Industry. R.Amor Ed. Proceedings of

http://www.livepicture.com/

594

