A Proposal for the Development of a Study to Determine the
Effectiveness of a Creativity-Centered Unit of Study in the
Advancement of Spatial Abilities of American and Japanese
Female Engineering Students
Susan G. Miller, Assistant Professor
Purdue University, USA
of Computer Graphics at Purdue University.
The experimental treatment will consist of
exposure or no exposure to a unit of study in
creativity in an engineering graphics course(s). The
control group will consist of individuals who are not
enrolled or have not taken the engineering graphics
course(s) used in the study and are not exposed to the
creativity unit of study. The “Mental Rotations Test”
will measure spatial abilities. 111 The “Spatial
Aptitude Test in Spatial Relations” will also be
employed. 121 Creativity will be measured by the
“AC Test of Creative Ability”. [3]

Abstract
The purpose of this project is the deivlopirieiit,
evaluation, a i d iriipleriieritatioii of a crwiti\itycentered i i r i i t of study in the ndvariceriieiit of s p t i a l
abilities of Aiiiericari arid Japmese Feiiiale
eiigirieeriiig studeiits. This project is eiivisioiied as ( I
pcirtnership betweeri the author aiid colleagiies iii
universities iii Japaii. The betiefits will iiicliide
iriteriintiorial coopercrtioii betweeti
Japanese
uriivei-sities ai’id Piircliie Uriiversity i i i developiiig
spatial ability resear-cl!. Feiriale eiigiiieeriiig studerits
will nlso hopefiilly betiefit fi-orii tlie fiiidirigs of this
research. This paper will disciiss tlie project mid tlic
tlieor-eticalfoiiridfitioii iipoii which it w n s based.

2. Statement of the Problem
Will the use of‘ a unit of study in creativity
develop and advance the spatial abilities of American
and Japanese female-engineering students?

1. Introduction
This proposal defines the development o f ;I
research study that will determine if the use o f a
creativity-centered unit of study will advance
American and Japanese female-engineering students’
spatial abilities. The purpose ofthis study will be to
conduct an extensive review of related literature.
develop, evaluate, and field-test the creativity unit of
study to determine if it will advance the spatial
abilities of female engineering students.
The investigation will use a 2 x 3 factorial pretescposttest control group design with approximately 40
women engineering students from Purdue University
and 40 women engineering students from selected
Japanese universities. The study will compare the
spatial abilities of women engineering students
possessing high or low creative abilities, who are
exposed to a creativity unit of study, with female
engineering students, who are not exposed to the
creativity unit of study. This project will allow the
researcher to work directly with Japanese engineering
graphics professors through a cooperative effort of
Professor Kumiko Shiina of the National Center for
University Entrance Examinations, Tokyo, Japan,
who currently is a visiting scholar in the Department

3. Significance of the Problem
The use of spatial abilities to visualize solutions to
design problems is an important cognitive process for
individuals i n many diverse professions. In ;L survey
of‘professionals in educational and industrial settings
that are based on the concepts of engineering
graphics, Jensen found that spatial abilities are the
most important of i’ourteen various attributes a person
should possess to be a successful engineer or
technologist. 141 Spatial ability attributes also are
important for the seemingly unrelated areas of
achievement in mathematics, chemistry, biology, and
science. Data of the United States Employment
Service show that eighty-four occupations employ
persons who possess spatial abilities in the top ten
percent of the population. Engineers, scientist,
drafters, and designers represent eighty-five percent
of these occupations. Because spatial abilities have
been, and continue to be, important for many
disciplines, most technology and engineering
educational programs have included technical or
engineering graphics as a basic component of their

255
0-7695-0743-3100 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

curricula. [ 5 ] Presenting abstract conceptual ideas
graphically through the use of sketches, mechanical
drawings, and computer-aided design is a
fundamental approach used by many different
disciplines. [6] Engineering graphics is the basic
means of representing conceptual images graphically.
The concepts of engineering graphics are taught early
in the education of engineers, designers, and
technologists.
Like spatial abilities, creative abilities are
common to successful engineers. Creativity can be
defined as ability characterized by the production of a
unique solution of a problem. Creative ideas may be
either new or a combination of existing ideas in a
way that is new to the creator. The key to creating a
truly original focused and appropriate idea is to start
at zero with a completely open mind with no
preconceptions. The moment a wall is built around
those ideas, the range of possibilities becomes
limited. [7]
Traditionally, it has been assumed that special
talent is necessary to produce new and valuable
entities. However, it is rather popular among
professional researchers as well as nonprofessionals
to insist that the potential for creativity exist in
everyone. Many types of professionals, including
engineers, educational psychologists, business
executives, and government personnel concerned
with manpower, are interested in creativity in an
immediate and pressing way, primarily in order to
identify and nurture creative talent.
Rothenberg and Hausman claim that creativity
consists of the capacity for bringing something into
being by involving at least three separable
components: the creative person, the creative process,
and the created object. Although investigators of
creativity do not always specify the particular
components of their studies, it is helpful to bear in
mind that these components influence method and
conclusions. Frequently investigators are not aware
that the data appropriate to one component differs
significantly from the data appropriate to another. [8]
The literature has shown that very few, if any,
research studies have been conducted that investigate
the use of creative exercises in the development and
enhancement of spatial abilities. Thus, the literature
shows a need for research to determine if the
inclusion of creative exercises would advance the
spatial abilities of female engineering students. If so,
the results could be generalized to a larger population
because of the use of female engineering students
from the United States and Japan.
Knowledge gained specifically from this study
could be useful to determine how best to advance the
spatial abilities of American and Japanese female

engineering students based on their creative abilities.
The results of this study should show also how the
application of a unit of study in creativity in an
engineering graphics course might be effective in the
advancement of spatial abilities. If spatial abilities
can be advanced, the retention rates of engineering
students may be increased. Retention is vital because
fewer students are choosing engineering as a
profession. Because females are underrepresented,
engineering education programs should take steps to
recruit and retain these students. Female students not
retained in engineering education programs will be a
lost resource that could affect the future stability of
the engineering profession.

4. The Plan of Research
The population for a study of this nature would be
female engineering students enrolled in CGT 155
during Fall Semester 2000 at Purdue University and
female engineering students enrolled in selected
Japanese engineering universities, such as the
University of Tokyo. The sample will be determined
by the available number of students willing to
participate in the study. The total number for this
study will be approximately 80 subjects who have not
had any prior exposure to engineering or technical
graphics or related areas.
Hypotheses
This study will test null hypotheses of the
research questions to determine the validity,
reliability, and the practical usefulness of the
creativity unit of study for advancing the spatial
abilities of American and Japanese femaleengineering students. The statistical hypotheses
utilized for this study are listed below in the null
form:

256

HOI:

There will be no significant interaction
between spatial ability (strong or weak) and
instructional treatment (exposure or no
exposure to creativity unit of study) of the
group mean scores on the Mental Rotations
Test.

H02:

There will be no significant difference
between group mean scores on the Mental
Rotations Test between subjects who were
exposed or not exposed to the creativity unit
of study.

H03:

There will be no significant difference
between group mean scores on the Mental
Rotations Test for strong creativity ability

subjects exposed to the creativity unit of
study and strong creativity ability not
exposed to the creativity unit of study.

7. SUMMARY
The results of this study will provide the statistical
results necessary to justify the use of a creativity unit
of study to advance the spatial abilities of female
engineering students. In the future, American and
Japanese instructors will be able to use creativity
exercises to improve student performance in courses
in which advanced spatial abilities are required and to
continue further research in these areas. This grant
also will allow the author to develop an area of
research that is important for both engineering and
technology educators and for advancing her
professional growth.

H04: There will be no significant difference
between group mean scores on the Mental
Rotations Test for weak creativity ability
subjects exposed to the creativity unit of
study and weak creativity ability not
exposed to the creativity unit of study.

H05:

There will be no significant difference
between group mean scores on the Mental
Rotations Test between American and
Japanese subjects.

8. References

The major methodological activities that will be
performed for the implementation of this study will
include the following procedures:

[ I ] S . G. Vandenberg, A. R. Kuse, A.R., “Mental rotations,
a group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization”,
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1978, v. 47, pp. 599-604.

1. Extensive review of literature including spatial
abilities, creativity, instructional media design,
and learning styles.

[2] “Spatial Aptitude Test in Spatial Relations”, College
Entrance Examination Board. 1939.

[3] R. E. Magowna, R. E., “A comparison of pragmatical
and hypothetical problems for developing creativity in
design”, Texas A & M University, College Station, TX,
Doctoral dissertation. 1967.

2. Development of the creativity unit of study.
3. Peer evaluation of the creativity unit of study by
noted experts involved in creativity research and
instruction.

[4] C. H. Jensen, C.H., “The impact of computer graphics
on instruction in engineering education” The Engineering
Design Graphics Joumal, West Lafayette, IN, 1986, v. 50,
pp. 24-33.

4. Field testing of the creativity unit of study with
American and Japanese undergraduate students.

[5] G. R. Bertoline, G.R., “The effectiveness of using
CADD to learn engineering design graphics”, Proceedings
of the 1987 Annual Mid-Year of the Engineering Design
Graphics Division of the American Society for Engineering
Education, 1987.

5. Developing contacts through Professor Kumiko
Shiina, with appropriate Japanese engineering
graphics professors, so the study can be
successfully run in Japan.

6. Making revisions to the creativity unit of study.

[6] J. Simon, C. Fortin, R. J. Ferguson, “Using 3-D
industrial software in a teaching environment”,Proceedings
of the 1987 Annual Mid-Year Meeting of the Engineering
Design Graphics Division of the American Society for
Engineering Education, 1987.

7. Making final revisions to the creativity unity of
study based on all evaluation data.

8. Evaluation and gaining permission or purchasing

[7] M. Oldach, M., “Creativity for graphic designers’,
North Light, Cincinnati, OH, 1995.

the creativity and spatial evaluation instruments.

9. Obtaining human subject approval for the
implementation of this study in CGT 155 at
Purdue University and selected Japanese
universities during Fall Semester 2000.

[SI A. Rothenber, C. R. Hausman, C. R., “The creativity
question”, Duke University Press, Durham, N.C., 1976.

257

