LVis - Digital Library Visualizer
Margaret Dolinsky
School of Fine Arts, Indiana University
1201 East Seventh Street Room 123
Bloomington, IN. 47405 USA
E-mail: dolinshy@indiana.edu

Katy Bomer & Andrew Dillon

Indiana University, SLIS
10th Street & Jordan Avenue
Bloomington, IN. 47405 USA
E-mail: {katy, dillon) @indiana.edu
Abstract

extract semantic relationships bctwccn images. Thc LSA
output feeds into a clustering algorithm that groups
images into classes of images that sharc semantically
similar descriptors. A modified Boltzman algorithm is uscd
to lay out images in space. The general interfacc mctaphor
as well as the user interface is explained and a sample
scenario is provided. Finally, we discuss the usability
studies undertakcn as well as thcir first rcsults. The paper
concludes with a discussion of the approach as well as a n
outlook.

LVis is a joint project aiming at the 2-0 and 3-0
visualization of search results derived from user queries
of digital library collections. This paper gives an
overview of the intent of the project, the data mining
techniques applied, the visualization metaphors used,
and the usability studies planned and tindertaken to
date.

1. Introduction

2. The Dido Image Bank

The project LVis (Digital Library Visualizer) aims to aid
users' navigation and comprehension of large document
sets retrieved from Digital Libraries. The first prototype
provides an interface to the DIDO Image Data Bank.
Figure 1 shows a still image of the 3-D human-computer
interface with a typical data crystal in the front and two
enlarged images in the back.

The current prototype of LVis displays search rcsults
from the Dido Image Bank, provided by thc Department of
the History of Art, Indiana University. Dido stores about
9,500 digitized images from the Finc Arts Slick Library
collection of over 320,000 images. The Dido tlatabasc
permits convenient access and use of images for tcaching
and research purposcs at Indiana University via a Web
interfacc at httn://www.dlib.indiana,e~lti/collcctioiis/~lidoi.
Each image in Dido is stored together with its thumbnail
reprcscntation as well as a textual dcscription. Figurc 2
shows a typical data sct.

Bosch.Garden of Earthly D e l i g h t s . D e t . ,
BOSCH, HIERONYMOUS,
Garden of Earthly Delights.Details.Couple
in a bubble, after 1 5 0 0 , o / p 220x195 c m ,
Madrid, Prado.2823, DeTolnay.233.11/3/76,
RB.PTG.NTH

Figure 1: CAVE Still of Image Crystals
The paper starts with an introduction into the DIDO
Image Data Bank followed by an overview of the general
system architecture. Subsequently, we introduce Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA), which is used to automatically

Figure 2: DIDO Image Data Representation

77
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

documents correspond to images and terms refer to the
words in the image descriptions.
LSA has demonstrated improved performance over the
traditional vector space techniques by modeling wordrelationships using a reduced approximation of the term by
document matrix for the column and row space computed
by the singular value &composition. It overcomes the
problems of synonymy (variability in human word choice)
and polysemy (same word has often different meanings)
by automatically organizing documents into a semantic
structure more appropriate for information retrieval.

For demonstration purposes the search result for three
predefined search keys: “Paintings by Bosch”, “African”,
and “Chinese Paintings”, containing 11, 17, and 671
images respectively, were selected as test data sets and
analyzed for visualization.

3. Overview
The general system architecture is displayed in Figure 3.
It can be divided in data analysis done in a preprocessing
step and the actual display of a search result at retrieval
time.

4.2 Clustering of Search Results

7

At retrieval time, the result of a database query is
hierarchically organized, based on the LSA output. A
nearest-neighbor-based,
agglomerative, hierarchical,
unsupervised conceptual clustering algorithm (Arabie,
1996) is applied to create a hierarchy of clusters grouping
documents of similar semantic structure. Clustering starts
with a set of singleton clusters, each containing a single
document (image) d€ D, i=l, ..., N, where D equals the
entire set of documents and N equals the number of all
documents. The two most similar clusters over the entire
set D are merged to form a new cluster that covers both.
This process is repeated for each of the remaining N 1
documents. A complete linkage algorithm is applied to
determine the overall similarity of document clusters based
on the document similarity matrix.
Merging of document clusters continues until a single,
all-inclusive cluster remains. At termination, a uniform,
binary hierarchy of document clusters is produced.

I

aDCumdnrIhbtdlwaEJ

Figure 3: System Architecture
During the preprocessing stage (Figure 3, left), a larger
data set of Dido is analyzed using a computationally
expensive mathematical technique called Latent Semantic
Analysis. The resulting Document-Document-Similarity
matrix reflects the semantic relationships between images
and can be used at retrieval time (Figure 3, right) to
organize and display a list of matching images using
Clustering Techniques and an appropriate spatial layout
algorithm. This is explained in detail subsequently.

4. Semantic Organization of Search Results
In order to display search results according to their
semantic relationships, the semantic structure has to be
exwacted, images have to be clustered according to the
extracted semantic structure, the best clustering partition
has to be selected, and the images need to be laid out
spatially, see also (Bomer, SPIE 2000).

dl

d2

d3

d4

d5

)

Figure 4: Hierarchical Clustennp
may
Figure 4 shows an example of how five Ahown
be clustered hierarchically. The cluster hip given
on the left hand side. Corresponding p&’ of a
on the right hand side. Note that/
document to itself is one.
.thin-cluster
is
The partition that shows the
similarity and lowest between-cldns Of a
for data visualization. It is d e t e y

4.1. Extracting Semantic Structure
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) (Landauer et al., 1998) is
used to automatically extract salient semantic relationships
between images based on their textual representation. LSA
allows one to induce and represent aspects of the meaning
of words. In order to do this, a representative sample of
documents is converted to a term-by-document matrix in
which each cell indicates the frequency with which each
term (rows) occurs in each document (columns). Note that

78

measure that contrasts the sum of within-cluster
similarities wSim by the sum of between-cluster similarities
bSim:
utility = wsim
wSim+bSim .

Starting the CAVE application with the abovementioned three predefined search result sets, participants
enter a virtual display theater that stages the digital library
as a cyberspace Easter Island. It is composed of a main
environment that presents gateways or portals to specific
subject categories established by predefined searches.

4.3. Spatial Layout
Rather than being a static visualization of data, the
interface is self-organizing and highly interactive. Data are
displayed in an initially random configuration, which sorts
itself out into a non-overlapping layout via a modified
Boltzman algorithm (Alexander et al., 1995) in which similar
images are placed close to one another. The algorithm
works by computing attraction and repulsion forces
among nodes. In our application, the nodes represent
images, which are attracted to other nodes (images) to
which they have a (similarity) link and repelled by nodes
(images) to which there is no link. Attraction and repulsion
forces are computed based on the underlying documentdocument similarity matrix.

5. Interface
Figure 6: Portal Representations of Africa and Bosch
Two interfaces have been implemented for LVis. A 2-D
Java applet that can be used on a desktop computer --see
(Borner, 2000-DL) for details -- as well as a 3-D immersive
environment for the CAVE (Cruz-Neira et al., 1993). Both
interfaces give users access to three levels of detail: they
provide an overview about document clusters and their
relations; they show how images belonging in the same
cluster relate to one another; and they give more detailed
information about an image such as its description or its
full size version. In the following we describe the
underlying metaphors (Dolinsky, 1998) and the user
interface for the 3-D immersive CAVE environment.

The gateways resemble heads and are seen as
sculptural forms (Dolinsky, 1997). The notion of
“headings” is extrapolated into the creation of “heads”.
These heads, or +D icons, represent subject categories.
Oftentimes, the heads are inspired by images of the data
set such as masks in the “African” data set (see Figure 5 ) .
Participants travel through the environment and confront
the categorical headings (see Figure 6 or 7 for examples).
In order to explore the heading further, participants must
“get inside its head.” Once this confrontation occurs and
the head is entered, the environment is transformed to a
new one displaying the image database for that heading.

Figure 5: Two Wooden Dance Masks from Gabon
Figure 7: Portal Representation for Chinese Paintings

79

unison and collected as a separate and uniquely chosen
grouping.

The first CAVE iteration of LVis premiers the artist
Hieronymous Bosch and the countries of China and
Africa. After exploring the Easter Island, participants
“head)) into a chosen category by navigating inside the
sculptural form. This causes the participants to be
transitioned to a new environment. The separate
environment is composed of the Dido data bank images
available for that category. These images, or slides from
the library, are presented in crystalline structures.
Each crystal represents a set of images with
semantically similar image descriptions as derived by LSA.
Images in each crystal are arranged so that categorically
related and similar images are in close proximity to one
another as shown in Figure 8. The formations of the
crystalline structures depend on the size of the resultant
data set from the original subject search. For example, the
search for the category or subject “China” produces a
search result of 671 images and the semantic relationships
of these images generate an environment with multiple
crystals to explore.
Crystals may grow from one point of origin (see Figure
1) or they may grow in parallel rows with images next to
one another (see Figure 8).

6. Usability studies
To date, we have examined only the user’s development
of physical control in the immersive world through a study
of object manipulation in physical space and the CAVE.
This provided us with baseline data on how easily users
could adjust to 3-D information spaces in terms of feeling
comfortable selecting and moving objects. This revealed
that users in the CAVE environment could be expected to
take longer to complete a movement task (see Waite,
2000).
One-way ANOVAs were performed to compare subjects’
performance on the task between the two environments.
The number of moves to solve the puzzle varied widely
(15-1 13) but only approached significance between the
environments on the first trial p < .06 (Real=23.83;
VR=35.67).
However, the time to move a ring was significantly
different between two environments across all four trials,
with performance in the CAVE being significantly slower
(see Table l), as expected.

ANOVA:
Trial 1:
Trial 2:
Trial 3:
Trial 4:

SS
22.411
Error
15.402
Error
3.873
Error
9.668
Error

DF MS
F
P
1 22.411 26.557 0.000
8.439 IO 0.844
1 15.402 16.057 0.002
9.592 10 0.959
1 3.873 15.072 0.003
2.569 10 0.257
1 9.668 10.684 0.008
9.049 IO 0.905

Table 1: ANOVA scores comparing time by trial in each
environment to move an object
Current plans are to concentrate on comparing user
performance and satisfaction with each interface. We have
completed a user and task analysis of typical Dido users
and discussed usage scenarios with a domain expert. From
this, we have developed a task taxonomy that we will
apply to the 3D desktop and the 1 D immersive CAVE
interface. This taxonomy includes tasks such as:

Figure 8: Image Crystals and Panels
Find and save 5 examples of Chinese Bronze work
Find and save 5 images of African musical
instruments
Find and save 5 images that contain examples of
masks

Participants can explore the crystalline structures of
datasets by navigating this new environment and gaining
viewing vantage points. Participants may select images of
interest in order to display a larger and clearer size version
(as done for two images in Figure 1). If the larger version is
not satisfactory it can be retumed to its previous iconic
presentation. Those that are of interest may be exhibited in

The rationale is to provide tasks that demand more than
a simple input of a query (e.g. find all paintings by Monet).

80

In this way we are hoping to encourage wider exploration
of the information space by the users.
Our measures will include the standard usability indexes
of effectiveness (completed searches), efficiency (time
taken, path length) and satisfaction (user ratings of
interfaces on a survey tool designed for this experiment).
From these measures we will also compare user
performance over time to see if there is any performance
improvement over the trial, which we expect will occur in
the CAVE but may not occur in the other environment.
Within the 3-D space we will pay particular attention to
the navigation paths taken by users so that we can gain
some insight into what cues they are exploiting to guide
their behavior.
A comparison of free sorting results for image data by
human subjects with the spatial organization of images as
derived via the mathematical clustering techniques applied
during data analysis is reported in (Bomer, IV2000).

9. References
Alexander, Garcia, and Alder (1995) Simulation of the
Consistent Boltzman Equation for Hard Spheres and Its
Extension to Dense Gases, Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer
Verlag.
Arabie, P, Hubert L. J. and De Soete G. (Editors) (1996)
Clustering and Classification. World Scientific Pub Co.
Bomer, K. (2000) Visible Threads: A smart VR interface to
digital libraries. Proceedings of IST/SPIE's 12th Annual
Intemational Symposium: Electronic Imaging 2000, Visual
Data Exploration and Analysis, San Jose, CA., pp 228-237,
httD://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-katv/SPIEOO/
Bomer, K. (in press) Extracting and visualizing semantic
structures in retrieval results for browsing. ACM Digital
Libraries, San Antonio, Texas, June 2-7, 2000.
httu://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-katv/DLOO/

7. Outlook

Bomer, K. (in press) Searching for the perfect match: A
comparison of sorting results for images by human subjects
and by Latent Semantic Analysis techniques. Information
Visualization (IV2000).London, UK, July 19-21, 2000.

It has been suggested to us that searches for images
would be helpful if the participant is able to actually see
the iconic image enlarge to a true to life size relationship.
This dynamic is something that cannot happen in a real
life slide library. The manipulation and display of
information with multiple size relationships is possible in
the CAVE. In addition to this, images can be mapped on a
virtual map of the world revealing their place of origin. The
connection of LVis to complementary online resources
such as image catalogs, music libraries, or even other
educational CAVE projects would enhance the course
material used in art history classes as well.

Berry, M. et al. SVDPACKC (Version 1.0) User's Guide,
University of Tennessee Tech. Report (393-194, 1993
(Revised
October
1996).
See
also
httD://www.netlib.orp/svdnack/index.html.

Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J. and DeFanti, T. A. (1993)
Surround-screen projection-based virtual reality: The design
and implementation of the CAVE, in J. T. Kajiya (ed.),
Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 93), Vol. 27,
Springer Verlag, pp. 135-142.
Dolinsky, M. (1998) Virtual Environment as Rebus.
Consciousness Reframed 19-23 July 1998. Newport,
University of Wales College Center for the Advanced Inquiry
in the Interactive Arts. Consciousness Reframed, second
annual Intemational CAiiA Research Conference.

8. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the students involved in this
project: Andrew J. Clune, Ryan Schnizlein, Ho Sang
Cheon, Kevin Kowalew, Sumayya A. Ansari, and Tyler
Waite. We are grateful to Eileen Fry from Indiana
University for her insightful comments on this research as
well as ongoing discussions conceming the Dido Image
Bank. Dave Pape of the Electronic Visualization
Laboratory, UIC is the software architect for XP, the
underlying CAVE framework. The SVDPACK by M. Berry
was used for computing the singular value decomposition.
The research is supported by a High Performance Network
Applications grant of Indiana University, Bloomington.

Dolinsky, M. (1997) Creating Art through Virtual
Environments. Computer Graphics 31(4): p.34-35, 82 New
York: ACM Press.
The Indiana University Department of the History of Art Dido
Image Bank, httD://www.dlib.indiana.edu/collections/dido/
Landauer, T. IC, Foltz, P. W., 8c Laham, D.(1998) Introduction
to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259284.

Colored, full-size versions of Figures 1, 6, 7, and 8 are
.
accessible at httD://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-katv/IV-LVis

Waite, T. (2000) VEHanok Performance Differences in
Virtual vs Real Environments. MAICS 2000 - MidWest
Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science Conference,
pp. 13-20

81

