Illustrative Streamline Placement and Visualization
Liya Li*

Hsien-Hsi Hsieht

The Ohio State University

National Dong Hua University, Taiwan

ABSTRACT
Inspired by the abstracting, focusing and explanatory qualities of
diagram drawing in art, in this paper we propose a novel seeding
strategy to generate representative and illustrative streamlines in 2D
vector fields to enforce visual clarity and evidence. A particular focus of our algorithm is to depict the underlying flow patterns effectively and succinctly with a minimum set of streamlines. To achieve
this goal, 2D distance fields are generated to encode the distances
from each grid point in the field to the nearby streamlines. A local
metric is derived to measure the dissimilarity between the vectors
from the original field and an approximate field computed from the
distance fields. A global metric is used to measure the dissimilarity
between streamlines based on the local errors to decide whether to
drop a new seed at a local point. This process is iterated to generate
streamlines until no more streamlines can be found that are dissimilar to the existing ones. We present examples of images generated
from our algorithm and report results from qualitative analysis and
user studies.
Keywords: Streamlines, 2D flow visualization, illustrative rendering. distance field
Index Terms:
1.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation Display algorithms; 1.3.6 [Computer Graphics]:
Methodology and Techniques Interaction Techniques
1 INTRODUCTION
Effective visualization of vector fields plays an important role in
many scientific and engineering disciplines. To visualize 2D flow
fields, several techniques have been developed in the past. The better known techniques include the geometry-based methods such as
streamline and particle tracing, and the texture-based methods such
as LIC [2], Spot Noise [15], and IBFV [16]. In general, texturebased techniques display a dense representation of the flow fields
but the resulting visualization generally lacks visual focus to highlight salient flow features. They are also more expensive to compute
and can suffer from aliasing problems. Comparatively speaking, visualization of streamlines is still a popular method because they are
faster to compute and can be rendered at any resolution at interactive rates. The main challenge for the streamline-based methods,
however, is the placement of seeds. On the one hand, placing too
many streamlines can make the final images cluttered, and hence
the data become more difficult to understand. On the other hand,
placing too few streamlines can miss important flow features. An
ideal streamline seed placement algorithm should be able to generate visually pleasing and technically illustrative images. It should
also allow the user to focus on important local features in the flow
field.
Hand-drawn streamlines are frequently shown in scientific literature to provide concise and illustrative descriptions of the underlying physics. Fig. 1 shows such an example. The abstract infor*e-mail: lil@cse.ohio-state.edu

te-mail:hsi @game.csie.ndhu.edu.tw
te-mail:hwshen@cse.ohio- state.edu
IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2008
4 - 7 March, Kyoto, Japan
978-1-4244-1966-1/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Han-Wei Shent
The Ohio State University

mation provided by the streamlines in the image clearly shows the
primary features of the flow field. Even though the streamlines do
not cover everywhere in the field, we are able to create a mental
model to reconstruct the flow field when looking at this concise illustration. That means, to depict a flow field, it is unnecessary to
draw streamlines at a very high density. Abstraction can effectively
prevent visual overload, and only emphasizes the essential while
deemphasizing the trivial or repetitive flow patterns. In the visualization research literature, there have been some streamline seeding
algorithms proposed in the past [14, 6, 17, 10, 9]. Most of the methods, however, are based on evenly-spaced distribution criteria, i.e.,
streamlines are spaced evenly apart at a pre-set distance threshold
across the entire field. While those methods can reduce visual cluttering by terminating the advection of streamlines when they are
too close to each other, more streamlines than necessary are often
generated as a result. In addition, there is no visual focus provided
to the viewers to quickly identify the overall structure of the flow
field.

-W-.

-

Figure 1: Hand-drawn streamlines for a flow field around a cylinder. Image
courtesy of Greg Turk [14].

Spatial coherence often exists in a flow field, meaning neighboring regions have similar vector directions, and nearby streamlines resemble each other. To create a concise and illustrative visualization of streamlines, in this paper we present a seeding strategy which utilizes spatial coherence of streamlines in 2D vector
fields. Our goal is to succinctly and effectively illustrate vector
fields, rather than uniformly laying out streamlines with equal distances between them, as in most of the existing methods. We allow
the density of streamlines in the final image to vary to reflect the
coherence of the underlying flow patterns and also to provide visual focus. In our algorithm, 2D distance fields representing the
distances from each grid point in the field to the nearby streamlines
are computed. From the distance fields, a local metric is derived
to measure the dissimilarity between the vectors from the original
field and an approximate field computed from the nearby streamlines. We also define a global metric to measure the dissimilarity
between streamlines. A greedy method is used to choose a point as
the next seed if both of its local and global dissimilarity satisfy our
requirements.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first
briefly review the related work. We then present our illustrative
streamline placement algorithm in detail. Finally, results from
quantitative analysis and user studies are discussed.
2 RELATED WORK
There exist several streamline seeding strategies for two dimensional flow fields. The image guided streamline placement algorithm proposed in [14] uses an energy function to measure the dif-

79

ference between a low-pass filtered streamline image and an image
of the desired visual density. An iterative process is used to reduce the energy through some pre-defined operations on the streamlines. Jobard and Lefer [6] explicitly control the distance between
adjacent streamlines to achieve the desired density. Each candidate seed is placed at a point away from an existing streamline at
some pre-specified distance, from which a new streamline is advected backward and forward until it comes too close to the existing
streamlines or leaves the 2D domain. Verma et al. [17] proposed a
seed placement strategy based on flow topology characterized by
critical points in the field. Different seeding templates for various
types of critical points are defined, and the shape and size of templates are determined by the influence region covered by the critical points. To have a sufficient coverage, additional seed points are
randomly distributed in empty regions using Poisson disk distribution. Mebarki et al. [10] proposed a two dimensional streamline
seeding algorithm by placing a new streamline at the farthest point
away from all existing streamlines. Delaunay triangulation is used
to tessellate regions between streamlines, and seeds are placed in
the center of the biggest voids. The purpose of their algorithm is to
generate long and evenly spaced streamlines. Intuitively, seeding a
streamline in the largest empty region indeed favors longer streamlines. However, as more streamlines are generated or a smaller
separating distance threshold is used, especially near the critical
regions, discontinuity of flow paths can still exist. Liu et al. [9]
proposed an advanced evenly-spaced streamline placement strategy
which prioritizes topological seeding and long streamlines to minimize discontinuities. Adaptive distance control based on local flow
variance is used to address the cavity problem.
There are some other research related to our work. In the past
years, there are many techniques proposed to simplify vector fields.
Heckel et al. [5] proposed to generate a top-down segmentation of
the discrete field by splitting clusters of points. Beginning with a
single cluster including all points of the vector field, more clusters are created under the guidance of some error metric defined
by the distance between the streamline integrated from the simplified vector field and one from the original vector field. Telea and
Wijk [11] presented a method to hierarchically bottom-up cluster
the input flow field. The algorithm repeatedly selects the two most
resembling neighboring clusters and merging them to form a larger
cluster until a single cluster covering the whole field is generated.
The metric to evaluate the similarity between vectors is based on the
direction and magnitude comparison, and the position comparison.
Du and Wang [3] proposed to use Centroidal Voronoi Tessellations
(CVTs) to simplify and visualize the vector fields. In terms of measuring the similarity between streamlines, Bordoloi and Shen [1]
presented an interactive global technique for dense vector field visualization using levels of detail. The level of detail is controlled
based on the local complexity of the vector field. A quadtree is
constructed and used as a hierarchical data structure for error measurement. The error associated with each node represents the error when only one representative streamline is computed for all the
points within the entire region corresponding to the node.

Figure 2: Streamlines generated by our algorithm.

80

3 ALGORITHM OVERVIEW
The primary goal of our work is to generate streamlines succinctly
for 2D flow fields by emphasizing the essential and deemphasizing the trivial or repetitive flow patterns. Fig. 2 shows an example
of streamlines generated by our algorithm, where the selection of
streamlines is based on a similarity measure among streamlines in
the nearby region. The similarity is measured locally by the directional difference between the original vector at each grid point
and an approximate vector derived from the nearby streamlines, and
globally by the accumulation of the local dissimilarity at every integrated point along the streamline path. To approximate the vector field from the existing streamlines, 2D distance fields recording
the closest distances from each grid point in the field to the nearby
streamlines are first computed. Then the approximate vector direction is derived from the gradients of the distance fields. Our algorithm greedily chooses the next candidate seed that has the least
degree of similarity according to our metrics. Detailed information
about our similarity measures and the seed selection algorithm is
provided in later sections.
Our algorithm has the following unique characteristics when
compared with the existing streamline seeding algorithms [14, 6,
17, 10, 9]:
First, the density of streamlines. Some of the existing techniques
favor uniformly spaced streamlines. However, in our algorithm,
the density of streamlines is allowed to vary in different regions.
The different streamline densities reflect different degrees of coherence in the field, which allows the viewer to focus on more important flow features. Regions with sparse streamlines imply the flows
are relatively coherent, while regions with dense streamlines mean
more seeds are needed to capture the essential flow features. This
characteristic of our algorithm matches with one of the general principles of visual design by Tufte [13] - different regions should carry
different weights, depending on their importance. The information
can be conveyed in a layered manner by means of distinctions in
shape, color, density, or size.
Second, the representativeness of streamlines. The general
goal of streamline placement is to visualize the flow field without
missing important features, which can be characterized by critical
points. Since the flow directions around critical points can change
rapidly compared to those non-critical regions, our algorithm is able
to capture those regions and place more streamline seeds accordingly.
Finally, the completeness of flow patterns. In the previous
streamline placement algorithms that have explicit inter-streamline
distance control, the advection of streamlines can be artificially terminated. This may cause visual discontinuity of flow pattern, especially when it is near the vicinity of critical points. Our seeding algorithm, however, only determines where to drop seeds and allows
the streamlines to be integrated as long as possible until they leave
the 2D domain, reach critical points, or generate a loop. Without
abruptly stopping the streamlines, the flow patterns shown in the
visualization are much more complete and hence easier to understand.

3.1 Distance Field
A distance field [7] represents the distance from every point in the
domain to the closest point on any object. The distance can be unsigned or signed, and the sign is used to denote that the point in
question is inside or outside of the object. With the distance field,
some geometric properties can be derived such as the surface normal [4]. The concept of distance fields has been used in various
applications such as morphology, visualization, modeling, animation, and collision detection.
In our algorithm, we use unsigned distance fields to record
the closest distance from every point in the field to the nearby
streamlines that have been computed. In practice, a mathemati-

cally smooth streamline is approximated by a series of polylines
integrated bidirectionally through numerical integrations. Given
a line segment si {Pi,Pi+ }, where p C R3,i C N, a vector
vi p i+I-pi, we can compute the nearest point Pq on the line
segment si to an arbitrary point q by:
Pq

Pi + tVi

(1)

where
t

clamp( (q

P-i) iv), clamp(x)
Ivil

min(max(x, 0), 1),

The distance d(q, si) from the point q to the line segment si is
computed by the Euclidean distance between q and Pq. For a given
streamline L, where L = {Usi si= {pi, pi+, }, i C N, p C R3 }, and si
is a line segment of line L, the unsigned distance function at a point
q with respect to L is:
d (q, L)

min{d (q, si) Isi C L}

(2)

To speed up the computation of distance fields, we implement it
on GPU. We defer the discussion about the GPU implementation
to section 6. The distance fields are used to derive an approximate
vector field, which can be used to measure the dissimilarity between
streamlines in the local regions. In the next section, we describe our
algorithm in detail.

3.2 Computation of Local Dissimilarity
Because of spatial coherence in the field, neighboring points can
have advection paths with similar shapes, even though they may
not be exactly the same. Given a streamline, considering the closest
distance from every point in the field to this streamline, a distance
field can be computed. The iso-contours of this distance field will
locally resemble the streamline, i.e., the closer is the contour to the
streamline, the more similar their shapes will be. This is the basic
idea how we locally approximate streamlines in the empty regions
from existing ones, which forms the basis for us to measure the
coherence of the vector field in local regions.
With the distance field, we compute a gradient field using the
central difference operator. For each vector of this gradient field,
after a 90 degree of rotation, we get an approximate vector that is
derived from the single streamline. Whether to rotate the gradient
clockwise or counter-clockwise is decided based on the flow direction of the nearby streamline so that the resulting approximate
vector points to roughly the same direction as the streamline. To
measure the local coherence, we define a local dissimilarity metric
as the direction difference between the true vector at the point in
question and its approximate vector. For a point p C R3, the local
dissimilarity DI (p) at this point is written as the following:

DI (p)

1-(

P) (P)

Ivi(p) V(P)I +1)/2

(3)

where vl(p) is the approximate vector at p, and v(p) the original
vector. The value is in the range of 0.0 to 1.0; the larger the value
is, the more dissimilar between the true vector and the approximate
vector at that point. We note that this metric only denotes the local
dissimilarity between the vectors at the point, instead of the dissimilarity between the streamline originated from this point and its
nearby streamline. Also, so far we only consider the case that there
exists only one streamline in the field. In the next section, we discuss how to consider multiple streamlines existing in the field and
modify our dissimilarity metric, which is a more general case assumed in our algorithm. After that, we discuss how to select the
streamline seeds.

3.3 Influence from Multiple Streamlines
When there exist multiple streamlines in the field, we cannot use
the standard definition of distance field and simply compute one
smallest distance from each point to the streamlines, and evaluate
the dissimilarity metric as presented above. This is because the distance field computed with this method will generate a discrete segmentation of the field. For example, the left image in Fig. 3 shows
the approximate vectors in orange given two existing streamlines S1
and S2 in black. For the points in the lower triangular region under
the dotted line, they are classified to be the closest to streamline S2,
while the points in the upper triangle are the closest to streamline
SI. If we use a single distance field computed from the two lines
to approximate the local vectors, the resulting vectors will be generated in a binary manner, as shown by those orange vectors. This
binary segmentation causes discontinuity in the approximate vector
field. Given two lines as shown in the example, for the empty space
in between, a more reasonable approximation of the vectors should
go through a smooth transition from one line to the other, as shown
on the right in Fig. 3.
Si

....

..........

..S2rm

S2

Figure 3: Assume the flow field is linear and streamlines are straight lines.
The circle in the images denotes the region where a critical point is located.
Black lines represent the exact streamlines seeded around the critical point.
The orange lines represent the approximate vectors by considering the influence of only one closest streamline (left), and the blending influence of two
closest streamlines (right).

In our algorithm, we achieve a smooth transition of vector directions between streamlines by blending the influences from multiple
nearby streamlines. In the previous section, we discuss how to compute the dissimilarity metric if there exists only one streamline. For
the more general case where multiple streamlines are present, for
each point we pick the M nearest streamlines, evaluate the dissimilarity function as in equation 3 for each streamline respectively, and
blend the M Dlk (p) together to compute the final dissimilarity value
at p as:

DI (p)

=:

M
L

k=l

(WkDlk (P))

(4)

where Wk is the weight of the influence from the streamline k decided by the distance between point p and the streamline k. Dlk(p)
is the dissimilarity value computed at point p using the distance
field generated by streamline k. Analogously, the approximate vector at p is the blending of the vectors generated from the M nearest
streamlines, and each vector is a 90 degree rotation of the gradient
computed from the corresponding streamline, as described above.
We note that different methods for assigning the weight can be used
in the equation depending on the requirement of the user. For all
the images presented in this paper, we consider the blending of two
nearest streamlines, that is, M equals to 2 in equation 4.

3.4 Computation of Global Dissimilarity
As mentioned in the previous section, at each point, there is a local dissimilarity measure that represents the direction difference between the true vector at that point and the approximate vector derived from the nearby streamlines. However, the local dissimilarity
only captures the coherence about the local vectors instead of the
similarity between streamlines. In order to capture the coherence

81

between a streamline originated from a point and its nearby streamlines, we define a global dissimilarity measure by accumulating
the local dissimilarity at every integrated point along its streamline
path. Written in equation:

Dg(p)=

L

,
n=1

(unDl(Xn,Yn))

(5)

where Dg(p) is the global dissimilarity at point p, and (xn,yn) is
the nth integrated point along the streamline originated from p. The
length of the streamline is L. DI (xn, yn) is computed by interpolating the local dissimilar values at the four corner grid points. Based
on different metrics, un can be computed differently. In our algorithm, we use averaged local dissimilarity values along the streamline path, i.e., un is equal to 1 IL.

3.5 Selection of Candidate Seeds
Before we discuss our algorithm, we first introduce two userspecified threshold values, T, and Tg. T, is the threshold for the minimum local dissimilarity, while Tg is the threshold for the minimum
global dissimilarity. To avoid drawing unnecessary streamlines, we
only choose seeds from grid points satisfying equation 6.

DI(i, j) > T7;Dg(i, j) > Tg

(6)

The initial input to our algorithm is a streamline seeded at a random location in the field. For example, we can use the central point
of the domain as the initial seed to generate the streamline. With
the first streamline, the distance field is calculated and the dissimilarity value at each grid point is computed. The important step now
is how to choose the next seed. Here we present a greedy but more
efficient method for this purpose. Given the two threshold values,
our algorithm for choosing the next seed is described as follow:
1. Sort the grid points in the descending order of the local dissimilar values computed from equation 4.
2. Dequeue the first point (i, j) in the sorted queue. If DI (i, j) is
larger than T7, integrate a streamline from this point bidirectionally and compute the global dissimilarity value Dg (i, j) by
using equation 5. Otherwise, if DI (i, j) is smaller than TI, the
iteration terminates.
3. If Dg(i, j) is larger than Tg, this seed is accepted as the new
seed and the streamline being integrated is displayed. Otherwise, go back to step (2).

When a new streamline is generated, we update the distance field
and re-compute the dissimilarity values at the grid points as mentioned in section 3.3. The above algorithm runs iteratively to place
more streamlines. The more streamlines we place, the smaller the
dissimilarity values will become at the grid points. The program
terminates when no seed can be found that satisfies equation 6. At
this point, we have enough streamlines to represent the underlying
flow field according to the user desired coherence thresholds.
To speed up the process of choosing the candidate seeds, during
the process mentioned above, when Dg(i, j) is smaller than Tg, we
mark this grid point, and also those grid points at the four corners
of the cells that are passed by the streamline originated from (i, j).
These points will be excluded from being considered any further in
the later iterations, because there already exist nearby streamlines
very similar to the streamlines that would have been computed from
them. Therefore, it is unnecessary to check those grid points again.
Generally speaking, for a dataset that has a sufficient resolution, the
flow within a cell is very likely to be coherent, so this heuristic will
not affect the quality of our visualization output much. That means,
in most cases, streamlines from those grid points will be similar to

82

the streamline that has already been rejected. This allows us to reduce the number of streamlines to compute and test substantially,
without visible quality difference being seen from all of our experiments.
Fig. 4 shows an image of streamlines generated with an oceanfield data using our algorithm. For rendering, since our algorithm
allows streamlines to be integrated as long as possible until they
leave the 2D domain, reach critical points, or generate a loop, the
local density of ink in some regions may be higher than other regions. To even the distribution of ink, we render the streamlines in
the alpha blending mode, where the alpha value of each line segment is adjusted according to the density distribution of the projected streamline points in image space. Each sampling point on the
streamlines is first mapped to image space, and the corresponding
screen space point is treated as some energy source, which can be
defined by the Gaussian function. Then, an energy distribution map
based on all streamlines is generated. This energy map is mapped
to an opacity map to control the opacity of the streamline line segments as they are drawn. This can effectively reduce the intensity
of the lines if they are cluttered together.

Figure 4: Streamlines generated by our algorithm on the Oceanfield data.

4 TOPOLOGY-BASED ENHANCEMENT
Although without explicitly considering the flow topology, our algorithm would naturally place more streamline seeds around the
critical points because of the lack of coherence there. Sometimes
it is desired to highlight the streamline patterns around the critical
points so that the viewer can clearly identify the type of the critical
points. To achieve this goal, we can adapt our algorithm by placing
an initial set of streamlines with some specific patterns around the
critical points, instead of randomly dropping the first seed. This is
similar to the idea of seed templates proposed by Verma et al. [17].
For each type of critical points, we use a minimal set of streamlines to distinguish them from each other. For a source or sink, we
place four seeds along the perimeter of a circle around the critical
point, where each of the seeds is the intersection point of the x-y
axes with the circle; for saddle, we place four seeds along the two
lines bisecting the eigen directions with two seeds on each line; for
spiral or center, we place one seed along a straight line emanating
from the critical point. Fig. 5 shows such an image of streamlines
generated with topology information being considered.

5 QUALITY ANALYSIS
As mentioned above, our algorithm generates representative
streamlines to illustrate the flow patterns of the underlying field.
Given appropriate threshold values, our algorithm selects streamlines based on the flow coherence via the dissimilarity measures
defined above. The density of the selected streamlines can vary
based on the degree of coherence in the local regions. As in Fig. 4,
there are void regions between the displayed streamlines, which tell
us the streamlines in those void regions look similar to each other
and hence can be easily derived. Therefore, our algorithm does not
place many seeds in those regions. Since we only draw a small
subset of the streamlines in the whole vector field, it is necessary

Figure 5: Streamlines generated when the flow topology is considered. There
are three saddle and two attracting focus critical points in this data.

to conduct quality analysis of our method. One method of analysis, which can be performed quantitatively, is to compare the original vector field with the approximate vector field derived from the
streamlines selected by our algorithm. Another method is to perform user studies to verify whether the users can correctly interpret
the field in the empty regions, and also whether our representation
is an effective method to depict the vector fields. In the following,
we first describe our approach for performing quantitative analysis
with some results, and then present findings from our user studies.

5.1 Quantitative Comparison
Our quantitative analysis consists of a data level comparison and
a streamline level comparison. For the data level comparison, we
first reconstruct a vector field from the streamlines generated by our
algorithm. Then we compare the local vectors between the reconstructed field and the original field. For the streamline level comparison, originated from each grid point, two streamlines are integrated
respectively in the original vector field and the reconstructed one,
and we compute the errors between these two streamlines. We note
that the errors are only used to study whether our algorithm misses
any regions that require more streamlines to be drawn. The errors
do not represent the errors in the visualization, since every streamline presented to the user is computed using the original vector field.
In the following, we first describe how we reconstruct a vector field
from the streamlines that are displayed. We then present our data
level and streamline level comparison results.

5.1 .1 Reconstruction of Flow Field
The process to reconstruct the approximate flow field from selected
streamlines is very similar to the process presented in section 3.2
and 3.3 that we use to iteratively introduce streamline seeds. The
main difference is that now we are given a final set of streamlines to
generate the gradient fields. Given a streamline in the final streamline set, a distance field can be computed, from which we can compute its derived gradients. In section 3.3, we discuss the computation of the local dissimilarity by considering multiple nearby
streamlines. With the same idea, for each grid point, we first identify the nearest M streamlines, and use the distances to the streamlines to generate M gradients at that point. After rotating the gradients by 90 degrees to get the approximate vectors, the final reconstructed vector at this grid point is computed from an interpolation
of the M vectors inversely proportional to the distances from the
point to the corresponding streamline. As mentioned above, in this
paper we consider the nearest two streamlines for each grid point,
that is, M 2. For the grid points that are selected as the seeds or
there are streamlines passing through it, we use the original vectors
as the reconstructed vectors.
5.1 .2 Data Level Comparison
Data level comparison is performed between the original vector
field and the reconstructed vector field at every grid point. Our goal

is to evaluate how well the streamlines displayed by our algorithm
can represent the original vectors at the empty regions, based on the
computational model we introduce above. One of the challenges to
perform data level comparison is to design appropriate metrics to
quantify the errors. Since our goal is to evaluate how much the true
vector direction at each grid point is aligned with the reconstructed
vector, we take the cosine of the angle between the original vector
and the reconstructed vector at each grid point as a measure of similarity. Fig. 6 shows a result of our comparison using one vector
data set. In the image, dark pixels depict that the two vectors at the
grid points are almost the same, while brighter pixels mean more
errors. From the image, it can be seen that the streamlines we display are representative for the original vector field, because in most
of the empty regions, the approximate vectors from the streamlines
are well aligned with those in the original field. There are a few regions with higher errors, which mostly fall into the following cases.
The first case is regions near the domain boundary. Our algorithm
explicitly excludes the grid points on the boundary from being selected as candidate seeds. This is because sometimes the vectors
on boundaries are odd due to sampling issues, but the fieldlines in
downstream or upstream tend to be more normal and stable. The
second case of error is due to our implementation. When we select
the next candidate seed, if a grid point is too near to an existing
streamline, for example the distance to this streamline is within a
cell, we exclude this point from being a candidate seed. This is
really not a cause of concern because even if the streamline integrated from this point eventually will be different from this existing
streamline, there will be some point elsewhere on this streamline
or near this streamline being picked up as the seed. The third case
might be a problem caused by the linear interpolation operator we
use to blend the influence from multiple nearby streamlines based
on the distance from the grid points to those streamlines.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: (a) Representative streamlines generated by our algorithm
(b) Gray scale image colored by one minus a normalized value of
the cosine of the angle between vectors from the original field and
the reconstructed field. Dark color means the two vectors are almost aligned with each other, while brighter color means more errors.
The maximal difference between the vector directions in this image
is about 26 degree, and the minimal difference is 0 degree.

5.1.3 Streamline Level Comparison
Besides comparing the original and the reconstructed vector fields
with the raw data, we can also compare these two fields in terms
of some global features, such as streamlines. To do this, from every grid point, we simultaneously integrate streamlines forward and
backward in the original vector field and the reconstructed field, and
then compute the distance between those two streamlines at every
integration step based on some metrics, such as Euclidean distance,
or Manhattan distance. Fig. 7 shows a result of streamline comparison on the same vector fields as Fig. 6, where we compute the
average Euclidean distance between the two streamlines. Similar to
the cases discussed in section 5.1.2, some errors are detectable in
some local regions but they are quite small. In Fig. 7 (b), we show
the histogram of the distance errors, from which we can see that

83

most of the grid points from which the streamlines originated only
bear small errors.
8000
6000

*|l5 l|_~2000I
0

(a)

10

20

30

(b)

Figure 7: (a) Gray scale image colored by the distance errors (in
the unit of cells) between two streamlines integrated from each grid
point in the original vector field and the reconstructed one. Dark
color means low errors, while brighter color means higher errors (b)
Histogram of the streamline errors collected from all grid points in
the field. X axis is the error, while Y axis is the frequency of the
corresponding error value. The maximal difference is 23.1 and the
minimal is 0.0. The dimensions of the field is 100 by 100.

5.2 User Study
Abstract or illustrative presentations have been widely used and accepted in non-photorealistic rendering and artistic design to depict
information succinctly. User study is a way to quantify the effectiveness of new methods, like in [8]. To evaluate the effectiveness of
using illustrative streamlines generated by our algorithm, we conducted a user study which contained four questions categorized into
two tasks. The tasks and questions were related to visualization of
four different 2D vector fields. In the following, we describe our
study and discuss the results.
5.2.1 Participants
Subjects for the user study were 12 unpaid graduate students from
the Department of Computer Science and Engineering. Five of
them are majored or will be majored in Computer Graphics, and
others are in other research groups, such as Artificial Intelligence,
Networking, etc. Two of them know a little about the concept of
flow fields and streamlines, but none of them had studied fluid mechanics or related courses. There were four female students and
eight male students. They all have normal or corrected visions and
can see the images presented to them clearly. The study took about
30 mins for each subject, and before the test, the subjects were given
a tutorial introducing them to the application. We explained the purpose of using streamlines to visualize flow fields, and different flow
features being depicted by different types of critical points. The
tests did not start until they could easily tell the flow features in the
training datasets without our help.
5.2.2 Tasks and Procedure
Our first task was to evaluate whether the users were able to effectively identify the underlying flow features, including flow paths
and critical points, from the visualization generated by our algorithm. In particular, we wanted to verify whether our streamline representation was as effective as other existing algorithms, or
more, in terms of allowing the users to understand the vector fields.
This part was conducted on pieces of paper handed out to the subjects and there were three questions involved.
To perform the test, we chose two existing 2D streamline placement algorithms by Mebarki et al. [10] and Liu et al. [9], plus our
method, and generated images using four datasets. The subjects
were shown 15 groups of images, and each group included three images generated by the three algorithms respectively. For the images
within each group generated by the algorithms of Mebarki and Liu,
the streamline densities were similar, but between different groups,

84

the density of streamlines were different. To avoid possible bias
caused by a fixed ordering of images by the three algorithms, we
changed the order of three images randomly in each group. Fig. 8
shows three groups of images used in our user study. At the beginning of this task, instructions were given to the subjects about
the questions in detail. They were required to fully understand the
questions before they started to give answers.
The first question in the test was to ask the subjects to rate the
three images in each group according to the easiness of depicting
the flow paths in the vector fields, where 1 was the best and 3 was
the worst. The second question was about critical points. If there
were critical points in the fields, subjects were asked to circle them
and rate how helpful the streamlines presented in the visualization
were to detect those critical points. The third questions was about
the overall effectiveness of visualization considering both the flow
paths and critical points.
In the study, we did not ask the subjects to classify the critical
points. If the subjects thought all three images were equally helpful,
then they could rate them equally.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

Figure 8: Streamlines generated by Mebarki et al. 's algorithm (left), Liu
et al. 's algorithm (middle), and our algorithm (right).

Our second task was to evaluate how correctly the subjects were
able to interpret the flow directions with the images generated from
our algorithm in those empty regions without streamlines being
drawn. This task was run with a completely automated program
with four datasets. We pre-generated streamlines using our algorithm on each data set, which were used as the input to the program. When the program started with each data set, four random
seed points were generated in those void regions. For each point,
six circles with increasing radii were generated in a sequence. The
subjects were asked to mark where the streamlines would intersect
with the circles when they were advected from the seeds. That
means, given a seed point, a circle with the smallest radius was
first shown to the subject, who would then mark the streamline intersection point on the circle. After that, another circle with a larger
radius was shown around the same point. This process repeated six
times for each seed point. For some seed points, if the subjects believed the advection would go out of boundary or terminate at some
point before it reached the circle, such as stagnant points, they could

identify the last point in the circle instead of on the circle. Fig. 9
shows a screen snapshot of the interface for this task with only one
circle drawn.
Our user study was not timed, so subjects had enough time to
give the answers. In summary, the questions involved in our study
were: (1) Rate images based on the easiness to follow the underlying flow paths. (2) Rate images based on the easiness to locate
the critical points by observing the streamlines. (3) Rate images
based on the the overall effectiveness of visualization considering
both the flow paths and critical points. (4) Predict where a particle
randomly picked up in the field will go in the subsequent steps.

possible once they start. Around critical points, relatively speaking,
the streamlines become dense and converge around a small region
near each critical point. According to Tufte [12], more data ink
should be accumulated around the more important regions.
Algorithm
Mebarki et al. 's
Liu et al. 's
Ours

Rank 1
3.3%
7.7%
89%

Rank 2
42.5Yo
52.7%
4.8%

Rank 3
60.0Yo
37.8%
2.2%

Table 2: The percentages of user rankings for each image based on the easiness to locate the critical points by observing the streamlines.

The third question asked the users to rate the overall effectiveness of visualization considering both the flow paths and directions
and it let the subjects to decide what they think are more important
to visualize a vector field and how to balance the possible conflict
between those two criteria. It is possible some images are good
at depicting flow paths, while others are good at depicting critical
points. The study result is shown in Table 3.
Figure 9: Interface for predicting particle advection paths. Blue arrows on
red streamlines show the flow directions. The red point is the particle to be
advected from.

5.2.3 Results and Discussions
For the task about rating how easily the streamline images allow
the subjects to follow the flow paths, the study result is shown in
Table 1. From the result, we can see that most of the subjects prefer images generated by our algorithm. When we analyzed the results from individual subjects in detail, we found that, for some images generated by our algorithm, if they are too abstract, some subjects tended to rate the evenly-spaced based methods higher. Even
though the subjects could tell and follow the flow directions with
images from our algorithm, evenly spaced methods were better for
them to pinpoint the vectors at local points, because the streamlines
were uniformly placed and cover all the domain. We also found that
six subjects liked our images very much and always rated the highest, while one subject completely did not like all images generated
by our algorithm and rated all our images the lowest.

Algorithm
Mebarki et al. 's
Liu et al. 's
Ours

Rank 1
5.4%
20.1%
74.5%

Rank 2
45.5%
46.9%
7.6%

Rank 3
51.0%
30.0%
19.0%

Table 1: The percentages of user rankings for each image based on
the easiness to follow the underlying flow paths.

Even though our algorithm does not explicitly place more
streamlines near critical points, it indeed captures most of the features around the critical points. This is because vectors around
critical points are less coherent and our algorithm is designed to
place streamlines based on the streamline coherence. Additionally,
streamlines getting converged or diverged around critical points
contribute more ink in the neighborhood of them, which makes the
critical points much more noticeable. The second question in our
first task was to ask the subjects to rank how helpful the streamlines
in the images were for the subjects to detect critical points. The
study result, shown in Table 2, suggests that images generated from
our algorithm are more helpful for the subjects to detect the critical points. This result is in accordance with our expectation since
our algorithm allows the viewer to focus on more prominent flow
features. Our algorithm allows the streamlines to advect as far as

Algorithm
Mebarki et al. 's
Liu et al. 's
Ours

Rank 1
3.5%
19.9%
76.6%Y

Rank 2
42.5%
52.7%
4.8%Y

Rank 3
57.0%
37.8%
5.2%

Table 3: The percentages of user rankings for each image based on the overall effectiveness of visualization considering the flow paths and critical points.

For the task about predicting the advection paths of particles,
error was measured as the Euclidean distance between the userselected point and the correct point from the integration using the
actual vector data, in the unit of cells. Mean errors are shown in
Fig. 10 with error bars depicting plus and minus of the standard deviation. We observe that as the radius of circle was increased, the
error became slightly larger. In other words, the closer to the starting seed points, the easier for the subjects to pinpoint the particle
path, except when the flow becomes convergent in some regions. In
this case, even if the radius of the circle becomes larger, because the
space between streamlines becomes smaller, it is still easier for the
subjects to locate the advection path. Overall, from the test result
we can see that the errors were well bounded. In other words, the
subjects were able to predict the flow paths reasonably well given
the illustrative streamlines drawn by our algorithm. In general, the
error range is related to and constrained by the spacing between
streamlines, which depends on how similar the nearby streamlines
are.
6 PERFORMANCE
We have tested our algorithm on a PC with an Intel Core 2 2.66GHz
processor, 2 GB memory, and an nVIDIA Geforce 7950 GX2
graphics card with 512 MB of video memory. The streamlines
were numerically integrated using a constant step size Runge-Kutta
fourth order integrator. In an earlier section, we have presented
three comparative results generated by Mebarki et al. 's, Liu et al. 's,
and our algorithm in Fig. 8. Generally speaking, algorithms generating evenly-spaced streamlines are fast, and the performance is
relatively independent of the flow feature. Our algorithm generates
streamlines by evaluating flow features locally and globally, however, from the timings listed in Table 5 for the four datasets (Table 4), it can be seen that our algorithm can also run at interactive

speeds.
There are three main steps in our algorithms: updating distance
fields (section 3.1), computing local dissimilarity (section 3.2), and
selecting seeds (section 3.5) including computing the global dissimilarity values. Updating distance fields takes place whenever a new

85

0
1

-1

6.4 9.6 12.8 16 19.2

2:6 5.2 7:8

10.4 13 15.6

(b)

(a)

1o
-1

5.6 8.4 11.2 14 16.8

3.2 6.4 9.6 12.8 16 19.

(d)

(c)

Figure 1 0: Mean errors for the advection task on the four different datasets. X
axis stands for radius of circles around the selected points, and Y axis depicts
the mean error plus or minus the standard deviation. Larger value along Y axis
means higher error. Y axis starts from -1 to make the graphs easier to visualize.
Dimensions of the datasets (a) 64x64 (b) 64x64 (c) 64x64 (d) 1 OOxl 00.

streamline is generated. We implemented this on GPUs: for each
line segment of the newly generated streamline, a quadrilateral is
drawn to a window with the same size as the flow field. The fragment shader computes the distance from each fragment to the line
segment. This distance is set to be the depth of the fragment. After
all line segments from a streamline are drawn, the depth test supported by the graphics hardware returns the smallest distance from
every pixel to the streamline in the depth buffer, which is then read
back to the main memory. On the CPU, the distances to the nearest M streamlines for each pixel are recorded. The computation of
local dissimilarity is also performed on the CPU by blending the
influence of multiple nearby streamlines. From the timings, we can
see that when the size of the flow field increases, more time is spent
on the portion of our algorithm that runs on the CPU. Although we
have not done so, the computation of the dissimilarity metric for
each pixel potentially can be implemented on GPUs as well and
will be our future work. This could also reduce the overhead of
transferring data from CPU to GPU, and reading back from GPU to
CPU.
r

Dataset

Dimension
64x64

Fig. 8(c)
Fig. 6(a) 10Ox100
Fig. 5 -4-- 400x401
576x291
Fig. 4

r

r

t t
# of lines
18
19
28

45

# of line segments

696
1204
3697
6129

Table 4: Information of four different datasets, and the number of streamlines
generated by our algorithm.

Total
-.

Timing

F-

0.078
0.156
2.562
4.453

Updating

. I

I

Distance Field
0.031
0.079
0.799
1.08

Computing
Local dissimilarity
0.00
0.03 1
1.355
1.639

=

Finding--I

-

,

Seeds
0.047

0.046
0.172
1.375

Table 5: Timings (in seconds) measured for generating streamlines using our
algorithm. Each row corresponds to a data set listed in the same row of Table 4.

7 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have presented a seeding strategy to generate
streamlines in an illustrative and representative manner for 2D flow

86

fields. Our algorithm fully utilizes the spatial coherence in the underlying flow fields, such that the density of streamlines in the final images can be varied to reflect the coherence of the underlying
flow patterns and provide visual focuses. Our method is based on
the measurement of dissimilarity between streamlines locally and
globally. Our approach is innovative in three regards: (1) the density of streamlines is closely related to the intrinsic flow features of
the vector fields, (2) our method does not explicitly rely on detecting the existence of critical points, and (3) the abstract and illustrative visualization generated by our algorithm can effectively reduce
visual cluttering. User studies were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of using illustrative streamlines generated by our algorithm
to depict the flow information. Results suggest that users can interpret the flow directions and capture important flow features. In the
future, we plan to explore various strategies to measure the similarity between streamlines and other flow features, to further speed up
our algorithm using GPUs, and to extend our algorithm for visualizing time-varying flow fields.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by NSF ITR Grant ACI-0325934, NSF RI
Grant CNS-0403342, NSF Career Award CCF-0346883, and DOE
SciDAC grant DE-FC02-06ER25779.

REFERENCES
[1] U. Bordoloi and H. Shen. Hardware accelerated interactive vector
field visualization: A level of detail approach. Computer Graphics
Forum (Proceedings of Eurographics 2002), 21(3):605-614, 2002.
[2] B. Cabral and C. Leedom. Imaging vector fields using line integral
convolution. In SIGGRAPH '93, pages 263-270, 1993.
[3] Qiang Du and Xiaoqiang Wang. Centroidal voronoi tessellation based
algorithms for vector fields visualization and segmentation. In IEEE
Visualization, pages 43-50, 2004.
[4] Sarah F. F. Gibson. Using distance maps for accurate surface representation in sampled volumes. In VVS '98, pages 23-30, 1998.
[5] Bjoern Heckel, Gunther Weber, Bernd Hamann, and Kenneth I. Joy.
Construction of vector field hierarchies. In IEEE Visualization, pages
19-26, 1999.
[6] B. Jobard and W. Lefer. Creating evenly-spaced streamlines of arbitrary density. In Visualization in Scientific Computing, pages 43-56,
1997.
[7] M. Jones, J. Baerentzen, and M. Sramek. 3d distance fields: A survey
of techniques and applications. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 12(4):581-599, 2006.
[8] D. Laidlaw, R. Kirby, C. Jackson, J. Davidson, T. Miller, M. Silva,
W. Warren, and M. Tarr. Comparing 2d vector field visualization
methods: A user study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 11(1):59-70, 2005.
[9] Z Liu, R. Moorhead, and J. Groner. An advanced evenly-spaced
streamline placement algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 12(5):965-972, 2006.
[10] A. Mebarki, P. Alliez, and 0. Devillers. Farthest point seeding for
efficient placement of streamlines. In IEEE Visualization, pages 479486, 2005.
[11] A. Telea and J. Wijk. Simplified representation of vector fields. In
IEEE Visualization, pages 35-42, 1999.
[12] E. Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics
Press, 1986.
[13] E. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[14] G. Turk and D. Banks. Image-guided streamline placement. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH '96, pages 453-460, 1996.
[15] Jarke J. van Wijk. Spot noise texture synthesis for data visualization.
In SIGGRAPH '91, pages 309-318, 1991.
[16] Jarke J. van Wijk. Image based flow visualization. In SIGGRAPH '02,
pages 745-754, 2002.
[17] V. Verma, D. Kao, and A. Pang. A flow-guided streamline seeding
strategy. In IEEE Visualization, pages 163-170, 2000.

