Data Ingestion and Evidence Marshalling in Jigsaw

VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 1 Award: Good Support for Data Ingest
Zhicheng Liu*, Carsten Görg*, Jaeyeon Kihm§, Hanseung Lee§, Jaegul Choo*, Haesun Park*, John Stasko*
Georgia Institute of Technology

ABSTRACT
This article describes the sense-making process we applied to
solve the VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 1 using the visual analytics
system Jigsaw. We focus on Jigsaw’s data ingest and evidence
marshalling features and discuss how they are beneficial for a
holistic sense-making experience.
KEYWORDS: Visual analytics, investigative analysis, information
visualization, data ingestion, evidence marshalling
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information
Interfaces and Presentation - User Interfaces
1

INTRODUCTION

We used the Jigsaw system [3] to solve the VAST 2010 Mini
Challenge 1. Jigsaw has been under continuous development since
2006, and we already used it for our award-winning entry in the
VAST 2007 contest [2]. Since the original Jigsaw publication [4],
we have enhanced the system with additional features and views.
This article focuses on the data ingest capability and the Tablet
component for evidence marshalling, and we discuss how we used
these features while working on the Mini Challenge.
2

correctly. Through direct manipulation in its Document View,
Jigsaw supports manually adding entities that were missed by the
entity identification process, changing the type of, or altogether
deleting wrongly identified entities. Applying these entity cleanup
features allowed us to work with a clean and consistent set of
entities and their connections.
Additionally, the same logical entity may be identified by
different strings in different documents. Jigsaw provides an
operation that allows analysts to merge different entities (strings)
under one alias (see Figure 1). After assigning a primary identifier
to the merged entities, that identifier represents all the initially
different entities in Jigsaw’s visualizations. Jigsaw uses italics to
indicate entities with aliases.
We performed aliasing early in our sense-making process to
clean up obvious misspellings and name variations. When it was
less certain that two similar names actually referred to the same
entity, we read the documents more carefully and created aliases
whenever necessary during the exploration.

DATA INGESTION

Jigsaw supports an XML based data file format (.jig file) that
describes the attributes of documents and the entities within them.
Since the documents in the Mini Challenge data set were in the
Microsoft Word format, we first saved them as plain text files.
Next, we simply used the Emacs text editor and its macro
capability to convert each of these text files into a .jig file with the
appropriate XML tags for the documents’ ID, date, source, body
text, and so on. The macros helped us to repeatedly search for a
text string and then output the relevant surrounding XML tag.
After generating proper Jigsaw data files, we imported them into
the system and identified entities via Jigsaw’s embedded entity
identification (EI) capabilities. (Jigsaw includes a few different
open source EI packages for analysis, and we used one from Dan
Roth’s group at the Univ. of Illinois in the Challenge.) We
identified people, places, and organizations using the Illinois
statistical entity identification package and we identified dates,
phone numbers, and URLs using a pattern-based identification
process that we created.
2.1
Entity Cleanup
Since Jigsaw focuses on analyzing and visualizing entities and
their relationships, it is important that entities are identified
* e-mail: {zcliu, goerg, joyfull, hpark, stasko}@cc.gatech.edu
§ e-mail: {jkihm3, hanseung.lee}@gatech.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Figure 1. Selected entities can be merged via the “Make Aliases”
command in Jigsaw.

2.2
Computational Analyses
To better assist analysts in browsing and understanding text
documents in a more structured manner, we have coupled the
interactive visualizations in Jigsaw with automated computational
analysis capabilities such as analyses of document similarity,
document sentiment, document clusters, and document
summarization [1]. After importing the documents and identifying
and cleaning the entities, we performed these automated analyses
on the Challenge data. The computational analyses, in particular
the document clustering, proved to be very useful in guiding the
process of reading and making sense of the documents.
We started our exploration by examining the high-frequency
entities and their connections in the List View and the Graph
View. This enabled us to directly focus our attention on important
people and places in the data set. Showing document clusters
grouped by topics in the Document Cluster View helped us to

271

keep track of the different threads of the stories embedded in the
data set; in addition, this view indicated which documents we had
already read and explored.
3

EVIDENCE MARSHALLING

Since the number of documents in the data set was relatively
small (just over a hundred compared to more than a thousand in
the 2007 contest), we were able to quickly familiarize ourselves
with most of the documents using the views in Jigsaw. We soon
realized that unlike in the 2007 contest data where only a small
subset of the documents was relevant to the final solution, most
documents in this Mini Challenge seemed to contribute to a larger
story. To take notes about interesting entities and events,
formulate hypotheses and organize findings, we used Jigsaw’s
new Tablet functionality, an environment that serves as an
evidence marshalling and sense-making tool.
3.1
The Tablet Interface
The Tablet adopts a minimalistic design, intending to offer
greatest flexibility for visual thinking and sense-making. Entities
in Jigsaw’s views can be directly added to the Tablet via popup
menu commands. The added entities retain their original colorcoding according to their types. Analysts also can create their own
items representing customized entities or events. Any two items or
entities can be linked and the links can be labeled. Additional
information about the items can be represented as post-it-notes
(on a yellow background). Analysts can also create timelines and
link entities or items to specific points on the timeline. All the
visual items in the Tablet can be freely moved around and
repositioned. Figure 2 shows multiple timelines we created for
important people in the data set. Figure 3 shows a social network
that we built during our investigation using some of the Tablet’s
functionality.

Figure 3. A social network in the Tablet in Jigsaw. The red nodes
represent people and the green nodes represent places. A person
is connected to a place if he/she is based in that location. Two
persons can be connected in various ways, and the semantics of
the connection is annotated as the label on the link. Additional
information about the entities can be added in yellow notes.

every view that have been created and modified. Since our
investigation spanned across multiple sessions, this feature was
especially useful.
4

CONCLUSION

The Jigsaw system proved to be very useful for investigating the
events here in Mini Challenge 1. Unlike the text documentfocused VAST Contest of 2007 where one needed to find the
“needle in the haystack”, here many different documents
contributed to a complex, multifaceted storyline. Jigsaw’s
flexible document import and entity identification capabilities
coupled with the new Tablet sense-making environment were
particularly helpful in our investigation. For further details on
Jigsaw, we refer the readers to the Jigsaw website [3] where
several videos showing different aspects of the system are
available.
5

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under awards CCF-0808863 and IIS-0915788 and the VACCINE
Center, a Department of Homeland Security’s Center of
Excellence in Command, Control and Interoperability.
Figure 2. Multiple timelines in the Tablet in Jigsaw. Each timeline
records the activities of a specific person.

3.2
Sense-making with the Tablet
We created multiple pages in the Tablet, each represented by a
tab. The pages organized our findings and thinking processes in
terms of different perspectives and themes including social
networks, timelines, specific topics such as weapon and fund
transfers, and geographically connected people and events. We
iteratively modified and refined the hypotheses and findings
represented in the Tablet as we read the documents in greater
depth and discovered connections between interesting entities.
Jigsaw also provides the functionality to save the entire
workspace including the pages in the Tablet and the states of

272

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

C. Görg, J. Kihm, J. Choo, Z. Liu, S. Muthiah, H. Park, and J.
Stasko. Combining Computational Analyses and Interactive
Visualization to Enhance Information Retrieval. In Fourth Workshop
on Human-Computer Interaction and Information Retrieval, 2010.
C. Görg, Z. Liu, N. Parekh, K. Singhal, and J. Stasko. Jigsaw meets
Blue Iguanodon - The VAST 2007 Contest. In IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pp. 235-236, 2007.
Jigsaw project. http://www.gvu.gatech.edu/ii/jigsaw/.
J. Stasko, C. Görg, and Z. Liu. Jigsaw: Supporting Investigative
Analysis through Interactive Visualization. In Information
Visualization, 7(2):118-132, 2008.

