A Continuous Analysis Process Between Desktop and Collaborative
Visual Analytics Environments
Dong Hyun Jeong∗
⋆ Univ.

Evan Suma†

of the District of Columbia

† Univ.

Thomas Butkiewicz‡

A BSTRACT
Since its inception, the field of visual analytics has undergone
tremendous growth in understanding how to create interactive visual tools to solve analytical problems. However, with few exceptions, most of these tools have been designed for single users in
desktop environments. While often effective on their own, most
single-user systems do not reflect the collaborative nature of solving real-world analytical tasks. Many intelligence analysts, for example, have been observed to switch repeatedly between working
alone and collaborating with members of a small team. In this paper, we propose that a complete visual analytical system designed
for solving real-world tasks ought to have two integrated components: a single-user desktop system and a mirroring system suitable
for a collaborative environment.
1

⋆†‡§¶ Univ.

of Southern California

I NTRODUCTION

In real-world analysis, domain experts often work together to solve
analytical problems and have a beneficial to perform analysis together for complicated tasks. However, it has been observed that
real-world analysts typically perform both individual and group
tasks, and as a result must frequently transition between singleuser and multi-user collaborative workflows during the course of
their analysis [1]. Despite this fact, most visual analytics solutions
have been designed either as standalone single-user applications or
as purely collaborative systems, and very few analytical tools have
been developed to cohesively support both activities.
In this paper, we propose that a complete visual analytical system
designed for solving real-world tasks ought to have two integrated
components: a single-user desktop system and a mirroring system
suitable for a collaborative environment. Our viewpoint begins with
understanding limitations both in a single-user desktop environment and a collaborative environment. To demonstrate our viewpoint, we adapted an existing single-user desktop analytical tool
for exploring data using principal component analysis (iPCA) into
a collaborative touch-table system (iPCA-CE) using a user-centric
approach. The system parameters and analytical findings for these
tools are tightly integrated so that analysts may seamlessly transition back and forth between single-user and collaborative work
environments without losing track of the analysis process.
Converting an existing single-user desktop application into a
collaborative touch-table environment introduces unique technical
challenges. The inherent differences between mouse and touchbased interaction require that the user interface must be redesigned,
and limitations may also be imposed by factors such as system
performance and screen resolution. However, despite the costs of
∗ e-mail:donghyunjeong@gmail.com
† e-mail:suma@ict.usc.edu
‡ e-mail:tjbutkie@uncc.edu
§ e-mail:ribarsky@uncc.edu
¶ e-mail:remcochang@gmail.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

William Ribarsky§

Remco Chang¶

of North Carolina at Charlotte

¶ Tufts

University

converting an existing application into a new interaction modality,
we believe that supporting both single-user and collaborative work
in an integrated fashion provides important benefits for real-world
analysis.
2

S YSTEM OVERVIEW

Although supporting collaboration when solving real-world analytical tasks is important, most visual analytics tools, with few exceptions, have been designed as single-user desktop systems. Multitouch surfaces support a rich set of interactions that allow multiple
users to work together to solve complex analytical problems interactively. We selected the Interactive Principal Component Analysis (iPCA) application, which has been shown to be an effective
and easy to use desktop visualization for analyzing data sets and
interactively exploring the parameters of principal component analysis [2]. Figure 1(a) shows an example of a single user performing
an analysis with iPCA and Figure 1(b) represents multiple users’
collaborative analysis with the extended collaborative application
(iPCA-CE).

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) A single user is performing an analysis of Glass dataset
(214 × 9 matrix) using iPCA. (b) Multiple users are interactively collaborating on a multi-touch table using iPCA-CE.

iPCA-CE is an extension of iPCA designed specifically for use in
a collaborative touch-table environment. Each workspace in iPCACE displays the same four views as iPCA. However, the system
provides the capability to create multiple workspaces within the
application, each of which can be used independently. A total of
18 touchable buttons were designed for interaction in iPCA-CE:
nine buttons for interacting with represented data items, six buttons
for controlling the application, one toggle button for expanding and
collapsing the sliderbars panel, and two tab buttons for managing
annotations and findings.
2.1 Technical Challenges
Creating a collaborative tabletop visual analytics system based on
a single-user desktop counterpart has the following technical challenges: performance limitations, differences in rendering mechanisms, and differences in user input modalities. Together, iPCA
and iPCA-CE form an integrated toolset which allows analysts to
switch back and forth between the two visualizations on separate
hardware without losing track of their current analysis tasks.
Performance In a collaborative environment, multiple processes and threads are necessary to manage the display and listen

231

for incoming touch events. By utilizing a multi-process and multithreaded architecture, iPCA-CE becomes significantly more complex than iPCA. However, this architecture allows the application
to take advantage of a multi-core CPU to support non-interrupted
real-time interactivity for multiple users.
Rendering Mechanisms The rendering mechanism for
iPCA-CE differs significantly from the desktop version since iPCACE needs to support multiple interfaces for multiple users. While
iPCA utilizes a single OpenGL context, iPCA-CE needs to create
multiple “virtual” contexts, one for each of the interfaces. Since a
multi-touch table is inherently without orientation, we wanted the
iPCA-CE interface to be usable by all users standing around the
table, regardless of their positions.
Input Modalities Another important interface difference between iPCA and iPCA-CE is that the “mouse-over” mechanism is
no longer available on a touch-table. In traditional mouse-based
interaction, the user can move a mouse over a visual element to
highlight the element (such as to display its label) without the use
of the mouse buttons. In a multi-touch environment that utilizes infrared refraction and reflection to detect a user’s touch, there is no
way to discern the difference between mouse-over and mouse-drag
(holding down a mouse button and moving the mouse) because both
operations require the user’s finger to be touching the surface of the
table.
3

With regards to overall preferences for solving problems, most
participants preferred the single workspace for communicating and
sharing ideas. This indicates that a single shared workspace may
be effective for communicating findings since users are looking at
the same visual representation of the data. This is an interesting
result, since creating a single, shared workspace was also possible
in the multiple workspace condition, though participants may not
have opted to do so.
Discussion From this study, we found that collaborative environments have advantages for solving analytical problems, especially when sharing ideas and findings. However, this approach has
several limitations, such as:
• It is difficult to collaborate in a shared workspace when users’
ideas conflict.
• Interference between collaborators may cause difficulty in
forming new ideas or strategies.
• Users become fatigued when standing at a multi-touch table
for long periods of time.
In light of both the advantages and limitations of collaborative
environments, we suggest that users’ analyses should not be isolated in one environment (see Figure 2). Instead, the general analytical process that should be supported and maintained to allow
analysts to switch back and forth between single-user and collaborative workflows.

U NDERSTANDING U SERS ’ A NALYTICAL P ROCESSES

In a co-located collaborative environment (multi-touch table), numerous studies on collaborative visualization have been performed
to overcome the limitations of sharing ideas, parallelizing efforts,
and performing discussion and consensus building in single-user
desktop environments. However, in a collaborative environment,
such as our multi-touch table, a limited number of studies have
been performed to find limitations, especially when solving analytical problems. We performed a user study of the collaborative
iPCA-CE application with single, double, and multiple workspaces
to understand how participants cooperate and share ideas in a collaborative environment.
Study Design A total of 12 people participated in the study
(nine males, three females). The experiment required two participants to work together to solve a given task. The study used a
within-subjects design with three conditions, corresponding to the
number of available workspaces as Single (the two participants
shared a single workspace), Double (each participant had their own
personal workspace), and Multiple (participants were allowed to
create as many workspaces as they desired). The order of the conditions was counterbalanced.
Study Results Each of the task performance measures was
treated with a repeated measures ANOVA testing the withinsubjects effect of workspace condition. Although the completion
time (p = .28) and the verbal communication time (p = .86) are not
statistically significant across the condition, we find that the number of findings discovered across the condition was significant (F(2,
10) = 15.67, p < .01, η p2 = .76). We conducted post-hoc analysis
using paired-sample t-tests with a Bonferroni corrected significance
value of α = .017 to reduce error in multiple comparisons. Participants using a single workspace (M = 2.33, SD = 1.03) discovered
fewer findings than those using a double workspace (M = 5.83, SD
= 2.32), p < .01, or multiple workspaces (M = 5.17, SD = 2.14),
p < .01. The double workspace and multiple workspace conditions were not significantly different, p = .42. These results indicate that in a collaborative system, providing each user with their
own personal workspace (or multiple workspaces) allows them to
better perform an analysis task, although the task completion time
and time spent communicating were not affected.

232

Figure 2: An illustration of users’ processes of solving complex analytical problems and sharing analysis results (findings), including
(1) asynchronous self-sharing in a desktop environment, (2) synchronous sharing in a collaborative environment, and (3 and 4) asynchronous transitional sharing processes between environments.

4 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an integrated visual analytics toolset
composed of a single-user desktop application and a collaborative
touch-table system. Based on a study of users’ analytical processes,
we presented an informal model for the general analytical process
that occurs as analysts switch back and forth between single-user
and collaborative environments. Finally, putting this model into
practice, we presented our improvements to both the desktop and
collaborative applications for supporting this continuous analysis
process.
R EFERENCES
[1] G. Chin, Jr., O. A. Kuchar, and K. E. Wolf. Exploring the analytical processes of intelligence analysts. In CHI ’09: Proceedings of the
27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 11–20, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[2] D. H. Jeong, C. Ziemkiewicz, B. Fisher, W. Ribarsky, and R. Chang.
ipca: An interactive system for pca-based visual analytics. Computer
Graphics Forum (EuroVis 2009), 28(3):767–774, 2009.

