Poster: Dynamic Time Transformation for Interpreting Clusters of
Trajectories with Space-Time Cube
Gennady Andrienko, Natalia Andrienko
University of Bonn and Fraunhofer Institute IAIS

ABSTRACT
We propose a set of techniques that support visual interpretation
of trajectory clusters by transforming absolute time references into
relative positions within temporal cycles or with respect to the
starting and/or ending times of the trajectories. We demonstrate
the work of the approach on a real data set about individual
movement over one year.
1

2.

Transformations that reflect the cyclic nature of time.
Depending on the data and application, it may be useful to
project trajectories to a single year / season / month / week /
day / hour etc.
Transformations with respect to the individual lifelines of
trajectories. Thus, it may be useful to adjust the times of
spatially similar trajectories by aligning their start and/or end
times.

INTRODUCTION

Progress in positioning technology and availability of tracking
devices created opportunities for collecting large amounts of
movement data. Such data may be very useful for optimizing
traffic, improving commercial and public services and quality of
life in general. One of the major approaches to overcome the
problem of large data size is clustering, or grouping trajectories by
similarity. In the recent decade, numerous trajectory clustering
methods were developed in the data mining [7] and visual
analytics [2][8][9] communities.
Visualization is essential for interpreting clusters. The spatial
aspect of trajectory clusters can be explored using the method
suggested in [3], which represents clusters as flows (Figure 1).
Space-time cube (STC) [4] is often used for exploring temporal
and spatio-temporal aspects of trajectories. This visualization
method has been advanced in several studies [6][1][5].
Exploration of a large number of trajectories with a STC may
be hindered by visual clutter (Figure 2). Grouping of spatially
similar trajectories and transformations of their temporal
references can reduce this problem. Commonalities and
differences among temporal and dynamic characteristics of
spatially similar trajectories can be revealed. We demonstrate this
using a set of about 365 car trajectories of one person recorded
during one year. Density-based clustering with the “route
similarity” distance function [2][8] detected 9 major clusters of
spatially similar trajectories (Figure 1); 123 trajectories were not
included in clusters. The straightforward application of the STC
(Figure 2) is not helpful due to the visual clutter.
2

1.

Figure 1. Spatial profiles of 9 clusters.

INTERACTIVITY OF SPACE-TIME CUBE.

Previous works suggest the following basic interactivity of STC:
•
change of the viewpoint;
•
selection of spatio-temporal objects to be displayed;
•
access to objects by pointing and dragging;
•
zooming in the spatial (horizontal dimension) and temporal
(vertical dimension) extents;
•
animation of the content of STC;
•
moveable plane for additional temporal reference.
We propose to extend this set of techniques by various
transformations of time in respect to the lifelines of the
trajectories. We have designed two classes of transformations:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Figure 2. 242 trajectories in a space-time cube. Different colors
represent cluster membership.

Figure 3 (top) shows a STC with trajectories adjusted by the
weekly cycle. The time axis is oriented upward. The large red,
green, and blue clusters occur on the working days. The yellow
and orange clusters occur on Saturday. Sunday has only out-ofcluster trajectories, which are not displayed. Figure 3 (bottom)
represents the same clusters of trajectories adjusted by the daily
cycle. It is easy to see that the green cluster occurs mostly in the
morning, red and blue in the evening, and yellow and orange in
the middle of the day.

213

In Figure 4, we have aligned the starting times of the
trajectories. On the left the starting 60 minutes of all clusters are
shown. One cluster is shown separately on the right. Most of the
trajectories of the green and red clusters have short duration. Few
trajectories of these clusters have intermediate stops (indicated by
vertical lines), which increase their durations. Almost all
trajectories from the blue cluster have stops of variable duration in
the same place.

belonging to the same cluster. Figure 6 shows the STC with a
single cluster of trajectories. It can be seen that only a few cluster
members differ in their dynamics characteristics from the majority
of the trajectories.

Figure 5. Trajectories are aligned by their ends.

Figure 6. Trajectories are aligned by their starts and ends.

The time transformation techniques are implemented in the
Geospatial Visual Analytics toolkit [2] that integrates visual and
computational analysis methods.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by DFG within the priority research
program on visual analytics (SPP 1335).
REFERENCES
[1]

Figure 3. Weekly (top) and daily (bottom) arrangements

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

Figure 4. Trajectories are aligned by their starts

It is also possible to align the ending times of the trajectories.
Figure 5 presents the STC with the end-aligned trajectories seen
from two different viewpoints. Only the last 30 minutes of the
trajectories are displayed. Such representation complements the
previous technique for interpreting the dynamics within clusters.
The transformation by aligning both the starts and the ends of
trajectories is useful for comparing the dynamics of trajectories

214

[7]
[8]

[9]

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., and Gatalsky, P. Visual Data
Exploration using Space-Time Cube. In Proceedings of the 21st
International Cartographic Conference, Durban, 10 - 16 August
2003. International Cartographic Association, pp. 1981-1983.
Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N., and Wrobel, S.: Visual analytics tools
for analysis of movement data, ACM SIGKDD Explorations, 9(2),
2007, 38-46
Andrienko, N., and Andrienko, G. Spatial Generalization and
Aggregation of Massive Movement Data. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG), 2010 (accepted),
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.44
Hägerstrand, T. What about people in regional science? Papers,
Regional Science Association, 24, 7-21. 1970
Kapler, T. and Wright, W. 2005. GeoTime information visualization,
Information Visualization, 4(2), 136-146
Kraak, M.-J. 2003. The space-time cube revisited from a
geovisualization perspective, in: Proc. of the 21st International
Cartographic Conference, Durban, 2003, pp.1988-1995
Li, Y., Han, J., and Yang, J. Clustering moving objects. In
Proceedings ACM KDD 2004, 617–622
Rinzivillo, S., Pedreschi, D., Nanni, M., Giannotti, F., Andrienko,
N., and Andrienko, G.: Visually–driven analysis of movement data
by progressive clustering, Information Visualization, 7(3/4), 2008,
225-239
Schreck, T., Bernard, J., Tekusova, T., and Kohlhammer, J. Visual
cluster analysis in trajectory data using editable Kohonen maps. In
Proc. IEEE VAST 2008, 2008, 3-10

