Conveying Network Features in Geospatial Battlespace Displays
J. Alex Godwin*

Ryan M. Kilgore**

Charles River Analytics

ABSTRACT
Advanced battlespace network visualization techniques are
required within the modern Air Operations Center (AOC) to
improve cross-domain situation awareness and to support
planning and decision-making. We present a visualization toolkit
to address this need that supports the integration of network health
and status information and meta-information with other traditional
AOC information resources and activities across air, space, and
cyber domains. Applications include the development of
battlespace visualization technologies that will improve
warfighters’ decision-making response time and provide enhanced
flexibility for mission planning by efficiently revealing
affordances for leveraging, disrupting, or enhancing network
connectivity.
1

INTRODUCTION

Mission planners in U.S. Air Force Air Operations Centers
(AOCs) must have sufficient awareness of how a variety of
disparate operational actions—across air, space, and cyber
domains—will impact progress towards the Commander’s intent.
Planners must rapidly identify ways in which particular network
properties may be transformed into affordances for (or constraints
against) operational actions in a wider context (e.g., “How does
this unexpected failure in my airborne communications network
impact our maintenance of information superiority in area X?”).
To identify and address such cross-domain impacts, AOC
planners must access, integrate, and relate network health and
status information with other, more traditional AOC data
resources that are distributed across many specialized tools,
services, and application interfaces.
Although a number of tools have been developed for querying
and monitoring network conditions, these tools are typically
intended to support network administrators in identifying and
troubleshooting network failures. In contrast, comparatively little
work has been done to develop display methods that reduce the
cognitive burden placed on warfighters who must leverage
network status information and its implications within a broader
operational context. Instead, current information display methods
require planners to mentally integrate disparate views of the
battlespace to reason about and understand the cross-domain
contributions of kinetic (e.g., strike) and non-kinetic (e.g.,
jamming) activities towards a shared effect. These cognitive
activities are time-intensive and error-prone processes that limit
the potential for identifying novel attack or defense profiles.
A major challenge in developing visualizations for battlespace
awareness is designing methods for rendering network features
that provide warfighters with access to critical logical (e.g.,
centrality) and physical (e.g., location, defense) network
*agodwin@cra.com
**rkilgore@cra.com
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

information. Moreover, networks must be rendered within a
correlated geospatial display that allows mission planners to
understand and reason about the network within a broader context
while still mitigating the potential for information overload. To
address this need, we present a visualization toolkit that allows
mission planners in the AOC to integrate network health and
status information with other traditional AOC information
resources in a geospatial context.
2

RENDERING NETWORK FEATURES

In domains where the primary purpose is to illustrate relationships
between instances of similar nodes (e.g., computer networks with
a fixed type of asset), the aspects of individual node visualization
are not as important. However, when networks concern a variety
of connection types between a variety of node types, different
visualization capabilities are required. Fortunately, the literature
from general information visualization may guide the design of
individual nodes and links [1]. Ware [2] recommends a visual
grammar for network diagrams, focusing on the graphical
elements of nodes. A semantic definition, such as entity type or
relationship, is attached to the types of attributes, such as color or
size, which encode information about that node. Iconic
representations of node attributes may ease the effort needed to
understand a network. Similarly, links between nodes can use
different graphical representation techniques, such as width or
pattern, to represent link types.
In the development of our network visualization toolkit, we
have explored the use of graphical transformations such as
manipulation of the scale, color saturation, and transparency of
displayed shapes, objects, and icons to rapidly convey additional
task-critical information across multiple network nodes
simultaneously. Building upon these methods, we developed a
number of preliminary design mockups to determine ways in
which role- and task-specific logical and physical combat network
information could be integrated into display components. In
contrast to serial, drill down exploration of this information, these
rendering techniques make it easy for planners to rapidly perceive
the critical aspects of multiple network features in parallel.
We have also worked to identify promising techniques for
visualizing network information and meta-information for the
communications links that connect nodes within a network. As
part of this effort we explored visual transformation methods that
are best suited for adjusting the appearance of lines or arcs. For
instance, through early concept sketch prototyping, we evaluated
potential rendering mechanisms for mapping the visual properties
of network connections (e.g., thickness, dash pattern, dash
frequency, color) to type of communication link (e.g., airborne,
land-based, land-based aerial) that exists between each set of
connected nodes (Figure 1). Using these techniques, link
rendering can be manipulated to intuitively convey the areas of a
battlespace that are susceptible to electronic and cyber-warfare
through jamming, eavesdropping, or spoofing attacks, allowing
the planner to rapidly focus their attention to specific areas within
the network. However, without these visual encodings, a mission
planner would be forced to explicitly search for task-relevant
information through focused, serial exploration (e.g., clicking on a

221

variety of network nodes to determine which edge is currently
carrying the most communication traffic).

objectives in the battlespace. For example, fiber-optic cables that
physically cross bridges in the battlespace are highly vulnerable at
those locations, providing an opportunity for mission planners to
affect the logical structure of networks through kinetic activities.

a

b

Figure 3. Logical features of the network (a) and physical features
(b) provide independent but related views of network structure
Figure 1. Mapping the rendering (e.g., thickness, dash pattern,
dash frequency, color) of network links to underlying features
of the connection to support direct perception of network
structure and vulnerability

3

DEPICTING NETWORKS WITHIN GEOSPATIAL DISPLAYS

There are many challenges for conveying critical network features
within a geospatial display, as map-based network visualizations
can quickly become intensely cluttered with information. Often,
visualization designers attempt to circumvent this difficulty
through the use of abstract network layouts such as hyperbolic
trees and force-directed layouts. Although these techniques
provide an excellent visual cue of where nodes lie with respect to
the logical center or periphery of a network, they also implicitly
convey spatial attributes of the network that may have little or no
correspondence to the true location of network nodes within
physical space (Figure 2a). In contrast, we have worked to design
our visualization toolkit to similarly support planners’ direct
perception of abstract network attributes by manipulating visual
properties of network feature rendering (e.g., increasing icon size
and opacity with increasing node centrality) while maintaining
accurate node location in a geospatial display context (Figure 2b).

Y
Y

4

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We will continue to expand our development of a visualization
toolkit for rapid user-definition and flexible development of
display interfaces that are highly role- and task-tailorable and
seamlessly integrate logical and physical network information and
meta-information with other resources and activities (Figure 4). In
particular, we will focus on broadening the scope of our toolkit
from communications networks specifically, to AOC operations
across air, space, and cyber domains. There is significant
commonality across these domains: (1) the types of information
and meta-information critical to supporting all three domains, and
(2) the ways in which this information can be visualized to
improve the warfighter’s decision-making response time and
provide enhanced flexibility for mission planning. We will
continue to iterate on our initial toolkit prototype through a series
of knowledge elicitation sessions and cognitive walkthroughs with
subject matter experts in the AOC operational domain.

Y
Y

a

b
Figure 4. Screenshot of our toolkit prototype for conveying
information about network features in geospatial battlespace
displays

Figure 2. Alternative methods for visualizing node centrality: (a) an
abstract force-directed network, and (b) a map-based display
mapping measures of centrality to feature rendering effects

We have worked to support awareness of critical relationships
between the location of physical entities in the operational space
and their role in (or impacts upon) networks (e.g., relationships
between dynamic vehicle positions, physical equipment for
jamming operations, and resultant network coverage areas). We
have also worked to push the contextualization of network
connections within geospatial displays that allows planners to
variably display components of the network through
visualizations of either the logical features of the network (e.g.,
“Node X is connected to Node Y”, Figure 3a) or the physical
features (e.g., the specific path through space that is occupied by a
fiber optic communications cable connecting Node X and Node
Y, Figure 3b). From a planning perspective, this alternative
display format provides a unique capability for relating the
physical location of network features to desired operational

222

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Air Force Research
Laboratory and Human Effectiveness Directorate through a Small
Business Innovation and Research Grant, FA8650-09-M-6975.
We thank Ms. Denise Aleva of AFRL/RHCV for her support over
the course of this research. We also thank Mr. Robinson Ihle of
Rome Research Corporation for his invaluable domain knowledge
and support.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

C. Chen. Information Visualization: Beyond the Horizon. SpringerVerlag, New York, 2004.
C. Ware. Information visualization. Morgan Kaufmann, San
Francisco. 2000.

