CZSaw, IMAS & Tableau: Collaboration among Teams
VAST 2010 Grand Challenge Award: Excellent Student Team Analysis
Dustin Dunsmuir, Mahshid Z. Baraghoush, Victor Chen, Minoo Erfani Joorabchi, Mona Erfani Joorabchi,
Saba Alimadadi, Eric Lee, John Dill, Cheryl Qian, Chris D. Shaw, Robert Woodbury
School of Interactive Arts and Technology, Simon Fraser University

ABSTRACT
The VAST 2010 Challenge consisted of three separate datasets
which we investigated with three student teams using three
different tools in order to solve each Mini Challenge (MC1-3).
The teams met to share findings, request supporting evidence
from the other mini challenges, and raise questions for other
teams to investigate further. We used CZSaw [1] to investigate the
MC1 arms dealer reports by organizing an overview before
drilling down to investigate each country’s activities. We used
Tableau for MC2 to summarize the spread of the Drafa virus
within each country and compare the times at which it occurred.
We used the IMAS [2] genomics tool for MC3 to discover the
origin and initial spread of the virus.
KEYWORDS: Visual analytics, investigative analysis, information
visualization, analysis process, biology and genetics
INDEX TERMS: I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Applications-Visual
Analytics; I.6.9 [Visualization]: Information Visualization; H.5.2
[Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation;
J.3 [Computer Applications]: Biology and Genetics
1

INTRODUCTION

For this Grand Challenge we initially worked in three separate
groups which subsequently collaborated to share results. In the
team meetings, each team described their findings. Following this,
we brainstormed possible connections between scenarios and
developed two competing hypotheses. Further investigation with
the tools allowed us to narrow this to a single supported scenario
with evidence connected between mini challenges by common
geography and paired time frames. Using IMAS, we determined
the country of origin of the virus. Using Tableau we developed a
timeline showing the spread of the disease to other countries. The
MC1 data in CZSaw described the activities of people from each
of these countries and allowed us to connect the other two
challenges with a scenario involving arms dealers spreading the
disease from the origin country to the others. Our hypothesis was
strengthened by matching dates from arms dealer meetings
discovered with CZSaw to disease outbreaks analyzed in Tableau.
In the following sections we provide an overview of our use of
these tools, focusing on their novel features and the discoveries
we made about them during the analysis.
2

CZSAW – MINI CHALLENGE 1

CZSaw is a visual analytics tool that focuses on capturing and
E-mail: { dtd, mzeinaly, yvchen, mea18, mea16, salimada,
ela10, dill }@sfu.ca, qianz@purdue.edu, shaw@sfu.ca, rw@sfu.ca
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

supporting the analysis process. CZSaw contains data views for
visualization and manipulation of entities, entity collections, and
relations. CZSaw also creates an editable, re-playable, and reuseable script of the analysis process to help analysts understand,
explore, reference and reuse this process. The script contains the
model of the analysis and provides the foundation for a visual
History View of the process and a Dependency Graph.
CZSaw visualizes entity collections; thus we asked our
colleagues in the SFU Natural Language Lab to run entity
extraction algorithms on the original dataset. Unfortunately this
challenge highlighted the fact that such algorithms are never
perfect and refinement is required on the extracted entity set. To
help with this, we built into CZSaw a capability to alter the set of
entities by extracting new ones and removing unnecessary ones as
well as merging and linking entities. For example, when a
person’s name was spelled differently and thus tagged as two
separate entities, we could easily merge these together. We also
discovered connections between phone numbers and their owners
that could be encoded as a person entity with a phone alias.
CZSaw’s Dependency Graph maintains dependencies among
all data results generated during the analysis. Each data result, a
node in the dependency graph, is dependent upon the root data or
an existing data result. Altering the root data or content of a result
causes propagation in the Dependency Graph resulting in an
automatic update of the data views. This quick update of the data
views allowed us to smoothly integrate data exploration with
refinement of the data.
The data views within CZSaw provided us the flexibility we
needed to organize the dataset into subsets for each country and
then drill down into these subsets. CZSaw’s Semantic Zoom View
(SZV) is a document cluster overview with a focus+context
continuous zoom. Initially the SZV displays all documents in the
dataset as small rectangles. A layout algorithm places documents
containing many of the same entities close to each other. From
this overview, a semantic zoom can be applied to any subset of
documents to see in detail their set of entities and then their full
text. During this zooming, the SHriMP algorithm [3] is used to
move the other documents (the context) outward while the focus
documents are expanded. The SZV also allows brushing and
linking with entities and grouping documents. We were able to
quickly divide the data into groups by country and then each
could be analyzed by a single team member. These groupings
were stored within CZSaw’s script which allowed team members
to not only re-generate the same groups by running the script on
their individual machines but also to step through the process of
analysis that was taken to create them. To investigate the social
network of arms dealers in each country and across countries,
groups of documents could be dragged from the SZV and dropped
into a Hybrid View.
CZSaw’s Hybrid View displays relations between document
and entities in a node-link graph. It can display nodes (entities) in
different forms and layouts. By populating a Hybrid View with
entities related to one of the subsets of documents we could see
the network of people and places in a country. The force directed

267

layout in this view clusters entities and documents by pulling
closely related nodes together by their edges. The edges between
clusters informed us of the connections between disparate
activities within each region and led us towards understanding the
larger scenario.
3

TABLEAU – MINI CHALLENGE 2

Using Tableau for MC2 was effective for importing and analyzing
the data, in particular for huge datasets (for Karachi and Aleppo).
The features of Tableau made the analysis of data straightforward
and easy. Below we describe the key features used.
We used the join feature where the attribute ID was the primary
key in the two files of each city/country. We left joined the two
files in order to save all the attributes of patients and deaths.
However, it took up to 4 minutes to join large files in Tableau.
Tableau’s filtering capability was essential for our task. We
were able to set different conditions on the fields to be filtered.
For instance we set several conditions on the Symptoms, Number
of Records, Date of Death, etc. We could easily include or
exclude groups by setting different conditions.
Another useful feature was the definition of new calculated
fields. For example we added a function named “Datediff” to the
attributes. It was used to measure the number of days between
hospital admittance of the deceased and their date of death, i.e. the
hospitalization time for the deceased.
There were many options for selecting the type of visualization;
we predominantly used bar charts and scatter plots in our analysis.
Moreover, Tableau easily handled different types of data such as
Date, Number, String, etc. Additionally, each field could have
different formats for its values e.g., the Date fields in MC2 had
mixed format of 20/8 2010, August 2010, or 20 August 2010.
Other features that we used were colour coding, size and sorting
the bar charts.
4

IMAS – MINI CHALLENGE 3

IMAS (The Interactive Multi-genomic Analysis System), a visual
analytics system for the discovery of knowledge in genomic
information, was used to analyze the genomics data to determine
the evolution of the Drafa virus. IMAS was initially developed by
Shaw and his students in 2007. IMAS is available at
http://imas.sourceforge.net under the GPL 3 license. IMAS
enables the user to load various FASTA format files. One or more
sequences can then be selected to work with at a time.
This tool visualizes the output of common bioinformatics tools
such as BLAST and ClustalW in a unified framework. In this
challenge, BLAST was used for pair-wise nucleotide sequence
alignment. Pair-wise alignment visualizes the character-bycharacter similarities and color highlights the differences between
sequences.
IMAS provides us with a horizontal zooming of the sequences.
This interaction assists in the discovering of patterns in the whole
sequence area by controlling the level of detail. Those patterns
emphasize non-conserved regions at a glance. We can then zoom
in to a region of interest for more detail.
4.1
Finding Pair-wise Relationships
When determining the original country of all the virus strains, we
assumed that the native sequence which displays the most
similarities to each of the current outbreak sequences was the
ancestor of all the mutant strains. We defined the similarity
between two strains as the number of different bases; those
sequences that have the least number of base substitutions are the
most similar.

268

Fig. 2 shows one BLAST run result for sequence strain 118
against all the countries. The light purple areas show the similar
regions and the green rectangles highlight the differences, which
indicate that at least one substitution takes places at that area. (We
ignored green color gradients).

Figure 2. The results of the pair-wise alignment of sequence 118
against each of the countries.

By looking at the image it is clear that the first sequence,
Nigeria-B, has the least number of differences with the strain 118
in comparison with others.
5

CONCLUSION

The tools we used in our analysis were specific to the data we
were given for each mini challenge. CZSaw excelled at handling
the textual data’s multiple threads of activity through entity
refinement, semantic zooming, clustering, grouping and node-link
diagrams.
Tableau, was easy and effective for MC2 and we suggest using
it for the next epidemic outbreak.
With IMAS, we found the virus origin country in a few
minutes. The clear visualization of the result of pair-wise
alignment of each strain against all the countries helped us to
observe that the least number of mutation areas was for
Nigeria_B. Although IMAS was successfully used in solving the
tasks and determining the correct answers, we believe the
interaction aspects of the tool could be further improved.
These three tools performed efficiently at this VAST challenge,
and we now better understand them for future improvements.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

N. Kadivar, V. Chen, D. Dunsmuir, E. Lee, C. Qian, J. Dill, C. Shaw
and R. Woodbury. “Capturing and Supporting the Analysis Process”,
Proceedings of IEEE Visual Analytics Science & Technology,
(Atlantic City, NJ, Oct 11-16, 2009), pp. 131-138, 2009.
C. Shaw, G. Dasch, and M. Eremeeva. “IMAS: The Interactive
Multigenomic Analysis System”, Proceedings of IEEE Visual
Analytics Science & Technology, (Sacramento, CA, Oct 30-Nov 1,
2007), pp. 59-66. 2007.
M-A. D. Storey, and H. Muller, “Graph Layout Adjustment
Strategies”, Proceedings of the Symposium on Graph Drawing,
(Berkeley, CA, Sept 18-20, 1996), pp. 487-499. 1996.

