Multi-Viz Data Fusion
VAST 2010 Grand Challenge Award: Outstanding Debrief
C. Campbell1, S. Blanchard1, S. Chin1, C. Henderson2, M. Holland1, K. Jennings1, P. Kuehl5, D. Lucey4,5, M. McCoy1, J.
1
1
5
1
3
1
1
1
McCracken , B. Pecheux , M. Pietrzak , D. Roberts , M. Sanders , K. Taylor , D. Whitford , R.P. DiMassimo
Noblis1; Centrifuge Systems2; Future Point Systems3; Georgetown University4, and MedStar Institute for Innovation5

ABSTRACT
In response to the 2010 VAST Grand Challenge our team
developed an analytical pipeline combining manual analysis with
automated entity extraction and visualization tools to gain insight
into the complex source documents associated with a fictional
illegal arms dealing network spanning multiple countries. This
data was then integrated with data hospital records information
and genetic data from the associated virus to determine the origin
of the outbreak, and to identify how it was spread to various
countries. Using our methodologies we surmised that a Ukrainian
group served as the central mediators for a variety of deals, and
that these deals culminated in a meeting that was attended by
representatives from most of the identified countries in this
network. One of the early attendees of these meetings was
infected with this Drafa Fever virus and subsequently spread it to
other attendees who then spread the disease in their respective
countries upon returning home. While this scenario was fictitious,
the methods developed could be applied to real-world scenarios,
and with some improvements, in near real-time which could
potentially allow decision makers to prevent a future pandemic.
KEYWORDS: data fusion, visual analytics, link analysis,
relationship graphs
INDEX TERMS: H.3.1. [Information Storage and Retrieval]
Document and Text Processing–Indexing Methods; H.3.3.
[Information Storage and Retrieval] Systems and Software–
Information Networks; J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences]–Health
1

INTRODUCTION

The 2010 VAST Grand Challenge asked participants to find links
between three distinct data sets (intelligence analysis, medical
records, and genetic information) that explained the connections
between a fictional illegal arms network and a global pandemic.
These data sets were large, complex, and very different from each
other, and fusing salient information between them was a
challenging task. The approach chosen to integrate these datasets
was to remain platform agnostic. Multiple analytical methods
were used to gain a multi-faceted look at the datasets and generate
hypotheses to support the storyline.
To gain insight into this data our overall analytical approach
started with data pre-processing for all data types, followed by
*Correspondence should be sent to: Catherine Campbell,
Noblis, 3150 Fairview Park Drive South, Falls Church, VA
22042
email: catherine.campbell@noblis.org
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

parallel analyses that combined manual analysis with more
automated visual analytics. From these processes we developed
entity lists for people, events, dates, places, transactions, aliases
and objects, as well as symptom categories associated with
disease and genetic polymorphism associated with symptoms. The
data from the intelligence records and health data were transferred
into Starlight and Centrifuge, resulting in visualizations that drove
hypothesis development and further analysis.
2

ANALYSIS

Our analysis approach for this challenge used a combination of
manual and automated analyses and a combination of subject
matter experts in medicine, bioinformatics, microbiology, and
intelligence analysis, as well as visualization experts. While this
analysis did require expert analysis, future development could
automate much of this process. However, in the unlikely event of
a true pandemic, we would not recommend cutting all expertise
from the analysis pipeline. Having expert-eyes on machine
generated data, and using visualization tools to hasten analysis,
remain a desirable approach. In addition to aiding in the analysis
process, the final visualizations were essential for communicating
findings and evidence to others.
2.1
Intelligence Records
In this challenge, unstructured text records such as phone and wire
intercepts; email and message board intercepts, and news reports,
contained valuable data that would have been challenging to
manually analyze. The original VAST intelligence datasets were
therefore first preprocessed using Starlight Data Engineer (SDE)
to extract entities [1] and create structured XML and CSV files
that were then ingested into a variety of tools. Once in structured
form, analysis was conducted using data visualization tools such
as Starlight, Centrifuge and Protovis, as well as utilizing Copernic
indexed desktop search for targeted data mining. From these
visualizations key activities, people, locations, and network nodes
were quickly identified and used to identify data gaps, generate
hypotheses, and arrive at conclusions. This combination of
automated inquiry and detailed manual investigation were critical
to completing this task accurately and in a timely manner
2.2
Health Records
Analysis of the large datasets of hospital admission and death
records relied on the use of a PostgreSQL database to manage the
data on a shared server, statistical analysis of subsets of data using
Excel, and trend analysis and visualization using Centrifuge. In
this dataset the Centrifuge was found to be very useful for
exploratory analysis, working seamlessly with the remote
database server to allow for rapid exploration of patterns within
the data. A Microsoft Access front end to the database, coupled to
Excel, provided an alternate and efficient means to query the data,
develop appropriate graphics, and facilitate implementation of
custom statistical functions such as CUSUM. The CUSUM

265

function [2], which can also be used in predictive analysis,
compares an indicator function (such as admits or deaths) for a
given day to a running baseline derived from previous values, in
this case a 7-day running baseline. These methods allowed the
correlation of the disease outbreak liftoff dates in the various
cities with the order of the dates of the arms meetings in Dubai.
2.3
Genetic Records
The genetic data, while robust in its own right, primarily fed into
the Grand Challenge through the text description that linked
Nicolai Kuryakin to the disease outbreak and to the intelligence
dataset. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) information from
the DNA sequences along with phylogenetic analysis was also
used to identify the origin of disease. The genetic information was
used to correlate and substantiate facts from the other data sets.
Additionally, a Javascript-based visualization toolkit developed at
Stanford–Protovis– was used to develop interactive pedigree trees
which also gave insight into the mutation rate of the disease.
3

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The fusion of results and visualizations from multiple tools
allowed the determination that the global pandemic of Drafa
Fever was set off following an illegal arms meeting held in Dubai.
An attendee from Nigeria initially infected others at the meeting,
who transferred the virus back to the general population of their
respective countries. Analysis of intelligence reports using
Starlight led us to visualize key people movements converging in
Dubai in April of 2009 (Figure 1).

Liftoff dates were calculated based on outbreak mortality rates
using the statistical function CUSUM (note that these dates could
have been calculated from admission rates, there is more noise in
that data and the correlations are less strong). Each country’s
outbreak correlated very well with the order that arms network
members from each country met in Dubai.
The analysis methods used for this challenge also identified
some anomalies. Saudi Arabia experienced the outbreak although
there was no representative at the meetings. However, intelligence
reports showed one Yemeni representatives travelling through
Saudi Arabia who could be responsible for the outbreak.
Additionally, according to health records neither Turkey nor
Thailand experienced a measurable outbreak, despite having
representatives in Dubai during the arms meetings. Intercepted
communications indicated that Turkish dealers may not have met
directly with other members of the arms network and might have
avoided infection. However for Thailand, there was one
representative who participated in face to face meetings, but it is
hypothesized from the intelligence reports that perhaps he did not
return home, but travelled with one of the Ukrainians to Paris.
Finally, at the end of the reporting period (and the outbreak) the
intelligence data indicated there were still residual arms
subnetworks. Since the health records estimated the mortality rate
at 8-11%, and intelligence reports and the genomics data set
confirmed the death of only 4 members of the arms network, it
could reasonably be concluded that most other Dubai meeting
attendees survived. From this analysis, recommendations for
future directions were also made. For example, key individuals
and countries were assessed to be unaffected by the pandemic and
were assessed to be important to the continued proliferation of the
arms network. The results of this analytical pipeline could feed
this information into future efforts for disrupting this network.
4

Figure 1. Convergence of arms dealers in Dubai

Genetic analysis of the outbreak strain indicated that it evolved
from the Nigeria B strain of the Drafa virus which was also
supported by intelligence information. Health records showed that
all of the outbreaks began within weeks of the arms dealers
returning home, and also occurred in an order corresponding to
the meeting schedule in Dubai (Figure 2).

CONCLUSION

The VAST Challenge provided three unique data sets, used in
concert, to indentify the cause of a global pandemic. The
integration of these datasets required a suite of tools and
collaboration among different subject matter experts. While fewer
tools could have been used, the reliability and accuracy of the
solution would have been diminished. This approach remains tool
agnostic, and while the tools chosen for this response functioned
well, additional tools could be added or subtracted from future
analysis based on data types and subject areas.
Visualization was also a key component of this challenge, and
visualization tools were used throughout the analysis from
informing hypothesis to illustrating conclusions. This greatly
speeded the analysis process overall.
Finally, it is critical to mention the audience the analysis is
intended for. For this response we summarized our hypotheses for
a target audience of analysts. Had this audience been doctors,
microbiologists, or law enforcement agents, a different summary
style (and perhaps different visual representations of the data)
might have been warranted. Therefore, any tool used in this type
of analysis should offer a variety of outputs and be able to tailor
the visualization to a variety of audiences.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
Figure 2. Correlation of Dubai meetings and outbreak liftoff dates

266

E. Agichtein, and L. Gravano. Querying text databases for efficient
information extraction. In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE
International Conference on Data Engineering (Bangalore, India,
2003), pages 113–124, 2003.
R.D. Fricker, B.L. Hegler, and D.A. Dunfee. Comparing syndromic
surveillance detection methods: EARS' versus a CUSUM-based
methodology. Statist. Med., 27:3407-3429, 2008.

