Visualization of Temporal Relationships within Coordinated Views
Stephanie Dudzic*

J. Alex Godwin**

Ryan M. Kilgore***

Charles River Analytics

ABSTRACT
In command and control (C2) environments, decision makers
must rapidly understand and address key temporal relationships
that exist between critical tasks as conditions fluctuate. However,
traditional temporal displays, such as mission timelines, fail to
support user understanding of and reasoning about critical
relationships. We have developed visualization methods to
compactly and effectively convey key temporal constraints. In this
paper, we present examples of our visualization approach and
describe how we are exploring interaction methods within an
integrated visualization workspace to support user awareness of
temporal constraints.
KEYWORDS: temporal relationships, temporal visualization
1

INTRODUCTION

Decision makers in time-sensitive command and control
environments, such as Air Operations Centers (AOCs), must
rapidly evaluate their environment and, under significant time
constraints, make decisions based on their understanding of the
evolving situation at hand. Often, tasks within these environments
are tightly inter-dependent with other tasks and events [2]. To be
effective, decision makers must understand critical relationships
and interdependencies between current and planned tasks, as well
as the effects each decision will have on other downstream
activities.
Although a number of tools are available to display situational
information to operators, traditional temporal displays (such as
mission timeline displays) typically only show rudimentary
information (such as start and end times of tasks) and fail to show
the underlying relationships between tasks. Traditional temporal
planning tools, such as Gantt charts or other project management
displays, use connecting arrows to depict key relationships
between tasks. However, these methods rapidly lead to high levels
of clutter in timelines with large numbers of related tasks. They
also fail to provide operators with direct, efficient access to
decision-critical information, such as the specific amount of time
a task can be delayed before there is a significant negative impact
on other tasks.
Visualization methods for efficiently presenting decisioncritical information regarding task interdependencies are needed.
While there are many exhaustive representations of time and
temporal logic [1], we have found through discussion with expert
members of C2 centers—specifically an Air Operations Center
and an Emergency Operations Center—that awareness of four key
task relationships (Figure 1) are necessary to support timesensitive decision-making [3]. While more comprehensive models
can be useful, operators within C2 environments must maintain
*sdudzic@cra.com;**agodwin@cra.com;***rkilgore@cra.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

awareness of dozens, potentially hundreds, of task relationships
simultaneously and there is insufficient time to consider the
details of each.
Interactive timeline displays that leverage task relationship
visualization methods are needed to support operator
identification and reasoning about the effects of their decisions.
Finally, linked geospatial and task-specific displays are needed to
better support overall time-sensitive decision-making within
command and control environments.
2

A VISUAL LANGUAGE FOR TEMPORAL CONSTRAINTS

Under previous efforts, we have developed a simple visual
language for encoding decision-critical temporal relationships in
an intuitive and compact format [3]. We developed a
representative symbol set to represent each key temporal
relationship based on two key symbols to represent the start and
terminal endpoints of tasks (Figure 1): a right facing triangle to
represent the start of a task, and a left backing bracket to represent
the endpoint of a task (into which the terminal endpoint of the task
neatly fits). Leveraging the order of the symbols, a user can
quickly infer the critical relationship that is represented by the
visual cue. In addition, we set the first symbol to the color red to
redundantly highlight the constraint that is imposed on the task,
leaving the second symbol to represent the potential downstream
effect.

Figure 1. Visual language representing the four key temporal
relationships necessary for time-sensitive decision making

Below, we describe our efforts to leverage these constraintbased display components within interactive timeline displays to
support C2 decision makers’ rapid exploration of critical task
interdependencies, as well as additional visualization techniques
that more effectively link temporal and geospatial display
perspectives.
3

INTERACTIVE TIMELINE REPRESENTATION

To support decision makers’ rapid exploration of critical task
interdependencies, we integrated the visual constraint language
within a interactive temporal component allowing operators
within C2 environments to rapidly identify and evaluate
competing alternatives and explore the what-if decision space
before making a decision.
To support the high level of temporal detail that is needed by
decision makers within time-sensitive command and control
environments, these compact representations of the underlying

219

temporal relationships between tasks are placed directly within
traditional mission displays at the exact moment of time that the
constraint will be violated and will negatively impact another task.
This immediately conveys the remaining time before violation
along the temporal axis (Figure 2). In addition, a translucent bar
with low visual salience connects the end of a precedent task to its
first constraint and helps the user quickly perceive the amount of
time available before that constraint is violated, without overly
cluttering the display space. However, as the time that remains
until a constraint is violated reaches a minimum level, the
translucent bar is highlighted with the color red. For tasks that
have several constraints, subsequent constraints are rendered with
higher transparency so that they are still apparent but provide less
distraction to overburdened decision makers.

Figure 2. Integration of visual language and bars highlighting the
time that remains until the constraint is violated in a Timeline

4

INTEGRATED GEOSPATIAL DISPLAY

Geospatial representation is a common tool used by decision
makers within these environments to monitor and track the
progress of units and tasks. To merge the spatial and temporal
perspectives of the key temporal relationships, we have linked the
interactive temporal component within an integrated visualization
workspace (Figure 3) with multiple coordinated views, including
geospatial and other task-specific linked views.

dependent tasks are highlighted in corresponding views to support
a richer understanding of the constraint within the context of
multiple views. In addition, as users filter information within a
timeline display, related information in coordinated views is also
filtered to support linked behavior and consistent information
across views.
5

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We will continue to expand our development of the integrated
visualization workspace to support operator awareness of
temporal task relationships in command and control
environments. In particular, we will focus on broadening the
scope of our visual language and strategies to support additional
temporal relationships. Although high-tempo environments may
not afford in-depth analysis of temporal relationships, we intend
to explore an expanded set of interaction techniques for temporal
relationships in an interface that allows users more time to explore
temporal datasets and examine the impacts of task timing as they
manipulate these tasks.We also see a great deal of potential
benefit to training operations in emergency management,
especially for providing immediate salient feedback to trainees
regarding the temporal importance of interrelated events and the
potential consequences of mismanaged resources.
We also will continue working with representative users within
these domains to evaluate the usability and efficacy of our visual
strategies in conveying these relationships.We are currently
developing a formal plan to empirically evaluate the performance
of our strategies for the display of task relationships in temporal
visualizations in decision-making tasks. As part of this work, we
plan to ascertain the intuitiveness of our visual language and
determine if usability of an enhanced timeline is affected by user
familiarity with the symbol set. We will also assess the benefits of
our timeline enhancements to user performance in time-sensitive
operations. For example, can a user identify, from a pool of
available tasks in an enhanced temporal visualization, the one task
whose delay will have the least effect on dependent operations
and resources? What effect does the type of visualization have on
the time required by a user to accomplish this test accurately? We
believe that these advanced timeline displays will lead to better
decisions in complex, time-critical C2 environments. To this end,
we will investigate the answers to these questions, and more, in a
follow-up study.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Figure 3. Integrated temporal component with visualization cues
within integrated visualization workspace

We have developed a set of task-specific linked views within
the integrated visualization workspace (such as a time-to-target
view) to explicitly answer specific planning questions (e.g., “How
long will relevant assets take to reach a new target?” “How is this
changing over time?”), which are challenging and error prone.
These additional displays allow the user to filter down the
decision space to a subset of potential options to explore and
evaluate relative to constraints.
Within the integrated visualization workspace, we have
extended traditional linked highlighting across views to support
linking with the visual constraint language across other views. As
a user selects the constraint component, the related task and

220

This research was supported by the Air Force Research
Laboratory and Human Effectiveness Directorate through a Small
Business Innovation and Research Grant, FA8650-09-C-6941. We
would like to thank Mr. Joseph Ghrayeb of AFRL for his support
over the course of this research. We would also like to thank Mr.
Robinson Ihle of PAR Technologies and Mr. William Giannini of
Global Training, LLC, for their invaluable domain knowledge and
support.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

J. Allen. Maintaining Knowledge About Temporal Intervals.
Communications of the ACM, volume 26, 832-843, 1983.
B. Brehmer. The human in command: exploring the modern military
experience: Dynamic Decision Making in Command and Control.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers New York. pages 233-248,
2000.
S. Dudzic, A. Godwin, and R. Kilgore. Visual Strategies for
Enhancing User Perception of Task Relationships in Emergency
Operations Centers. In SPIE Defense and Security Symposium, 2010.

