Visual Analytics of a Pandemic Spread
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 2 Award: Thorough Description of Analytic Process

Andrada Astefanoaie∗

Rodica Bozianu†

Marc Broghammer‡

Roland Jungnickel§

University of Konstanz

University of Konstanz

University of Konstanz

University of Konstanz

Christian

Rohrdantz¶

University of Konstanz

Juergen Schniertshauer
University of Konstanz

David

Spretke∗∗

University of Konstanz

Peter Bak††
IBM Haifa Research Lab
Israel

1 I NTRODUCTION
The task of the VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 2 was to characterize
the spread of an epidemic outbreak. The analysis should take into
consideration symptoms, mortality rates and temporal patterns of
the disease. Finally, the outbreak should be compared across different locations searching for anomalies.
For the preprocessing and the automated analysis of the data we
used the Konstanz Information Miner (KINME)1 , which is a modular data exploration platform that enables the user to visually create
dataflows, the R2 software for statistical computing and some selfwritten Java programs for data preprocessing. For conducting the
visual investigations we applied Many Eyes3 and Protovis4 , which
compose scalable and customized views for datasets of interest.
2 A NALYTIC P ROCESS
To find the answers for both questions of the Mini Challenge, an analytic pipeline was designed which combines automatic and semiautomatic data analysis with interactive visual explorations. The
analytic pipeline (see Figure 1) is divided into three parts: preparation of data (Section 2.1), information extraction and visual analysis (Section 2.2) and knowledge extraction and results’ refinement
(Section 2.3).
2.1 Preparation of data
The first part of the analytic pipeline, common to both questions of
Mini Challenge 2, is comprised of data preprocessing and the initial
analysis. The raw input data consists of hospitalization and death
records for 11 locations. An initial statistical analysis helped us to
gain general knowledge about the data, like the average mortality
rate and the fact that males and females were affected to the same
extent by the disease.
For further automatic and visual analyses, the different data
sources about the patients hospitalization and death had to be
merged first. Afterwards, the symptom descriptions for patients
had to be processed in multiple steps, from which the removal of
duplicate symptoms and their cleansing took major efforts (several
hours).
2.2 Information Extraction and Visual Analysis
The number of occurrences of each symptom on each day for both
hospitalizations and deaths, as well as the mortality rate for each
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:
‡ e-mail:
§ e-mail:
¶ e-mail:

e-mail:
∗∗ e-mail:
†† e-mail:

andrada.astefanoaie@uni-konstanz.de
rodica.bozianu@uni-konstanz.de
marc.broghammer@uni-konstanz.de
roland.jungnickel@uni-konstanz.de
christian.rohrdantz@uni-konstanz.de
juergen.schniertshauer@uni-konstanz.de
david.spretke@uni-konstanz.de
peterba@il.ibm.com

Figure 1: The analytic pipeline represents the workflow that was used
to extract the information needed to answer the Mini Challenge.

symptom were calculated automatically. As a result, we gained
some indication which symptoms relate to the disease.
In a confirmatory step, the correlation of the symptoms was calculated and visualized with the arc graph presented in Figure 2. The
visualization shows that some symptoms are strongly and others are
not correlated with the main symptoms.
The small multiples visualization from Figure 3 enables to see
further temporal aspects of the data. The chart reveals the evolution
of deaths for each location - taking into consideration the day of
hospitalization and the day of death (left column), the total number
of infected patients (middle column) and the temporal evolution of
infected people that died (right column). It is clearly visible that the
locations Turkey and Thailand pattern differently and were probably not affected by the disease. More details about which symptoms
were involved in which location can be derived from the temporal
heatmap in Figure 4. The chart shows the change of mortality rates
over time. We expected to see a simple correlation between symptoms and mortality rate. But, it seems that mortality rates do not
follow a clear pattern as a function of symptom or time. However,
an anomaly of the mortality rate peaking towards the end of the
recovery period is perceivable for several countries.
The world map in Figure 5 was created to explore potential correlations between the location of a country and different data attributes, as well as to compare the spread across countries. The
most affected country is Syria, being represented by Aleppo. The
next one is Kenya (represented by Nairobi) with a marginal difference.
1 KNIME

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

(Konstanz Information Miner) - http://www.knime.org/
- http://www.r-project.org/
3 Many Eyes - http://manyeyes.alphaworks.ibm.com/manyeyes/
4 Protovis - http://vis.stanford.edu/protovis/
2R

277

Figure 3: The Small Multiples Chart.
Figure 2: The Arc Graph shows the co-occurrences between the
most common symptoms. The size of each node represents the
number of occurrences of the symptoms and the width of the arc
represents the number of records with both symptoms.

2.3 Results
Based on all the aforementioned and further visualizations several interesting findings were made. First, both major symptoms (Vomiting, Diarrhea, Nose Bleeding, Abdominal Pain, Back
Pain) and minor symptoms (Conjunctivitis Red, Encephalitis, Facial Swelling, Hearing Loss, Proteinuria, Tremor) of the disease
were detected. Nairobi could be identified as the first location
to be affected and to reach the peak. The peaks of the disease
were reached on May 16th in Kenya (Nairobi), May 17th in Syria
(Aleppo), May 19th in Lebanon, Yemen and Pakistan (Karachi),
May 20th in Venezuela, Saudi Arabia and Iran and May 21st in
Colombia. The temporal developments of mortality rates showed
that the severity of the disease was not the same for each country. Turkey and Thailand might be considered as anomalies because
they were not affected. Finally, it became obvious that the spread
of the disease was at least partly caused by infected people flying
from one country to another: Not all affected countries border each
other and the time spans between the outbreaks were very short.

Figure 4: Heatmap visualizing the change of mortality rates over
time: Every column represents a country. Within each country time
is mapped from top to bottom. Symptoms are mapped from left to
right. The more red, the higher the mortality rate is.

3 L ESSONS L EARNED
The clearly defined analysis pipeline enabled us to solve the analysis task of Mini Challenge 2 by mainly applying existing tools.
Whereas the preprocessing required some own code writing and
took a considerable amount of time, once the data was in a structured and clean format it could be easily visualized. Quite a number of different visualizations could be tested without too much additional effort and some of them immediately revealed interesting
additional insights, while others helped to confirm previously generated hypotheses.
Figure 5: The World Map shows the average mortality rate per country in the geospatial context.

278

