Periscopic Visualizes Symptomatology of Pandemic
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 2 Award: Effective Visualization of Symptoms

Kim Rees

1

Periscopic

ABSTRACT
By using affordable, off-the-shelf software and novel visualization
methods, characterizing the spread of a pandemic was achieved
for the VAST Challenge. Dashboards of the presenting
symptomatology, anomalies, and death records all contributed to
creating ways for health officials better detect and analyze the
spread of the disease.
KEYWORDS: visual analytics, data mining, data sharing, medical
information systems.
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces—Theory and methods
TOOLS USED

1

Focusing primarily on ease of use, ease of deployment, and cost
effectiveness, the goal was to envision a real world solution for
the Challenge. If this pandemic scenario were real, these factors
would be eminent to decision making when employing a solution,
presumably.
With that in mind, it seemed that using only off-the-shelf software
would best meet those goals. The tool which best fit the above
criteria was Tableau [1]. It allows for quick connection to data,
exploration of the data, and various methods of visual analysis.
Creating multiple charts to show different aspects of the data as
well as dashboards that combined those charts into a single view
were relatively easy using the Tableau desktop software. Tableau
also allows for creating animations that demonstrated the spread
of the pandemic over time.
As an accessory, Microsoft Excel [2] was also employed for data
storage and import.
2

METHODOLOGY

The data provided exhibited the hallmarks of disorganized input
mechanisms and inconsistencies across external systems. This was
as expected due to the nature of the current state of information
systems and the inability to create consistency between various
political and geographic entities.
The following methodology was used and is recommended for
implementing a system that could enhance early detection of an
epidemic. These methods would also increase chances of
containing the spread across countries.
1

2.1
Aggregate Symptoms
The first task is to group symptoms that are the same but have
different spellings, abbreviations, or are variants. For instance,
two reporters of abdominal pain may list it as “AB PAIN” or
“ABD PAIN” therefore, the symptoms need unification.
2.2
Ignore non-Indicators
Remove, hide, or exclude symptoms that would not indicate a
disease (i.e. broken arm, dog bite, etc.). While these are important
for other areas of medicine, they are not useful for detecting an
epidemic.
2.3
Prioritize Symptoms
There are obviously conditions that are more likely to occur with
a contagious disease such as fever, chills, pallor, vomiting,
weakness, etc. These symptoms should be prioritized over others
such as bleeding, stroke, and speech problems. Although, while
less likely to be an indicator, those outlying symptoms should not
be overlooked.
2.4
Dashboard
These indicators should be visualized in various ways over time.
By doing this, they can be observed on a daily or hourly basis.
Employing different methods of viewing the same data should
allow for any anomalies to become readily apparent. Line charts,
heat matrices, and sized symbol charts among others can be used
in conjunction to synthesize a time-based picture of the data.
2.5
Compare
The time-based dashboard should extend at least twelve months in
the past. This will enable one to see seasonal fluctuations or other
normal occurrences as compared to the current incoming data.
Without the historic perspective, it may be difficult to establish a
baseline for what is considered normal for that particular time of
year and could lead to false assumptions.
3

VISUAL ANALYSIS

Once the data was cleaned up and consolidated, visual exploration
could take place. Various methods were employed to discover
onset symptomatology, death rates, and pandemic spread among
other characteristics of the disease.
3.1
Heat Matrix
Heat matrices are typically used to find relationships between
entities and determine the extent of the relationship. However, this
method can be used effectively to highlight outliers over time.

kim@periscopic.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

283

3.3
Dashboard
It can be useful to view multiple charts at one time. This concept
of “dashboarding” allows the viewer to assess relationships. For
instance, figure 3 shows the heat matrix described earlier, a line
chart showing the comparative rates of each symptom (in order to
detect epidemic onset), and a separate heat matrix that breaks the
symptom rate down by age groups.

Figure 1: Heat matrix showing clear indicator symptom anomalies.

Figure 1 shows symptoms on the left with each rectangle
representing a day. An item that is in the green spectrum shows
that the number of cases of that symptom is within the normal
range. Conversely, one in the red end of the spectrum denotes that
there are an abnormally large number of cases for that symptom.
It is shown in figure 1 that the presenting symptomatology of the
disease consisted of fever, rash, and abdominal pain. Additionally,
the vast majority of deaths in every city had the admission
symptoms of abdominal pain and vomiting. This is clearly seen as
the epidemic sets in a few days after the initial outbreak.

Figure 3: Symptomatology dashboard.

Various charts can be grouped to create dashboards with different
themes.

By using this heat matrix as a dashboard element to be monitored
daily, one can clearly spot anomalies as they arise and treat the
outbreak early.
3.2
Animated Map
In order to view the spread of the disease over time, the use of
animation is very helpful. Sometimes unrecognized relationships
emerge only after the data has been animated [3].

Figure 4: Epidemic onset and death rate dashboard.

The dashboard shown in figure 4 shows both the onset of the
epidemic in a given city and the death rate as the epidemic spread.
This could help in detecting the relationship between onset
symptomatology and symptoms that eventually led to death. Each
color-coded line represents a specific symptom for admittance on
the left chart, and for death record on the right chart.
Figure 2: Still from animated map.

The still in figure 2 shows a single day of the pandemic. The size
of the circle denotes the numbers of deaths in that city for that
specific day. The color of each circle denotes the number of days
to contain the disease for that city with red being one of the longer
time frames.
By animating the pandemic spatiotemporally, one can see where
the pandemic began and how it spread. The size of the dots grows
and shrinks as the disease spreads and is later contained, giving
one insight into areas that were quick to recover and others that
were more problematic.

284

4

CONCLUSION

In matters of health and well-being, we often look for the most
comprehensive and exceptional solution. However, in times of
need, sometimes the quick and easy answer is enough to reign in
catastrophe. In this VAST Challenge it is apparent that thoughtful
solutions that can be rapidly implemented could perhaps save
lives.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

Tableau Software: www.tableausoftware.com
Microsoft Excel: office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel
Mark Harrower. “Animated Maps: Overview of Animated Maps.”
Cartography 2.0. Sept 2009.
cartography2.org/Chapters/page6/OverviewAnimated.html

