EmailTime: Visual Analytics of Emails
Minoo Erfani Joorabchi, Ji-Dong Yim and Christopher D. Shaw
Simon Fraser University

ABSTRACT
Although the discovery and analysis of communication patterns in
large and complex email datasets are difficult tasks, they can be a
valuable source of information. This paper presents EmailTime’s
capabilities through several examples. EmailTime is a visual
analysis of email correspondence patterns over the course of time
that interactively portrays personal and interpersonal networks
using the correspondence in the email dataset. We suggest that
integrating both statistics and visualizations in order to display
information about the email datasets may simplify its evaluation.
KEYWORDS: Email, Enron, EmailTime, Email Correspondents,
Visual Analysis.
Index Terms:
1

EMAILTIME OVERVIEW

Our system, the EmailTime [1], visualizes the communication
activities found in a collection of the emails over a course of time.
The original email dataset is from the Enron Email Corpus [2]. To
apply the archive to our visualization, we prepared the dataset
from either one’s or multiple users’ mailboxes, and filter off the
emails out of the time period we are interested in.
EmailTime is a visual analysis of email correspondence patterns
over the course of time that interactively portrays personal and
interpersonal networks using the correspondence in the email
dataset. Our approach is to put time as a primary variable of
interest, and plot emails along a time line. EmailTime helps email
dataset explorers interpret archived messages by providing
zooming, panning, filtering and highlighting etc. To support
analysis, it also measures and visualizes histograms, graph
centrality and frequency on the communication graph that can be
induced from the email collection.
In the visualization, the horizontal dimension depicts time and
each email message is displayed as multiple visual aliases painted
in three different colors, which are a black circle for the Sender
(or email address in From field), blues for To recipients and
greens for CCs Sent emails have different sizes to represent the
number of recipients (To + CC) of the email message.
Figure 1 displays the plot of a small network. As mentioned above
a message draws multiple circles in three different colors. The
message #1 is sent by Aaron to Beth, the message #2 is sent by
SIAT, Simon Fraser University, 250-13450 102 Avenue,
Surrey, Canada
Send correspondence to M.E.J.
M.E.J.: E-mail: mea18@sfu.ca
J.D.Y.: E-mail: jdyim@sfu.ca
C.D.S.: E-mail: shaw@sfu.ca

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 Crown

Chris to Aaron, and copied to Beth, the message #3 is sent by
Beth to Aaron and copied to Chris and David. Therefore the black
circle gets larger as the numbers of recipients increased.
#1
aaron@a.org
beth@b.org

#3

chris@c.org

#2

david@d.org
Time

Figure 1. Plotting email messages. A message draws multiple
circles in three different colors; black for Sent, blue for Received as
To, and green for Received as Cc. The size of a Sent node
represents the number of recipients. (e.g. the message #3 is sent
by Chris to Aaron, and copied to Beth.)

2

EMAILTIME CAPABILITIES

EmailTime visualization enables the analysts to infer underlying
implications from observation and thus helps them move from
observation to investigation. Using the system the analysts/users
can:
x
Compare the activity of one or more email addresses in the
particular time periods (Figure 2).
x
Temporal gaps in email addresses’ activities are obvious.
Therefore if the analysts/users know some events they can
easily relate those to them (e.g. holidays, trips…, Figure 2-B)
x
All the top frequent correspondents (user clique) who have
sent/received relatively a large amount of emails to/from the
focused one are easily distinguished – any bunch of emails
that are rendered in a row and can be highlighted by plot
(Figure 3).
x
Types of correspondence (general or private messages)
which means that to how many people that email address
sent messages (realized by size of messages, Figure 3).
x
Compare the email addresses of one individual (Can select
one or more email address from the email list and see the
related emails in the plot, Figure 4).
x
Some changes such as switching from one email address to
another one can be recognized (Figure 4).
x
Role of each email address (sender, receiver, both) and the
behaviour pattern of each email address (e.g. start and end
time, more or less activity) by plot and histogram (Figure 4).
2.1
Examples
Figure 2 displays the datasets of four randomly selected Enron
Employees in two different time period, June-Dec 2000 and 2001.
These two time periods are completely different. The first one
(Figure 2-A) is more uniform than the second one whereas the
second one (Figure 2-B) has the gap period and crowded part at
the end of 2001 which can be the result of Enron’s fall. In the first
period only these four employees sent the emails but in the second
period many others sent emails to the network as well.

233

Chapman) frequently spread emails to many people, while the
Sender 5 (David Delaney) usually talked to a small group of
people. Also, we can recognize three of active email senders. In
similar ways, To and Cc emails make interesting patterns each.
1

2

3

4

A. First time period.

Temporal gap
5

Figure 3. A subset of Sent emails (or From nodes) within the
example dataset in year 2000. The highlighted nodes at the bottom
(in red) are the messages that the actor david.delainey@enron.com
sent.

B. Second time period.
Figure 2. The datasets of four randomly selected Enron Employees;
Albert Meyers, Judy Townsend, Matthew Lenhart and Susan
Pereira are plotted in the visualization in two different time periods.
A) June-Dec 2000. B) June-Dec 2001.

Since our visualization displays a large number of emails and
draws multiple instances for a message, the very basic and
important filter in the system is the Node Type Selector applied to
the three types of email node - Sent, Received as To, and Received
as Cc. In Error! Reference source not found.3, where To and Cc
nodes are filtered out, we can clearly see different patterns of
sending activities. For example in Figure 3, Sender 2 (Kay

Jeff.shankman@enron.co

Jeffrey.shankman@enron.com

The Email List Tab in the control panel contains the list of all
email addresses found in the dataset and filters the plot
visualization to only display the selected ones. In Figure 4 we can
see Jeffrey Shankman had multiple email addresses. His first
email address was jeffrey.shankman@enron.com and switched to
a..shankman@enron.com in March 2001. Jeffrey Shankman
played different role during each time period. He was a sender in
his first and last activities and was a receiver in his second
activities. He didn’t actively use other email addresses.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

Minoo Erfani Joorabchi, Ji-Dong Yim , Christopher D. Shaw,
“EmailTime: Visualization of the Temporal Email,” Grace Hopper
Celebration 2010.
W. W. Cohen, CALD, CMU. October 2004, from http://www2.cs.cmu.edu/~enron/

Jeffshankman@hotmail.com

Jefry.a.shankman@enron.com

a..shankman@enron.com

March 2001
Figure 4. Emails sent or received by the five email addresses of Jeffrey Shankman, the President of Enron Corporation.

234

