Visual Tools for Dynamic Analysis of Complex Situations
Marielle Mokhtari1, Eric Boivin1, Denis Laurendeau2 and Maxime Girardin2
1

2

System of Systems Section, Defence R&D Canada
Quebec (QC), Canada

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an interactive interface synchronized with a
simulation framework for exploring complex scenarios. This
interface exploits visual analysis for facilitating the understanding
of complex situation by human users.
KEYWORDS: Information visualization, 2D1/2 animation, line &
surface graph animation, interaction, synchronization.
1
INTRODUCTION
The IMAGE concept (Lizotte et al., 2008) aims at supporting
collaboration among experts in their attempt to reach a common
understanding of complex situations. The concept: i) is iterative:
understanding is reached through revision and sharing of
successive representations of the situation; ii) is human-centric:
understanding is achieved by humans who use various tools
judiciously for supporting their mental process; and iii) exploits
the synergy between complementary technologies: the Knowledge
Representation tool aims at supporting users to build and share
conceptual graphs making the common understanding explicit; the
Scenario Scripting tool transforms conceptual graphs into a
simulation model; the Simulation tool allows the space of scenario
variables to be explored and the results of simulations to be
compared; and finally, the Exploration tool (a part being presented
in this paper) relies on a wide range of visualization and
interaction metaphors for observing large data sets dynamically.
The main objectives of the implementation of the Exploration tool
are to: i) make exploration user-centric; ii) support the elicitation
of common understanding efficiently; and iii) allow the
performance of users to be assessed by cognitive psychologists
through objective measurements of user actions (in order to
demonstrate whether or not IMAGE helps users to improve and
share comprehension). Two solutions have been developed:
IMAGE Desktop (presented in this paper), and IMAGE CAVE (not
presented in this paper, but pictures are given in Figure 3) which
uses partial user immersion and provide users with more
sophisticated visualization metaphors than IMAGE Desktop. These
two solutions allow cognitive psychologists to measure user
actions objectively. The paper presents the scenario implemented
by the Simulation tool and the scenario analysis interface included
in the Exploration tool.
2
COMPLEX SITUATION EXPLORATION IN IMAGE
2.1
Architecture
The underlying architecture is built on the integration and
exploitation of the off-the-shelf technologies shown in Figure 1.

Computer Vision and Systems Laboratory
Dept. of ECE, Laval University, Quebec (QC), Canada
2.2
Scenario
The selected scenario is inspired by a logistic convoy attack
situation currently experienced by the Department of National
Defence and the Canadian Forces deployed in Afghanistan
(Bernier and Rioux, 2010). This procedural level of the scenario
encompasses the tactical level. Here, an iterative co-evolution of
Blue Forces (BF) and Red Forces (RF) is implemented. The
objective of the scenario (whole mission) is to carry cargo from A
to B with minimum of loss (in terms of cargo or convoy integrity)
i.e. to provide troops with building material for the construction of
a school. The scenario is composed of 100 successive “tactical
missions” (iterations) with a co-evolution step between each
during which BF and RF are allowed to evolve separately as
follows. After each iteration, an algorithm reallocates the BF and
RF resources in order to maximize their chances of reaching their
own objectives at the next iteration (i.e. Measures of Performance
– MoPs – for BF are integrity, cargo and timeliness). When applied
repeatedly, this reallocation results in a co-evolution similar to the
one observed in real enduring conflicts. Besides the concepts
defined at the tactical level, the procedural level introduces new
concepts that can be exploited in order to influence the evolution:
population allegiance, cargo offered to the population and intelligence.
Evolution of the RF cannot be modified by the user, who, in the
meantime, can control the BF by allocating a portion of the carried
cargo to increase population allegiance which facilitates intelligence
gathering (that will hopefully influence BF evolution positively).
3
INTERFACE FOR ANALYSING COMPLEX SITUATIONS
Figure 3 presents an in-depth description of the scenario analysis
(Figure 3A) and complementary parameters analysis (Figure 3B)
interfaces.
4
CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a visual interface for providing users
with tools for exploring the progress of complex situations in a
co-evolution context. This interface (and the CAVE version) is
currently being used by cognitive psychologists for measuring its
impact on human users’ performance in their understanding of
complex situations.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

M. Lizotte, D. Poussart, F. Bernier, M. Mokhtari, É. Boivin, and M.
Ducharme, (2008), “IMAGE: Simulation for Understanding
Complex Situations and Increasing Future Force Agility,” Proc. of
ASC 2008. Orlando (FL), USA.
F. Rioux, (2009), “Conception and Development of Multichronia, a
Framework of Interactive Visual Simulation,” PhD’s Thesis, Laval
University, Quebec (QC), Canada (in French).
F. Bernier, and F. Rioux, (2010), “Convoy Scenario for Complexity
Study,” DRDC Valcartier Technical Memorandum.
http://www.eye-sys.com
http://www.tableausoftware.com

Figure 1. Application Architecture

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 Crown

241

CAVE
Adaptation

Tableau Software

MoP Performance Analysis

This panel displays the ID of the
current mission and the ID of the
current iteration. The user can use
Tableau Software, if required, to
analyze / explore the current
mission or all existing missions.

The user can choose to compare / analyze (1) only one MoP (integrity,
cargo & timeliness) for a set of existing missions or for all missions or (2)
several MoPs for one mission. He can also choose the kind of plot,
(2D or 2D½), and in which visualization panel (top/bottom) it appears.

2D Plot

2D½ Plot

Iteration Priority for Current Mission
At each iteration, the user can influence the mission
evolution by changing the ratio of cargo offered to the
population (thicker black line) and, also, by defining the
iteration’s priority (goal), i.e. selecting integrity (in red)
or cargo (in green) to be optimized. These evolutions
are shown in this plot for the whole mission.

Synchronization between SIM & XPL Modules
All the interactions relative to the mission control are
executed in the SIM module (Multichronia interface).

Mission Co-Evolution Parameters
For each mission iteration, the user can observe
simultaneously, at one glance, co-evolution (a set of)
parameter values (intelligence, allegiance & BF support).

FIGURE 3A. COMPLEX SITUATION
ANALYSIS INTERFACE

Cumulative MoP Performance Panel
During the mission, the user can compare
simultaneously MoP values defined by one specific
color, the current mission being highlighted. The
contents of this panel adapts to the number of
iterations to be displayed. When this number is too
large, only one MoP is shown and the width of the
bars decreases so only the last ones are shown.
Then, the user can choose the MoP to be displayed.
The left side displays
the resources allocated
prior the execution of
the iteration: the BF
resources (lateral &
underneath armor
thicknesses); the RF
resources (RPGs &
IEDs); and the cargo
amount carried by the
convoy.

Current Iteration

The right
Information Panel
side
displays
the value
of each
MoP
(integrity,
timeliness
& cargo). Those values allow the
evaluation of the iteration success.

Mode Selection
The user can choose to
analyze the current
mission, all the existing
missions or decide to
choose between a set of
missions (at this point,
the selection appears).
Each mission is
composed of 100
iterations, and is
displayed as a chain of
colored & sized spheres
(representing iterations).
This graphics, as other
graphics in the Complex
Situation Understanding
Interface, is synchronized
with the SIM module. The
current mission is
highlighted by a thicker
chain, the current iteration
is highlighted by a cross
and an information panel is
attached to it. The color,
form, and size codes are
given by the corresponding
legend. Depending on the
parameters being selected,
all 100 iterations are not
represented each by a
242
sphere, some being lumped
in a common sphere.

Graphical Analysis

2D½ Plot
2D Plot
The user can choose to visualize information according to two graphics types: line graphs or
surface graphs. “Line graphs” propose different display combinations which easily show /
compare information for one or several MoP(s) associated to one mission. The user has
possibility to select what mission to investigate. “Surface graphs” allow to compare information
on only one MoP but for all existing missions. The user can at any time zoom-in, zoom-out, tilt,
pan and swing this surface graph. He can exploit the tool best suited for his needs for better
understanding the differences, similarities and relations between MoPs, thus leading to a better
understanding of the complex situation as a whole. In these graphs, “data-brushing” is
implemented by showing where the current iteration is located as selected and manipulated
directly in the SIM module.

FIGURE 3B. PARAMETERS AND MOPS
ANALYSIS INTERFACE

Display Options
This graphics allows to show, when needed, all
available combinations of parameters : input
data (BF resources - lateral and underneath armor
thicknesses; RF resources - RPGs & IEDs); MoPs
(cargo, integrity & timeliness); co-evolution
parameters (allegiance, intelligence, BF support, the
cargo offered to the population); and the iteration
priority (integrity or cargo). The graphics is
updated automatically to changes of parameter
values. Three to five dimensions are always
available to the user.

Legends
Four legends are available: no
legend (XYZ); one for defining
the meaning of color & size
associated to the fourth selected
parameter (4D); one for defining,
if iteration priority is chosen, the meaning of
color or form; and one for defining, if iteration
priority is chosen, the meaning of color & form.

Main Display
The user can rotate the data /
information along to the three
coordinate axes. He can also
zoom-in/-out the data /
information. The display is
updated dynamically each
time a new mission is
created / deleted in the SIM
module, and when user focus
changes (current mission).

CAVE Adaptation
For cognitive experimentation purpose,
2D½ plot have been adapted to a CAVE.

