2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Art, Interaction and Engagement
Ernest Edmonds
Creativity and Cognition Studios, School of Software, FEIT, University of Technology, Sydney
{ernest@ernestedmonds.com}
Abstract

shape or create the artwork. It seemed to me that
involving audiences explicitly in the creative process of
art making was ‘in the air’ at the time. Even in the case
of the novel, B.S. Johnson published ‘The Unfortunates”,
which consisted of 27 sections which, with the exception
of the first and last, could be read in any order that the
reader desired [13]. The visual artist Roy Ascott was
working on a range of artworks that could be modified or
re-arranged by the audience. He saw a potential for
computers to enable the development of interaction in a
number of ways, including what he termed ‘telematic art’
[1].
Thinking about audience engagement and
interaction in the arts led to me also thinking about those
ideas more generally. Cybernetics, and the closely
related study of Systems Theory, seemed to me to
provide a rich set of concepts that helped us to think
about change, interaction and living systems [2,18].
Whilst my art has not been built directly on these
scientific disciplines, many of the basic concepts, such as
interactive systems and feedback, have influenced the
development of the frameworks discussed below.
I first became interested in exploring interaction
within my art practice in the late 1960s and, meeting
with Stroud Cornock, I worked with him on an
interactive artwork called *Datapack, which was shown
in the CG70 exhibition at Brunel University in 1970.
This was a very early computer-based interactive
artwork. At the same time, we realised that we needed a
conceptual framework for talking and thinking about
such artworks. We presented a classification of
interactive art systems, which we called “the matrix”, at
the CG70 conference [6]. We identified four situations,
which we termed ‘Static’, ‘Dynamic-Passive’,
‘Dynamic-Interactive’
and
‘Dynamic-Interactive
(Varying)’. Briefly, ‘Static’ applied to works that do not
change, ‘Dynamic-Passive’ to works that changed but
were not influenced by the audience, ‘DynamicInteractive’ to works that changed as a result of audience
actions and “Dynamic-Interactive (Varying)’ applied to
interactive works that were also influenced by other
factors, so that their response varied. This was the initial
framework that I worked with. As we will see, it did not
cover all the cases that have turned out to be interesting
in my practice, but it did provide a fairly robust starting
point.
A useful explanation of the first Cornock and
Edmonds framework was described as follows:-

This paper reviews the development of frameworks
for thinking and talking about interactive art in the
context of my personal practice over the last forty years.
It traces a number of paths taken, from an early simple
direct notion of interaction through to communication
between people through art systems and, more recently,
interactive art for long-term engagement. The
frameworks consist of an evolving set of concepts, over
several dimensions, which are developing together with
the practice of interactive art..

1. Introduction
A significant part of art making, for me, is the
development of an understanding of the forms and
material being used, what Cezanne called “a language
and a logic” [7:17]. The language that the artist evolves
is a language of form, of-course: shapes, colours,
textures and so on. However, it is sometimes helpful to
have a language of words to help one think about and
discuss the art. For example, although the key issues
about an understanding of colour are embodied in
artworks exploring colour, it is also good to be able to
name hue, saturation and intensity etc. This helps in the
thinking about colour that provides the context for using
it.
The practice discussed in this paper is concerned
with developing and exploring interaction in the context
of art. It is concerned with the form, language and logic,
of interaction. The frameworks discussed are sets of
words that help in the development of interactive art in
the same way that words such as hue and saturation help
with the painting of colour. So the frameworks help to
frame the thinking and hence the practice of interactive
art. It is not surprising, therefore, that they are always
evolving.

2. Interaction and the computer
In the 1960s, although my art was primarily
painting, I took an interest in ‘happenings’, in which
direct and physical audience participation became, at
times, an integral part of the artwork, such as in Allan
Kaprow’s Eat which, for example, included, amongst its
props, fruit that the audience was invited to eat [14].
Artists devised situations in which the audience was
meant to engage by actually taking part and so explicitly
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.73

451

conversation was rather like the famous Eliza software
[17] that spotted keywords and used various tricks to
respond in ways that could be seen to be plausibly
‘intelligent’. For example, when someone typed in “I feel
sad”, Eliza might respond with “Why do you feel sad?”
As in our case, Eliza had no smart intelligent system that
understood the user’s remarks but rather presented a
simulation of conversation that sounded (mostly)
plausible.
As a result of the conversation, the computer
software made certain decisions that determined what
graphical output would result. This was in the form of a
drawing executed on a plotter. The drawing identified a
notional space around the Vickers Building next to the
Tate Gallery (now the Tate Britain) in London. A
package, including the drawing and a printed copy of the
conversation (as produced by the teletype), was then
handed to the participant as their artefact to take away.
The key issue at this time was to find a way to explore
interaction at all. The technical limitations made it
difficult to match the theoretical goals, but *Datapack
certainly was interactive and informal discussions with
participants at the exhibition indicated that it was also
engaging.

“Static: The art object does not change and is
viewed by a person. There is no interaction between the
two that can be observed by someone else, although the
viewer may be experiencing personal psychological or
emotional reactions. The artwork itself does not respond
to its context. This is familiar ground in art galleries and
museums where art consumers look at a painting or print,
listen to tape recordings and talk to one another about the
art on the walls and, generally speaking, obey the
command not to touch.
Dynamic-Passive: The art object has an internal
mechanism that enables it to change or it may be
modified by an environmental factor such as
temperature, sound or light. The artist specifies the
internal mechanism and any changes that take place are
entirely predictable. Sculptures, such as George Rickey's
kinetic pieces, that move according to internal
mechanisms, and also, in response to atmospheric
changes in the environment, fall into this category. The
viewer is an observer of this activity performed by the
artwork in response to the physical environment.
Dynamic-Interactive: All of the conditions of the
dynamic passive category apply with the added factor
that the human ‘viewer’ has an active role in influencing
the changes in the art object. For example, by walking
over a mat that contains sensors attached to lights
operating in variable sequences, the viewer becomes a
participant that influences the process of the work.
Motion and sound capture techniques can be used to
incorporate human activity into the way visual images
and sounds are presented. The work ‘performs’
differently according to what the person does or says.
There may be more than one participant and more than
one art object. An example of this work is the
Iamascope, a work which includes a camera looking at
the viewers and is connected to a controlling computer.
The work reacts to human movement in front of it by
changing a kaleidoscope-like image and making music at
the same time in direct response to the viewer's
movements.
Dynamic-Interactive (Varying): The conditions for
Dynamic-Interactive apply, with the addition of a
modifying agent that changes the original specification
of the art object. The agent could be a human or it could
be a software program. Because of this, the process that
takes place, or rather, the performance of the art system
cannot be predictable. It will depend on the history of
interactions with the work. In this case, either the artist
from time to time updates the specification of the art
object or a software agent that is learning from the
experiences of interaction automatically modifies the
specification. In this case, the performance of the art
object varies, in addition to case 3, according to the
history of its experiences.” [5].
#Datapack was of the third kind, DynamicInteractive. By modern standards it was technologically
very clumsy (this was a decade before the advent of the
PC). However, it demonstrated the point. The participant
sat at a ‘tele-type’ (keyboard and printer combined) and
entered into a ‘conversation’ with the computer. This

3. Interaction: from simple to complex
Working with the relative complexities of
#Datapack, I wondered if it would be possible to make a
very simple work that encompassed the same principles.
I came up with JigSaw, which was just sixteen wooden
pieces that could be fitted together, rather in the manner
of a jigsaw puzzle. The key point was that they were so
designed that there were hundreds of different ways of
putting them together but each way was highly
constrained. The participant could interact with the work
by arranging or re-arranging it, but its internal logic
constrained the result.
Having worked on an interactive and a rearrangeable artwork, I started to explore the nature of
interaction itself. I began to ask myself questions like:
What was going on when a human interacted with the
world around them? What motivated or limited those
interactions? This led me to read about various
psychological studies of human interaction with the
world and with other humans. Current scientific studies
of very young infants provided the clue that led to my
next development. It seemed that right from birth a child
interacts with its environment in a purposeful way: not
just to obtain food and so on, but also to try to construct
understandings about that world. “If I do this and that,
will the world do some particular other thing?” This very
early and basic form of interaction is conducted without
a shared language, just by prodding the world and
looking at what happens: trying to find patterns [4].
As a result of my reading about early infant
behaviour I started to think about ways in which I might
deal with such issues in an artwork. I did not want to
build an imitation of an infant, but I tried to think of what
might be essential elements of their situation in relation

452

to interaction. As a result I started building what I came
to call my Communication Game series of works . These
interactive works were concerned with humans
interacting with humans through technology (rather than
humans interacting with technology). In part, they
represented a realisation of Ascott’s telematic art in that
they transformed the viewer into an active participant in
creating the artwork [8]. The key points about the work’s
intentions were to restrict communication between
participant to a very low bandwidth, to provide no
instructions or code and to add a certain amount of
complexity. The complexity was injected by having what
a participant saw controlled by two other participants,
only one of whom saw the results of that participant’s
actions. We could say that the data that a participant was
working with was incomplete or noisy, as tends to be the
case in all real life situations.
After a few iterations of the Communication Games
work, including the use of sound, I left it alone until
about 2006, when I re-started the development of that
series in the form of the Cities Tango works, of which
more later on.
In my own art practice, I left interaction alone for
some years. I was still interested, but I was not content
with any of the technological methods that I found.
However, I worked with PhD students and other artists
on a number of approaches to making interactive art.
Steve Bell, for example, looked in detail and different
strategies. He concentrated himself on work that used a
‘life’ model of growth and restricted the participant’s
actions to very specific roles, such as seeding the growth
of a dynamic work [2]. This work was time-based and
certainly involved interaction, but the interaction was
essentially quite simple. The complexity was more in
the growth of the image over time. Mike Quantrill is a
different case. He explored interactive drawing using an
electronic whiteboard and made experimental works in
which participant movement (detected by floor pads)
determined the nature and dynamics of a visual display.
The audience could almost play the work as if it was an
audio-visual instrument (Edmonds and Quantrill, 1998).
So in Quantrill’s case, the interaction was continuous and
fluid. Growth is the central interest in Bell’s work and
interaction is the central interest in Quantrill’s.
There are a number of strands to my work and I
have not only explored interaction. My central concern is
with the implication of the notion of computation in art,
of which interaction is certainly a significant example. At
the time when I was not directly working with interaction
(1980s and 1990s), I was largely concentrating on
another implication of computation. That was generative
time-based work, in which a set of rules that I designed
led to the unfolding of an abstract work over a period of
time, sometimes extending to hours or days [9]. The
work was determined by the rules and not influenced by
the audience. The generative works had come about
through the realisation that as a computer program
worked through the sets of rules that were intended to
define the art system, it could display its progress. Hence
the generative search could become the core of time-

based art rather than a route to a final object. The key
issue here, for me, was finding ways of thinking about
the rules and this time-based process. The only way that I
found to do this was to build a platform, an art making
software environment, that I could use to both
experiment with rules and learn about their implications.
By 2001, however, I had seen how to incorporate
interaction into my time-based generative works. The
addition of interaction to the generative works
represented a particular example of the category
discussed above, Dynamic-Interactive (Varying). In this
case, the variation came from the internal generative
system. The interaction came from the analysis of images
of the audience captured by a camera. The camera used
was typically a small webcam.
The generative process in these works is dynamic in
itself but what I added was an input to the art system that
could cause a change in that dynamic process. The
mechanism was to have the process consult data from the
camera as part of the determination of the next action.
Thus, activities external to the artwork itself, such as
audience behaviour, altered the generative process. I
used image processing, taking data from a video camera
pointing at the audience and analysing movement or
sound analysis of voice. To begin with, I made works in
which the alteration was direct and immediately visible:
audience actions caused visible responses.

4. Interaction: from reaction to influence
Most artists would probably say that they aimed for
their work to encourage long-term engagement with their
audience. Much interactive art, however, seems to
emphasise attraction and immediate engagement. Why is
this? There are two possible reasons for the focus on the
immediate. One is the seductive appeal of direct
interaction that has been so powerfully exploited in
computer games. There is no doubt that the model of the
game is interesting. However, it also represents a
challenge to the artist taking the long-term view. How is
the interactive artwork going to retain its interest once
the initial pleasure has worn off? An answer may be
implied in the second reason for the emphasis on the
immediate, which seems to me to be an over reliance on
an action-response model of interaction.
The psychological underpinning of interaction as it
is employed in HCI as well as in art is the study of action
and response. Each action leads to a response that, in
turn, encourages or enables another action. This view of
interaction is seen today by science as oversimplified. It
does not take long-term influence properly into account
and that point is clearly relevant to a concern for longterm engagement. Put simply, the key issue is that a
system as complex as a human (or animal etc) must have
internal states that represent memory, mood, state of
development etc. An interaction, be it with another
human, an artwork or a game, can influence internal
states. This can happen whether or not any immediate
action is made. Engagement over long periods of time
almost certainly involves changes in these internal states

453

and so an interactive artwork that is successful in these
terms must take these things into account.
From my perspective, the psychological models
most interesting for interactive art are not action
response ones, but Systems Theory ones. In Systems
Theory, the interchanges between interlinked entities are
studied in a much broader context than in the action
response case. For interactive art, this perspective
introduces the possibility of considering interactions that
have effects in the future and that may even have no
observable response at the time. A simple example
would be where an artwork has a memory of audience
actions that is only used to affect the artwork’s behaviour
days or weeks later. I have suggested elsewhere that
influence might be a better term than interaction to
describe such cases [10].

modified in a way that accumulates a history of
experiences over the life of the work. The shaping of the
form is a never-ending process of development.

5. Distributed interaction
My earlier concern for communication through
digital systems, exemplified in the Communication
Game works, continued and was revived firstly by
making a version of Shaping Form that worked on the
World Wide Web. This changed the structure to include
a shared memory and the possibility of many remote
users and so united the core ideas of Shaping Form with
Communication Game. The main step, however, came
about between 2008 and 2009 with the development of
the Cities Tango series [11]. I call this type of interactive
art ‘Dynamic-Interactive (Communicating)’. This
category more-or-less corresponds to Ascott’s early
concept of Telematic Art, which advocates the use of
computer-mediated networks as an art medium.
In Cities Tango, two or more ‘nodes’, consisting of
Shaping Form like works with camera input, are
connected over the Internet. The first major example had
one node in Sydney and a second in Belfast. In addition
to the typical colour bands that I use, I added two other
elements. First, I used photographs of a single location at
each site at different time of the day as abstract elements
that substituted for certain colours and gave a sense of
the remote site. Second, occasional live stills were
transmitted from one site to another, typically at a time
of significant audience activity. In this way, we have the
idea of distributed interactive art systems that can
involve instant response and/or communication as well
as long term influence in the Shaping Form sense.

4. Long term engagement
I started to explore the idea of moving from
interaction to influence in 2003 and we might term it
Dynamic-Interactive (Influencing). This idea matured in
a series of artworks begun in 2007, called Shaping Form,
in which images are generated using rules that determine
the colours, the patterns and the timing. These are
generative works that are changed by the influence of the
environment around them. Movement in front of each
work is detected by image analysis and leads to continual
changes in the program that generates the images. People
can readily detect the immediate responses of the work to
movement but the changes over time are only apparent
when there is more prolonged, although not necessarily
continuous, contact with it. A first viewing followed by
one several months later will reveal noticeable
developments in the colours and patterns. The Shaping
Form series are the latest works arising from my
preoccupation with interaction and time expressed in a
wide range of abstract generative forms over many years.
Digital artworks like Shaping Form are designed to
interact with the environment in which they are found.
Exactly how they behave depends on what kind of
compositional elements or principles are being worked
with at the time. I work with structural relationships
between visual elements, the colours and shapes that
determine how the images are constructed. Some works
are made to learn from external movement such as a
hand waving or a person walking by. The way the art
systems accumulate information from these inputs, or
‘learns’, determines how they select future choices of
colour and pattern in the images displayed. The
behaviour of the works is not intended to always be
obvious, so that if you continuously try to force a
response by waving it might result in a period of quiet.
Shaping Form has a generative element, a computer
program, which produces a continuous stream of images
using predefined rules that control the rectangular
pattern, the pallet of colours and the timing. The program
continuously analyses movements detected in front of the
work. As a result of this analysis, the rules are steadily

6. Interaction engagement and experience
The physical way in which the audience interacts
with a work is a major part of any interactive art system.
Three main approaches are used. The first is as in
#Datapack, where members of the audience physically
manipulate the work in some way (typing at the teletype
in #Datapack). The second approach is where members
of the audience are provided with special devices of
some kind, such as headsets as in Char Davies’ works
using virtual reality [16] or Cardiomorphologies [15].
The third approach is ambient, such as many of the
examples described in this book, where audience
movements, or states, are detected by non-invasive
devices, such as cameras, floor pads or infrared beams.
We can term these approaches:
• Direct
• Facilitated
• Ambient
In making Dynamic-Interactive works, issues about
the audience reaction to them are significant and have
gained increasing attention, in particular, by many of the
contributors to this book. One specific area of interest is
engagement. Do people become engaged with the

454

artwork? Is that engagement sustained? What are the
factors that influence the nature of the engagement?
Does engagement relate to pleasure, frustration,
challenge or anger, for example? Of-course, the artist can
use themselves as typical of the audience and rely on
their own reactions to guide their work. Much art is made
like that, although asking the opinion of expert peers, at
least, is also normal. However, understanding audience
engagement with interactive works is quite a challenge
and needs more extensive investigation than
introspection.
There are many forms of engagement that may or
may not be desired in relation to an artwork. For
example, in museum studies, people talk about
‘attractors’, that is, attributes of an exhibit that encourage
the public to pay attention and so become engaged. The
immediate question arises of how long such engagement
might last and we find that the attributes that encourage
sustained engagement are not the same as those that
attract. Another form of engagement is one that extends
over long periods of time, where one goes back for
repeated experiences such as seeing a favourite play in
many performances throughout ones life. We often find
that this long-term form of engagement is not associated
with a strong initial attraction. Engagement can grow
with experience. These issues are ones that the
interactive artist needs to be clear about and the choices
have significant influence on the nature of the interaction
employed.
The discussion of engagement needs to be
significantly extended in order to cover the complexities
of Dynamic-Interactive (Communicating) art systems.
This is an area that remains in need of exploration and
research. However, there is another aspect that
interactive art research has brought very much top our
attention. This is the nature of the experience that
audiences have during their engagement with an
interactive art system.
In my own practice, I have considered just three
kinds of engagement. Let’s call them
• Attracting
• Sustaining
• Relating
‘Attracting’ is a matter of drawing attention, so that
a sudden noise (or a sudden silence) will attract attention.
‘Sustaining’ is the process of retaining that attention for a
period of time. ‘Relating’ is developing a long term
interest, which occurs when the audience wants to
experience the work again and again, perhaps over many
years. Attracting and relating do not always go together.
Sometimes, what is most immediately engaging is also
easily discarded. My Shaping Form works, for example,
clearly aim at a ‘Relating’ type of engagement. The
challenge is to provide just enough attracting and
sustaining engagement to draw the audience in, but not
so much as to induce boredom.

7. Categories of Interaction Re-visited
I have discussed three kinds of classification in
relation to interactive art. The first was the one that dealt
with what kind of art ‘systems’ are at play, based initially
on the Cornock and Edmonds set. The second was of the
different kinds of way that the physical exchange takes
place. The third was the set of different kind of
experience that the interaction encourages in the
audience.
The ‘systems’ categories that have been discussed
above extend the early Cornock and Edmonds
terminology. To make the naming more consistent, we
can replace ‘Dynamic-Interactive’ by ‘DynamicInteractive (Responding)’. This implies that the system
responds directly to audience action, at the time of that
action, and so is directly reactive.
Thus we now have:
Static
Dynamic-Passive
Dynamic-Interactive:
Responding
Varying
Influencing
Communicating
The central interest in relation to interactive art in
this paper, and in the book, is in the dynamic-interactive
cases, so we might simplify our categories by saying that
we have four kinds of interactive art systems:
• Responding
• Varying
• Influencing
• Communicating
Naturally, art systems may fall into more than one of
these categories. For example, the Shaping Form works
are
both
‘Varying’
and
‘Influencing’.
The
Communication Games are both ‘Responding’ and
‘Communicating’. All four categories apply to Cities
Tango.
As discussed above, the physical interactions might
be any of:
• Direct
• Facilitated
• Ambient
Each kind of system might be implemented with
various physical interfaces. However, we can see that the
‘Influencing’ case, for example, may not be easily
realised by the ‘Facilitated’ method, for the simple
reason that it may not be practical to facilitate over long
periods of time.
In relation to experience, I have discussed
• Attracting
• Sustaining
• Relating
Thus we have three dimensions in which to consider
interactive art systems.

455

7. Conclusion
As interactive art developed since the various
innovations of 1960s, I have become more concerned
with the nature of interaction itself. There are many
aspects to this issue, which I have explored above. As the
developments in my art practice have unfolded a concern
for the active audience’s perspective on the work has
grown. This is where my discussion of the issues of
interaction, engagement and experience is important.
Interactive art systems involve artefacts and
audiences equally. The artist sets up situations that
develop in ways that are, at least in part, determined by
the audience. The cybernetic and systems principles that
informed the early developments are now applied more
completely than at first, by the equal and reflexive
consideration of art object and active audience
experience. As a result, the frameworks that inform our
thinking and practice have had to evolve appropriately.
There is no question that they will evolve still further as
new opportunities, new understandings and new
practices emerge.

[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

References
[14]
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

Ascott, R. “Behaviourist art and the cybernetic vision”.
Cybernetica, Vol. 9, 1966. pp. 247-264.
Bell, S. PhD Thesis: Participatory Art and Computers.
Loughborough University, UK. Available at
http://nccastaff.bournemouth.ac.uk/sbell/. 1991.
von Betralanffy, L. “An outline of General Systems
Theory” Brit. J. Philos. Sci. Vol 1, 1955. pp. 139-164.
Bower, T. G. R. Development in Infancy. Freeman and
Company, San Francisco, CA. 1974.
Candy, L. and Edmonds, E.A.. “Interaction in Art and
Technology”. Crossings: Electronic Journal of Art and
Technology - http://crossings.tcd.ie/issues/2.1/Candy/
Vol. 2 (1). 2002.
Cornock, S. and Edmonds, E. A. “The creative process
where the artist is amplified or superseded by the

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

456

computer” Proceedings of the Computer Graphics '70
Conference, Brunel University, UK 1970, and later
published in a revised form in Leonardo, Vol.16, (1973),
pp. 11-16.
Doran, M. (ed) Conversations with Cezanne, University
of California Press. 2001.
Edmonds, E. A. “Art systems for interactions between
members of a small group of people”. Leonardo, Vol. 8,
1975. pp. 225-227.
Edmonds, E. A. “Logics For Constructing Generative Art
Systems”. Digital Creativity, Vol. 14 (1). 2003. pp 2338.
Edmonds, E. A. “Reflections on the nature of
interaction”. CoDesign: International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts. Vol. 3 (3), 2007. pp
139-143.
Edmonds, E. A. “Cities Tango: between Belfast and
Sydney, 2009” (installation). In Mey, K. E. A. (Ed.)
ISEA: Interface, University of Ulster. Belfast, Ireland,
2009.
Edmonds, E. A. and Quantrill, M. “An Approach to
Creativity as Process”, Proceedings of CAiiA Conference
“Reframing Consciousness”, Ascott (editor), Intellect
Books, 1998. pp. 257-261.
Johnson, B. S. The Unfortunates. Panther Books,
London. 1969.
Kirby, M. “Allan Kaprow’s Eat” Tulane Drama Review
Vol 10 (2), 1965. pp. 44-49.
Khut, G. & Muller, L. “Evolving Creative Practice: A
reflection on working with audience experience in
Cardiomorphologies”. In Anastasiuo, P., Smithies, R.,
Trist, K. & Jones, L. (Eds.) Vital Signs: Creative
Practice & New Media Now. RMIT Publishing,
Melbourne, Australia. 2005.
McRobert , L. Char Davies's Immersive Virtual Art and
the Essence of Spatiality. Univ of Toronto Press. 2007.
Weizenbaum, J. "ELIZA — A Computer Program For
the Study of Natural Language Communication Between
Man And Machine", Communications of the ACM Vol. 9
(1) 1966. pp. 36–4
Wiener, N. Cybernetics. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
1965.

