2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Knowledge Visualization in Qualitative Methods – or how can I see what I say?
Nicole Bischof
University of St. Gallen
=mcm institute
St. Gallen, Switzerland
nicole.bischof@unisg.ch

Alice Comi
Università della Svizzera italiana
IMCA Institute
Lugano, Switzerland
alice.comi@usi.ch

pants elaborate their perceptions about a novel stimulus
(i.e., concept).
In this paper, we propose an approach where visuals
are used not only as stimuli to elicit comments from participants, but also as instruments to facilitate the interview
process. In this facilitation approach, visuals are used not
as static objects, but rather are drawn simultaneously by
the interviewer and the participants. As explained in the
next sections, visual facilitation can bring cognitive and
communicative advantages to qualitative interviewing,
such as enhancing knowledge sharing [9], focusing attention and fostering common understanding [10, 7]. We
structure our paper as follows: First, we focus on qualitative interviewing by paying particular attention to the
shortcomings of both one-to-one interviews and focus
groups. Subsequently, we review the current literature on
projective techniques in the attempt to explain the use of
visual objects as stimuli in qualitative interviewing. Finally, we describe the advantages of using visuals as facilitation techniques for qualitative interviewing, while also
introducing real examples of visual interviews and visual
focus groups. We conclude by outlining the limitations of
our approach, and by suggesting directions for future research on the use of visual methods in qualitative research.

Abstract: In several research fields, qualitative interviewing
(i.e., face-to-face individual interviews and focus groups) is
an essential approach to gather high-quality, and deep data
about a wide range of subjective experiences. Although being
a well-established research method, qualitative interviewing
is fraught with various shortcomings such as difficulties in
initiating the interview process, in eliciting tacit knowledge
and in avoiding information redundancies. In this paper, we
propose the use of visual tools (e.g., visualization software) as
a support to facilitate the interview process and to gather
sound qualitative data. Visual representations provide structure, context and explicitness, and thus foster knowledge elicitation and sharing in interviews. Our contribution is twofold: First, we provide a methodological extension of qualitative interviewing. Second, we suggest a practical approach to
use visuals in interviews, presenting concrete examples from
the research field. We conclude our paper by discussing the
limitations of our approach, and by suggesting directions for
future research on visualization-based interviewing.
Keywords - Qualitative interviewing; one-to-one
interviews; focus groups; projective techniques; visual aids;
visual facilitation.

1. INTRODUCTION
Qualitative interviewing is a valuable research method
for gathering data on people’s attitudes, opinions, and life
experiences [1]. The aim of qualitative interviews is thus
to address questions of how and why, not how much or how
many [2]. Usually, the researcher lets data emerge from the
interviewees’ accounts and inductively reconstructs clusters of meaning and action [3]. Qualitative interviewing
can take a wide variety of forms, being “not a research method, but a family of research approaches that have only
one thing in common – conversation between people in
which one person has the role of the researcher” [1, p. 2].
While one-to-one interview is most commonly used, qualitative interviewing can also be conducted in larger
groups, as in focus groups [4].
Even though interviewing has been the subject of a
large body of literature [5, 6] many practical difficulties in
conducting interviews have not yet been solved. Visual
aids (e.g., cards, maps, photographs) are often used as
projective techniques to encourage participants to share
their innermost feelings or thoughts [7, 8]. In projective
techniques, interviewees are asked to freely express their
thoughts, by making associations between the visual stimuli and the concept with which they are being presented
[14]. In essence, projective techniques evoke reactions to
a familiar stimulus (i.e., an image) in order to aid partici-

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.14

Martin J. Eppler
University of St. Gallen
=mcm institute
St. Gallen, Switzerland
martin.eppler@unisg.ch

2. QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWING: CHARACTERISTICS,
ADVANTAGES AND SHORTCOMINGS
2.1. One-to-One Interviews
One-to-one (or individual) interviews are as old as
mankind, and had already been used by the Ancient Egyptians for demographic investigations [11]. For individual
interviews to be a research method, one of the participants
should act as a researcher, and conduct the interview with
the objective to answer a research question. Individual interviews can take a large variety of formats, ranging from
structured (or close-ended) to unstructured (or ethnographic): While the first gives little room for variation in the answers [11] the latter is closer to observation and leads to
open-ended data [12]. In between these two extremes,
semi-structured interviews allow for long and in-depth accounts, while also providing guidance on the interview
topic.
There are several advantages of one-to-one, face-toface interviews: First, qualitative interviewing enables the
researcher to gain deep insights into the respondents’
perspectives [8]. Second, qualitative interviews are relatively inexpensive and allow collection of very rich data,
enabling the researcher to notice and correct the respondents’ misunderstandings, to probe vague answers, as well
371

as to clarify doubts or concerns. Compared to other research methods, face-to-face interviews allow to monitor
the order in which the questions are answered, and to control the context of the interview, thereby avoiding the
possible biasing presence of other people [8]. Finally, the
interviewing methodology is easily adjustable and can be
combined with quantitative methods [3].

interaction provides valuable data on the extent, and the
nature of consensus and diversity among participants.
2.3. Shortcomings of Qualitative Interviewing
There are several challenges in qualitative interviewing, such as getting the interviewee to speak freely, and
gathering high-quality and valuable data. During the interview process, one of the greatest challenges is managing information, which means eliciting tacit knowledge,
and at the same time avoiding information redundancy.
Fontana and Frey [11, p. 361] describe the process-related
difficulties of qualitative interviewing in a vivid and concrete way: “Asking questions and getting answers is a
much harder task than it may seem at first. The spoken or
written word has always a residue of ambiguity, no matter
how carefully we word the questions and report or code
the answers”. Besides issues of wording and language
choice, the phenomenon of knowledge asymmetry often
threatens to disrupt the interview flow. In some instances,
the knowledge of the interviewee – especially if she is an
expert in her field – is much larger than the foreknowledge of the interviewer. This discrepancy leads to misunderstandings which usually are not detected prior to analyzing the data. At this stage, contacting the interviewee
for further clarifications or questions may be practically
unfeasible. The problem of knowledge asymmetry may
occur also in the other direction, when the interviewer –
because of her confidence with the interview topic – uses
an expert language which is too elaborated for the counterpart to understand. If the interviewee is unable to fully
understand the question, she may fear to lose her status
when probing the question, and thus may provide inaccurate or vague answers.
Another difficulty lies in building up trust with the interviewee, and gaining access to deep and high quality
data. If the interviewer fails to build a personal chemistry
with the counterpart, for example by appearing unprofessional, the respondent may hide information. Furthermore,
interviewer effects may interfere in the rapport between
the interviewer and the respondent: The interviewer’s expectations or personal characteristics, such as ethnicity,
physical appearance and sex, can bias the responses. Since
a strong interpersonal rapport is created in face-to-face
interviews, respondents often tend to please the interviewer by providing socially desirable, yet invalid answers [8].
In focus groups, the moderator is faced with further
challenges, such as encouraging participants to build on
each other, avoiding overlaps in turn taking, and preventing individuals from dominating the conversation. In addition, there may be conformity pressure operating in a focus group: In this case, the moderator should identify
nonverbal signs that indicate that a participant disagrees
with what is being said. Besides, it is undeniable that
group members affect each other in their answers [15, 19].
Sussman et al. [19] found a polarization effect related to
group interaction – i.e., the attitudes of participants become more extreme after the group discussion. Moreover,
the mutual exposure of participants limits the range of
topics that can be effectively investigated in focus groups.

2.2. Focus groups
The focus group is an interview technique where the
researcher collects data by creating a group interactive discussion [13, 14, 15]. This definition deliberately excludes
groups or research methods that have inappropriately been
called focus groups: First, focus groups should be distinguished from groups set up for purposes other than data
collection (e.g., decision making, product development,
project management groups). Second, focus groups should
be set apart from procedures that involve multiple participants but do not allow interactive discussions, such as nominal and Delphi groups. Finally, focus groups should be
distinguished from methods to collect data in naturally occurring discussions where no one acts as an interviewer
[15]. Frey and Fontana [4] further suggest to draw a dividing line between group interviews and focus groups:
Group interviews cannot be considered as focus groups if
they (i) are conducted in informal settings; (ii) use nondirective interviewing; or (iii) use unstructured question
formats. To this definition, marketing scholars [16, 14] add
another criterion, suggesting that focus groups consist of
structured discussions “among 6 to 10 homogeneous
strangers in a formal setting” [15, p. 131] As explained by
Hoyle et al. [8, p. 401], “Fewer than 6 makes it less likely
that the desired diversity of opinions will be elicited, more
than 10 makes it difficult for everyone to express their
opinions fully … Lack of familiarity promotes free expressions of ideas and opinions that may not be forthcoming if
members feel constrained by what they have said in the
past to others in the group”. Given the breadth of their
possible applications, focus groups are used across a variety of academic fields, such as communication studies, education, and public health. Outside of academia, focus
groups are popular in marketing research, where they are
used to collect consumer’s opinions about products, or to
estimate the impact of advertising campaigns [17].
Focus groups are low in costs, produce results relatively quickly, and can increase the sample size of a study.
However, the main advantage of focus groups lies in the
ability to generate collective data, as the interviewer asks
participants to build on each other, rather than aggregating
individual data in search for general patterns. In the words
of Morgan [15]: “What makes the discussion in focus
groups more than the sum of separate individual interviews is the fact that the participants both query each other and explain themselves to each other”. Moreover, the
interaction in focus groups – i.e., the “group effect” –
enables the investigation of complex phenomena, that are
more difficult to uncover in one-to-interviews. Morgan
and Krueger [18] have also underscored that such group

372

Since group interaction requires self-disclosure, some participants may find certain topics unacceptable for discussion [15].
Given the inherent challenges of qualitative interviews, the skillfulness of the interviewer / moderator has
important consequences for the quality of the data collected. In focus groups, the moderation role is particularly
difficult, since the facilitator is required to guide a multilateral conversation and at the same time to carefully
process what is being said. Finally, a common challenge
in both focus groups and interviews is to organize, and
analyze the data gathered in order to identify recurrent
patterns of meaning [8].
In the next sections, we make an attempt to explain
how visual aids may help to overcome the multiple challenges of qualitative interviewing. We start by reviewing
the current literature on projective techniques, and outline
the advantages and the limitations of using visuals as stimuli in qualitative interviews. We then argue for a paradigm shift in the role of visuals, suggesting that the use of
visual facilitation may improve qualitative interviewing,
and increase the quality of data collection.

ipants tend to project their feelings of the discussion topic onto the pictures stack.
• Expression. In expressive drawing, participants are
asked to provide their reaction to a discussion topic by drawing a picture of how they feel about it.
At the end of the task, the interviewer asks the
respondent to comment on the meaning of her picture, and to elaborate on the relationship with the
discussion topic. In focus groups, the moderator
can involve the entire group in developing interpretations of each other’s drawings, and hence of
the discussion topic. Expressive drawing can be
very useful to elicit information that otherwise
might not be generated with traditional techniques,
and at times can also motivate respondents.
• Completion. Another type of projective technique
used in qualitative interviews is picture completion. In this technique, the participants are presented with an incomplete comic-strip story and
are asked to add statements into the empty balloons. Like other projectives, picture completion
helps the interviewer delve into the participants’
minds, and learn more about their inner feelings.
• Grouping. In the grouping technique, participants
are asked to collect, and to group a number of images that relate to the topic being discussed. The
interviewees – either individually or in group – are
given a pile of newspapers, scissors, glue and a
blank piece of paper onto they can make a collage
of pictures to represent the discussion topic. At the
end of the task, the interviewees are asked to
comment on the collage, and to explain the rationale behind their image choices. Often used in
marketing research, this technique has proven useful to elicit the values, typical users, and purchasing motives associated to new products.
Although providing high-quality and deep data, the
visual projectives described above fail to fully address the
multiple challenges normally encountered in qualitative
interviewing. In the following section, we explain how a
paradigm shift from visuals as projective techniques towards visuals as facilitation techniques may enhance qualitative research, by enabling interviewers to fully exploit
the potential of visual language.

3. VISUALS AS STIMULI IN QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS
Visual aids, such as drawings, pictures and maps, can
be used during the qualitative interviewing as projective
techniques to elicit comments from the participants [8].
Visual aids remove respondents’ natural inhibitions, reveal
less conscious and deeply-seated feelings, while also allowing to add affective evaluations to rational evaluations.
As illustrated by Anastas [21], visuals jump-start respondents’ imaginations and verbal responsiveness: “When
asked a question like ‘what are your feelings when you use
this product?’, some respondents become tense and anxious … When asked ‘select a picture and tell how it
shows your feelings when you use the product’, they relax
and jump into complex stories”. By engaging interviewees,
visuals enable better access to the participants’ thoughts,
energize the interview process and in turn lead to highquality data [20]. Moreover, visuals act as boundary objects [22], i.e. as objects that facilitate the sharing of tacit
knowledge, and reduce knowledge barriers between the
interviewer and the participants. In reviewing the current
literature on projective techniques [14, 23], we have identified four typologies of visual-based stimuli:
• Association. In the association technique, photographs are used to stimulate the participants’
thinking, and to help them articulate their feelings
about the discussion topic. In general, the interviewees are asked to express their impressions
about pictures portraying people (personality associations), or situations (situational associations)
that are connected to the discussion topic. In alternative, the participants may be invited to indicate
which of several photographs in a stack most
closely relate to the subject under discussion
(forced associations). This technique enables the
interviewer to uncover deep insights, as the partic-

4. VISUALS AS FACILITATION TECHNIQUES IN
QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWING
As mentioned above, visuals can be introduced into
qualitative interviews not only to elicit comments from
participants (i.e., content support), but also to improve the
research methodology (i.e., process support). In the facilitation approach, visuals are drawn simultaneously by the
researcher and the participants during the qualitative interview. The visual language is thus integrated into the
research process, and shifts from being an external stimulus to prompt answers, to becoming an integral component of the research method. As an example, the facilitator
in focus groups may use visualization tools such as visual

373

templates, sticky walls, and e-moderation software to lead
the discussion, and at the same time enable participants to
write and/or draw out their thoughts. In particular, visual
templates – printed on a large poster support – provide a
structured canvas where participants can document the
discussion with post-it notes.
In comparison to purely text-based facilitation (e.g.,
flipchart handwriting), visual facilitation enables greater
visibility of discussion threads, while also providing a
more engaging experience for participants. Moreover,
visual representations play a crucial role in the sensemaking of individuals and groups, by bringing the advantage of representational guidance. In fact, the notations
on a visual template may constrain what is expressed, and
at the same time make certain aspects more salient. Thus,
visual representations may support qualitative interviewing by providing an overarching structure which organizes
information, coordinates the conversation, and highlights
key aspects [24]. As suggested by Kuchenmüller and Stifel [25, p. 394], by filling visual templates the individual
and / or the group “answers important questions while
respecting definite rules”.
By drawing attention on central themes, visual facilitation helps both the researcher and the interviewee to keep
track of the conversation threads. In focus groups, this
leads to the constitution of a group memory, which reduces the participants’ difficulties in following the conversation, and building on each other’s contributions. This advantage is present also in online interviews and focus
groups, where visual techniques enable participants to
make more fitting contributions, by providing tangible
orientation and signposts during the conversation.
Furthermore, visualization techniques have been
proven to facilitate balanced participation of group members, and to reduce the potential for interpersonal conflict.
This is the case, since the target of the conflict shifts away
from the person, to the concept being mapped onto the
visual canvas. The de-personalization effect of visuals is
particularly beneficial in focus groups, for reducing social
pressure and encouraging participants to freely express
their dissent with the rest of the group. When the conversation is mediated by visuals, participants are not pointing
directly at each other, but rather express their agreement
or disagreement towards impersonal objects, such as notes
on a visual template [26]. In a study of business meetings,
Kuchenmüller and Stifel [25, p. 388] consistently noticed
that “it is easier to offend and attack using words than images”. At the end of the qualitative interview, showing the
filled template to the participants offers the possibility to
gather further data, by asking probing questions, delving
into important aspects, and commenting on the main findings.
As regards the final stage of data analysis, the use of
prefabricated templates facilitates the aggregation, and
the comparability of data collected across multiple interviews or focus groups. Thus, the use of visual templates
leads to more reliable results, while also reducing the risk

of gathering highly idiosyncratic data that cannot be easily
inserted into the broader framework of the research
theme.
Based on our literature review, as well as on our experience in qualitative interviewing, we suggest a fourstage method for visual-based research in one-to-one interviews and focus groups:
1. Preparing visual templates: Before the qualitative
interview, the researcher should carefully choose visual
templates based on the topic under investigation. As an
example, a visual template for expectation inquiry may be
useful in the initial phase of a focus group, to explore
participants’ expectations, experiences, perplexities, and
questions on the subject at hand. For the selection of
visual templates, the extant literature on knowledge
visualization may provide a useful reference [27].
2. Filling visual templates: During the qualitative
interview, the researcher fills the visual template by
prompting answers from the interviewee(s). As regards
group interviews, guiding and at the same time visualizing
the conversation may be exceptionally difficult, and it is
therefore advisable to have two facilitators acting in
combination, one to moderate and the other one to
visualize on her behalf [25].
3. Wrapping-up with visual templates. At the end of
the qualitative interview, the researcher can summarize
the main points emerged in the interview process by
showing the filled template to the interviewees. By
wrapping up the qualitative interview with visual
representations,
the interviewer
may stimulate
respondents to further delve into relevant topics, or to
clarify misunderstandings in the documentation process.
4. Analyzing visual data. The researcher may look for
consistent patterns by integrating the visual data reported
on multiple templates. If necessary, she may explore
group differences by comparing the visual templates filled
out by different categories of interviewees and
participants. In a way, the availability of standard
templates replicates the rigor of quantitative procedures
for data collection, although without trading away the
richness and deepness of qualitative data.
In the next section, we present a few examples from
our research experience, to better illustrate the use of visual facilitation in one-to-one interviews and focus groups.
5. EXAMPLES FROM THE FIELD
In two large research projects, we have facilitated qualitative interviewing situations with a total of more than
60 participants. In all of these face-to-face interviews
(one-to-one and focus groups) we have been using visualizations for three purposes: First, to stimulate respondents and thus to initiate the interview process; Second, to
sharpen the quality of data by eliciting deeper information; and third, to moderate the interview process with
considerable improvements from a methodological perspective. In the following sections, we will present examples and discuss results from both interview situations.

374

5.1. Visualizations in One-to-One Interviews
In the first research project, we have conducted qualitative interviews for the purposes of gathering expert information on the use of software applications for monitoring natural hazards in Switzerland. Challenges at the very
beginning of one-to-one interviews, such as establishing
rapport, gaining trust, and understanding the language of
respondents, could be overcome by using an association
stimulus, i.e. a sketch about the interview process (Fig. 1).
This sketching was used not only as an ‘ice-breaker’ at the
beginning of the interview, but also as a reference to
structure the interview content, and to ensure coverage of
all the discussion topics (e.g., problems in software appropriation).

Figure 2: Timeline used as visual facilitation during the interview and
for data analysis in retrospect.

5.2. Visualizations in Focus Groups
In a second research project, we have investigated the
use of software applications for supporting decisionmaking in inter-organizational settings. In terms of research design, we have used randomized experiments as a
primary method, and introduced focus groups as a followup method. In particular, we have used focus groups with
the purpose to clarify unexpected experiment findings,
while also gathering richer and deeper data on the research topic (see [15, 17] on the use of focus group in
combination with other research methods). The experimental subjects served as focus group participants and
were asked to reflect on their experience in the experiment.
In conducting the focus group, the facilitator used a
visualization software (let’s focus) connected to a video
projector. For each interview question, the facilitator
filled a visual template with contribution from the focus
group participants (an example is shown in Fig. 3). In this
regard, visual templates were used for real-time documentation of the focus group discussion. The visual facilitation enabled focus group participants to keep track of the
discussion, and to build on each other’s contributions with
greater ease. Furthermore, the use of visual templates ensured consistency and comparability of data collected
across different focus group sessions. As regards the data
analysis, the availability of standard templates facilitated
the comparisons, and aggregation of qualitative data. In
this regard, the researchers elaborated an aggregated visual template summarizing the common patterns that
emerged across the focus group sessions.

Figure 1: A sketch used as stimuli for expert interviews.

During the interview process another visual tool was
used, namely a visual timeline loaded on a graphic facilitation software (Fig. 2). The respondents were asked to
fill out the empty template by indicating how they perceived the evolution of their work domain including
events, laws, and directives. This completion stimulus addresses the challenge of gathering high-quality data, by
literally bringing tacit knowledge, experiences and opinions to the table. All of the participants liked the template completion, and provided positive feedback without
being asked. Often, there was a moment of surprise in the
beginning, which then turned into ‘fun’ and an ambition
to fully complete the sheet. While filling out the visual,
the interviewees kept on talking, what we consider as
‘thinking aloud’. This phenomenon is reminiscent of ethnographic interviewing [11].
Based on our experience, we observed three main advantages of using visualization in one-to-one interviews:
First, the respondents shared insights, experiences and
memories which probably would have been hidden or forgotten without the template. Second, the template use allowed deep insights into the opinions and world views of
the respondent and thus generated high-quality data.
Third, the visuals enabled us to note side information
mentioned incidentally by the interviewee, and in turn to
elicit nuances that often lead to highly important and unexpected findings. Last but not least, the interviewer using
visuals appeared to be more reliable and was regarded as
being professional, objective and clear in her communication.

Figure 3: Visual template used for real-time documentation in focus
group

375

6. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

[5] A.L. Cunliffe, "Crafting Qualitative Research: Morgan and Smircich
30 Years on, " Org. Research Methods, vol. 00, 2010, pp. 1-27.
[6] N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln, Handbook of qualitative research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994.
[7] N. Crilly, A. Blackwell, and P.J. Clarkson, "Graphic elicitation:
using research diagrams as interview stimuli," Qualitative
Research, vol. 6, 2006, pp. 341-366.
[8] H.R. Hoyle, M.J. Harris, and C.M. Judd, Research methods in social
relations. US: Wadsworth, 2002.
[9] S. Bresciani, A.F. Blackwell, and M.J. Eppler, "A Collaborative
Dimensions Framework: Understanding the Mediating Role of
Conceptual Visualizations in Collaborative Knowledge Work,"
Proc. ICSS 2008.
[10] M. Banks, Using visual data in qualitative research. London: Sage,
2007.
[11] A. Fontana and J. Frey, "Interviewing. The art of science," in
Handbook of qualitative Research, N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln,
Eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994, pp. 361-376.
[12] J. v. Maanen, Tales of the field. On writing ethnography. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1988.
[13] R. Barbour, Doing focus groups. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007.
[14] T.L. Greenbaum, Moderating focus groups: A practical guide for
Group Facilitation. London: Sage, 2000.
[15] D.L. Morgan, "Focus Groups," Annual Review of Sociology, vol.
22, 1996, pp.129-152.
[16] B.J. Calder, "Focus groups and the nature of qualitative marketing
research," J. of Marketing Research, vol. 14, 1977, pp. 353-364.
[17] D.L. Morgan, Focus Groups as Qualitative Research. Qualitative
Research Methods Series. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1997.
[18] D.L. Morgan and R.A. Krueger, "When to use focus groups and
why," in Successful Focus Groups, D.L. Morgan, Ed. London:
Sage, 1993, pp. 3-19.
[19] S. Sussman, D. Burton, C.W. Dent, A.W. Stacy, and B.R. Flay,
"Use of focus groups in developing an adolescent tobacco use
cessation program: collective norm effects," J. Appl. Soc. Psychol.
vol. 21, 1991, pp. 1772-82.
[20] C.B.M. van Riel, N.E. Stroeker, and O.J.M. Maathuis, "Measuring
Corporate Images," Corporate Reputation Review, vol. 1, 1998, pp.
313-326.
[21] M. Anastas, "Visuals stimulate richer response in focus groups and
individuals interviews," Quirk’s Marketing research review, 1994.
[22] P.R. Carlile, "A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries:
Boundary Objects in New Product Development," Organization
Science, vol. 13, 2002, pp. 442-455.
[23] R.A. Krueger and M.A. Casey, Focus groups: a practical guide for
applied research, 4th ed., London: Sage, 2000.
[24] D.D. Suthers, "Toward a Systematic Study of Representational
Guidance for Collaborative Learning Discourse," Journal of
Universal Computer Science, vol. 7, 2001, pp. 254-277.
[25] R. Kuchenmüller and M. Stifel, "Quality without a name," in The
IAF Handbook of Group Facilitation, S. Schuman, Ed. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2005, pp. 381-420.
[26] A. Comi and M.J. Eppler, "Assessing the Impact of Visual
Facilitation on Interorganizational Collaboration: an Experimental
Study," Journal of Universal Computer Science, forthcoming.
[27] M.J. Eppler and R.A. Burkhard, "Visual representations in
knowledge management: Framework and cases," Journal of
Knowledge Management, vol. 11, 2007, pp. 112-122.
[28] S. Bresciani and M.J. Eppler "The risks of visualization: A
classification of disadvantages associated with graphic
representations of information," in Identität und vielfalt der
kommunikations-wissenschaft, P.J. Schulz, U. Hartung, and S.
Keller, Eds. Konstanz: UVK Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, 2009, pp.
165-178.

Although providing considerable advantages, qualitative interviewing is fraught with methodological shortcomings. The major difficulties are situated in initiating
the interview process, capturing valuable data, and preventing respondents to go off topics. In this article, we
have proposed an interdisciplinary procedure, suggesting
to use visual methods in qualitative interviews to obtain
deeper insights. The visuals, used both as stimuli and facilitation, work as ‘boundary objects’ [22] and therefore
enhance discussions, debates or consensus during the interview situation. This allows for more awareness of the
respondents’ perceptions, and thus permits to draw more
rigorous conclusions. However, some limitations exist in
the use of visuals for qualitative interviews and focus
groups, as for example:
• The productivity of the interview is highly dependent on the visual literacy of the interviewer or
moderator.
• Given the difficulty of simultaneously conducting
and visualizing the interview, it is advisable to
have two facilitators or interviewers working together. Nevertheless, the coordination among the
two researchers may be difficult, or bias the interview process.
• The respondents may be ‘locked’ into the visual
templates, and neglect discussing relevant issues
that are not pointed out on the visual structure.
This is the negative side of the representational
guidance provided by visual representations [24].
• The visuals may ‘cajole’ the respondents, and lead
to overly positive attitudes towards the interview
topic [28].
Moreover, the mentioned strengths of visualization
methods in qualitative interviews need to be substantiated
with further empirical evidence. In future studies, for example, researchers could assess the added value of visualization-based interviewing through an experimental
methodology, i.e. by comparing the quality of data gathered in intervention (visualization-based interviewing)
versus control (pure verbal interviewing) groups. Also,
our practical methodology for using visualizations in oneto-one interviews and focus groups has to be further
tested, evaluated and discussed in academia. Nevertheless,
it should be mentioned that our preliminary experiences
make it evident that the real-time use of visualization
enables people to better see what they say and mean.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Arksey and P. Knight, Interviewing for social scientists. London:
Sage, 1999.
[2] C.A.B. Warren, "Qualitative Interviewing", in Handbook of
Interview Research, J.F. Gubrium and J.A. Holstein, Eds. London:
Sage, 2002, pp. 83-101.
[3] T. Brüsemeister, Qualitative Forschung ein Überblick. Wiesbaden:
Westdt. Verl., 2000.
[4] J.H. Frey and A. Fontana, "The group interview in social research,"
Social Science Journal, vol. 28, 1991, pp. 175-197.

376

