2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Showing Action in Pictures

Yvonne Eriksson, Peter Johansson

Petra Björndal

Division of Information Design
Mälardalen University
Eskilstuna, Sweden
{Yvonne.Eriksson, Peter.Johansson}@mdh.se

Industrial Software Systems
ABB Corporate Research
Västerås, Sweden
Petra.Bjorndal@se.abb.com

Abstract— One challenge for the global market is to overcome
communication problems of different kinds. The largest
communication problem is language; people speak different
languages and have limited knowledge in other languages. This
problem is central in manuals and instructions for assembly
and installations. One hopeful solution is that pictures can
replace verbal instructions. In this paper we will discuss how
illustrations in flat perspective can be useful for showing action
in drawings.

II.

The project was initiated by a manufacturing company,
and the objective for the company’s partner in this study is
twofold; firstly to explore the possibility of using pictures to
a greater extent in installation instructions to achieve reduced
translation and printing costs, and secondly to investigate the
improvement potential for installation instructions per se.
Since language and pictures belong to different symbol
systems, a different strategy has to be employed when
changing from words to pictures. Writing can describe what
to do, whereas pictures cannot. An activity can only be
indicated in pictures; therefore the challenge for the project
was to find a way to represent action in static pictures.
The objective of the research is to see if an alternative to
the commonly used isometric line drawing can be used in
installation instructions. The goal is to overcome differences
in cultural traditions and to focus on the actual action rather
than the object itself. The project’s aim is also to see if a less
detailed picture can be easier to interpret.
The research questions are:
x How can events/sequences connected to each other
be visualized in an instruction?
x How does the image style affect how an instruction
is perceived?
x How abstract/limited in amount of detail can a
picture in an instruction be and still give information
to the viewer?

Keywords - visual communication, instructions, sequential
drawing, image style

I.

INTRODUCTION

One challenge for the global market is to overcome
communication problems of different kinds. The largest
communication problem is language; people speak different
languages and have limited knowledge in other languages.
Therefore translations in different kinds of instructions are
necessary. Since industries export to a widening range of
countries, the instructions accompanying their products must
be translated into several languages. Sometimes up to twenty
different languages may be involved, which means that the
instruction materials for a single product are often
disproportionate to the information required. In many cases a
small product is accompanied by a big instruction book that
may weigh more than the product itself, which affects
transportation costs. In order to reduce the costs for attached
instructions, manufacturing industries are looking for
alternatives to written instructions. The substitute for written
instructions is visual instructions. However, to replace
language with pictures is complex, since language and
pictures belong to different symbol systems, and therefore
demand different strategies from the designers of
instructions.
In this paper we will present a suggestion for how to
represent action in instructions for assembly and installation
by using an example (See Fig. 1). The suggestion is based on
the results from a research project made for a manufacturing
company. The project is under a non-disclosure agreement
and pictures used in this paper are therefore not the ones
used in the pre-test or the following test. The pictures used in
this paper have the style that was developed from the
analysis and the tests but have another motif.

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.104

REPLACING WORDS WITH PICTURES

III.

BACKGROUND

Language can be a communication obstacle for the global
market on different levels — in business to business and in
business to customer, and within individual companies. In
manufacturing industries assembly is central, and many
companies outsource that part. To avoid expensive assembly
mistakes, it is necessary to disambiguate instructions. In
manufacturing industries, pictures are used to clarify how
assembly is performed and to show the appearance of the
objects that are to be put together. However, the quality of
the pictures is often very poor; they frequently consist of
digital photos taken by the assemblers themselves. Such
photos are often overloaded with information and hard to
interpret for new workers who are not already familiar with
the actual assembly process.
It is often pointed out that contemporary products are
designed in CAD, and hence CAD files can be used as the
403

basis for assembly instructions. However, CAD files are
complex and contain more details than necessary. For
multifaceted products such as JAS airplanes with trained
assemblers, it works [1]. In most industries the assemblers
are not trained, nor are the installers of less complicated
installations. Therefore the instructions have to be simple
and clear, so they can be interpreted intuitively. This is easy
to say but hard to realize, since there is no unambiguous
definition of what is meant by a “simple” picture. Within
engineering design there is a long tradition of using drawings
for different purposes, e.g. for construction, for assembly and
for installation [2]. Those drawings have their own taxonomy
and can hardly be interpreted intuitively.
The heritage of contemporary engineering drawings is to
be found in a French encyclopedia from the late 18th
century. The French philosopher Roland Barthes has argued
that the illustrations in Denis Diderot and d´Alemberts
Encyclopedia were something radically new for 18th century
readers. For the first time, French people saw objects
represented in intersection and disassembly, piece by piece,
on a plane surface [3]. The illustrations offered a new way of
structuring understanding and knowledge. In the West this
tradition is well established in scientific illustrations,
engineering drawings and educational material. Studies
indicate that the Western drawing traditions can be
challenging to interpret by non-Western people, who often
lack experience of the drawing style employed. Further
research is needed to gain a deeper understanding of how
different cultural backgrounds influence the ability to
interpret traditional engineering drawings [4]. In addition, it
is necessary to study the tradition of instrumental drawings
(pictures for instructions, in teaching material or in scientific
texts) in different cultures to learn more. For instance, China
has a long tradition of using instrumental pictures that goes
back to the 13th century [4]. In this paper we will present an
alternative to the pictorial tradition that originates in the
Encyclopedia.
IV.

a third dimension. Another reason is that the definition of
arrow is not clear; does it include the line or not? [6].
There is a lack of research concerning how picture
instructions work in different situations in general, and in an
industrial context specifically. Scholars interested in picture
instructions often study them from a cognitive or perceptual
perspective. Our perspective is to combine the perceptual
and cognitive processes that are involved in interpreting
pictures with a picture theory. Others have done usability
tests on picture instructions intended for consumers of such
things as furniture or home-electronic equipment [7]. Only
limited research has been done focusing on the use of
pictures in manufacturing industries. One study concerning
assembly in such industries has demonstrated the need for
further research (Eriksson) [14].
Many scientific areas are dependent on visualizations, to
illuminate their results or to prove them. Engineering
drawings are central both for constructions and for
communications [2]. Peter Galison, among others, has
illustrated the importance of pictures in science from a
scientific historical point of view, and the belief in
photography as an objective medium for visualization in
science [8]. In cognitive science, pedagogy and psychology
research have shown the importance of pictures to clarify
and to explain functions and appearances of objects. The
cognitive scientist Barbara Tversky has emphasized that
visualization is a cognitive tool, designed to augment human
cognitive capacities [9, 10, 11]. She suggests that pictures aid
memory by off-loading it from limited working memory or
fallible long-term memory. By off-loading, visualizations
relieve working memory of its memory functions, leaving
more capacity for processing. In her research, Tversky shows
the important and practical function of visualizations: to
convey information [11]. Correctly designed pictures can
clarify how to perform procedures such as assembly or
installation. Correctly designed means pictures designed
compatible with human perception and cognition [11].
Research has proved that illustrations are superior in
assembly instructions because they show how to assemble
without any further instructions. However, the research does
not indicate, or make any concrete suggestions for, how to
implement their results in assembly instructions for
manufacturing industries, or for installations. And in addition
they do not focus on the picture as such, that is as a
meaningful entity that communicates independently in
different contexts.

REPRESENTING ACTION IN DRAWINGS

One of the crucial points for picture-based instruction is,
however, to interpret a static drawing as an intended action.
Even though a drawing looks familiar, it is not obvious to
everyone how it should be used, that is to perform a specific
act. Action can be indicated in a series of pictures
representing the change from one picture to the next. For
example we see a person with long hair walking into a
hairdresser, in the next picture we see the same person
coming out from the hairdresser with shorter hair. From that
we draw the conclusion that the person has had a haircut. It
is the space between the pictures that makes sense for the
viewer, not the pictures themselves, but this requires an
experienced “reader”. Otherwise the two pictures in this
example will be interpreted as two separate pictures, not as
one story. Research shows that illiterates often interpret
comic strips as separate pictures, and not as a story that
continues from picture to picture [5]. The action can also be
indicated by arrows, but it is seldom obvious how to interpret
an arrow; one reason is that it is hard to show its direction in

A. Traditions for visual representations
It is common to represent installations or assembly
instructions by line drawings in an isometric perspective.
This kind of drawing is often rich in detail. Drawings with
many details can be hard to interpret, inasmuch as it can be
difficult to understand the purpose of the picture. To be sure
that the observer/reader of a picture will be able to
understand the intended message, it is necessary to
emphasize central parts in the drawing and omit details. This
could be done by colors, or by the position of single objects
on the surface, or by thicker lines, or by eliminating details
around a specific part.

404

Reorganization is fundamental for pictures, because they
are interchangeable. We recognize and identify objects by
their shape, especially when we identify objects on a more
general level. In pictures that represent objects in general,
and not a specific element, the shape is often emphasized and
details are eliminated. This might involve a clear shape
contrasting against the background. To focus on an object as
a whole is not always of interest; we often need to focus on
single details. Details can be highlighted in different ways;
one is to enlarge parts of the drawing. By oscillating between
the object as a whole and enlarging parts we got a mixture of
focus. This mixture helps us to represent an activity.
In an assembly instruction we have to focus on the object
per se, in order to understand the expected outcome.
Therefore we need to know the appearance of the actual
thing we are to assemble. However, when we are to install
something, it is the activity that has to be in focus, not the
object itself. What shall be done? How shall we do it? The
pictures should represent what? and How? But we must not
ignore that it is fundamental to recognize the object that is to
be installed, and the equipment that will be used for the
installation.

representations, and establishes that different viewers can
read codes on different levels. According to Gestalt Theory,
it is the shape that dominates in recognition of depicted
objects, and this is universal. However, to be able to
recognize an object from its shape, it is important that the
object is depicted from an angle that shows its typical
appearance. This is, more or less in front view. The
discussion about the possibility to identify a specific object
in a picture can be linked to the discussion about similarity.
The ideas about pictures’ mimetic qualities have a long
history, and are strongly connected to the Western tradition.
But if we accept the Gestalt Theory notions about shape
identification as something universal, we should focus on
shape in depictions when we are making instructions for the
global market.
Visuals can be divided into different kinds, such as
drawings, sketches, photos, and moving images. In an
engineering context, the most common visual aids are
drawings, but moving images are used for demonstrations
and photographs for assembly. The technique and style used
for visual representation affects the perception of the content.
Drawings allow us to emphasize single parts, enlarge details
and show several angles of an object at the same time, while
photography can only represent one angle at a time.
Therefore, it is only possible to focus on either details or the
whole at the same time. However, photographic collage or
montage offers other possibilities. In contradiction to moving
images, it is complicated to show action in pictures,
especially when it comes to instructions. It is one thing to
look at a series of pictures and interpret a particular action,
and another to follow an instruction and to fulfill a requested
act.
However, pictures can be divided into two kinds: those
that portray things that are essentially visuo-spatial, and
those that represent things that are not inherently visual.
Maps, molecules and architectural drawings belong to the
first group; organization charts, flow diagrams and graphs
belong to the second group [11]. Picture-based instructions
can be defined as a mixture of the two, since they portray
objects or parts of objects that should be installed or
assembled, and at the same time provide instructions for the
actual action. Arrows are fundamental for showing how to
put different parts of an object together or to twist, bend or
turn something upside down. Arrows are not inherently
visual. Assembly or installations instructions are complex
and they consist of both the appearance of the objects that
are to be assembled or installed and representation of the
action. Representation of an action is abstract since there are
no conventions for showing how to do something.
Interpreting pictorial instructions is a two- fold process: first
one has to identify the object as such and its different parts;
secondly one has to figure out how to act.

B. Pictures for instructions in a global perspective
Today we have surprisingly poor knowledge about how
visual communication works in different cultural, ethnic and
language contexts. And we have only limited knowledge
about the embedded codes in engineering drawings. On an
everyday level there is no need for a definition of pictures [2,
12, 13, 14]. But to be able to use pictures in instructions in
general and for installations specifically, it is necessary to
define the concept. Pictures are a symbol system that differs
from language, as mentioned before. Pictures contain
symbols that are spatially organized, and in pictures it is
possible to show things like appearance and relations.
Pictures differ from other representations, such as text and
music, because they can imitate. To imitate demands that
essential elements in the visual representation correspond to
the actual object [15]. A critical question concerning likeness
is to what extent can a 2D picture represent a 3D object?
What is required? In terms of installation instructions we
have to ask ourselves: how do we represent objects and
actions involved in installation processes?
Pictures are irreplaceable tools for showing appearance
and relations of different kinds. Pictures can imitate, and
therefore a common apprehension is that pictures are
universal and can overcome language obstacles. As
mentioned before, this is not true because pictures largely
build on conventions that vary between cultures. Therefore,
we have experimented with the style of pictures in
instructions to try to find out if it is possible to identify a
pictorial language that could satisfy the demand from
industry for use in a global market. For art historians it is
obvious that traditions of pictorial representations differ
between cultures and from time to time. But in an industrial
context this is rarely noticed. To be able to communicate via
pictures there has to be a common understanding of how the
pictures shall be interpreted. In Class, Codes and Control
(1971), Basil Bernstein elucidates embedded codes in visual

V.

METHOD

A study involving 21 informants (9 Chinese, 2 Spanish, 3
Singaporean and 7 Swedish) was made to try to find an
answer to the research questions: How can events/sequences
connected to each other be visualized in an instruction? How
does the image style affect how an instruction is perceived?

405

How abstract/limited in amount of detail can a picture in an
instruction be and still give information to the viewer?
The work began with a survey and analysis of how
drawings are used by the company that initiated the project.
The analysis revealed what image style the drawings have
and how they are used. An installation carried out by an
experienced installer was filmed to understand how a
professional conducts an installation. To compare how others
in the same line of business use pictures, the observations
from the analysis were compared with material from the
company’s subsidiaries. Instructions in other trades were also
examined to get a better understanding of how drawings in
instructions can look and how they are used.
When the analysis and survey of drawings in instructions
was completed, a prototype of an instruction was drawn. The
image style in the prototype was based on the observations in
the analysis.
The image style in the prototype had a limited level of
detail, and the drawings contained sequences that showed
how to do an installation. The prototype had a twofold
purpose. The main purpose was to test how the sequences
worked – if it was possible to follow the steps and handle the
drawings provided. The second purpose of the test was to see
if a reduced level of detail affects how the drawings in an
instruction are perceived.
The prototype was tested in Sweden with four informants
who made installations guided by the prototype. The test was
filmed and the informants answered a questionnaire about
the instructions after the test. The test was also documented
with a sound recording, and the result from the installations
was photographed.
With the results from the prototype test, the sequences
were redrawn to be more coherent. The test also gave hints
for developing the image style. When the steps and handling
in the sequences were refined, three different image styles
were created. The image styles had a reduction of details in
common. They differed in that one image style had a front
view and contour lines, one image style had no lines and a
front view, and one image style had no lines and an isometric
perspective.
The instruction was now made in three versions: all
versions had the same sequence but different image styles.
Now the image style was tested. The test was performed with
informants that work with installations. The test was carried
out with professional installers in Sweden and in China. In
China the test instruction was translated into Chinese, and
two Spanish test informants in Sweden got the instructions in
English. The Singaporean informants got their instructions in
English. The Swedish informants did the tests in Swedish.
The informants made the installations aided by the
installation instruction. Each informant carried out one
installation. No informant was allowed to do more than one
installation. The test was documented with a video camera.
The finished installation was photographed, and the
informants answered a questionnaire about the installation
instruction (the Singaporean informants did not answer the
questionnaire but their results clearly showed high skills in
installation).

We have chosen to discuss the results on a general level
related to an industrial context, and therefore the example is
an assembly instruction (see Fig.1). Because of the nondisclosure agreement the motif is not the same as in the tests.
VI.

DISCUSSION

The instructions are represented in sequential order, from
top to bottom. The picture elements are made on a gray
background. Every illustration has a thin black frame and a
white background. The frame and the white background
focus the reader’s attention on one picture at a time.
Activities belonging together are linked by an arrow that
goes from one picture to the next. The arrow goes from the
lower part of the frame and points to the pictures below.
Some of the illustrations show sequences with several
pictures, since the appearance of a tool is established and
how it shall be used. The instruction pictures are shown in a
front view. And the picture elements are made as plain
surfaces without contour lines. The tool has contour lines to
emphasize action. The pictures do not have an accompanying
text except from when size of tools and torque must be
given.
The instruction starts with a picture frame that shows
what kind of tool, which is needed to do the assembly and
which part the installation will start with. Then the process is
shown step by step. We will here discuss what we have
found essential while composing the instructions.
A. Choosing central activities
The first step is to observe what is to be represented and
analyze the situation. This could be done by asking an
experienced worker to show what to do and taping the
activity. From that one has to analyze the central activities
and find out when one activity is replaced by another. In the
pictures, it is important that the activity is represented step
by step, one picture for one activity. The progress has to be
represented in the following picture so a change can be
interpreted. Showing new details or a change in perspective
from an overall picture to close-ups could accomplish this.
B. Action indicated by tools
Key to installation is the use of tools. Therefore the
actual tools can be used to indicate actions that should be
performed, so the tool has to be linked to the activity that is
expected to be done. In this example the screwdriver is close
to the screw. The tool can be shown in action in e.g. a closeup picture.
C. Emphasis on shape and abstract pictures
The pictures are abstract, and therefore details are
limited. This is because the focus is on the actual activity and
not the appearance of the objects. Thus the instructions for
using a screwdriver can be employed for different models of
screw-drivers. We suggest that an abstract picture adds
clarity concerning the actual activity, because unnecessary
details are eliminated.

406

VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have brought up questions concerning if
and how it is possible to replace written instructions with
pictorial ones for a global market. It is complex to represent
activities in two-dimensional pictures. Therefore a strategy
for how to focus on action rather than appearance is
necessary. IKEA and other companies have developed
assembly instructions for customers. However, it is hard to
compare instructions for activities that take place once with
those that are to be repeated many times, such as in
professional installations or assembly in industry. For those
contexts, the pictorial instructions should be useable for
several purposes, including know-how and memory support.
Information Design works in a tradition of human-centered
design, which means that the design should meet the user’s
need. For a global market with limited knowledge of user
needs, backgrounds, knowledge and experience from the
field in question, it is a challenge to design with the
individuals in focus. By combining theories about how
human beings perceive visual representations with
knowledge about culture and pictorial traditions, we suggest
that it is possible to find new methods for pictorial
representations that will work more effectively and
efficiently. The pictures should be easier to draw and to work
with – picture elements is easily reused by copy-paste
instead of being redrawn from scratch. It should be less of an
effort to update old material once the pictures have been
drawn. We are striving to make the illustrations in the
instructions clear with regard to identifying the represented
objects. Therefore we concentrating on the shape and
showing the objects in front view, and thereby propose an
alternative to the traditional engineering drawings for
installations and assembly for a global market.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
Figure 1. An example assembly instruction

407

K. Hendersson. On line and on paper. Visual Representations, Visual
culture, and Computer Graphics in Design Engineering. Cambridge
Mass. MIT Press. 1999.
E.S. Ferguson. Engineering and the Mind´s Eye. Cambridge Mass.
MIT Press. 1994/2001.
R. Barthes, “Image, Raison, Déraison”, Ed. Barthes et al. L´universe
de l´encyclopédie images d´une civilization. Les 135 plus belles
planches de ´encyplocpédie de Diderot et d´Alambert. Paris: Les
Libraires Assoiés. 1964.
S. Han. A Chinese Word on Image – Zheng Qiao (1104-12) and his
thought on images, diss., Göteborg: Acta Universitatis
Gothoburgensis. 2008.
F. Qarin. Bildval i alfabetiseringsundervisning- en fråga om synsätt.
Rapporter om svenska som andrspråk ROSA 9. Institutet för svenska
som andradraspråk, Göteborgs universitet. 2007.
R. Krull and M. Sharp. Visual verbs: Using arrows to depict the
direction of actions in procedural illustrations, Information design
Journal, 14, 189–198.
B. Tversky. Spatical schemas in depictions, Spatial schemas and
abstract thoughts. Ed. M. Gattis, MIT Press, Cam. Mass. 2001.
L. Daston, and P. Galison. Objectivity. New York: Zone Books.
2007.
B. Tversky, Distortions in memory of maps. Cognition Psychology,
13, 407-433. 1991.

[10] B. Tversky. Some ways that graphics communicate, Mobile
communication: Essays on cognition and community, Ed. K. Nyiri,
Wien: Passagen Verlag. 2003.
[11] B. Tversky. Cognitive Design Principles for Automated Generation of
Visualization. 2006.
[12] M. Twyman. Using Pictorial Language: A Discussion of the
Dimensions of the Problem. In Designing Usable Texts, edited by
Thomas M. Duffy and Robert Waller, 245-312. Orlando: Academic
Press. 1985.

[13] J. Elkins. Into the Domaine of Images. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press. 1999.
[14] Y. Eriksson. Bildens tysta budskap. Interaktion mellan bild och text.
Stockholm: Norstedts Akademiska förlag. 2009.
[15] [15] R.L. Solso. Cognition and Visual Arts, MIT Press, Mass.
Cambridge. 1994.

408

