2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualization of Sensory Perception Descriptions
Carita Paradis
Centre for Languages and Literature
Lund University
SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden
Email: carita.paradis@englund.lu.se

Andreas Kerren, Mimi Prangova
School of Computer Science, Physics and Mathematics (DFM)
Linnaeus University
SE-351 95 V¨axj¨o, Sweden
Email (corresponding author): andreas.kerren@lnu.se

is high, there is beautifully sweet fruit underlying
the wines structure. It will require 8-10 years of
cellaring after release, and should drink well for
three decades.” (Wine Advocate 170, April 2007)

Abstract—On the basis of a large corpus of wine reviews, this
paper proposes a range of interactive visualization techniques
that are useful for linguistic exploration and analysis of lexical,
grammatical and discursive patterns in text. Our visualization
tool allows linguists and others to make comparisons of visual,
olfactory, gustatory and textual properties of different wines
from different parts of the worlds, from different grape
varieties, or from different vintages. It also supports the
immediate creation of visual proﬁles for descriptions of sensory
perceptions for exploratory purposes as well as for purposes
of conﬁrmatory investigations of linguistic patterns in text and
discourse and their correlations to metadata variables.

The visual appearance of the wine in (1) is described in
terms of its clarity and color using the descriptors ’opaque
ruby/purple’. The olfactory perceptions are primarily described through concrete objects, e.g., ’earth, smoke, cassis,
and cherries’, but also in terms of a gustatory property,
’sweet’, while taste and mouthfeel are described through
various gustatory and tactile properties (’high’ (tannin),
’sweet’ (fruit), ’textured, full-bodied’). Because almost all
wine reviews describe the wines in terms of four different
perceptual modalities, i.e., visual appearance, smell, taste
and texture, they are a gold mine for linguistic explorations
of descriptions of human sensory perceptions in discourse.
Of particular interest are the descriptions of olfactory perception. There is no speciﬁc olfactory vocabulary, neither
in English nor in (most) other languages of the world.
Olfactory descriptions have to be made using words from
other domains. In wine reviews, words for taste or words
for objects such as fruit, herbs or ﬂowers of different color
are used. In general, dark objects are used in descriptions
of red wines and pale objects describe white wines. In
other words, olfactory descriptions are primarily made on the
basis of the smell of objects and also their color and taste.
Exploring patterns for perceptual descriptors and the context
of their use in wine reviews provides useful information not
only about the relations between descriptors of odor and
other modalities, but also about language, perception and
cognition in general [3].

Keywords-multivariate visualization; interaction techniques;
text visualization; scatter plot; dynamic queries; wine reviews;

I. I NTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present our work on the development of
an interactive information visualization tool to be used on
corpus data. The tool has been developed on the basis of
84,864 wine reviews, or tasting notes as they are also sometimes called, from the Wine Advocate1 journal. Thanks to
the capacity of the tool to handle large amounts of data and
to its dynamic interface, it can be used for exploratory work
as well as for conﬁrmatory investigations in linguistics [1].
Wine reviews are descriptions and evaluations of wines
written by professional wine tasters. They have a strict
rhetorical structure and consist of three parts, starting with
production facts and ending with an assessment and a
recommendation of prime drinking time. The middle of the
text, which is the most important part, is devoted to an iconic
description of the wine tasting procedure from the taster’s
inspection of the wine’s visual appearance through smelling,
tasting and feeling its texture, i.e., from vision through smell,
taste, and mouthfeel (touch) [2], cf. sample review (1).
(1) “This great St.-Estephe estate has turned out a
succession of brilliant wines. The 2005, a blend
of 60% Cabernet Sauvignon and 40% Merlot,
has put on weight over the last year. An opaque
ruby/purple hue is accompanied by a sweet nose
of earth, smoke, cassis, and cherries as well as a
textured, full-bodied mouthfeel. While the tannin

Our tool supports the visual analysis of the corpus of
wine reviews from the Wine Advocate. The wine reviews
are available in the form of two databases that contain a
large number of wines, metadata about the wines, and the
actual reviews. In order for linguists to arrive at a better
understanding of different text types, different discourses
and their vocabularies, large corpora are of crucial importance. At the same time, it is also a challenge to identify
linguistic patterns in large corpora, to organize the data,
to make statistical calculations and to present the data to

1 https://www.erobertparker.com/entrance.aspx

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.38

135

can be changed, many questions regarding the potential
of the data receive on-the-spot answers. As a result, new
patterns emerge that can generate new research hypotheses
about language use in different genres and text types.

readers in intuitive and clear ways. The contribution of this
paper is to ﬁnd solutions to some of these challenges. The
ﬁrst challenge is that we have to be able to represent large
amounts of multivariate data. For that purpose, advanced
interaction techniques are essential, because they ensure
the opportunity for selecting a subset of tasting notes and
for getting detailed information about the tasting notes in
order to proceed with further analyses. Secondly, we have
to ﬁnd an efﬁcient way to interactively visualize the text
of the individual wine reviews, which brings us to the
ﬁeld of interactive text visualizations. Thirdly, a number of
compatible visualization approaches have to be combined
in order to efﬁciently explore the language used in the
descriptions of the wines.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II gives a general overview of the advantages of
our tool for linguists. Then, we discuss related approaches
in Section III within the ﬁeld of information and text
visualization as well as in the ﬁeld of linguistic analysis
of sensory descriptions. In Section IV, we describe the wine
database. Our own approaches to the visualization of wine
tasting notes by using information visualization (InfoVis)
techniques are presented in Section V. Initial results are
brieﬂy outlined in Section VI. We conclude in Section VII
and suggest some investigatory paths for future work.

III. R ELATED W ORK
Using both corpus methodologies including visualization
of the data and experimental psychophysical techniques,
Morrot et al. investigated the interaction between visual
appearance and odor determination in wine description and
wine tasting [3]. Their work presents the results of a study
carried out with the help of a tool called ALCESTE. It
is based on statistics about the distribution of words in a
corpus of text to determine groups of words that co-occur
in the same context. They found that the descriptors used to
characterize white and red wines were different in terms of
the colors of the objects used in the descriptions respectively
(i.e., dark objects describe red wines and pale objects
white wines). In addition to the corpus study, they also
carried out a psychophysical experiment, which conﬁrmed
the corpus data, demonstrating the impact of vision on the
human odor perception. In comparison to ALCESTE, our
visualization tool gives users more possibilities to browse
the text, to ﬁlter out uninteresting cases, and to interact with
the visualizations. Thus, it does not afford pure statistical
numbers only, but gives analysts an opportunity to explore
the dataset and to get a better understanding of the texts’
structure and content.
Another visualization approach, called Wine Fingerprints,
has been discussed by Kerren [4]. In contrast to the tool
presented in this paper, Wine Fingerprints focus on wine
attributes, such as wine color, rating, grape type, price,
or aroma, and not on the actual wine reviews. This data
forms a multivariate data set, part of which can be hierarchically structured into a so-called aroma hierarchy. The
Wine Fingerprints approach has various applications for
business and industry in that it can create visual patterns of
combinations of wine attributes and support comparisons of
visual, olfactory and gustatory properties of different wines
from different parts of the worlds, from different grapes,
from different vintages etc. Both customers and companies
can make visual comparisons of wines and select wines on a
pictorial basis instead of on the basis of a list of multimodal
perceptual attributes.
For the purpose of information visualization of complex
textual data, we use different well-known techniques and
interaction approaches. The general design of our visualization tool is based on standard coordinated and multiple
view visualization techniques as described in Section V-A.
An excellent starting point for related work of this kind of
visualization techniques is the annual conference series on
Coordinated & Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization
(CMV) or the work of Roberts [5].

II. L INGUISTIC BACKGROUND
Advances in visualization offer important possibilities
for organizing, presenting and analyzing linguistic data, in
which case visualization techniques provide a way to view
language in another formats than as linear stretches of letters.
Visualization techniques offer the tools to capture lexicosemantic usage patterns and to represent interactions of
different dimensions of language structure that characterize
different texts and discourses. As demonstrated in the introduction, descriptions of wines in wine magazines are short
texts with a very strict rhetorical structure. The language
of such texts are of interest to linguists at various different
discursive levels. Linguists want to know about what kind
of words are used to describe the wines’ visual properties,
what kind of descriptors are used for olfactory, gustatory
and tactile perceptions. They are interested in what words
and expressions are used where in the texts. For instance,
what kind of temporal expressions are used in different parts
of a text, and what expressions of personal opinion, such as
’should’, ’drinkable’, ’recommend’ are used where in the
texts and why. More generally, linguists take an interest
in how all linguistic patterns combine into what might be
our understanding of the discourse beyond the text itself.
In other words, visual imagery provides a way to represent
things that would otherwise go unnoticed. The added value
of the visualization tool presented in this paper is that it can
be used interactively. The data can be easily explored, and
because parameters and combinations of data and metadata

136

tasting notes are represented in different ways. The ﬁrst
database contains descriptive information about the wines,
their unique ID number, their origin, vintages, wine ratings,
dryness, color and the complete original wine review. The
second database contains the same tasting notes including
ID numbers, but they are segmented into words and wordclass tags (so-called word tags, such as nouns (NN) or
adjectives (JJ) [15]). The latter database was built from the
former, the original database, by using the WineConverter
tool, developed by Ekeklint and Nilsson from the computer
linguistics group at V¨axj¨o University, Sweden. The result
of this segmentation is a new structuring of the wine
tasting notes where each word is described by additional
information that accurately speciﬁes its position in the text
of the full tasting note. The location of each word in a tasting
note is determined by the following information: ID number
of the tasting note, number of the corresponding sentence in
the tasting note, position of the word in this sentence, the
word itself, and the word tag given to this word.
In order to get a better overview of appropriate visualization approaches for representing the tasting notes and
their attributes, we had to take the great amount of analyzed
data into consideration. Table I provides a list of substantial
statistical numbers derived from the dataset to give an idea
about the sheer quantity of the data to be visualized.

In order to specify the layout of our tool and to deﬁne the
functional requirements, we were inspired by the FilmFinder
tool for exploring ﬁlm databases [6]. It was one of the
ﬁrst tools, which integrated the concept of a two dimensional scatter plot with color coding, ﬁltering, and details
provided on demand (dynamic queries). The developers
realized different encoding and interaction techniques for
the representation of multivariate data.
The research project Many Eyes provides alternative
methods for data analyses using innovative visualization
techniques [7]. One of the approaches for supporting text
analysis is the representation of a given text as a word
tree [8]. The purpose of this visualization method is to afford
an insight into the different contexts in which a word is
encountered in an unstructured text. We used this concept
in one of the text visualizations of our tool to facilitate rapid
exploration of the wine tasting notes’ content.
An approach for visual literary analysis, called Literature
Fingerprinting, was presented by Keim and Oelke [9]. This
work supports the visual comparison of texts by calculating
features for different hierarchy levels and by creating characteristic ﬁngerprints of the texts. Such features might be
word length or measurement of vocabulary richness.
Salton and Singhal analyze the relationships between text
documents according to different topics. They developed a
tool called Text Theme [10] to represent such correlations
visually. Single topics can then be identiﬁed and be compared with the help of textures or color coding. In contrast to
this approach, our tool operates more on the syntactic level,
i.e., higher-level themes cannot be compared directly.
Tag clouds provide information about the frequency of
words used in a corpus of text [11]. This approach uses
different font sizes for each word in the text to indicate
how often this word is used by comparison with the others.
Several extensions and approaches exists, such as Wordle
or ManiWorlde [12], [13]. We use a simple tag cloud
implementation to represent the word frequency in a group
of tasting notes.
Stasko et al. developed a visualization tool for analyses of
textual reports called Jigsaw [14]. The goal of their tool is
to aid investigative analysts to faster understand the content
of reports in order to predict possible threats and to prepare
defensive plans accordingly. The main analysis unit in their
work are pre-deﬁned entities in the texts and the goal of
the implemented visualizations is to represent relations and
connections between these entities. As distinct from their
work, our tool is not designed to focus on the signiﬁcance
of speciﬁc entities extracted from the texts but rather on the
exploration of their content and linguistic constructions.

Table I
S TATISTICAL NUMBERS DERIVED FROM

THE WINE DATABASES .

Number of tasting notes
Total number of words used in the tasting notes
Number of different words used in the tasting notes
Maximum length of the tasting notes
Number of word classes
Number of vintages
Range of wine rating values

84,864
8,332,666
46,000
496
43
104
1 to 100

V. V ISUALIZATION F RAMEWORK
In order to provide an overall perspective of the analyzed
wine tasting notes, we follow Ben Shneiderman’s mantra of
information visualization: “overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter,
details on demand” [16]. This gives users an initial overview
of the explored data and the possibility to proceed with
investigation of its subsets. For this, we combined several
visualization approaches to achieve our goals: scatter plots,
tag clouds, word trees, bar charts / histograms, and a world
map. The scatter plot is used to be the main entry point for
using our tool as described in the following.
A. Visual Representations
1) Scatter Plot: The purpose of this visual representation
is to give a ﬁrst overview of the data. Because of the large
number of tasting notes (cf. Table I), we decided to use a
scatter plot for their initial display, i.e., each single tasting
note is represented by a blue circle. This approach also

IV. N OTES ON THE DATA S ET
The wine tasting notes are stored in two databases
that contain information about different wines as well as
the tasters’ comments about them. In each database, the

137

Figure 1. A snapshot of the main window of the application after starting. Note that one tasting note was selected in the scatter plot; its tag cloud is
shown in the bottom right corner.

saves space and gives an idea about the distribution of the
tasting notes on the basis of the values of two selected wine
attributes, see Figure 1(a). Attributes currently supported by
the scatter plot visualization are all possible pairs of Wine
Rating, Wine Vintage, Color Class, Tasting Notes Length,
and Wine Country.
2) Bar Charts and Histograms: Getting statistical information helps analysts to better understand the visualized
data and ﬁnding the desired set of tasting notes. Bar chart
diagrams are traditional approaches to statistical data visualization. In this work, they are supplied in order to show
the number of tasting notes that correspond to the values of
a speciﬁc wine attribute (Figure 1(c)).
3) Text Visualization: The visualization approaches that
we apply for the representation tasting notes are word trees
and tag clouds.
Word Tree: The word tree visualization facilitates rapid
querying and exploration of text bodies [8]. In our tool, a
word tree describes the sequence of words and phrases used
in a group of tasting notes. The structure of the word tree
is organized into two main groups of nodes: word tags and
words. There are three prerequisites for proceeding with the
word tree visualization:
• users need to select a group of tasting notes for further
analyses,
• a speciﬁc tasting note for deriving the initial data (from
now on referred as root tasting note), and

•

the word classes of the words in this root tasting note
that they would like to analyze.

The ﬁrst three levels of the word tree contain data from the
root tasting note. The other levels consist of data from the
whole group. The root node of the tree is artiﬁcially added,
and it contains the static text “Tags”, which suggests that the
following level is composed of word tags. The second level
contains the selected word tags that correspond to words
in the root tasting note. The third level consists of all the
words from the root tasting note that belong to the word
tags on the previous level. Figure 2 gives an example of the
word tree and the organization of its nodes. The levels of the
tree alternate with each other to represent either word tags
or words that correspond to the tags on the previous level.
The children of each node representing a word class are the
words from the analyzed group of tasting notes that belong
to this word class. For instance, the word tree in Figure 2
displays two (selected) word tags of the root tasting note,
i.e., “JJ” (adjectives) and “NN” (nouns, singular common).
By looking at the children of “JJ”, the user can see that the
root tasting note has four adjectives, e.g., “coarse”. Then,
by looking at the next two deeper levels, the user can see
that “coarse” has two successors: one noun (plural common;
“NNS” → “ﬂavors”) in another note from the analyzed notes
group (black) and one determiner (“DT”→ “, this”) in the
root tasting note.

138

4) World map visualization: The origin of a wine is
important information, visualized in a way that gives a
rough overview of the wine-producing countries of the
world. A natural approach for visualizing it is an interactive
world map indicating the density of wine production in
different countries. Figure 5 shows a world map representing
information about the wines produced in different parts of
the world that have been tasted and described in the tasting
notes. The color saturation is directly proportional to the
density of wines produced in each country.
B. Interaction and Coordinated Views
We combined the visualization approaches described in
Section V-A with appropriate techniques for user interaction
to build an efﬁcient tool for analyzing wine tasting notes.
The following subsections give a notion about the user
interface and the overall layout of the application. In detail,
there are ﬁve particular views intended to build an efﬁcient
overview visualization as displayed in Figure 1:

Figure 2. A word tree that shows the node organization into two main
groups: word tags and words. Furthermore, there is another partition of
the tree nodes as well: nodes that contain data from the root tasting note
(colored in red) and nodes that contain data only from the other tasting
notes (colored in black). The DOI value of each node is given in brackets
on its right side.

(a) a scatter plot (showing the distribution of tasting
notes),
(b) ﬁlters (to reduce the complexity by ﬁltering),
(c) bar charts and histograms (to show statistical data),
(d) tag clouds (for text visualization), and
(e) tag checkbox panel (to select speciﬁc word classes).

Our word tree visualization represents a large data set
of words and word tags. It is restricted by the size of the
display and people’s perceptive capabilities. To cope with
these restrictions, our implementation applies the idea of
Degree-Of-Interest (DOI) trees that provide a solution of
these problems. They combine Focus&Context visualization techniques and degree-of-interest calculations to ﬁnd a
proper layout that ﬁts within the bounds of the display. The
technical idea is the use of a degree-of-interest function,
which assigns a number value (DOI value) to each node
indicating how interested the user is in this node. This value
is then used as a criterion to determine, which of the nodes
should be visible, which of them are in the focus and how
they should be displayed [17], [18]. The nodes in the focus
have the greatest DOI value and are slightly magniﬁed.
The size of all other nodes is directly proportional to their
individual DOI value. An exception to this rule is the tree
element that was selected last, which is the most magniﬁed
element, in spite of the fact that it has the same DOI value
as the other focus nodes. Figure 2 demonstrates a degreeof-interest tree where the DOI value of the nodes are given
in brackets on the right side of the node label.
Tag Clouds: The tag cloud visualization makes use of
different font sizes for the words in a corpus of text to give
a hint about the frequency of their usage. There are two
prerequisites for the application of tag cloud visualizations
to a tasting note’s text. A group of tasting notes needs
to be deﬁned for further analyses, and one of them has
to be selected for its text visualization. The text of the
selected tasting note is then visualized by using the tag
cloud metaphor, where each word has a different font size
depending on how often this word occurs in the whole group
of tasting notes, cp. Figure 1(d).

All aforementioned views are coordinated by standard highlighting and brushing techniques.
1) Distribution of Tasting Notes: The scatter plot axes
on the left and bottom sides of the display correspond to
one wine attribute each. Range sliders [19] are added to the
axes in order to make it possible for the users to change the
range of the wine attributes’ values and therefore the scope
of tasting notes visualized in the scatter plot. The number
of visible tasting notes can be observed at the upper left
corner of the scatter plot (8,486 in our screenshot example
of Figure 1). Another possibility given to the user is to
change the wine attributes plotted on the x-axis and y-axis
by selecting other attributes from the combo boxes on the
top of the display.
There is a drawback appearing as a consequence of the
scatter plot concept and the data stored in the database: it
might happen that more tasting notes share the same values
for both of the wine attributes plotted on the axes. Such
tasting notes overlap when they are visualized at the same
spot in the scatter plot. This makes the selection of an
element from the display more complicated. We added a
tooltip to each element to give the user a hint about the
number of overlapping tasting notes at the speciﬁc position
(Figure 3(a)). Thus, an individual element can be selected
from a popup list of the overlapping tasting notes, as shown
in Figure 3(b). The selected tasting note differs from the
others in its blue color in the scatter plot and in the popup
list.

139

(a) Tooltip help

(b) Tasting note selection
Figure 3.

Figure 4.

Figure 5.
World map providing information about the tasted wines
produced in different countries. It is also possible to use this view as an
interactive ﬁlter for the speciﬁcation of single countries.

Overlapping tasting notes in the scatter plot view.

a country on the map and our tool visualizes only those
representations of tasting notes of wines produced in the
speciﬁed region.
To provide a better software maintenance, we use a speciﬁc property ﬁle that contains a list of wine attributes and
their required ﬁlter types. In this way, ﬁlters are dynamically
created on the basis of this information and can be easily
added or removed.
3) Statistical Information: The property ﬁle also contains
a list of wine attributes that can be represented by bar
chart diagrams. Figure 6 presents snapshots of histograms
implemented in the application. An individual bar chart or
histogram is created for each of the listed attributes showing
the number of visible tasting notes corresponding to each
of their values (Figure 6(a)). Only one of the diagrams is
visualized at a time in order to save space. We added range
sliders to the x- and y-axes to assist users in changing the
range of visualized attribute values and to get a closer look
at a speciﬁc section of the diagram, see Figures 6(b) and
6(c) where the vintage range was modiﬁed.
4) Word Frequency Analysis: After the selection of a
tasting note in the scatter plot view, its text is visualized
using a tag cloud approach (cf. Section V-A3). The font
size of each word is estimated according to the frequency
of its occurrence in all elements visible at the same time,
including the selected one. Figure 7(a) shows a tag cloud
example generated by our application.
The tag checkbox panel contains all word tags available.
A coordinated interaction exists between the tag cloud view
and the checkbox panel. On the one hand, when the user

Types of ﬁlters implemented in the application.

2) Filtering: Filters are used to facilitate the task of the
users to interact with the visualization and to ﬁnd the best
subset of elements to be further analyzed. Figure 4 shows
a screenshot example of ﬁlters supported by our tool. By
the current selection only those tasting notes are considered
in the different views, which corresponding wines have a
vintage between 1899 and 1978, a rating between 30 and 70
points, a length between 51 and 496 words, a red color, no
speciﬁc dryness, geographical information, and made from
Cabernet Sauvignon grapes.
The world map ﬁlter is a realization of the geographic visualization approach described in Section V-A4. It provides
users with the opportunity to ﬁlter out tasting notes on the
scatter plot depending on their origin (Figure 5). Different
standard functionalities are supplied to assist working with
the map like zooming in, zooming out and panning to a
speciﬁc region of interest. Users have the possibility to select

140

(a) Tag cloud visualization implemented in the application

(a)

(b)

(b) Tag cloud interaction together with the tag check box panel
Figure 7.

node “raspberries” are in the focus. These nodes constitute a
sequence of words which forms part of one or more tasting
notes in the current scatter plot. This sequence is displayed
at the bottom of the word tree, and it is also highlighted in
the root tasting note if included there.
In Figure 8, the actual sequence of words is “glass,
offering aromas of ripe raspberries.”. The node labels are in
red since they are contained in the root tasting note. Often,
the tree depth and width exceed the display bounds. It is not
possible all the nodes to be visualized in the space available.
In order to surmount such problems, different techniques are
integrated into the visualization, e.g., zooming in, zooming
out, and panning controls [17].
There is a close relation between word tree visualization
and the scatter plot. The word tree is constructed according
to all combinations of words beginning with words from
the root tasting note and followed by words from the whole
group of tasting notes visualized in the scatter plot. This
means that each sequence of words speciﬁed by the word
tree exploration is contained in at least one tasting note of
the current scatter plot selection. This relation is indicated by
highlighting those tasting notes in the scatter plot (by a ﬁlled
blue circle), which contain the sequence of words construed
by the word tree (Figure 9(a)). The tool makes sure that
highlighted elements are always visible. To distinguish them,
their texts are in blue in the popup list of overlapping tasting
notes. In the given example, there is only one tasting note
that contains the sequence of words “glass, offering aromas
of ripe raspberries” and its text is in blue in the popup list,
see Figure 9(b).

(c)
Figure 6.
Vintage”.

Word frequency analysis

Screenshots of an interactive histogram for attribute “Wine

selects a word from the tag cloud visualization, all words of
the same class (i.e., with the same word tag) are highlighted
in the tag cloud together with the tag itself in the tag
checkbox panel. Figure 7(b) demonstrates this interaction
after selecting the word “Last” in text of the tasting note. On
the other hand, when a word tag is checked in the checkbox
panel (such as “DT”), then it is highlighted together with
the words corresponding to this tag in the text.
5) Sentence Structure Analysis: The basic concept and
structure of the word tree visualization was already described
in Section V-A3. Figure 8 presents an additional example
of a word tree generated by our system. The visualization
consists of three basic components: (a) a display containing
the word tree, (b) a text area presenting the text of the root
tasting note, and (c) a text area presenting the currently
constructed sequence of words. All nodes that build a path
from the root node to the currently selected node are in
focus. Selecting a node from the tree changes the focus
to the nodes contained by the path from the root to this
node. A smooth animation is used to change the state
of the tree to the newly selected focus [17]. The nodes
in focus are highlighted with another background color
and slightly enlarged. In the example, the node selected is
“raspberries”, and therefore, all nodes from the root to the

141

Figure 8. Word tree visualization consisting of three basic components. The tree node labels corresponding to words that are contained by the root tasting
note are colored in red.

(a)

Figure 10.

(b)

Software architecture of the tool.

the bar chart diagrams and the word tree [22]. The world
map visualization was created by the functionalities of the
JAVA GIS Toolkit GeoTools [23].
Scalability Issues: The selected visualization approaches are appropriate for representing large amounts of
data. From a theoretical point of view, there is almost no restriction placed upon the number of visualized tasting notes.
The scatter plot and the bar chart diagrams provide different
interaction techniques that give users the opportunity to
focus on a subset of elements for further exploration. The
tag cloud visualization represents the text of one tasting note
using different font sizes for its words. With an increase in
the number of tasting notes, the proportions between the font
sizes of the words in the visualized text will be affected – not
the number of the words. This feature makes the tag cloud
visualization even more attractive. The word tree facilitates
for users to explore the correlations beginning from a set of
visible words and proceeding with other words which appear

Figure 9. Highlighting of tasting notes in the scatter plot that contain the
currently sequence of words constructed by the word tree.

C. Implementation Aspects
The tool’s software architecture can be represented by
four logical layers as shown in Figure 10. Because the
original database containing the wine tasting notes was
created using Microsoft Access R , we also decided to use this
database management system (DBMS). The programming
language that we decided to use for the implementation
of the application is JAVA. We used four open source
JAVA libraries to implement the required functionalities. The
JDBC library was employed for establishing connectivity
between the JAVA programming language and the database
[20]. The graphical user interface was created with the aid of
the JAVA Swing Toolkit [21]. We used the Prefuse Toolkit
for the following interactive visualizations: the scatter plot,

142

containing more than 400 words, only sweet wines, only
wines from Spain, etc., in various different combinations.
The tool provides direct feedback in the form of interactive
visualizations and is immediately able to answer questions
such as: Do tasting notes have the same format across
time? Or how do wines pattern that are described with the
attribute ’sweaty saddle’? Thus it offers the possibility for
linguists to play around with the variables and get a picture
of the differences in the distribution of tasting notes in
relation to the changes we make using the different ﬁlter
settings straight away. We also obtain statistical information
related to choices that we make in the form of bar chart
diagrams and tag clouds. These functions are particularly
important for the setting of parameters more accurately and
for the subsequent formulation of new hypothesis for corpus
investigations of text.

as a result of previous choices. This approach allows the
exploration of unbounded sets of words. However, increasing
the number of tree nodes makes it more complicated to
browse through the tree and to preserve the mental map.
Because there is no upper limit for the number of tasted
wines produced in the visualized countries, the world map
is not restricted by the amount of visualized data either.
That said, our implementation currently imposes some
restrictions on the functionality of the tool. The scatter plot
together with the ﬁlters, the tag cloud visualization and the
bar chart diagrams perform well for a number of up to
3,000 tasting notes. For more elements, the tool becomes
slower and thus less interactive. One way of improving
the application’s performance is to migrate the database
to another, more efﬁcient DBMS. The current DBMS and
the database schema are in fact the main bottleneck of
our implementation. Because of the inappropriate design of
the wine database, the word tree visualization cannot be
efﬁciently built for more than 60 tasting notes. In order to
overcome this restriction, the design of the database should
be modiﬁed in such a way that it represents the tree structure
of the words in the tasting notes. The response time of the
world map view for standard user interactions takes about
six seconds, which is a relatively long time. Here, we have
to ﬁnd out whether the GeoTools Toolkit API may provide a
solution to this performance problem or if we have to move
to another library.

VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This work is concerned with various approaches for
visualizing wine tasting notes that can be used to support
linguistic analyses. Our data sources are large databases
containing tasting notes and metadata related to the wines
tasted. Linguists are interested in the language of such texts
and the possibilities offered by the language to describe
sensory perceptions to better understand descriptions of
them. The purpose of our tool was to visualize this data
in a way that would help linguists to get a better picture of
wine descriptions. All solutions presented in this paper were
carefully discussed with linguists during their development.
There are several improvements that can be made to
enhance the visualization tool for wine tasting notes. In
Subsection V-C, we discussed several problems with the
current DBMS and the database schema. An improvement
of this situation would be one of the ﬁrst candidates for the
next software revision.
Another issue would be the tag clouds that can be improved. There are function words that occur very frequently
in general language like “a”, “the”, “of”, etc. They are
visualized by the largest font sizes and therefore attract
the attention of the users from other words that are more
important and more interesting for linguistic analyses. An
obvious solution to avoid this problem would be to create
a user-deﬁned black list of words that could be disregarded
and excluded from the calculations. The tool could thereby
avoid their overestimation.
The world map visualization and its performance could
be improved too. It would be useful to add more interactive
features to the map visualization. For example, the map
could be extended by visualizing vintages, i.e., time-series
data. Another idea would be to add an interactive control
for tracing the wine production density in different countries
on the basis of the wines’ vintages. Range sliders or other
controls could be integrated to change the time period of the
data visualized on the map.

VI. R ESULTS
Our tool offers possibilities for the exploration, the analysis and the presentation of large and complex amounts of
data in ways so that linguists can make use of them in investigations of the structure of texts and discourses and of the
lexical resources that languages have for the expression of
meaning domains. Not only can visual images communicate
concrete information, but they can also represent abstract
information in the form of visual imagery, which is of
particular signiﬁcance in the case of wine descriptions of
subjective sensory modal representations, which by nature
are transitory and volatile. Through these techniques, textual
data can be visually represented at a glance and can be
interactively explored at the same time. This is clearly an
innovation in linguistic research. The most essential part
of wine descriptions is concerned with the description of
passing sensory perceptions. They are captured by our visualization approaches in the form of scatter plots, tag clouds,
word trees, and bar chart diagrams. Given the availability
of tagged corpora, dynamic visualization techniques open
up for linguistic advances through typological comparisons
across different text types, different times and different
languages. For instance, with the aid of the various ﬁlters of
metadata we can explore linguistic patterns across subsets
of tasting notes, subsets of ratings of wines, or subsets of
grapes. And we can apply ﬁlters, such as only tasting notes

143

Finally, we recognize that our visual analyses are also
related to tasks in the ﬁeld of Sentiment Analysis. It would
be very interesting to develop our tool also in this direction,
see for example the handbook chapter [24].

[11] O. Kaser and D. Lemire, “Tag-Cloud Drawing: Algorithms
for Cloud Visualization,” in Proceedings of Tagging and
Metadata for Social Information Organization (WWW ’07),
Banff, Canada, 2007.
[12] F. B. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, and J. Feinberg,
“Participatory visualization with wordle,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 15,
pp. 1137–1144, November 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2009.171

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Ilir Jusuﬁ for carefully proof-reading
the ﬁnal version of this paper.

[13] K. Koh, B. Lee, B. Kim, and J. Seo, “Maniwordle:
Providing ﬂexible control over wordle,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 16, pp.
1190–1197, November 2010. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.175

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Prangova, “Visualization of sensory perception descriptions,” Master’s thesis, Linnaeus University, School of Computer Science, Physics and Mathematics, V¨axj¨o, Sweden,
2010.
[2] C. Paradis, “A sweet nose of earth, smoke, cassis and cherries:
Descriptions of sensory perceptions in wine tasting notes,”
in Proceedings of the 7th AELCO International Conference,
Toledo, Spain, 2010.

[14] J. Stasko, C. G¨org, and Z. Liu, “Jigsaw: supporting
investigative analysis through interactive visualization,”
Information Visualization, vol. 7, pp. 118–132, April
2008. [Online]. Available: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1466620.1466622

[3] G. Morrot, F. Brochet, and D. Dubourdieu, “The color of
odors,” Brain and Language, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 309–320,
2001.

[15] B. Santorini, “Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for the penn
treebank project,” University of Pennsylvania, Department of
Computer and Information Science, Philadelphia, PA, USA,
Tech. Rep. MS-CIS-90-47, 1990, (3rd Revision).

[4] A. Kerren, “Visualization of workaday data clariﬁed by means
of wine ﬁngerprints,” in Proceedings of the INTERACT ’09
Workshop on Human Aspects of Visualization, ser. LNCS, vol.
6431. Springer, 2011, pp. 92–107.

[16] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type
taxonomy for information visualizations,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages (VL ’96), 1996,
pp. 336–343.

[5] J. C. Roberts, “Exploratory visualization with multiple linked
views,” in Exploring Geovisualization, A. MacEachren,
M.-J. Kraak, and J. Dykes, Eds. Amsterdam: Elseviers,
December 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.kent.ac.
uk/pubs/2004/1822

[17] J. Heer and S. K. Card, “Doitrees revisited: Scalable, spaceconstrained visualization of hierarchical data,” in Proceedings
of the working conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI
’04). New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 421–424.
[18] S. K. Card and D. Nation, “Degree-of-interest trees: A component of an attention-reactive user interface,” in Proceedings
of the working conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI
’02). New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 231–245.

[6] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman, “Visual information
seeking: tight coupling of dynamic query ﬁlters with
starﬁeld displays,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems: celebrating
interdependence, ser. CHI ’94. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 1994, pp. 313–317. [Online]. Available: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/191666.191775

[19] D. A. Carr, N. Jog, H. Prem Kumar, M. Teittinen, and
C. Ahlberg, “Using interaction object graphs to specify
graphical widgets,” University of Maryland, Department of
Computer Science, College Park, MD, USA, Tech. Rep. CSTR-3344, 1994.

[7] IBM Research, “Many Eyes,” http://manyeyes.alphaworks.
ibm.com/manyeyes/, 2011.

[20] Oracle, “The Java Database Connectivity,” http://java.sun.
com/products/jdbc/overview.html, 2011.

[8] M. Wattenberg and F. B. Vi´egas, “The word tree,
an interactive visual concordance,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 14, pp.
1221–1228, November 2008. [Online]. Available: http:
//portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1477066.1477418

[21] ——, “JAVA Swing Toolkit,” http://java.sun.com/docs/books/
tutorial/ui/overview/intro.html, 2011.
[22] The Berkeley Institute of Design, “Prefuse Visualization
Toolkit,” http://prefuse.org/, 2009.

[9] D. Keim and D. Oelke, “Literature Fingerprinting: A New
Method for Visual Literary Analysis,” in IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technologie, Sacramento, CA,
USA, 2007, pp. 115–122.

[23] GeoTools, “The Open Source Java GIS Toolkit,” http://www.
geotools.org/, 2010.
[24] B. Liu, “Sentiment analysis and subjectivity,” in Handbook
of Natural Language Processing, 2nd ed., N. Indurkhya and
F. J. Damerau, Eds. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2010.

[10] G. Salton and A. Singhal, “Automatic text theme generation
and the analysis of text structure,” Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, USA, Tech. Rep. TR94-1438, 1994.

144

