2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Listening to Managers:
a Study about Visualizations in Corporate Presentations
Wibke Weber, Ralph Tille
Stuttgart Media University
{weber@hdm-stuttgart.de, tille@hdm-stuttgart}
explain complex information clearly and in an
intelligible manner. They have the potential to
summarize amounts of data comprehensible, point out
causal relationships, and engage the readers by telling an
appealing story.
In media science the term “information graphic” is
defined differently. In our previous study [1] we define
information graphic (1) as a visual representation of
information or knowledge. Each graphic intends to tell a
story with one topic. The value of an information graphic
is to display complex information, which is difficult to
be told verbally, in a visual way. (2) An information
graphic is a hybrid presentation of different modalities:
Verbal elements (texts, audios, typography) and visual
elements (photos, illustrations, diagrams, maps, symbols,
icons, pictograms, videos, moving images) are
combined. A line chart or a scatter plot can be a
significant part of an information graphic, but does not
represent an information graphic by itself. (3)
Interactivity, hypertextuality, and multimedia are main
characteristics of an interactive or animated information
graphic. [cf. 1, p. 361] In the words of the information
graphic designer Alberto Cairo, “An information graphic
is an aid to thinking and understanding.” [2] An example
what we mean by information graphic is shown in Figure
1: an online information graphic published by the New
York Times with video, verbal explanations and an
exploded diagram about the oil rig Deepwater Horizon
and how the rig crew responded to the blowout [3].
What in journalism has proved to be successful
might also be an option for communication purposes in
companies and organizations. Conveying sales figures,
showing how a new technology works, communicating a
new marketing strategy, convincing stakeholders to fund
a research project – these are relevant business issues
managers have to communicate. Would an information
graphic be an appropriate visualization type in a
presentation instead of the common charts in a
PowerPoint slideshow? There is no question: The
ubiquitous tool in organizations is PowerPoint and its
templates for visualizations, e.g. pie, bar, line, area
charts, – ready-made, easy to use, and therefore well

Abstract
This paper presents a study about the use of
visualizations in corporate presentations. We
interviewed nine executive managers of a leading
technology company about how they create business
presentations for different meetings and different
audiences. Thereby, we focused on which visualization
types they normally use and whether they would accept
new forms of visualizations such as information
graphics, which are currently very popular. Due to the
explorative character of the study, we used the grounded
theory approach.
Results show that design principles or effective
visualizations are not known to the most interviewees.
The interviewees rated corporate design, use of master
layout, and templates higher than individually designed
slides. The most popular visualization types managers
use in presentations are bar and pie charts. The term
“information graphic” was not known. Our conclusion
leads to the following hypothesis: If a company wants to
change or improve its communication, it will have to
become aware of the power of visual storytelling and
start an “iconic turn”.
Keywords:
corporate presentation, business
visualization, information graphic, design process,
corporate design, visual language, visual storytelling

1. Introduction
Starting point for our research was a question of a
senior manager who wanted to know why all the
presentations in the company are so sterile, unemotional,
not appealing, overloaded with information, and
therefore difficult to understand (especially the
presentations with technical topics). He asked whether
the new visual form of information graphics he had seen
in many newspapers might be an adequate visualization
tool for presentations. Indeed, information graphics
become more and more popular. Whether printed in
newspapers, interactive on news sites, or animated on
TV – information graphics are increasingly used to
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.28

343

methodology and finally present the results followed by
a conclusion with discussion and possible future steps.

accepted as a standard for presentations [4]. On the one
hand, the vividness of an information graphic might
attract more interest than standardized PowerPoint slides
and enhance better understanding of the presented facts;
on the other hand, employing information graphics in a
business presentation might be understood as a breach of
the corporate communication standards in a company.

2. Related Work
Information graphics as defined above are
particularly employed in newspapers and news sites,
manuals, scientific literature, public relations, and in the
field of education (e.g. school books, museums).
However, information graphics in business presentations
represent a rather new form of visualizations.
For printed information graphics, we find an
extensive body of literature: from books that provide
outstanding examples and rules for designing
information graphics [5, 6, 7, 8] through to perception
and knowledge acquisition with information graphics [9].
Especially Tufte provides good examples for the
connection between visual thinking and decision-making
[10]. For interactive information graphics – a relatively
new form of visual storytelling – the research is at its
very beginning [1].
An immense body of literature deals also with the
use of PowerPoint and how to perform a first-class
presentation, but only a few studies and publications
focus on visual thinking in the business world or on
visualizations in PowerPoint presentations or on
presentations generally [4, 11, 12, 13]. Lengler and
Eppler [14] selected 100 visualization methods via five
criteria; the result shows a periodic table of visualization
methods, which gives an overview of how to choose the
appropriate method. Bertschi [15] described the
importance of visual metaphors in the field of knowledge
visualization. Burkhard [16] developed a decision
framework model with three categories to arrange the
various problems in visualizing business issues.
Bresciani and Eppler [17] have started to study the use of
qualitative information visualization in the business
world; they provide a first overview of how familiar
managers are with different visualization types.

Figure 1: The information graphic shows the
final moments of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig
and explains the disaster in the making

3. Methodology
Following up the research of Bresciani and Eppler
we wanted to investigate, which visual representations
managers currently use in corporate presentations, for
which target groups and for which purposes, and what
the design process of a corporate presentation looks like.
In addition, we wanted to gain insights about the
corporate culture, the corporate design and whether there
are constraints on the part of the company regarding
visualization types, layout and visual templates. Due to
the explorative character of our study, we chose a
qualitative research approach: the grounded theory [19].
In contrast to traditional scientific research the grounded
theory method does not start with a hypothesis, but ends
with a hypothesis developed from the collected data.

Starting from these considerations we wanted to find
out: Do managers and marketing consultants know at all
what information graphics are and what they are useful
for? What do they know about visualizations in general?
How do they employ visualizations in a presentation?
And would they be open for the new visualization type
information graphic? In order to investigate these
questions, we interviewed executive managers of a
leading technology company in Germany about the
creation process of their presentations.
In the following chapters we first link our study to
related work and former research, then we describe the

344

Strauss and Corbin describe the grounded theory as a
qualitative research method “that uses a systematic set of
procedures to develop an inductively derived grounded
theory about a phenomenon”. [19, p. 24] Important steps
of grounded theory comprise:
• Data collection directed by theoretical
samplings, which means: not representative
sampling, but „sampling on the basis of concepts
that have proven theoretical relevance to the
evolving theory”. [19, p. 176] Sampling stops only
when theoretical saturation is achieved.
• Data coding (open, axial, selective coding)
• Memo writing (written records and notes of the
researchers’ thinking about data)
• Conceptualizing and categorizing (grouping the
data into concepts and the concepts into categories)
with the aim of:
• Theory building

The following concepts have been developed from
the data: context and conditions of creating a
presentation, content and preparation, design process,
effort required for a presentation with visualizations,
types of visualizations, tools and work techniques,
corporate design and templates, corporate culture and
corporate identity, expectations of the different target
groups, consequences and suggestions by the managers.
The concepts were grouped into five more general and
abstract categories:

For the data collection process we conducted socalled expert interviews in a leading technology
company in Germany, which has more than 250.000
employees and is a global supplier for automotive and
industrial technology. We interviewed nine experts
chosen by the company: top managers (development
managers, heads of department, sales managers,
marketing managers) who regularly have to prepare
presentations for strategy meetings, board meetings, and
customer presentations. The interviews were based on an
interview guide specially developed for the research
questions of our study. We focused on four main aspects
in terms of company presentations: (1) content and target
groups, (2) design process, (3) corporate culture and
corporate design, (4) employment of visualizations and
acceptance of new visualization types such as
information graphics. The questions were asked openended, that means, the interviewees could not answer
with a simple “yes” or “no”. Each interview took about
one hour and was recorded as audio file. Afterwards the
interviews were transcribed, anonymized, and
qualitatively evaluated with the grounded theory method.
We analyzed the data during the whole research process
by constantly comparing one interview to another,
identifying concepts on different levels of abstraction
and integrating the concepts into categories (Figure 2).

1.

Conditions of creating presentations

2.

Target groups

3.

Design process

4.

Corporate identity

5.

Visualizations

These categories and their relationship with each
other form the basis to develop a hypothesis about
managers’ visual literacy and the visual language in a
company.

4. Results
The five categories as described and sketched above
display the results of the study: They summarize what
managers know about visualizations and how they deal
with them in presentations.
Figure 2: Data coding of the interviews
according to the grounded theory method

345

use only those visual representations they are familiar
with (e.g. pie, bar, line charts). Consequently they run
the risk that all their PowerPoint presentations look
similar and boring.
Another crucial factor that has much impact on the
design process are the many templates predefined by the
company and the master layout with the corporate design
elements. Design guidelines, master layout and templates
were assessed differently. On one side, the interviewees
appreciate a standardized design of the slides, because in
a global acting company a uniform design fosters the
corporate identity; in addition, one interviewee
mentioned that the templates support her in creating
slides. On the other side, the managers feel overwhelmed
by so many templates. They do not have the time to
check over 250 templates for selecting an adequate
visualization type, nor do they know every visualization
type and its usefulness. In the managers’ opinion,
templates and the “overproduced” master layout cost a
lot of time, because they have to adjust pictures and
diagrams, correct typography to get the same font on
every slide, they have to choose the right colors and to
align headlines and subheadings (in case of copy and
paste to transfer text or data from an old slide to a new
one). An interviewee stated, “With all these adjustments
I waste a lot of time.” That is why most interviewees
deem templates and master layout less efficient.
Moreover, the interviewees regard the templates as a
strict limitation in terms of presentations, because (1)
especially external target groups (e.g. customers)
demand for a custom-tailored slide show, (2) the
employees do not feel encouraged by the company to
visualize or present in other ways or to try something
new.

4.1 Conditions for Creating Presentations
Creating presentations belongs to the main tasks of
the interviewed persons. They often have to present for
different target groups, in different settings, at different
levels. All interviewees emphasize that they attach great
importance to presentations, particularly for crucial
meetings such as strategy meetings. For these crucial
meetings they calculate enough time and invest a lot of
diligence in the preparation of their PowerPoint
slideshow starting several months before up to six
months. One manager said, “The higher a meeting is
ranked the more time the preparation takes. Sometimes,
the slides are fine-tuned and refined again and again.”
Even though managers often start their presentations
with a sketch on paper, all interviewees agreed that
PowerPoint is the undisputed tool for running a
presentation. Furthermore, the corporate communication
department has created over 250 templates for
presentations and visualizations to ensure the corporate
design of the company. A problem mentioned in the
interviews is the time management – not to prepare a
presentation, but to present a compelling story in a few
slides. Often the managers underestimate how much time
their presentations will take, and after a long introduction
they have to run through the slides and miss the main
point of the story.

4.2 Target Groups
The target groups differ in internal and external
target groups. Every target group determines the content,
the objectives, and the style of a presentation. Whereas in
external customer presentations the managers want to
show a high performance and competence and endeavor
to convey their message emotionally und attractively as
much as possible, the internal presentations require a
rational and unemotional style. The heterogeneity of the
target groups makes it so difficult for managers to use
the same templates and the same visualizations in
different settings and to engage the audience by
presenting the suitable topics and facts. Custom-tailored
or standardized slides? This question remains unsolved
for the interviewees.

4.4 Corporate Identity
Most interviewees believe that the heads of
department and the board of directors expect
presentations according to the corporate guidelines. That
means: avoid emotions, present in an objective style,
fact-orientated, try to communicate concisely in only a
few slides. It seems that for the managers it is more
important to give a short presentation than to look what
the data or the content requires. That implicates that the
managers overload a minimum of slides with a
maximum of text, figures, and facts. In the interviews we
also received the impression that the managers value the
corporate design (CD), the use of master layout and the
templates (given by the company) higher than
individually designed slides. A manager said, “Slides
that are too much elaborated could be regarded as
negative.”

4.3 Design Process
Design principles or rules for making good design or
effective visualizations are not known to the most
interviewees. They decide on the basis of a gut feeling:
“looks good or I don’t like it”. Admittedly, the company
offers trainings for effective business presentations, but
those trainings do not address visualizations or how to
convey ideas with pictures.
One important factor for the design process is
efficiency. The interviewed persons told that as often as
possible they reuse and adjust their “old” slides to
accelerate the design process. They consider this strategy
as efficient. The disadvantage of the strategy is that they

4.5 Visualizations
The most popular visualization types the interviewed
managers use in presentations are bar and column charts,

346

like, especially when the target group belongs to the top
management of an organization. PowerPoint, master
layout built on the corporate design guidelines of the
company, and templates for diagrams are the default
basis for every presentation – this fact is not questioned
by the managers; other visual forms like information
graphics, animated graphics, visual metaphors do not
seem to play a significant role. Managers, who often
have to present, perceive templates, master layout and
corporate design more as a corset that constricts visual
thinking than a support to create slides and convey the
message efficiently. This corresponds to Tufte’s
statement that the PowerPoint design style “uses only
about 40% to 60% of the space available on a slide to
show unique content, with all remaining space devoted to
Phluff, bullets, frames and branding” [4, p. 15]; the result
is that all presentations look similar and boring.
The reason for that might be that the adherence to
corporate design and predefined visualization templates
is regarded as a more successful strategy in business
meetings than to present unconventional and individually
designed visualization types such as information
graphics.
We assume that in organizations only little
awareness of visual storytelling exists; the power of
visual representations to convey a message is unknown
or even ignored as well as the correct usage of visuals
and design principles. Therefore, our hypothesis based on
the study is: If a company wants to change or improve its
presentation culture, it will have to start an “iconic turn”.
That means: to foster all aspects of visual thinking and to
develop a visual corporate language, which includes not
only a style guide for the corporate design (e.g. logo), but
also how to communicate a story or a message visually.
A first step towards this “iconic turn” could be a manual
with guiding principles for visuals (e.g. charts, graphs,
illustrations,
photographs,
information
graphics,
animations, videos); in addition an organization should
have an interest in improving the visual literacy of the
employees, regardless of their profession. A second step
might be to discuss and relax the corporate design
restrictions. A helpful tool would be a digital asset
management, as proposed by the interviewees.

and for marketing purposes pie charts. In addition, the
managers also employ maps (to depict the sites of the
company), tables, roadmaps, and technical drawings.
“We use the things we are familiar with and we can
master” – this statement was confirmed in all interviews.
The managers do not know very well the usefulness of
the different visual forms. A manager admitted,
“Sometimes we use trial and error to find out what visual
form fits best.” The interviewees are not aware either of
the strength and weakness of the visual presentations or
the wide range of visualization types.
Surprisingly, the interviewees express that they
would like to use more photos, illustrations, animations,
and videos, particularly for sales presentations. However,
for these visualization types the company offers no
templates, image database or digital asset management,
what would be appreciated by the interviewees. As a
consequence the presenters would have to search for
photos or produce videos and animations by themselves,
and this would cost a lot of time they do not have.
When we asked about information graphics the
interviewed persons did not know what we mean by this;
the term was unknown. It was only when we showed
examples of information graphics that they recognized
this visualization type they have already seen in
newspapers. However, information graphics would be a
new visual form, the employment of information
graphics in a presentation was deemed positive due to the
power of an information graphic: to explain complex
things in a simple and compelling way. In contrast, the
acceptance for information graphics in presentation was
evaluated differently: from “too cheerful, not factual
enough” through to “why not”. The interviewees view
information graphics as an appropriate visual form for
marketing or customer presentations; however, in
internal business meetings they would not risk to use this
visual form. Since the company itself does not have the
capability to develop information graphics in-house, the
effort to produce an information graphic by an external
agency would be too high.
In sum, the interviewed persons prefer vivid
visualizations to those, which are less abstract, sterile,
and unemotional. They would like to shape presentations
along attractive stories to improve emotional appeal and
the impact of visualizations.

5. Conclusion and Future Work
4.6 Hypothesis

Whereas in newspapers and on the Web information
graphics and visualizations play an important role
meanwhile, in the business world the visual
communication is at its very beginning. Whereas
journalists try to tell a story verbally and visually,
organizations still seem to focus on text and corporate
design. The “iconic turn” [18] that is taking place in the
world of media convergence has not yet arrived in the
world of corporate communications, particularly in the
internal communication (e.g. business presentations).
Managers would highly appreciate to communicate their

“What are the causes of the dreaded Engineering by
PowerPoint?” Tufte asks and surmises among other
things, “Designer guidelines and bureaucratic norms that
insist on PP for all presentations regardless of content?”
[4, p. 28]. Our results seem to confirm Tufte’s surmise.
The relations between the five categories (1)
conditions of creating presentations, (2) target groups,
(3) design process, (4) corporate identity, and (5)
visualization lead to the following theses: Organizations
have an (unwritten) code how a presentation should look

347

messages via more attractive visual forms such as
information graphics, animated graphics, or videos. But
for this, the communication culture of an organization
has to change, and the attitude towards visualizations that
are unusual in the managerial world, too. Similar to the
corporate language, which refers to the verbal
communication, a company should develop a visual
corporate language, that means: to develop guiding
principles how to use visuals, namely not only business
charts, but also visual representations that might be
unusual for the managerial world, e.g. information
graphics or animations – with the aim to enrich corporate
identity. That is a qualitative conclusion of our study in
terms of the company that has been investigated.
A quantitative conclusion cannot be drawn. Since
our study had an explorative character, we decided for
the grounded theory approach. The grounded theory
approach always generates only qualitative data, not
quantitative. That is a limitation of our study. Another
critical question concerning the grounded theory
approach is: When is the theoretical sampling finished?
According to Strauss and Corbin “sampling continues
until theoretical saturation of categories is achieved” [19,
p. 193]; that is the point where new data from further
interviews has no more implications for the theory. Even
though the number of the interviews in our study might
seem very small, we received the impression that the
theoretical saturation was achieved by nine interviews.
To ensure the point of theoretical saturation we evaluated
the interviews independently from each other,
reexamined the interview guide and discussed our
insights and memos constantly in order to develop
concepts, categories and finally formulate the hypothesis.
We consider our hypothesis as a useful step for
further research. In order to verify our hypothesis, more
studies in different companies, different branches, and
different countries (cultures) should be carried out. This
could also be done in the form of quantitative studies
with questionnaires. Additionally, we would like to
interview the external and internal target groups,
especially the different departments and different levels
of corporate hierarchy (e.g. board of directors), how they
perceive visualizations in corporate presentations. A
further step would be to analyze the visual language in
corporate publishing (e.g. custom media, employee
magazines) to find out whether the trend of information
graphics has already reached the world of corporate
communication – whether in printed form, animated, or
as an interactive visualization.

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

6. References
[1]

[2]

M. Burmester, M. Mast, R. Tille, W. Weber. How Users
Perceive and Use Interactive Information Graphics: an
Exploratory Study. In: IEEE Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference Information Visualization (IV 10).
London 2010. 361-368.
N. Paul, L. Ruel. Animated infographics and online
storytelling: Words form the wise. (An interview with

Alberto Cairo, May 23, 2007).
http://www.ojr.org/
ojr/stories/070523ruel/ (retrieved Feb 25, 2011).
How the Rig Crew Responded to the Blowout.
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/12/26/us/2010122
6-deepwater-horizon-rig-video-diagram.html?ref=
multimedia, retrieved Feb 19, 2011). Interactive Feature.
E. R. Tufte. The Cognitive Style of Power Point. Cheshire,
CT, Graphics Press. 2003.
E. R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press. 1990.
P. Wildbur, M. Burke. Information Graphics. Mainz:
Schmidt. 1998.
D. M. Wong: The Wall Street Journal Guide to Information
Graphics: The Dos and Don'ts of Presenting Data, Facts, and
Figures. New York, Norton. 2010.
A. Cairo. Infografía 2.0. Visualización interactive de
información en la prensa. Madrid, Alamut. 2008.
K. Foster, S. Stiermling, T. Knieper: Wissensvermittlung
durch animierte Infographiken: Ein Experiment. In: C.
Thimm (Hrsg.): Netz-Bildung. Frankfurt a. M., Peter Lang.
2005. 75-100.
E. R. Tufte. Visual Explanations. Cheshire, CT, Graphics
Press. 1997.
S. Kernbach, M. J. Eppler. The use of visualization in the
context of business strategies. In: IEEE Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Information Visualization
IV10. London. 349-354.
N. H. Lurie, C.H. Mason. Visual Representation:
Implications for Decision Making. Journal of Marketing, 71
(January). 160-177. 2007.
M. J. Eppler, K. Platts. Classifying visualization methods for
management: results of card sorting experiments with
managers and students. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Information Visualization: IEEE Press, 2007.
IV07. – Zürich. 335-341.
R. Lengler, M. J. Eppler. Towards a Periodic Table of
Visualization Methods for Management. In: Proceedings of
the IASTED International Conference on Graphics and
Visualization in Engineering. ACTA Press. Anaheim, CA.
2007. 1-6.
S. Bertschi. Linguistic Learning. A New Conceptual Focus
in Knowledge Visualization. In: Proceedings of the Ninth
International Conference on Information Visualisation. Los
Alamitos, CA. IEEE Computer Society Press, London. 2005.
383-389.
R. Burkhard. Visual Knowledge Transfer between Planners
and Business Decision Makers. In: Van Leeuwen, J. P.
(Hrsg.) ; Timmermans, H. J. P. (Hrsg.): Developments in
Design & Decision Support Systems in Architecture and
Urban Planning. Eindhoven: Eindhoven University of
Technology, 2004.
S. Bresciani, M. J. Eppler. Choosing Knowledge
Visualizations to Augment Cognition: the Manager's View
in. In: Banissi, E. et al. (Eds.): IEEE Proceedings of the
International Conference on Information Visualization IV10.
London. 355-360.
G. Boehm (Hrsg.). Was ist ein Bild? München, Fink. 1994
A. Strauss, J. Corbin. Basics of Qualitative Research.
Grounded Theory, Procedures and Techniques. Newbury
Park, CA, Sage. 1990.

7. Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the research assistants Daniela Vey
and Nadine Draksler for their support in carrying out this study.

348

