2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

The Effectiveness of Knowledge Visualization for Organizational Communication
in Europe and India
Sabrina Bresciani1, Martin Eppler2, Asha Kaul3, Riina Ylinen4
1
Università della Svizzera italiana (Switzerland), 2University of St. Gallen (Switzerland),
3
Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, (India), 4Aalto University (Finland)
{1bresciani.sabrina@gmail.com, 2mjeppler@gmail.com,
3
ashakaul@iimahd.ernet.in, 4riina.ylinen@aalto.fi}
Abstract

successful cases, as well as classifications and
conceptualizations of these phenomena. At this stage of
development of the field we identify the need to provide
a testing of the observed benefits of visualization through
rigorous empirical studies.
Thus we have set up and conducted a controlled
experiment in which we have assessed the effects of
knowledge visualization compared to text. As a specific
application context for the study we have selected a
common and often problematic communication task in
organizations: the communication of a company’s
strategy [6].
The second aim of the study is to evaluate if the
effect of knowledge visualization is universal or
dependent on a specific cultural background. While Asia
is gaining more and more relevance in the economic
sphere, it is not clear if communication messages created
in the Western world are equally effective in Asia, or
vice versa.
Visualization is often conceived as a universal
language, globally understood and able to overcome
language barriers. Yet there is evidence that cultural
differences in thought patterns can affect the reception of
any kind of communication, including visual messages
[7]. Based on theories of cultural differences in views of
the world between Westerners and Asians [8-9] we have
developed two different visualizations, of which one is
more suitable for Westerners and one more suitable for
Asians.
We have conducted an experiment with three
conditions: a control condition with text and two
treatment conditions with knowledge visualization types
suitable for Westerners (a linear diagram) and Asians (a
holistic visual metaphor), respectively. We have
replicated the experiment in two very different cultural
contexts, Europe and India. The results show that
knowledge visualization has a significant positive effect
on the attitude towards the content, compared to text,
across the two cultures. Second, we find confirmation of
cultural preferences for different visualization types
(diagrammatic and metaphorical), as predicted by theory.

In recent years we are witnessing a growing interest
and use of knowledge visualization for communicating
ideas and insights. Companies are deploying diagrams
and knowledge maps to convey crucial business
concepts. Scholars are reporting successful company
cases, theorizing on the topic and compiling
classifications and best practices. Yet few studies have
attempted to prove the effectiveness of visualization, nor
have they based their hypotheses on theories with
predictive power. We aim to provide a contribution for
the advancement of the field of knowledge visualization
by testing the effects of different visualizations on the
attitude toward its content. Second, we assess if
visualization effectiveness is universal or culturallybounded. We have conducted an experimental study,
comparing text and two knowledge visualization types.
The results of 231 subjects in Europe and India
demonstrate that knowledge visualization has the power
to increase the effectives of the message compared to
text, and that these benefits replicate across different
cultures.

Keywords--- Knowledge visualization, business
communication, attitude, cross-cultural experiment,
India, strategy communication.

1. Introduction
With this study we aim to provide a contribution
toward the understanding of the effects of knowledge
visualization for organizational communication. We
observe a general trend in organizations toward an
increasing use of visualization for communicating
knowledge. The benefits of visualization are extensively
discussed in various academic fields, ranging from
psychology [1] to education [2], and business [3-4] to
logical reasoning [5]. Academic studies specifically in
knowledge visualization have provided descriptions of
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.29

365

These results demonstrate that a suitable knowledge
visualization has the power to improve the
communication of business concepts, such as a strategy.
Organizations can therefore deploy knowledge
visualization for improving the effectiveness of their
strategy communication.
The novelty of this study is to be found in the
development of a model based on solid theories and on a
rigorous theory testing process. Although conceptual
visualization is commonly considered helpful for
improving communication, and several studies and
speculated on its usefulness and possible reasons, very
few studies have thus far measured the truth of these
claims and the extent of the effects. This paper provides
a first demonstration of the actual positive effects of
knowledge visualization.
In the following sections, we provide a review of the
relevant literature, followed by a description of the
experimental methodology employed, sample description
and results. In the fifth section implications for theory
and practice are given and in the conclusion we consider
the limitations of the study and provide suggestions for
future research directions.

level, cultural background can affect thought patterns.
The concept of the Geography of Thought, developed by
Nisbett [9] and in line with previous studies [7], suggests
that Westerners are more comfortable with an analytic
and liner reasoning style, while Asians prefer storytelling
and holistic reasoning. Specifically for the context of
Europe and India, it has been proposed [8] that the
differences we observe today in behavior and
communication style can be traced back to differences in
Mythical heroes of India over two thousand years ago
(i.e., Ram) and in ancient Greece (i.e., Achilles). Hence,
the interpretation of visual metaphors and analogies are
likely to be shaped by exposure to diverse traditions and
educational systems of these two cultural regions.

3. Methodology
3.1. Experiment Design
To address the proposed research question of
demonstrating if knowledge visualization leads to more
positive results (in terms of its perception) than textual
communication, we have set up a controlled experiment.
This methodology is considered the most appropriate for
our aim of conducting theory testing and be able to
generalize on the findings. The application context is the
communication of a business strategy. A typical
company strategy in text format is compared to visual
formats of the same content, displayed on a letter-sized
paper. As reviewed in the previous section, visualization
can affect people’s cognitive and emotional response to
content: the dependent variables of the study are thus the
cognitive and emotional response toward the content of
the strategy, assessed through scales of 3 items each and
collected via a questionnaire.
The second aim of the study is to assess if there are
cross-cultural differences in the reception of
visualization in Europe and India. Thus, based on the
theoretical background discussed in the previous section,
two types of knowledge visualizations have been
developed: One which is most suitable for Westerners
(emphasizing linear and analytical thinking), and one
which is suitable for Asians (emphasizing storytelling
and holistic thinking). The selection of these graphic
formats is a somewhat arbitrary process due to the lack
of specific and concrete guidelines. The authors have
analyzed existing literature and business practices for
strategy communication, and have brainstormed with
researchers in Europe and Asia to develop culturally
appropriate visualizations. The outcome of this process is
the selection of the ‘timeline’ as possibly the most
appropriate strategy representation for Westerners [16],
and of the ‘mountain trail’ visual metaphor for Asians
[17].
The mountain metaphor carries the meaning of
adventure and goal of reaching the peak in both cultures.
It emphasizes a holistic cognitive process and
metaphorical associations, thus we hypothesize that its
effect is stronger in Asia, where it can also be associated
with pilgrimage to holy places which are often located at

2. Selective Literature Review
Visualizing knowledge means mapping concepts
graphically, by structuring text and visuals in a
meaningful way. Visualizations are used in organizations
for enhancing both the cognitive and emotional response
to the presented content.
Scholars in various fields [1-5, 10] posit that when
visual representations are used, cognitive abilities are
enhanced, thanks to the ability of visualization to
structure information [11] and to “reduce cognitive load,
enhance representation of relationships among complex
constructs, provide multiple retrieval paths for accessing
knowledge” [2: page 71]. Second, visualization can
affect the emotional response by creating involvement
[12] and engaging employees [13].
As the world is becoming more and more flat [14],
companies are expanding worldwide and conducting
business across national borders. Thus they have an ever
increasing need to communicate to employees of
different cultures. Visual representation can be
particularly helpful for conveying information across
cultures, for its inherent ability to be understood despite
language differences. Well known examples are the
pictograms found in airports or used at the Olympic
Games. Knowledge visualization can provide further
benefits for conveying knowledge across cultures, as it
can lower the ambiguity of verbal and written
communication by making concepts more tangible and
concrete.
Yet, cultural differences in traditions and
conventions can affect the interpretation of visual
representations, as for instance in the meaning of colors,
the understanding of symbols and metaphors (for an
extensive review and references see [15]). On a deeper

366

the top of mountains. Pilgrimages are collective
experiences, which emphasize the sense of traveling
together to a holy destination and supporting each other;
each “stop” along the way is not only a means to an end,
but an important experience in itself.

The timeline is a rather standard visual format with
time depicted on the x axes, from left to right in both
cultural regions. It is an abstract and analytic
visualization, hence we hypothesize that it is more
suitable for westerners which prefer systematic and
analytic thinking.

Figure 2 Treatment Condition: Timeline

Figure 1 Control Condition: Textual

Figure 3 Treatment Condition: Visual Metaphor

367

The experiment is a 3-condition between-subjects
design. We compare three formats of the strategy, with
exactly the same content in terms of words: (1) a control
condition with bullet-points on a PowerPoint slide,
simulating the usual format for communicating a strategy
in an organization (Figure 1), to (2) a treatment condition
with a sequential diagram in the form of a timeline
(Figure 2), and (3) a treatment condition with a visual
metaphor in the form of a mountain trail (Figure 3). It
should be emphasized that the content remains exactly
the same across the three conditions, and that the
difference is found in the inclusion of the background
images for the treatment conditions, and – accordingly –
the mapping of the content on the page.

Cronbach's Alpha of .736, and the emotional response
scale gives a Cronbach's Alpha of .876, hence both
values are well above the recommended threshold (of .6).
The mean of the experiment results are reported in
Table 1, with Standard Deviation values (S.D.). A visual
representation of the results is reported in Figure 4 for
the cognitive response and in Figure 5 for the emotional
response.

Control:
Europe
India
Timeline:
Europe
India
Metaphor:
Europe
India

3.2. Procedure
The subjects have been randomly assigned to one of
the three conditions, as suitable in controlled experiment,
for having a random distribution of subjects’
characteristics [18]. Each participant has received one of
the three representations of the strategy (on a color lettersize paper sheet) and a questionnaire. Subjects have been
given instructions to read the strategy carefully and
answer the questions in the given order. In the
questionnaire they have been asked about the dependent
variables of cognitive and emotional response through
self-developed scales of three items each, rated on 7
point Likert scales. They have also been asked to explain
their understanding of the represented strategy. We have
also
included
questions
regarding
potentially
confounding variables, i.e. demographic characteristic,
familiarity with the topic and with the representation etc.,
and about their cultural background for manipulation
checking.

Cognitive Response
Mean
(S.D)

Emotional Response
Mean
(S.D)

3.84
4.48

1.34
1.14

2.80
4.01

1.08
1.24

5.12
4.97

1.21
1.01

4.17
4.11

1.14
1.16

4.56
5.24

1.06
1.03

3.96
4.94

1.26
1.06

Table 1 Experiment Results: Means by
Treatment Condition
A first inspection of the results already suggests that
the data follow the direction hypothesized, with the
treatment conditions having higher values than the
textual condition, in both cultures. To test the
significance of these differences, Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) is performed, with planned comparison
contrasting the control condition to each of the two
(visual) treatment conditions.
For both the European and Indian sample ANOVA
indicates a significant positive value for the cognitive
(p<.5) and for the emotional response (p<.5). This means
that the treatment has a significant positive effect
compared to the control condition on the cognitive
response toward the content: the subjects judge the
strategy as more convincing (i.e. “This strategy makes
sense”) when it is conveyed with the visual
representations. Subjects also have a more positive
attitude toward the strategy (i.e. “This strategy is
engaging”) when it is conveyed with the visualizations,
compared to when it is conveyed with text.
In particular, contrasting the effects of the two visual
representations, European subjects have more positive
responses when exposed to the timeline linear diagram
compared to the mountain metaphor, while Indians have
more positive responses when exposed to the mountain
visual metaphor compared to the timeline diagram.
These results confirm both hypotheses of the study:
communicating a business strategy with knowledge
visualization, compared to text, has a significant positive
impact on the cognitive and on the emotional response of
the subjects. Secondly, there is evidence of cultural
difference in the preferences for different visualizations.
As predicted by theory, the European sample has more
positive results with the timeline, while the Indian
sample displays more positive results with the visual
metaphor.

4. Results
4.1. Sample Description
The subjects who have participated in the
experiment are 231 graduate students with work
experience, attending management courses in Europe
(N=87) and in India (N=144). All the subjects are
enrolled in programs held in English.
The median age is 24, and they have 3 years of work
experience (median); 164 are males and 67 are females.
Sample characteristics are fairly distributed across
cultures.

4.2. Analysis
First, a principal component analysis (p.c.a.) is
conducted on the scales of cognitive and emotional
response, which are composed of 3 items each. The p.c.a.
results are satisfactory, with all items loading on the
expected factors, and having factors loadings above the
recommended value of .6. Then reliability analysis is
performed: the cognitive response scale returns a

368

and emotionally. These results confirm the theoretical
work reviewed in the second section, as expressed by [1,
4, 5, 12, 13], and it is innovative as it provides a testing
of the theories with rigorous assessment. Furthermore it
successfully combines different and complementary
theoretical perspectives: this study provides innovative
insights by extending the concept of the Geography of
Thought [9] and of cross-cultural mythology [8] and
philosophy [19] to knowledge visualization. It is the first
study of this kind, at best of our knowledge. The study
also shows that the positive effect of visualization is
found across cultures, but that there are cultural
preferences for certain types of visualizations. Hence
when a culturally appropriate visualization is employed,
the advantages of knowledge visualization can be
enhanced.

5.2. Practical Implications
Organizational communication has the power to
attract and solicit compliance from employees at all
rungs, provided it is well communicated. Increasing
business opportunities across countries and cultures has
created a need for communicating strategy in different
languages and formats. While the overarching goal
remains the same, the mode for communication is often
given a local hue for easy and quick comprehension and
implementation. Organizations can, to their advantage,
exploit the benefit of visual representation for sustained
and improved communication of information and
insights across cultures. This study shows that
visualizing knowledge is a very effective way to
communicate, with the potential to secure the attention
and buy-in of employees toward the content, for
example a company’s strategy. These positive effects are
found across cultures; therefore companies that operate
internationally can safely deploy visualization with a
changed patterning for maximum effect in Western
countries and Asia. However, for enhancing the effect of
the communication, they should use visual
representations which are specifically adapted to the
local culture. In particular, when communicating
strategic goals to Europeans, a sequential and abstract
diagram, as for example the timeline, might be suitable.
When communicating to Indians, a holistic and
metaphorical representation, as for example a mountain
trail metaphor, seems more appropriate.
In addition, this study provides first rigorous
empirical evidence regarding the potential advantages of
knowledge visualization – specifically in the form of
timeline and mountain visual metaphor – compared to
text alone (of the same content) for communicating
strategy. Thus organization can exploit knowledge
visualization to potentially improve the response to their
strategy communication programs and organization’s
change management. The commitment of employees to
implement the strategy and their buy-in is fundamental
for the strategy success. Several scholars [3, 6] have
mentioned communication as the number one cause of
failure of strategy implementation.

Figure 4 Results: Cognitive Response

Figure 5 Results: Emotional Response

5. Implications
5.1. Theoretical Implications
The results of the study indicate that knowledge
visualization can have a positive impact on the emotional
and cognitive response toward the content of a message,
compared to text. Implications of these findings are
relevant on a theoretical level as they show that
visualization is not a mere “nice to have” or decorative
element in communicating and conveying knowledge,
but truly makes a substantial difference, improving the
attitude of the reader toward the content, both cognitively

369

This study shows that knowledge visualization can
offer an effective and easy to implement tool for
organizations:
creating
a
suitable
conceptual
visualizations (as Figure 2-3) requires a very small effort,
and can substantially improve employees attitude toward
the strategy: the return on investment (for creating the
visualization) is thus very high.
The results suggest that the rare use of visualization
nowadays in business communication might be a missed
opportunity for organizations, as they are not exploiting
the full potential of communication tools available.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

6. Limitations and Conclusion
[5]

This study has limitations typical of experimental
works: by emphasizing internal validity and rigorous
evaluation, the experimental task is somewhat artificial,
and therefore has problems regarding external validity.
Futures studies could address the issue for instance by
conducting the study in a real organizational setting. A
second limitation regards the choice of the experimental
treatments: due to the lack of guidelines for designing
and selective effective visualizations for specific tasks
and cultures, the choice of the visual representations was
somewhat arbitrary. The translation of theories of crosscultural psychology and anthropology to specific
visualization forms is not free of problems. We would
like to encourage more research in this direction, given
the pragmatic relevance and the corresponding scarce
amount of guidelines on the topic.
Only one type of textual representation, in the form
of bullet points, has been tested. This format was
selected to be able to have the exact content in the same
form for all three conditions. Similarly, other
visualization types might lead to different results. We
have limited the number of conditions to three, in order
to be able to have an adequate number of subjects per
condition and thus make it likely to have sufficient
statistical power to be able to generalize the findings.
Further research is needed to understand how different
textual and visual formats affect the results.
In this study we have hypothesized and
demonstrated that knowledge visualization can have a
significant positive impact, compared to text, on the
cognitive and emotional response of the subjects toward
the presented content. The results show that theories of
cross-cultural differences in reasoning patterns apply as
well to conceptual visual representations. We find that
visualization is more effective than text across cultures
(specifically Europe and India), and when a culturally
appropriate visualization is deployed, its perception can
be improved.

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

370

B. Tversky. Visuospatial reasoning. In: K. Holyoak and
R. Morrison (Eds.), Handbook of Reasoning. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 209-249. 2005.
A.M. O’Donnell, D.F. Dansereau and R.H. Hall.
Knowledge Maps as Scaffolds for Cognitive Processing.
Educational Psychology Review. 14 (1), 71-86. 2002.
H. Mintzberg. Strategic Thinking as "Seeing". In: H.
Mintzberg, B. Ahlstrand and L. Lampel (Eds.) Strategy
Bites Back. London: Financial Times Prentice Hall, pp.
133-138. 2005.
M.J. Eppler and R.A. Burkhard. Visual Representations
in Knowledge Management: Framework and Cases.
Journal of Knowledge Management, 4 (11), 112-122.
2007.
J.H. Larkin and H. Simon. Why a Diagram is
(Sometimes) Worth Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99. 1987.
L.D. Alexander. Successfully Implementing Strategic
Decisions. Long Range Planning, 18: 91-97. 1985.
M.H. Segall, D.T. Campbell and M.J. Herskovits. The
Influence of Culture on Visual Perception. Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill Co. 1966.
D. Pattanaik. Myth = Mithya A Handbook of Hindu
Mythology. Penguin. 2008.
R.E. Nisbett. The Geography of Thought. Bookwell:
New York. 2003.
A. Okada, S. Buckingham Shum and T. Sherborne
(Eds.). Knowledge Cartography. Software Tools and
Mapping Techniques. London: Springer. 2008.
D.D. Suthers and C. Hundhausen. An empirical study of
the effects of representational guidance on collaborative
learning. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12(2): 183219. 2003.
T. Buzan. The Mind Map Book: How to Use Radiant
Thinking to Maximize Your Brain's Untapped Potential.
Plume. 1996.
A.S. Huff. Mapping Strategic Thought. Chichester, New
York: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 1990.
T.L. Friedman. The World is Flat. London: Penguin
Books. 2006.
S. Bresciani and M.J. Eppler, M.J. Glocalizing Visual
Communication in Organizations. In: B. Bertagni, M. La
Rosa M. and F. Salvetti (Eds.), Glocal working. Milan:
Franco Angeli, pp. 233-251. 2010.
E.K. Yakura. Charting Time: Timelines as Temporal
Boundary Objects. Academy of Management Journal; 45
(5), 956-970. 2002.
M. Useem, J. Useem and P. Asel. Upward Bound: Nine
Original Accounts of How Business Leaders Reached
Their Summits. Crown Business. 2003.
D.T. Campbell and C.J. Stanley. Experimental and
quasi-experimental design for research. Chicago, USA:
Rand McNally College Pub. Co. 1966.
E. Holenstein. Philosophie-Atlas: Orte und Wege des
Denkens. Zürich: Ammann. 2004.

