2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Evaluation of Parallel Coordinates for Interactive Alarm Filtering
Saad Bin Azhar and Mikko J. Rissanen
Industrial Software Systems
ABB Corporate Research
V¨aster˙as, Sweden
Email: {saad.azhar, mikko.rissanen}@se.abb.com
consolidated view of the alarms, they do not have a sense
of trend or correlation in the alarms’ data.
There are a high volume of alarms in today’s industrial
processes which have to be analyzed in order to identify
patterns in these processes and especially anomalies in them.
Alarms must be visualized in a manner which indicates
problems by means of pointing out temporal as well as
other non-temporal parameters of these alarms. Interesting
patterns can be identiﬁed if the different parameters can be
compared together to ﬁnd correlations in the alarm data. A
visualization technique which supports this kind of visual
analysis of data are the Parallel Coordinates [2], [3].
This study focuses on the use of Parallel Coordinates
for alarm management. The objective was to ﬁnd results
which either reject or support the use of interactive Parallel
Coordinates as an effective, efﬁcient and intuitive visualization method for analysis of alarm data. Two visualizations
namely, Alarm List and Parallel Coordinates were evaluated
to see if use of one method is advantageous over the other.

Abstract—Alarm management is a crucial part of many
industrial systems used in generation, transmission and distribution of electric power as well as in production processes,
for example in steel mills and oil reﬁneries. Filtering of
important alarms from unessential alarms is a critical task
for operators of such systems, since failures may result in
severe abnormal situations such as plant shutdowns. Currently,
alarm ﬁltering tasks are performed with alarm lists that
offer limited interactivity. We evaluated an application of
Parallel Coordinates for interactive ﬁltering of alarm data by
comparing its user performance against typical alarm lists.
Statistical results demonstrate marginally signiﬁcant evidence
(p<0.1) for easy and moderate tasks while there is a highly
signiﬁcant evidence (p<0.01) for difﬁcult tasks that Parallel
Coordinates reduce alarm ﬁltering time. Furthermore, Parallel
Coordinates were found to reduce human mistakes.
Keywords-Evaluation; Parallel Coordinates; Alarm Management;

I. I NTRODUCTION
Industrial processes or automation systems for utilities
like electricity, gas, and heating or production plants for
paper, steel and chemicals run into numerous abnormal
situations every day. These abnormal situations have to be
rectiﬁed for reliable and non-disruptive operation of utilities
and production processes. An abnormal situation in such
industrial applications is reported as ”Alarms” which are
information about the upset or abnormal conditions in the
process. Alarms contain information such as the place the
alarm occurred - a device or section of the plant - the
description of the alarm - the actual problem - and other
parameters like priority, category and time of occurrence.
Alarm management is the core of such industrial applications. Good alarm management is the key to ensuring safe
and normal operations. Over time, processes and requirements in the industry change, this can result in alarms that
have never been seen before. This reinforces the need for
proper alarm management in such processes. [1]
Alarm management has many aspects, among which visualization of alarms holds much importance. Traditionally,
alarms have been represented as lists typically referred to
as Alarm Lists. This is mainly because legacy systems from
the beginning of the digital era have always contained such
representation of alarms. Though these lists serve as a good
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.30

A. Alarm Management in Industrial Processes
Industrial processes for manufacturing, electricity generation and distribution, production, mining, reﬁning and
other processes dealing with real-time data acquisition and
control, usually have a means of alarm management. Alarm
management solutions can be as simple as lists or more
advanced solutions that allow ﬁltering and visualization of
alarms in different ways for pattern identiﬁcation for example Parallel Coordinates. The EEMUA guidelines on design,
management and procurement of alarm systems deﬁne the
sophistication of an alarm management system based on
different factors among which the number of alarms is one
factor [4]. Depending upon the application domain and its
scope, the number of alarms in an alarm management system
can range from a couple of hundreds to thousands at a time.
Applications like the one presented in Figure 1 have
one main purpose, to present all the important parameters
upfront and keep the operator informed about the processes’
abnormal states i.e., alarms. This is a challenging task
because of the large number of events occurring in such
processes. These events could range from malfunctioning
equipment to level of a tank’s contents to temperature in
102

ships could lead to better awareness about the processes’
state and facilitate better decision making.
C. Alarm Lists vs. Parallel Coordinates
The Alarm List in Figure 2 shows the existing and
typical way of representing alarms in the system. This list
is typically very long depending upon the time of day,
week, month or year and the nature of operations being
carried out. While the number of alarms on a display can be
reduced to some extent by means of shelving, suppressing
and state-based alarming (see [1], [4]), the alarm lists are
inherently incapable of visualizing patterns and relationships
in the data. A study on comparison of tabular and graphical
displays [6] indicates that lists or tabular visualization of data
are not suitable of tasks like trend analysis, interpolation
and forecasting as compared to graphical visualizations.
However, the study also indicated that lists are better at
identifying speciﬁc values than doing trend analysis as
compared to graphical displays. The reason alarms lists have
been in use for so long is because they have traditionally
been best practices for displaying alarms. However, with
the increased number of alarms in the current industrial
applications due to changing requirements, better methods
of visualizing and managing alarms are needed.

Figure 1. Alarm management in a process control application. The area
on top of the screens in front of the operator show red blocks indicating
alarms and part of the alarm list.

a furnace. Industries need to be able to visualize and ﬁlter
important alarms from the rest of the alarms for purpose of
complying with process requirements on production, safety
and quality. [5]
B. Interactive Filtering and Visual Pattern Identiﬁcation of
Alarms
When analyzing alarms from an industrial process, not
only is the volume of alarms very large, but there are several
parameters within these alarms that need to be monitored.
Data about the states of different parts of the process comes
in every few seconds and it needs to be observed and acted
upon to ensure error-free operation.
The operators should be able to pinpoint trouble areas and
important events that occur while the process is running.
Equipping the operators to ﬁlter out unwanted data helps in
focusing on the more important and critical data related to
alarms. Additionally, enabling the operators to visually identify patterns that show trends in the alarm data and analyze
relationships inferred from these trends, critical information
about the process can be revealed. This information can
then facilitate maintenance and troubleshooting in industrial
processes.
A visual pattern represents a typical behavior which shows
the progress of certain process parameters over time. For
instance, a certain alarm occurring at a particular time of
day or at repeated intervals. However, a rather different
and interesting pattern could be the relation between two
parameters and how they affect each other and the overall
process. For example, a particular type of alarm is always
followed by another known alarm or, manual operation
results in more high priority alarms. Among the two types
of patterns mentioned, the latter is comparatively difﬁcult
to identify. Such patterns are usually not visible in lists
unless the data is visualized in a way other than lists which
supports identiﬁcation of patterns. Visualizing such relation-

Figure 2. A typical alarm list. A row in the list represents an alarm and
each column corresponds to one or more attributes of the alarm.

Knowing the weaknesses and strengths of lists in
terms of visual trend analysis, interpolation, forecasting
and identiﬁcation of speciﬁc values, the use of Parallel
Coordinates together with lists was suggested as a means
of ﬁltering alarm data and identifying patterns visually [7].
As the concept is proposed earlier, this study sought to
answer the following research question:
Do Parallel Coordinates improve ﬁltering of alarms in
terms of visual pattern identiﬁcation and trend analysis?
A prototype application has been developed which includes a Parallel Coordinates plot as well as an Alarm List.
Filtering and selection techniques were implemented in both

103

Information Visualization Tool Using Multiple Coordinated
Views [11]. The tool was evaluated through user testing.
Task execution time and errors were the main metrics for
the evaluation. It was concluded that the use of Parallel
Coordinates does not harm the performance of user tasks
and helps improve ﬁltering and visualization if coordinated
with other visualizations [11].
All the mentioned related studies, in one way or the
other, evaluate Parallel Coordinates with Lists and other
comparable visualizations. However, results from previous
studies do not reveal how much more effective and efﬁcient
Parallel Coordinates would be than lists in ﬁltering tasks
typical to Alarm Management in industrial systems.

the visualizations. There are seven different parameters in
the Parallel Coordinates visualization that could be ﬁltered
with the help of slider controls in the user interface. The
lines passing through the axes in Figure 3 represent the same
alarms as in Figure 2 . Moving the sliders up and down on
the axes ﬁlters the alarms which is reﬂected in both the
Parallel Coordinates and the Alarm List.

III. M ETHODOLOGY
To evaluate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of Parallel
Coordinates over the Alarm List, an empirical, test-case
based user study was conducted. The experiment aimed at
ﬁnding answers to the following questions:

Figure 3. Parallel Coordinates representing alarms in the system. Each
vertical axis represents a parameter of alarms. The lines passing through
the axes represent alarms. Slider controls on each axis are used to ﬁlter
alarms based on the values of the axis.

II. R ELATED WORK
Siirtola has studied Parallel Coordinates and Reorderable
Matrix visualizations and evaluated their use when coordinated or linked together [8]. A Reorderable Matrix is
similar to a list in that its contents are symbols instead
of text or numerical values. The study found coordination
between the visualizations very useful in terms of reduced
thinking overhead. The research also shows that the use of
coordinated visualizations accelerates learning of complex
user interfaces.
Cluster identiﬁcation in different variants of Parallel Coordinates have been evaluated by Holten et al. [9]. The variants
include the use of scatter plots, colors, opacity, smooth
curves, and animation to supplement the standard Parallel
Coordinates plot. It was found that with the exception
of scatter plot variant, neither of the variants offered a
considerable improvement.
Lanzenberger et al. have compared two InfoVis techniques
namely, Stardinates and Parallel Coordinates [10]. The evaluation is based on task based user testing. The metrics for
the evaluation were the task execution time for each of
the visualizations. The errors from the user tasks were also
used to judge the effectiveness of the techniques. Parallel
Coordinates showed much better performance as compared
to Stardinates.
Godinho et al. have developed a set of coordinated
visualization tools called PRISMA - A Multidimensional

•

How signiﬁcant is the gain in terms of efﬁciency
(time) and effectiveness (error rate) when using
Parallel Coordinates compared to Alarm List for
ﬁltering alarms?

•

Which visualization method do the participants
prefer in terms of usability factors namely, accuracy,
efﬁciency, learnability, memorability, satisfaction and
intuitiveness?

During the design of the prototype and while trying
out the visualizations we observed that use of Parallel
Coordinates made many difﬁcult ﬁltering tasks trivial and the
amount of thinking required to ﬁnish the task was reduced.
This formed the basis of our hypothesis.
A. Hypothesis
We hypothesized that use of coordinated Parallel
Coordinates to ﬁlter alarms and identifying patterns in
alarm data would be faster and more accurate as compared
to Alarm List. The null hypothesis thus assumes that
ﬁltering does not improve when Parallel Coordinates are
used.
H0 : μP C = μAL
H1 : μP C > μAL
Where:
H0 = Parallel Coordinates does not improve ﬁltering of
alarms
H1 = Parallel Coordinates improves ﬁltering of alarms
μP C = Mean of group’s performance using Parallel
Coordinates
μAL = Mean of group’s performance using Alarm List

104

B. Participants

Table I
L IST OF TASKS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT.

A total of 12 participants were involved in the evaluation,
eight male and four female. They were between 24 and 56
years old, median age being 26 years. The participants used
computers on a daily basis and almost all of them were from
Information Technology or Engineering background. Some
of the participants had background knowledge about the
context of application but had not used these visualizations
before.

Easy tasks
Task 1

Highlight all the Alarms that occurred from March 2009 to
May 2009.
Task 2
Highlight all the Alarms that occurred during May 2009 and
have Priority 5 or higher.
Task 3
Highlight all the Alarms that occurred for the month of March
2009 with maximum Priority.
Moderate tasks
Task 4
Highlight all the Alarms that occurred for the month of April
2009 with Priority 5 or higher and are Unacknowledged.
Task 5
Highlight Alarms of type ”Spontaneous Breaker Trip” having
Priority 2.
Task 7
Highlight all the Alarms for the month of March 2009 with
type ”Protection” having the highest Priority.
Task 8
Highlight all the type ”Control” Alarms for the month of
March 2009 that are Unacknowledged, with Priority 3 or
higher.
Task 9
Which Stations (Source) have currently the most number of
high Priority, Unacknowledged Alarms?
Task 10
Which Stations (Source) have currently the most number of
type ”Protection” Alarms and are Unacknowledged?
Difﬁcult tasks
Task 6
Highlight Alarms that are Unacknowledged, are of type
”Controls” and have minimum Priority.
Task 11
In April 2009 which Station (Source) got minimum ”Control”
Alarms with Priority 3 or higher?

C. Test Apparatus and Setting
The prototype application for the experiment was developed using the Geo Analytics and Visualization (GAV)
framework [12], [13]. It runs on a desktop computer with
displays set up similar to a real set up. The computer had
large (17 inch), high-resolution (1280x1024 pixels), dual
screens to show the visualizations side-by-side and was
fast enough (Intel Pentium-IV 2.0 GHz) to instantaneously
respond to user’s actions. The experiment was recorded on
video to capture participants’ comments and actions while
at the same time two experimenters timed the task execution
and took notes as the participants performed the tasks.

world case. The following parameters were recorded during
the experiment:

D. User Tasks
The participants were required to do two types of tasks,
selection and ﬁltering for Alarm List and Parallel Coordinates. Tasks consisted of sub-tasks like sorting for the Alarm
List and reordering the axes in the Parallel Coordinates.
There were two similar blocks of 11 tasks each (22 in
total). Tasks were designed so that they have an equivalent
and corresponding task for both Alarm List and Parallel
Coordinates visualizations. This was done to ensure that both
the visualizations are tested against the same use cases so
their results can be compared.
The order in which participants performed tasks on the
two visualizations was balanced to prevent skewed results(half of the participants performed tasks on the Alarm
List ﬁrst and then Parallel Coordinates, while the other half
performed the tasks on Parallel Coordinates ﬁrst). Tasks
appeared in random order inside each block.
The tasks were categorized by their difﬁculty into groups
based on the number of parameters involved and the steps
needed to perform them correctly. Table I shows tasks used
in the experiment. To accomplish a task, participants had
to highlight alarms in the alarm list by selection or obtain a
reduced set of alarms by ﬁltering in the Parallel Coordinates.

•
•

Task Execution time (efﬁciency)
Error rate (effectiveness)

Participants were asked to ﬁll in a questionnaire to obtain
subjective information such as accuracy, speed, learnability,
memorability, efﬁciency, satisfaction and errors. Answers
were recorded on a Likert scale by the participants. Another
reason for using such a questionnaire was to capture the
participants’ perceived notion of the visualizations’ characteristics like speed and accuracy. Answers from the questionnaire served as a veriﬁcation of the observations from
the experiment.
F. Test Protocol
Each participant was briefed about the evaluation procedure before the test. The experiment supervisor gave a 15-20
minutes introductory presentation to each participant about
the motivation and context of the study, the two visualization
methods and their use, and the tasks in order to familiarize
him/her to the system equally. The participant was asked
to perform some sample operations to get familiar with the
prototype and ’think aloud’ during the procedure. When the
participant indicated being familiarized with the use of the
prototype, the actual tests were conducted.
The test was conducted with each participant one by
one and observed by two experimenters. The experimenters
took notes, recorded execution times and errors for tasks,
recorded the verbal communication and interviewed the
participant for feedback after each test.

E. Evaluation Criteria
Since this study essentially focused on design and evaluation of an Alarm Management solution, metrics in EEMUA
[4] were considered in the experiment design. Although
EEMUA metrics were not used in their entirety, the experiment utilized parameters such as operator response times
and use of questionnaires in a similar fashion as in a real

105

At the completion of the test, the participants were
asked to ﬁll out the questionnaire to acquire demographic
information, their preferred technique in each task, the
difﬁculties they had with each of the visualizations. The

Figure 5. Mean task execution times on Parallel Coordinates and Alarm
List for all tasks. Parallel Coordinates have shorter executing times on
average.

Figure 4. A view of the Parallel Coordinates plot with some alarms ﬁltered
to show unacknowledged alarms from ﬁrst quarter of 2011, occurring on
Mondays between 15:00 and 18:00. The Alarm List corresponds to this
ﬁltering and is reduced automatically to show only the alarms which match
these criteria.

experiment took 50 to 70 minutes to perform all the tasks
by one participant. The mean duration was 60 minutes. The
participants were asked to execute the tasks as quickly as
they could manage but with the aim of getting the right
answers. Figure 4 shows the ﬁltered Parallel Coordinates
visualization similar to one of the evaluations.
A pilot test was conducted to check the clarity, completeness and impartiality of the testing protocol. The test design
was iterated based on the ﬁndings from the pilot test before
the actual evaluation was conducted. Results of the pilot test
were omitted from the ﬁnal analysis.

Figure 6.
Number of right and wrong answers for each task using
Alarms List(AL) and Parallel Coordinates(PC). Parallel Coordinates produced lesser wrong answers to tasks.

IV. R ESULTS

The observations for task execution times for the two
groups (Parallel Coordinates and Alarm List) were statistically analyzed using single factor ANOVA. The analysis indicated that there is a signiﬁcantly high efﬁciency
gain in terms of task execution time for difﬁcult tasks
(p<0.01) while for the simple and moderate tasks there was
a marginally signiﬁcant gain (p<0.1) with moderate tasks
having relatively higher performance gain as compared to
easy tasks.
Comparing Alarm List and Parallel Coordinates, the results for difﬁcult tasks namely, Tasks 6 and 11 both had a
73.7% decrease in mean task execution time with a drop
in standard deviation from 79.6 to 10.3 for Task 6 and
130 to 22 for Task 11. The mean drop in task execution
time for moderate tasks ranged from 40-80% when Parallel
Coordinates were used. The standard deviation in execution
times for moderate tasks shows that there was a considerable
improvement in general. Among easy tasks, Tasks 1, 2 and
3 had 64%, 49% and 28% lower executions times in case

The most pressing evidence was found in the task execution time per task together with the reduced number
of errors. Figure 5 shows the mean, minimum and maximum execution times per task for Alarms List and Parallel
Coordinates for all 12 participants and 11 tasks. Figure 6
summarizes the right and wrong answers for the same.
The results showed that there is indeed an improvement in
the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the tasks performed when
Parallel Coordinates were used. Use of Parallel Coordinates
enhanced ﬁltering and pattern analysis.
A. Task Execution Times per Task Difﬁculty
The participants performed better with the Parallel Coordinates in general. The task execution time using ﬁltering
on Parallel Coordinates was 392.82 seconds (61.5% faster)
on average. Figures 7, 8 and 9 represent box plots of
task execution time for easy, moderate and difﬁcult tasks
respectively.

106

B. Error Rate

of Parallel Coordinates with standard deviations lowered to
5.5, 32.8 and 13.2 respectively.

Out of the 132 tasks performed by total 12 participants,
Parallel Coordinates produced 29.9% (126 as compared to
97 right answers) more correct answers than Alarm Lists.
The error rate was reduced by 4.8% (6 as compared to
35 wrong answers) when Parallel Coordinates were used.
Figure 10 represents the total right and wrong answers by
participants on the Alarm List and Parallel Coordinates.

Figure 7. Task execution times (n=12 for each) for easy tasks. Parallel
Coordinates do not offer considerable improvement from Alarm List.

Figure 10. Number of right and wrong answers per participant (n=12) for
both the Alarm List and Parallel Coordinates.

C. Subjective Satisfaction
Apart from the ﬁndings from the quantitative evaluation,
the participants expressed subjective satisfaction on the
questionnaire. Participants found the use of Parallel Coordinates faster, more intuitive, more accurate, easier to learn
and remember, more supportive of pattern identiﬁcation as
compared to Alarm Lists. Figure 11 shows the ﬁndings of
the questionnaire on participants’ perceived notion of factors
such as speed, accuracy, intuitiveness for Alarm List and
Parallel Coordinates respectively.

Figure 8. Task execution times (n=12 for each) for moderate tasks. There
is a marked decrease in execution times when Parallel Coordinates were
used.

Figure 9. Task execution times (n=12 for each) for difﬁcult tasks. Parallel
Coordinates have highly signiﬁcant effect on the ﬁltering tasks in terms of
execution time.

Figure 11.
Participants perception of the Alarm List and Parallel
Coordinates visualizations on a scale of one to seven, seven being highest.

107

D. Learning Effect

for ﬁltering alarms and identifying patterns in alarm data
especially when there are complex or difﬁcult tasks at hand.
Future work covers a real world validation as a longitudinal study with operators in a real control room environment
in e.g. electricity distribution or production plants using a
full set of EEMUA metrics for alarm management.

There was no considerable effect of learning on the participants’ performance i.e. the order in which the participants
used the Parallel Coordinates or the Alarm List, did not
affect their performance on either visualization. Although the
questionnaire results revealed that the participants preferred
using Parallel Coordinates, statistical results show that their
performance on either of the visualizations did not improve
or reduce due to the order they performed tasks.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Christine Mikkelsen for valuable comments
as well as Magnus Larsson and Martin Naedele for their
support and all the participants for making the experiment
possible.
We also thank Ammad Aslam and Bo Helgeson for their
support.

V. D ISCUSSION
The results obtained from the evaluation were strongly
in favor of use of Parallel Coordinates for Alarm ﬁltering. Among the three categories of tasks, the increase in
efﬁciency was not very high for easy tasks. The underperformance of Parallel Coordinates in Task 3 was thought
to be attributed to one participant’s extensive experience
on working with list based visualizations on normal ofﬁce
applications, namely MS Excel. Only this one participant
showed a tendency of having some difﬁculty in learning
the use of Parallel Coordinates. The participant also had
problems in the previous Task 2, but managed later tasks
better.
For Parallel Coordinates in general, moderate and difﬁcult
tasks showed higher performance gain in terms of execution time. These results are representative of the reduced
complexity of task execution in terms of execution time as
well as thinking overhead for the participants. Overall, it
can be said that the use of Parallel Coordinates improved
the effectiveness and efﬁciency of ﬁltering tasks which is
supported by the alternative hypothesis as asserted by the
statistical evaluation.
A limitation to this study was the scope of the experiment
conducted. It should be investigated if more participants
and a thorough and larger set of tasks will lead to more
accurate results (p<0.01 for all tasks). Also, speciﬁc differences between various domains within the industry were not
addressed in this study which are, e.g. number of priority
levels and parameters in general, typical time interval between alarms and geographical distribution of alarms. The
results here, however, demonstrate the advantages of Parallel
Coordinates in alarm ﬁltering tasks.

R EFERENCES
[1] B. Holliﬁeld and E. Habibi, The Alarm Management Handbook. PAS, 2006.
[2] A. Inselberg, “The plane with parallel coordinates,” The Visual Computer, vol. 1, pp. 69–
91, 1985, 10.1007/BF01898350. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01898350
[3] A. Inslberg, Parallel Coordinates: Visual Multidimensional
Geometry and Its Applications. Springer, 2009.
[4] EEMUA 191: Alarm Systems. A Guide to Design,
Management and Procurement. Engineering Equipment
and Materials Users Association, 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://www.eemua.co.uk
[5] J. S. Alford, J. Kindervater, and R. Stankovich, “Alarm
management for regulated industries,” CEP Magazine, pp.
25–30, 2005.
[6] M. J. Lalomia and M. D. Coovert, “A comparison of tabular
and graphical displays in four problem-solving domains,”
SIGCHI Bull., vol. 19, pp. 49–54, October 1987. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/36111.1045596
[7] C. Mikkelsen, J. Johansson, and M. Rissanen, “Interactive
information visualization for sensemaking in power grid supervisory control systems,” in Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV2011),
London, UK, 2011.
[8] H. Siirtola, “Combining parallel coordinates with
the reorderable matrix,” in Proceedings of the
conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views In
Exploratory Visualization. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2003, pp. 63–. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=937938.937951

VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This study evaluated Parallel Coordinates against conventional Alarms List for ﬁltering and visual pattern identiﬁcation of alarms. It was observed that it is in fact more
efﬁcient and more effective to use Parallel Coordinates. Use
of Parallel Coordinates made it easier to perform difﬁcult
tasks in particular that consisted of multiple parameters. For
easy tasks, performance gain was smaller. Thus we claim
that Alarm Management in industrial applications could
beneﬁt from having Parallel Coordinates as the interface

[9] D. Holten and J. J. Van Wijk, “Evaluation of cluster identiﬁcation performance for different pcp variants,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 793–802, 2010.
[10] M. Lanzenberger, S. Miksch, and M. Pohl, “Exploring highly
structured data: A comparative study of stardinates and
parallel coordinates,” Information Visualisation, International
Conference on, vol. 0, pp. 312–320, 2005.

108

[11] P. I. A. Godinho, B. S. Meiguins, A. S. G. Meiguins,
R. M. Casseb do Carmo, M. de Brito Garcia, L. H.
Almeida, and R. Lourenco, “Prisma - a multidimensional
information visualization tool using multiple coordinated
views,” in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
Information Visualization. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 23–32. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1270398.1271556

[13] M. Jern, S. Johansson, J. Johansson, and J. Franzen, “The gav
toolkit for multiple linked views,” in Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 85–97. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1270380.1270580

[12] S. Johansson and M. Jern, “Geoanalytics visual inquiry and
ﬁltering tools in parallel coordinates plots,” in Proceedings of
the 15th annual ACM international symposium on Advances
in geographic information systems, ser. GIS ’07. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 33:1–33:8. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1341012.1341055

109

