2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Developing and Applying a User-Centered Model for the Design
and Implementation of Information Visualization Tools
Lian Chee KOH, Aidan SLINGSBY, Jason DYKES, Tin Seong KAM
Lian Chee KOH is a PhD student at the giCentre, City University London, but is based in the School of Information Systems, Singapore
Management University, e-mail:lckoh@smu.edu.sg
Aidan SLINGSBY is with the giCentre, City University London; email: sbbb717@soi.city.ac.uk ;
Jason DYKES is with the giCentre, City University London; email: jad7@soi.city.ac.uk ;
Tin Seong KAM is with the School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University; email:tskam@smu.edu.sg.

Abstract – The objective of this paper is to show how approaches for
user-centered information visualization design and development are
being applied in the context of healthcare where users are not
familiar with information visualization techniques. We base our
design methods on user-centered frameworks in which ‘prototyping’
plays an important role in the process. We modify existing
approaches to involve prototyping at an early stage of the process as
the problem domain is assessed. We believe this to be essential, as it
increases users’ awareness of what information visualization
techniques can offer them and that it enables users to participate
more effectively in later stages of the design and development
process. This also acts as a stimulus for engagement.

analysis. These additions: (a) inform domain users about the
concepts and techniques of information visualization, early in the
process; (b) help visualization experts understand the work domain;
and (c) act to build trust between both parties. At this stage
‘patchwork prototypes’ [4] – ad hoc combinations of existing tools,
scripts and mocked-up examples – are used, some of which may
contribute to eventual implementation. This early iteration involving
data and interaction broadens Robinson et al.’s [13] and Roth et al.’s
[12] Work Domain Analysis to a wider consideration of the problem
domain. It is intended to better inform all participants about
techniques, concepts and objectives, enabling them to participate
more actively in the design and development process of information
visualization applications to meet user needs.

The problem domain analysis stage of a pilot study using this
approach is presented, in which techniques are being collaboratively
developed with domain users from a healthcare institution. Our
results suggest that this approach has engaged users, who are
subsequently able to apply generic information visualization
concepts to their domains and as a result are better equipped to take
part in the subsequent collaborative design and development process.

We applied this approach to the design and development of an
information visualization application for a government healthcare
institution in Singapore. The study aimed to establish whether and
how the introduction of prototypes to the healthcare domain users at
the beginning of an iterative user-centered process, benefits both
domain users and visualization experts. We also used the study to
reflect on how each stage of the process should be implemented. The
study involved an analyst and a manager from the Quality
department. It applied this adapted iterative user-centered design
approach to visualize responses to patient satisfaction surveys
conducted on a sample population of patients discharged from the
healthcare institution.

Keywords- Information visualization, User-Centered approach,
prototyping, problem domain characterization, requirements, design,
Healthcare Patient Satisfaction Index

1

I N TR O DU C TI O N

The notion of user-centered design was described by Norman [9] and
Nielsen [8] as the early and continuous inclusion of targeted endusers in the design and development process. Many researchers in
the design and development of geographical information
visualization tools have recognized the benefits of being consistent
with this concept in the involvement of targeted users from the start
to the finish of the design and development cycle of information
visualization tools [15, 12, 13].

2

Work Domain Analysis – the task of gathering ideas and
requirements from the end-users;
Conceptual Analysis – developing the functionality and designs
to be featured in the tool;
Prototyping – the creation of working models of the tool’s
capabilities;
Interaction and Usability Studies – the evaluation of the model’s
partial capabilities;
Implementation – the creation of the tool with full features;
Debugging – the validation of the tool’s features before final
deployment.

In visualization projects, domain users and visualization experts
come together with a mutual objective. Frequently, their shared
knowledge is limited. Whilst processes for capturing requirements
are well established, means of sharing knowledge of visualization
methods that may support and influence this process are less so. We
have found that participatory visualization exercises can be effective
in sharing knowledge about domain, visualization and their
interaction through a process of ‘co-discovery’ [7, 3]. We propose a
modification of Robinson et al.’s framework [12] that incorporates
Roth et al.’s idea of early prototyping [13]. We also propose some
additional activities at the beginning of the iterative user-centered
process to inform and ensure engagement in our problem domain

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.32

Background

Robinson et al. [12] recommended an iterative user-centered design
process (Figure 1) that drew on Slocum et al.’s work [15]. The
targeted end-users are actively involved in each of the six stages of
this design framework, which involves significant feedback loops
between stages:

Roth et al. found several practical issues with this process [13]. Strict
compliance to the previous process meant that the Work Domain
90

Analysis stage had to be completed before the creation of the
working interfaces in the Prototyping stage. They reported that this is
not practical where (a) initial scaled-down proof-of-concept projects
do not have the resources to include user participation; (b) a new
development team joins an existing project; (c) users are unavailable
or non-existent during the development of the project; (d) an existing
application is required to be extended to a broader group of users
[13].

human-centred design. We therefore suggest another context in
which this model, or variants of it, may be relevant, having found
that many potential users of visualization have little experience of
interactive graphics, the possibilities available or the kinds of
analytical approaches that they encourage. This is particularly
important as emerging methods of software development, APIs and
toolkits are making interactive prototypes that can overcome these
difficulties less expensive to generate [4, 11, 2].
As such, just like [13], we use prototypes prior to the work domain
characterisation stage. We do so to engage interest, establish
common understanding and engender creative thinking. However,
we also use this process to characterize the problem domain and
build confidence between experts in visualization and the problem
domain. We find that this helps with knowledge sharing, trust
building and ‘orientation’ and that it can be rewarding [7, 3]. This
additional need for early prototyping, whereby users and visualizers
engage in some initial learning before work domain analysis, differs
from the other scenarios identified by Roth et al. [13] in that it is, in
itself, user focused – the objective being to inform at a number of
levels. We have found that a combination of broad and general
learning about visualization possibilities and specific experience
using data that are familiar to our users is successful in terms of
being informative, engaging and likely to stimulate ideas [7, 3].
Our ‘prototypes’, range in terms of their functionality. We use both
specific and focused data prototypes for domain visualization, with
broader, more generic, visualization examples for visualization
awareness. To use a visualization metaphor, these provide ‘details
on demand’ and ‘overview’ in terms of visualization knowledge
respectively and act as a stimulus for information exchange between
visualizers and domain users. The data prototypes are interactive and
use existing, modified, or rapidly coded applications with different
levels of functionality that support the visual analysis of data
provided by, and of interest to users. These are used in a Domain
Visualization Workshop. The visualization examples may be
interactive prototypes, but canned, animated or perhaps even static
examples of visualization possibilities tend to provide coverage
effectively. We use these in a Visualization Awareness Workshop.
Thus, rather than using prototypes for ‘formative studies’ we use
them much as they are employed by Roth et al. [13] in their work
domain analysis "to prompt useful ideas and reactions that users
might not otherwise think to offer" through structured activities at
workshops in which we characterise the problem domain by sharing
knowledge and establishing interest and needs.

Figure 1: Robinson et al.’s six-stage user-centered design process [12].

Appropriate ordering of these stages is context dependent. Where
participants have knowledge of some visualization possibilities and
experience of exploratory analytical work, their existing applications
may be used for initial Domain Visualization where strengths,
weaknesses and needs are discussed [3], followed by Visualization
Awareness in which additional opportunities are determined. Where
participants have little experience of graphical approaches,
Visualization Awareness may be an important first step, required to
ensure that Domain Visualization is effective and successful.

Figure 2: Roth et al.’s modified user-centered design process [13]

Figure 2 illustrates the modified iterative process proposed by Roth
et al. [13]. The adapted approach is also focused on active domain
user participation, with the added flexibility of making use of
existing versions of the software or working interfaces prior to
performing or revisiting Work Domain Analysis. This has the
advantage that prototypes or existing versions of the software can be
used to extract user ideas and viewpoints that may otherwise not
have occurred to them [13, 4].

This modified iterative process allows domain users to see and
engage with some visualization at an early stage and this may
stimulate creative thinking. Enabling users to see and interact with
their own data through visualization has been shown to be very
useful at this stage [7], with rapidly developed prototypes partially
functional prototypes or existing versions of software being used to
extract user ideas and viewpoints that may otherwise not have
occurred to domain users whilst helping visualizers understand the
domain and user priorities [3]. The ideas and viewpoints, together
with user feedback gleaned through the Work Domain Analysis
stage, can then be used as input into the Conceptual Development
and more formal prototyping.

In our experience, potential users of visualization are often unlikely
to know the true potential or scope of visual approaches or their
possible impact on workflow at the early stages of design. Indeed
Plaisant [10] reports that those new to or unfamiliar with information
visualization concepts may struggle to participate effectively in

91

3

approaches and techniques within their domain, unlike user groups in
our subsequent study in Singapore. Our sequence of conducting the
Awareness Workshop before the Domain Visualization is deliberate
in this case, as our experience in working with various industry
groups in the region in the field of software implementations had
made us mindful to the fact that domain users in this case had little
or no exposure to the concepts of information visualization. Without
the initial workshop and prior knowledge about the way information
visualization has been applied in various business domains, they
would have been unable to participate effectively in the Domain
Visualization.

P R OB LE M D O MA IN A N A LYS IS

The Problem Domain Analysis stage is a process of characterizing
the domain in which visualization is being applied and building
understanding and confidence between experts in visualization and
the domain users. Prototypes are key in this stage, for engaging
interest and stimulating broad and creative thinking.
The Visualization Awareness Workshop is designed to introduce
general information visualization concepts to the users, illustrating
the range of information visualization techniques from standard
statistical graphics to more specialized and innovative graphics
designed for different types of research questions. The workshop
seeks to engage users and allow them to gain a broad appreciation of
the scope and characteristics of the information visualization
approach and its tools and techniques. Structuring a workshop to
help participants relate ideas and consider the application of
visualization techniques to their own data analysis and
communication scenarios is essential here – through discussion,
imagination exercises and the like.

As such, we recommend engaging users through workshops that
inform, stimulate and are of interest to domain users. These
workshops should inform Work Domain Analysis prior to
Conceptual Development and more formal prototyping, and are
designed and sequenced to introduce users to visualization
applications that are relevant to their domain and knowledge and that
ultimately use their data.
These workshops are followed by Work Domain Analysis sessions
in which the requirements for a visualization application are collated.

4

A P ILOT S TUD Y

We conducted a pilot study at a government healthcare institution in
Singapore, to try this approach on domain users with little
experience and knowledge about information visualization
techniques. Senior management staff of the healthcare institution are
contemplating the use of information visualization tools in the
organization and had identified a group of departmental heads with
analytical problems and questions, from the Business Development,
Corporate Communications, Financial Control, Medical Affairs, and
Quality departments to participate in this pilot study, with the aim of
identifying potentially viable information visualization projects from
these departments. The pilot study is still in progress and this paper
only reports on the Problem Domain Analysis stage. We assess the
impact of this process on the domain users though observational
note-taking and by running informal feedback sessions during and
after each stage in the process. As the domain users involved in the
pilot study had had little exposure to information visualization
concepts, we ran the Visualization Awareness workshop prior to the
Domain Visualization session.

Figure 3: Modified version of Robinson et al.’s user-centered design process
[12] with early prototyping as advocated by Roth et al. [13].

The Domain Visualization Workshop is another interactive session
with a different emphasis. Here domain users can see and use
specific examples of visualization techniques as applied to their own
data. The visualization experts prepare data prototypes that
showcase visualization techniques that are appropriate to the data
supplied by the domain users. This may require several days’
preparation on the part of the visualization experts, depending on
how many prototypes are prepared and the nature of the prototypes,
but patchwork prototypes [4] or existing software or components
may be appropriate. The workshop demonstrates possibilities to the
domain users of using visualization techniques with their own data.
It also gives the visualization team the opportunity to gain initial user
feedback and broad user requirements. The exchange of data, in
itself, is a useful process that involves trust and learning on all sides.
Ideally, domain users will achieve some insights from their data
using these prototypes during this workshop [7].

4.1
Visualization Awareness Workshop
We invited these domain experts, to a Visualization Awareness
Workshop, which was facilitated by an information visualization
subject expert. The domain experts had very little knowledge about
information visualization techniques and concepts, but were keen to
learn more about these and see how they might apply to their work
domains.
The visualization team shared various non-healthcare specific
applications of information visualization tools and techniques with
the domain users, who were encouraged to reflect on and to share
their views on how information visualization techniques could be
applied within their respective domains. The team asked questions to
prompt feedback about what participants liked or disliked about the
various information visualization techniques, as the workshop
progressed. Feedback from the domain experts was noted by the
visualization team. In addition to eliciting feedback about the
applications and methods presented, the visualization team sought to
establish whether domain experts were receptive to the techniques
and concepts presented. The prototypes were selected to provide a
range of representative information visualization techniques and
interactions applied to public information that would be familiar to
workshop participants:

These workshops may be re-ordered according to local needs.
Engaging users in Domain Visualization before holding a
Visualization Awareness Workshop may be appropriate in some
circumstances, depending upon local knowledge of and experience
with analytical and visual methods. In our vizLegends work [3], the
domain users had significant prior exposure to visualization

92

•

•
•
•

Domain users from Business Development arranged for a separate
meeting shortly after the initial Visualization Awareness Workshop
to discuss ideas that had occurred to them as a result of the
workshop. This included ideas of tracking elderly patients using
social network visualization techniques to enable more of the elderly
to remain in their homes. Users from the Quality department also
came forward indicating keen interest in applying information
visualization techniques to the analysis of their patient satisfaction
survey data. This kind of creative thinking is a typical response to
Visualization Awareness, which stimulates ideas by broadening
knowledge and encouraging its application and synthesis.
Establishing focus in the problem domain and managing expectation
is an important next stage.

1

The Hive Group Gallery , a collection of sample information
visualization applications by industry, was used to illustrate an
interactive tree map representation of a sales team’s
performance. This prototype was used to depict how high
volume, hierarchical data could be visualized;
2
Oakland Crimespotting , an interactive map of crimes in
Oakland for understanding crime in cities, which focused on
visualization of spatial and temporal data;
3
News Dots , a social network visualization of the most recent
topics in the news, to show how to visualize complex social
relationships;
Parallel Sets 2.1 (Parsets [6]) was used to illustrate the
relationships between where purchasers were currently housed
(either in public or private properties); property types that the
purchasers had bought and regions where properties are located.
(Figure 4). The highlighted region in Figure 4 shows that the
most significant section of property transactions (23%) came
from purchasers who were currently living in private housing,
who bought condominiums located in the central region of
Singapore.

Feedback obtained through this workshop and the subsequent
meetings requested by the domain users, provided us with some
evidence that participants were able to relate information
visualization concepts to specific areas of work within their
respective domains. The authors also gained some preliminary
understanding of the kind of information analysis challenges faced
by the various domain users, demonstrating the close relationships
between these participatory learning events and work domain
analysis as a problem domain is characterized. Further to this, the
Visualization Awareness Workshop enabled the visualization team
and domain users to identify domain problems or questions that were
unsuitable for information visualization - due to the lack of data that
available for analysis; or problems requiring solutions that were
transactional or operational in nature; or users realising that they
lacked the resources to commit to the implementation process.
Discussions with the healthcare institution’s Management, Business
Development and Quality Management departments led to a decision
to focus on the patient satisfaction survey rather than the ‘tracking
elderly patients’ alternative as data collection activities for this
domain were ongoing.
4.2
Domain Visualization Workshop
Our domain experts wanted to analyse patient satisfaction surveys
that were conducted by patients. The Quality department
commissioned appropriately sampled telephone surveys of patients
about how satisfied they were about the level of healthcare services
they experienced, several weeks after they had been discharged from
one of three departments: Emergency Department, Specialist Clinics
and Inpatient Wards. Each of these departments contains various
patient touch-points, where the department’s staff has service
delivery contact with patients (Figure 5).

Figure 4: Parsets [6] visualization of property sales in Singapore.

In addition, generic interaction techniques such as select, filter,
explore, abstract/elaborate, connect, encode and reconfigure [18],
were demonstrated.
Feedback elicited from participants during the course of the
workshop revealed that they had found the workshop informative
and engaging, and were receptive to the interactive way data could
be investigated using means that were previously unknown to them.
Participants also thought that information visualization tools would
add value to the way they analysed their domain data, but reflected
their concerns that they might have to commit additional resources
(and cost) in the form of expertise and special skillset upgrade in
order to use the visualization tools.

Selected patients answered a series of questions about their overall
satisfaction with the department that provided the treatment and the
touch-points within that department. Surveys differed between
departments, but all questions were measured on a 5-point Likert
scale (1=”very poor”; 5= “excellent”). Patients could also choose not
to answer questions that were not relevant to their treatment.
Respondents could also provide free-text comments for each
question.

Participants shared how information visualization tools could be
applied in their respective work domains:
•
•
•
•

The patient satisfaction indices for overall patient experience and the
various touch points were calculated as the percentage of total
patients who responded with 4 (“good”) or 5 (“excellent”) for the
relevant survey questions. Each month, the tele-survey company
summarizes the survey responses into a set of static graphical reports
that chart key patient satisfaction indices by departments and touchpoints within the healthcare institution. The Quality department is
provided with these results on a quarterly basis.

exploring how doctors from various specialties collaborated;
tracking trend of inpatient readmissions, falls or medication
errors;
analysing patient satisfaction survey data;
trending financial results.

1

In this pilot study, we are working with Quality department to design
an application that would allow their staff to visually analyse these
results as they become available through the institution’s intranet. A

http://www.hivegroup.com/solutions/demos/salesforce.html
http://oakland.crimespotting.org/map/
3
http://labs.slate.com/articles/slate-news-dots/
2

93

Quality Manager and an analyst of the healthcare institution
participated in this study.
Emergency
Department
Registration
Triage
Doctors
Nursing Staff
Other Services
Pharmacy
Facilities

Specialist Clinics

Inpatient Wards

Registration
Doctors
Nursing Staff
Other Services
Pharmacy
Facilities

Admission
Doctors
Nursing Staff
Meals
Ward Facilities
Other Services
Discharge

keen to continue working with the visualization team to design an
information visualization solution based on the parallel sets
prototype for use in their work domain. They had also begun to
suggest broad ideas about the kinds of questions information
visualization tools could help them answer as we began to capture
requirements.
4.3
Work Domain Analysis
The visualization team held Work Domain Analysis sessions with
domain experts to formally gather their requirements for an
interactive visualization system. This was done through structured
discussion to elicit the questions they would like answered using
interactive visualizations. The following questions were prioritised:

Figure 5: Patient touch points in the segments of a healthcare facility

The patient satisfaction data in its raw form was obtained from the
Quality department for the Domain Visualization Workshop. The
workshop, which was held several weeks after the Visualization
Awareness Workshop, presented a number of prototypes of
visualization techniques using the patient satisfaction survey.

•

The workshop enabled the domain users to see the possibilities these
techniques offered for visually analysing their own data. It also
allowed the visualization team to learn more about existing means of
analysing the data, to get feedback from the domain users on the
prototypes presented, and the kinds of questions that the domain
users wanted to be able to answer of their data.

What impact does ‘very poor’ (or alternatively ‘excellent’)
satisfaction index at specific patient touch-points (Figure 5)
have on the overall satisfaction index for each of the hospital
department (Emergency Department, Specialist Clinics and
Inpatient Wards)? Users would like to verify whether particular
touch-points perceived as main draws for patient complaints (or
alternatively bouquets) are key contributors to the impact on
overall satisfaction index for the healthcare institution;
Which days of the week, and peak hours for patient
visits/admissions have greater impact on satisfaction index for
specific patient touch-points? To provide a feedback loop back
to resource planning staff to improve patient’s experience at
service delivery touch-points even during busy periods;
How do the various touch-points within each of the hospital
departments relate in terms of the department’s overall
satisfaction index? To show how patients perceive service
delivery by each touch-point within the department;
How can patients’ free-text comments be used to back-up the
results derived for patient satisfaction at the touch-points of
each department? Patient surveys may include (optional)
patients’ comments about each touch-point. Users would like to
analyse comments for keywords that may lend support or
clarify aspects of patients’ satisfaction with service delivery.

•

The patient satisfaction survey data represented patients’ responses
to a telephone survey for each of the patient touch points and the
patient’s overall satisfaction with their episode of care. The patient
survey data consisted almost exclusively of categorical variables.
Parallel Sets [1, 6] and Mosaic Plots [5, 16, 17] are suited for this
type of data [14] and these were the techniques chosen for
presentation at this workshop.

•

•

The Domain Visualization Workshop was facilitated by an
information visualization expert and attended by domain users from
Quality department. Parallel Sets 2.1 (Parsets [6]) and JMP 8 (a SAS
proprietary tool used to visualise mosaic plots) were used to
visualize the patient satisfaction survey data.
5

The visualization team elicited feedback from the users about how
they perceived the way they interacted with the prototypes, and the
way their domain data was visualized. This was done through
initiating discussions at appropriate points during the presentation
and observational note-taking. The users liked the fact that these
techniques allowed them to interactively explore their own data in
new ways. They were able to see relationships between variables in
their data that were not provided by the static reports they had been
using. Users also suggested additional features that they would find
helpful, that were partly informed by the Visualization Awareness
Workshop. One such request was the ability to be able to drill-down
to obtain details on demand, a capability not available in the
applications that we were using.

D I SC USS I ON

We observed a number of benefits associated with early prototyping
and the use of Visualization Awareness and Domain Visualization
Workshops. In terms of successes:
•

•

After interacting with both the parallel sets and mosaic plots
prototypes, domain experts expressed a preference for parallel sets
prototype as compared to mosaic plots. The indication was that the
parallel sets was deemed simpler and hence faster for users to
understand. We might hypothesize that the parallel layout of this
approach simplifies reading and comparison of the data dimensions,
compared to the nested structure of mosaic plots. Participants in the
workshop seemed to find it easier to conceptualize questions about
their data, and to co-relate 3 or more data dimensions using parallel
sets than mosaic plots through our prototypes.

•

•

At the end of the workshop, users indicated that they were
enthusiastic about the prospect of now interactively exploring their
domain data in ways previously not available to them. They were

94

Domain users were able to relate the information visualization
concepts and techniques to their current work and immediate
needs within their work domain as a result of participating in a
Visualization Awareness Workshop;
Leading on from the previous point, domain users coming
forward with their ideas on how information visualization
concepts could be applied to their domain areas, in turn could
lead to the identification of potential information visualization
projects for an organization that is considering the incorporation
of the use of information visualization tools into the
organization;
The Domain Visualization Workshop enabled domain users to
better understand information visualization concepts that could
be used to visualize the data as well as to enabling the
developers to gain a better understanding of the problem
domain – these findings are in line with those of [3];
Our data owners became more demanding of their data and used
ideas developed through the workshops to look for more
sophisticated relationships in the data that they currently own –
importantly demonstrating that our approach has an ongoing
effect on analytical process.

We did observe some problems however in the case of domain
experts who do not have experience of visualization:

experience interaction with various prototypes and by structuring
activities and presenting software in ways that emphasize this.

•

Future work will include development and deployment of a
customized information visualization application using experiences
and requirements derived from the Problem Domain Analysis stage
of the pilot study to inform subsequent stages of the model.

Whilst ideas about visualization were forthcoming at our
workshops, participants were somewhat limited in their
visualization aspirations and there was a tendency to select
functionality that existed in data prototypes used during our
Domain Visualization Workshop;
Using existing (polished) software as data prototypes for
domain visualization does not emphasize the preliminary nature
of the designs and the prototypical (in terms of the visualization
development project) nature of the methods being considered.
Consequently participants were focused on tool rather than data
at the initial interactions with visualization tools.

•

R E FE RE NC ES
[1]

[2]

We consider the benefits reported here to be encouraging. Both
concerns could be addressed either in the Domain Visualization
Workshop or through feedback loops within the Problem Domain
stages of our approach, to allow users to augment their knowledge as
they experience and gain familiarity with visualization prototypes.

6

[3]

[4]

C O NC LUS I ON

We modify Robinson et al.’s user-centered approach [12] to the
design, development and implementation of information
visualization applications in the context of work with potential users
with little knowledge of visualization techniques. Our modification
introduces Domain Visualization and Visualization Awareness
Workshops early in the process and incorporates some of Roth et
al.’s ideas about using prototypes [13] at this stage of user-centred
design in visualization. These modifications are designed to enable
those lacking experience in visualization to participate as informed
users in UCD. They are also applicable to those with more
experience and can help domain experts participate more effectively
and to help build understanding and knowledge between those with
domain knowledge and needs and those with visualization
knowledge and capabilities.

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

We are applying this process to users in a government healthcare
institution in Singapore. This pilot study is still in progress, but we
are able to report on the Problem Domain Analysis stage.

[11]

Our reflections on the implementation suggest that the model has
impact because:

[12]

•

•
•
•

It informed domain users about a range of possibilities for
visual analysis and equipped them to take an active part the
process. They were able to suggest ways that these concepts
could apply to their data and their problems that drew upon
visualization to consider their data more comprehensively;
It educated the visualization experts about domain-specific data,
the questions of those data that the domain users find interesting
and how receptive they are unfamiliar techniques;
It engaged the domain users to take an active part in the process,
evidenced by the further meetings that they called after the
Visualization Awareness Workshop;
It promoted trust between the domain users and visualization
experts, enabling free and frank discussion at the workshops.

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]

We observed that users new to information visualization, focused on
tools rather than on questions about their data; and brought up ideas
and questions about their data that were limited to what they had
experienced in the prototypes used in the Domain Visualization
Workshop. We believed that these issues could be addressed with
iterations within the stages of the Problem Domain Analysis of our
approach, where users could further expand the coverage of and

[18]

95

F. Bendix, R. Kosara, and H. Hauser, “Parallel Sets: Visual Analysis of
Categorical Data,” in In INFOVIS '05: Proceedings of the Proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (2005),
2005.
M. Bostock and J. Heer, “ProtoVis: A Graphical Toolkit for
Visualization”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 2009 Nov-Dec, vol. 15, no. 6, pp 1121-1128, Dec 2009.
J. Dykes, J. Wood, and A. Slingsby, “Rethinking Map Legends with
Visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 2010 Nov-Dec, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 890-899, Dec. 2010.
I. R. Floyd, M. C. Jones, D. Rathi, M. B. Twidale, "Web Mash-ups and
Patchwork Prototyping: User-driven technological innovation with Web
2.0 and Open Source Software," hicss, pp.86c, 40th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'07), 2007
M. Friendly, “Visualizing categorical data: Data, stories, and pictures,”
in SAS User Group International Conference Proceedings, pp. 190–200,
1992.
R. Kosara, F. Bendix, and H. Hauser, “Parallel Sets: Interactive
Exploration and Visual Analysis of Categorical Data,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 558-568, 2006.
D. Lloyd, “Evaluating human-centered approaches to geovisualization,”
City University London, 2010.
J. Nielsen, “Usability engineering”. Boston, Massachusetts: Academic
Press, Inc., 1993.
D. Norman, “The design of everyday things.” New York: Basic Books,
2002.
C. Plaisant, “The challenge of information visualization evaluation,”
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces,
Gallipoli, Italy: ACM New York, NY, USA, pp. 109 – 116, 2004.
C. Reas and B. Fry, “Processing: a learning environment for creating
interactive Web graphics”, ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Web Graphics, San
Diego, CA; ACM New York, NY, USA, 2003.
A. C. Robinson, J. Chen, E. J. Lengerich, H. G. Meyer, and A. M.
MacEachren, “Combining Usability Techniques to Design
Geovisualization Tools for Epidemiology,” Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 243–255, 2005.
R. E. Roth, K. S. Ross, B. G. Finch, W. Luo, and A. M. MacEachren,
“A user-centered approach for designing and developing spatiotemporal
crime analysis tools,” in Sixth international conference on Geographic
Information Science, 2010.
R. Scheaffer and N. Yes, “Categorical Data Analysis,” NCSSM
Statistics Leadership Institute, 1999.
T.A. Slocum, D.C. Cliburn, J.J. Feddema, and J.R. Miller, “Evaluating
the usability of a tool for visualizing the uncertainty of the future global
water balance,” Cartography and Geographic Information Science, vol.
30, pp. 299-314, 2003.
M. Theus, “Interactive data visualization using mondrian,” Journal of
Statistical Software, vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 1–9, 2003.
M. Theus and S. R. Lauer, “Visualizing loglinear models,” Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 396–412,
1999.
J.S. Yi, Y. Kang, J.T. Stasko, and J.A. Jacko, “Toward a deeper
understanding of the Role of Interaction in Information Visualization,”
Journal of Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphic, vol.
13, no. 6, pp. 1124–1231, 2007.

