2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

What is an Effective Knowledge Visualization?
Insights from a Review of Seminal Concepts

Martin J. Eppler
University of St. Gallen
mcm institute
St. Gallen, Switzerland
e-mail: martin.eppler@unisg.ch

intensive) images in section 2. Then, we describe the
rationale behind our review of key concepts that can inform
knowledge visualization conceptions in section 3, where we
also discuss seminal, highly cited constructs from disciplines
as diverse as sociology, art history, e-learning, psychology,
epistemology, or design. We cluster these constructs
according to their emphasis on visualization or collaboration
respectively. As a main contribution we identify similarities
among the concepts and summarize them in five derived
knowledge visualization principles. To illustrate these
principles, we focus on a few seminal concepts in more
depth in section 4. In the subsequent section 5, we derive
implications from the reviewed constructs for the theory and
practice of knowledge visualization. The final section 6 of
this paper consists of a short conclusion and an outlook on
future research in this area.

Abstract— The domain of knowledge visualization focuses on
the collaborative use of interactive graphics to create, integrate
and apply knowledge. This emerging approach nevertheless
builds on decades of research on using images collaboratively
for sense making and knowledge sharing. In this paper, we
review seminal concepts from different disciplines that help to
explain how visualizations can effectively act as collaboration
catalysts and knowledge integrators. Our review makes it
apparent that many different labels and conceptions exist in
very different domains to explain the same phenomenon: the
integrative power of visuals for knowledge-intensive
collaboration processes. These concepts can be used to compile
a list of the requirements of an effective knowledge
visualization. We conclude the paper by showing the
theoretical and practical implications of this review.. (Abstract)
Keywords- knowledge visualization, knowledge integration,
key concepts, collaboration, boundary object, conscription device,
confection, artifact of knowing, transitional object, immutable
mobile

I.

II.

We define knowledge visualization (in contrast to the
mostly data-driven information visualization field) as
follows: Knowledge visualization designates all (interactive)
graphic means that can be used to develop or convey
insights, experiences, methods, or skills [1, 2]. This
definition implies that the realm of knowledge visualization
is not limited to computer-based images and that the main
purpose of knowledge visualization is to support the
(inherently social) processes of creating and sharing
knowledge with others.
The following figure provides a simple example of this
approach. Figure 1 represents the completed analysis
conducted by a management team regarding the service
quality problems in their call center. Starting with the empty
iceberg metaphor (as a discussion template) and its tip
containing the label “service quality low”, the team went to
probe its root causes and mapped the main issues or
problem drivers in a reverse causal chain backwards to the
less visible problems (in the lower part of the iceberg). In
doing so, the group elicited the team members’ different
insights regarding the current challenges in the call center.
The graphic iceberg template and corresponding facilitation
method enabled the team to pool these insights and relate
them to each other, as well as devise adequate improvement
actions.

INTRODUCTION

The domain of knowledge visualization is a relatively
young discipline that focuses on the collaborative use of
interactive graphics to create, integrate and apply knowledge
– particularly in the management context. This young field
nevertheless builds on decades of research on using images
collaboratively for sense making and knowledge sharing.
The objective of the current paper is to make this rich
legacy of the knowledge domain field visible and use it to
inform the practice visualizing knowledge. In this paper, we
will thus review seminal concepts from different disciplines
that help to explain how visualizations can act as
collaboration catalysts and support the elicitation,
integration, and application of knowledge on a team or group
level. The review will make it apparent that many different
labels exist in various domains to explain the basically same
phenomenon: the integrative power of visuals for
knowledge-intensive collaboration. Our review of key
concepts, however, will also reveal that visuals must meet
certain criteria to achieve this integration function
effectively.
The paper is structured as follows: First, we provide an
example of a knowledge visualization and discuss the
already identified attributes of such epistemic (knowledge1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.13

THE REALM OF KNOWLEDGE VISUALIZATION

349

6.

7.

These criteria are derived from the cognitive [14] and
collaborative dimensions of visualization research [17] and
from the practical use of knowledge visualizations in
management [1, 2]. However, requirements for knowledge
visualization may go beyond this straight forward list of
attributes. Are there other key characteristics that
knowledge visualizations should exhibit to support
knowledge processes? Are these seven attributes confirmed
by approaches in other domains?

Figure 1. An example of a knowledge visualization

The resulting image can then be used in subsequent
meetings to explain the problem to other staff members and
to help in the implementation of improvement measures.
The image contains knowledge on a detail level, such as the
impact of budget restrictions on the available infrastructure,
as well as one overall insight, namely that the service
quality level is just the tip of the iceberg of a much larger
problem. The image in Figure 1 is a typical knowledge
representation in the sense that it contains various types of
images, such as the visual metaphor of an iceberg,
sketchmarks for highlighting (the blue circle) as well as
diagrammatic elements (text elements and arrows). It also
indicates a process of how to discuss the problem analysis,
namely in an overview to detail, top-to-bottom process.

To answer these questions, we have reviewed seminal
concepts related to ‘collaboration through artifacts’ (the
larger subject domain). These concepts are shortly presented
and compared in the next section.
III.

2.
3.

4.

5.

A REVIEW OF SEMINAL CONCEPTS

Having described the goal and rationale of reviewing
concepts related to knowledge visualization and more
broadly working with artifacts to share knowledge, we now
proceed to a concise overview of closely related constructs
from different domains.

A knowledge visualization, such as the simple one
depicted above, consequently has to fulfill the following
criteria to merit the label in our (group-level) application
context:
1.

It has to be communicable in the sense that the image
can be communicated to others (of different
professional background) who have not been present
during its creation process (this is for example a
common problem with the use of mind maps).
Ideally, its use leads to new discoveries or insights that
were previously unknown and that are useful to viewers
of the visualization.

Altogether, we have been able to identify the following
concepts that describe the key notion of using visualization
as a catalyst for knowledge sharing. Each one contains a
profound insight into the nature of images as collaboration
platforms. We will briefly discuss these insights below.

It has to be able to capture and depict knowledge, that is
to say (valid and current) insights, experiences,
concepts, perspectives, opinions arguments etc. of
informed participants.
Ideally, it contains insights from more than one person
alone and relates these ideas to one another.
It has to be visual in the sense that the knowledge
mapped in the image is spatially positioned within a
diagram, visual metaphor (as above), sketch, map, or
photograph, or combinations thereof.
It has to support the (group) process of knowledge
integration among various people. It should in other
words facilitate (synchronous or asynchronous)
conversations.
To achieve this, the visualization has to be revisable or
flexible, so as to be able to react to changing insights in
a group over the course of time.

The selection criteria for these concepts were that a)
they have to be highly cited, i.e., have achieved more than at
least one hundred citations (in Google scholar), b) they have
to specifically address (at least partly) images as knowledge
exchange mechanisms and c) relate them to collaboration
contexts (to a lesser or greater extent).
We were also interested in concepts from radically
different domains, so that different kinds of insights into
collaborative visualization could be fruitfully integrated.
To select highly influential concepts, we have counted
the total amount of citations reported on Google Scholar for
the first three articles (in terms of citations) employing the
concept in the article title or abstract. This has lead to the
following list of seminal concepts:

350

TABLE I.
KEY CONCEPTS RELATED TO KNOWLEDGE
VISUALIZATION FROM DIFFERENT DOMAINS

Concept

Concept
Domain
Sociology

Originator

Epistemic object

Epistemology

1919

Dynamic
affordance
Transitional
object

Management

Notation criteria

Philosophy
(of Art)
Computer
Science

KnorrCetina [5]
Cook
&
Brown [11]
Eden
&
Ackermann
[8, 9]
Goodman
[15]
Green [14]

Information
Design
Sociology

Tufte [13]

924

Latour [16]

860

Instruction
Sociology

499
366

e-learning

Horn [12]
Henderson
[4]
Suthers [10]

Logic

Peirce [7]

283

TABLE II.

Art history
Psychology

Elkins [6]
Tversky
[18]

113
100

Derived
KV
principle
Visual
Variety

Boundary
Object

Cognitive
dimensions
notation
Confection

Management

of

Immutable
mobile
Visual language
Conscription
Device
Representational
Guidance
Diagrammatic
reasoning
Visual hybrids
Visuospatial
reasoning

Star et al.
[3]

Citations
(Ʃ top 3)
2083

1523
1200

1120
110

Figure 2. A segmented overview of key concepts for knowledge
visualization

More important than their differences, however, are the
at times astonishing (given their radically different
backgrounds) similarities among these concepts. In the
following table, we have articulated key requirements for
knowledge visualizations (KV) directly deduced from these
seminal concepts.

324

These concepts not only differ with regard to their
disciplinary background, but also with regard to their
respective focus.
As we have shown in Figure 2, the concepts can be
distinguished regarding their emphasis on the role of images
or on the actual collaboration that (graphic) artifacts can
support.
The resulting segmentation shows two main groups of
concepts, namely those focusing on visualization
(represented by visualization scholars such as Edward Tufte,
James Elkins, or Barbara Tversky), and those focusing
primarily on collaboration (visualized as empty bubbles in
the matrix, such as the ethnographic work of Barbara KnorrCetina in the context of scientific discovery or of Kathryn
Henderson in the area of design engineering).

351

REQUIREMENTS DERIVED FROM THE CONCEPTS
Base Concepts

Main Insight of the
Concepts

Confection;
Visual Hybrids; Visual
Language; Boundary
Object; Notation
Criteria; Cognitive
Dimensions of Notation

An image that is able to
capture and convey the
knowledge of different
people requires different
ways of expression,
ranging from simple
sketched marks to
complex rich visual
metaphors contained in a
single image.
To be useful for knowledge sharing and
collaboration, a visualization must be able to be
switched from a fixed
mode to a flexible,
modifiable mode and
back.
A visualization for
collaboration must
provide assistance for
reasoning, reflection, and
linking items in new ways
so as to facilitate new
discoveries from the
shared insights.

Visual
Unfree
zing

Immutable Mobile;
Boundary Object;
Conscription Device;
Notation Criteria;
Cognitive Dimension of
Notation; Transitional
Object

Visual
Discovery

Diagrammatic
Reasoning; Visuospatial
Reasoning; Dynamic
Affordance;
Representational
Guidance; Conscription
Device; Cognitive
Dimensions of Notation

Visual
Playfulness

Visual
Guidance

Representational
Guidance;
Diagrammatic
Reasoning; Transitional
Object; Conscription
Device

Representational
guidance; Transitional
Object; Boundary
Object; Diagrammatic
Reasoning; Dynamic
Affordance

conventional formats such as statistical charts, tables, or
maps” [13, p.122]. Tufte himself thus envisions that there
are other visualizations than simple data or information
representations.

In order to overcome rigid
assumptions or role
definitions and narrow
perspectives, the visual
should provide playful
mechanisms to reframe
issues and cajole
participants into a
different mindset and thus
generate new insights and
intensify collaboration.
The visual has to fulfill a
dual role of not only
capturing and structuring
contributions, but also of
providing a process of
doing so in a useful
sequence of actions.

Also Latour’s concept of Immutable Mobiles emphasizes
the need for visual variety defining such artifacts as
consisting of “figures, diagrams, plates, texts, silhouettes.”
[16, p. 37].
Latour’s concept can also be used to explain the concept
of Visual Unfreezing. Inscriptions are mobile as their
elements can easily move, but these inscriptions become
immutable and fixed on paper, once they have been
confirmed by all participants.
Star and Griesemer’s concept of a Boundary Object also
emphasizes this dual nature of collaborative artifacts.
Boundary Objects, according to Star and Griesemer [3], are
“both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints
of the several parties employing them, yet robust enough to
maintain a common identity across sites.” Boundary objects
are weakly structured in common use, and become strongly
structured in personal use. They may be abstract and
conceptual or concrete and specific. They have different
meanings in different social or professional contexts, but
their structure is common enough to more than one
professional community to make them recognizable means
of translation.

Compared to the original list of knowledge visualization
attributes presented earlier, we notice that visual playfulness
is a new item, while visual variety, visual unfreezing, and
visual discovery, as well as visual guidance are existing
ones that are confirmed. Based on these attributes we can
now provide a normative definition of what a knowledge
visualization should amount to, namely a communicable
image, consisting of various visual notations, that is
interactively annotated in a playful yet systematic manner
and leads to new discoveries while remaining flexible to
incorporate future revisions and insights.

The principle of Visual Discovery is not unique to the
domain of knowledge visualization, as detecting new
patterns is also the main aim of the field of information
visualization. In the knowledge visualization context, the
pursue of novel insights takes on a different form, as they
are generated not out of the analysis and mapping of mass
data, but rather visualized individual and collective views,
opinions, assessments, and analyses.

In the next section, we present a few of the above listed
seminal concepts in more detail to show how they
contribute to the emerging principles of knowledge
visualization.
IV.

SELECT SEMINAL CONCEPTS IN DETAIL

To illustrate the principle of Visual Variety, we can use
Elkin’s idea of Visual Hybrids, Tufte’s concept of
Confection and Latour’s notion of Immutable Mobile:

This notion of insight through a process of interacting
with a visual is probably best captured in the concept of
Diagrammatic Reasoning that was first introduced by
Charles Peirce [7]. The visualization becomes a think tool
with which an individual or a group tackles a difficult
problem. A simple example of diagrammatic reasoning is
the positioning of elements according to their similarities in
overlapping or containment circles, as in a Euler or Venn
diagram. From this positioning, new insights can emerge,
for example groups with many versus groups with few
members.

A visual hybrid, according to Elkins [6] is a graphic
notation system that not only relies on one image genre, but
combines two or more visualization formats (such as
graphs, charts, tables, diagrams, genealogical trees, etc.).
According to Elkin “Especially given the hurtling
development of new image technologies, mixed images can
be said to be the norm rather than the marginal exception”
[6, p. 91].
Very close to this notion is the idea of a visual
confection. A Confection according to Tufte “is an assembly
of many visual events, selected from various streams of a
story, then brought together [….] Confections illustrate an
argument, present and enforce visual comparisons, combine
the real and the imagined, and tell us yet another story” [13,
p. 121]. “Confections are not direct representations of preexisting scenes, nor are they the result of placing data into

The principle of Visual Guidance is a particularly
important concept for knowledge visualization, as images in
this context are not only used as representations of data but
as catalysts for a collaboration process. Images act as
signposts to what should be discussed and in what order.
We find this attribute in Suthers’ concept of

352

x

Representational Guidance [10] in the context of e-learning
and in Cook and Brown’s concept of Dynamic Affordance
in the management context [11]. An image used in
collaboration can act as a representational guidance,
according to Suthers, by providing certain constraints to a
discussion, by stimulating certain actions in a group, and by
drawing attention to certain discussion topics (that are made
salient graphically). Dynamic affordance, according to Cook
and Brown’s perspective, is what becomes possible when
knowledge is used as a tool in the context of situated
activity [11, p. 392]. These situated activities can be
influenced through artifacts that invite participants to do one
thing rather than another. Visuals thus provide affordances
to steer the discussion in a particular direction.

x

x

In terms of theoretical implications, we have seen that
in spite of their great differences in background, the
examined concepts have an astonishing congruence with
regard to the underlying mechanisms that they discuss.
Anyone working on a future theory of collaborative
knowledge visualization is thus well advised to venture
outside the realm of his or her own discipline and make use
of the insights generated in such diverse disciplines as
design, instruction, sociology, psychology, or art history. In
this way the domain of knowledge visualization could also
make this often dispersed knowledge accessible to scholars
and practitioners alike.

Regarding the new principle of Visual Playfulness, we
can – for instance – use Eden and Ackermann’s notion of
Transitional Objects: In their book on strategic management
[8, p.71], Eden and Ackermann state that to do something
enjoyable together can make collaboration easier; for
example tinkering with a strategy visualization used as a
transitional object. Used in this provisional, exploratory or
playful way, the visualization encourages an open dialogue
and is capable of change by the group in real-time (ibid.).
According to Eden and Ackermann, the participants who
interact in this way waste less energy in impression
management and are more immersed in their knowledge
exchange than they would otherwise be. In this way
playfulness can be conducive to productive collaboration.

V.

VI.

x

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have made an attempt to define the
requirements of a knowledge visualization that deserves the
label. We have done so based on our practical experience [1,
2], the cognitive and collaborative dimensions framework
[14, 17] and based on seminal concepts in the literature on
collaborating with artifacts [3-16]. This has resulted in an
extended list of requirements for knowledge visualizations
that we captured in five knowledge visualization principles.
These principles can be used to assess or improve
knowledge visualization templates used in knowledge
sharing tasks of teams.

IMPLICATIONS

In terms of practical implications, the principles
derived from the review of seminal concepts can be used as
a checklist for group facilitators in the preparation stage of
their work. They can use the identified attributes to evaluate
or improve their discussion templates and thus make them
more conducive to knowledge elicitation, integration and
application. More specifically, the five principles derived
above can be used as check questions before knowledge
creation, sharing or application session, as exemplified
below:
x

Visual Discovery: Does the visual template provide
affordances to connect elements in a new way or look at
the big picture and detect new patterns?
Visual Playfulness: Does the visual invite participants
to change perspectives, assume new roles, immerse in
the collaborative effort, let go of assumptions or
otherwise reframe issues creatively?
Visual Guidance: Does the visual offer a clear
‘roadmap’ of how it should be iteratively populated or
completed? Is it clear where to start in the visualization
and how to proceed?

In future research, we would like to see which of these
requirements are in a trade-off relationship with one another
and how they can be achieved through the help of
interactive visualization software and adequate facilitation
interventions.

Visual Variety: Have you provided a sufficiently rich
visual vocabulary that enables participants to express
their ideas through various ways, such as through
diagrams, sketches, metaphors, or simple text
additions?
Visual Unfreezing: Have you incorporated ways in
which certain states of a collaboratively drawn
visualization can be captured and ‘frozen’ for later
reference? Are there clear criteria when a frozen visual
can be re-elaborated and changed again?

353

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10] D.D. Suthers (2001) Towards a Systematic Study of
Representational Guidance for Collaborative Learning
Discourse. Journal of Universal Computer Science (J.UCS),
7(3), 254-277.
[11] S. D. N. Cook, J. S. Brown (1999). "Bridging
epistemologies: the generative dance between organizational
knowledge and organizational knowing." Organization
Science 10(4): 381-400.
[12] RE Horn (1998) Visual Language: Global Communication
for the 21st Century. Bainbridge Island (WA): MacroVU
Press.
[13] E.R. Tufte (1997) Visual Explanations. Cheshire, CT:
Graphics Press.
[14] TRG Green (1996) Usability Analysis of Visual
Programming Environments: A Cognitive Dimensions
Framework. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing,
1996
[15] N. Goodman (1969) Languages of Art. London: Oxford
University Press.
[16] B. Latour (1990) “Visualisation and Cognition: Drawing
Things Together” Michael Lynch and Steve Woolgar (Eds.)
Representation in Scientific Activity, Cambridge Mass: MIT
Press, , 19-68.
[17] S. Bresciani, A.F. Blackwell M. J. Eppler (2008) “A
Collaborative Dimensions Framework: Understanding the
Mediating Role of Conceptual Visualizations in
Collaborative Knowledge Work” Proceedings of the 41st
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS 2008). Hawaii: IEEE Press.
[18] B. Tversky (2005) “Visuospatial Reasoning” The Cambridge
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning. Eds. K. Holyoak and
R. Morrison, Chapter 10. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

M.J. Eppler, R.A.Burkard (2004) “Knowledge Visualization.
Towards a New Discipline and its Fields of Application”
Schwartz, D.G. (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Knowledge
Management. Idea Group.
M.J. Eppler, & R. Burkhard, (2007) “Visual Representations
in Knowledge Management: framework and cases” Journal
of Knowledge Management, 4(11), 112-122
SL Star & JR Griesemer (1989) “Institutional Ecology,
'Translations' and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and
Professionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology”
Social Studies of Science 19(4), 387–420.
K. Henderson (1991) "Flexible Sketches and Inflexible Data
Bases: Visual Communication, Conscription Devices, and
Boundary Objects in Design Engineering“ Science,
Technology & Human Values, vol. 16, 448-473.
K. Knorr-Cetina (2003) Epistemic Cultures. How the
Sciences Make Knowledge, [1999]. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press Cambridge.
J. Elkins (1999) The Domain of Images. Ithaca and London:
Cornell University Press.
H.G. Michael Hoffmann (2003) "Peirce's "Diagrammatic
Reasoning" as a Solution of the Learning Paradox" Process
Pragmatism: Essays on a Quiet Philosophical Revolution.
Ed. Guy Debrock. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 121-143.
C. Eden, F. Ackermann (1998) Making Strategy, The
Journey of Strategic Management. London: SAGE
Publications.
C. Eden, F. Ackermann (2006). “Where Next for Problem
Structuring Methods”. Journal of the Operational Research
Society 57(7): 766-768.

354

