2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Sculpture Meets Ecological Science: Marijana Tadiü’s Wandering Albatross
Exhibitions & The Concept Of Philopatry
Christine Nicholls
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia
{Christine.Nicholls@flinders.edu.au}
Adelaide plant as a skilled tradesman, the Tadiü family
moved to South Australia, settling in Adelaide, for a
while living near the beach at the Glenelg Migrant Hostel
and later renting a bungalow at St Marys. After several
years in Australia, the family returned to Yugoslavia, but
their return was short-lived. Once back in Adelaide,
Marijana Tadiü took up office work, also taking on
several other part-time jobs, mostly in the building
industry. During that period she was awarded a Master
Builder’s certificate, the first woman in South Australia
to do so. In 1983 she enrolled in the South Australian
School of Art, majoring in sculpture. Whilst attending art
school Tadiü began seriously planning for an artistic
future. After graduating in 1986 she began working as
professional artist.

Abstract
The concept of philopatry is most often applied to
animal, bird and insect populations. As such, it is closely
connected to the disciplines of zoology, animal science,
behavioural ecology and non-human genetics. Only
rarely (in reality, almost never) is this concept deployed
in relation to human population movement. Yet, as a
result of colonisation, globalisation, intermarriage,
wars, political unrest and other diasporic forces,
increasing numbers of migrants and asylum seekers now
settle in places far away from their countries of birth.
Travel, often involving long distances back and forth
between people’s adoptive and natal homelands, and
frequently taking place on a repetitive, seasonal, basis,
has become a significant contemporary phenomenon. In
the Yugoslav-born, Australian conceptual sculptor
Marijana Tadiü’s recent installation and sculptural
exhibitions, collectively titled Wandering Albatross,
exhibited in South Australia February-March 2011, the
artist has appropriated the concept of philopatry,
applying it to ideas about contemporary patterns of
migrancy with thrilling conceptual and aesthetic results.

I Marijana Tadiü’s Wandering Albatross
Exhibitions
Wandering Albatross, the umbrella title of Tadiü’s
two Adelaide Fringe Festival 2011 exhibitions, on show
more or less concurrently at South Australia’s BMG
Galleries (BMGArts, 25 February – 19 March 2011) and
AC Arts Gallery Light Square (16 February -10 March
2011), mark the culmination of Tadiü’s art-making thus
far. In a career now spanning 25 years of uninterrupted
practice, Tadiü, who lives and breathes her artistic
métier, has developed a distinctive body of work
characterised by subject matter to which she keeps
returning. Tadiü’s enduring themes and affiliations are
clearly apparent in the titles that she bestows upon her
artworks.
Tadiü conceived Wandering Albatross as two
interrelated exhibitions, distinct but connected spaces.
These elegantly mounted, provocative art exhibitions
were conceptualised as spaces between which audiences
were encouraged to travel, like birds of passage. In these
exhibitions the artist evoked, in visual terms, concepts
relating to birds, flight, navigation, and the traversal of
large stretches of water for the purpose of survival or
simply that of seeking a better life. Balancing these ideas
were artistic and thematic concerns about nesting and
sanctuary.
The artworks in Wandering Albatross are analysable
as visual metaphors relating to border crossing, the
migration experience and its double, ‘arrival’. Implicitly

Keywords--- Sculpture; visual art; migrancy;
philopatry; Wandering Albatross.

Introduction
Australian conceptual artist Marijana Tadiü’s
activities encompass the creative fields of sculpture,
installation, public art and design. Born in Brcko, near
the border of Croatia in the former Yugoslavia (now the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina), Tadiü’s childhood
was spent in a house on the banks of the River Sava, a
tribute of the Danube. That ‘first place’ – of deeply
flowing water and movement – profoundly shaped
Tadiü’s artistic consciousness. Today, ideas associated
with the urgent energy of rapidly moving water inform
Tadiü’s art making. Underpinning her artistic practice is
an awareness of human population movement (migrancy,
in the broadest sense of that word) as a metaphor for the
human condition.
In 1969, as a teenager, Marijana Tadiü migrated to
Australia with her parents and younger brother. Initially
the family stayed in a migrant hostel in New South
Wales. When her father Joko found work at Chrysler’s

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.105

414

posing questions about what might truly constitute a
‘destination’, Tadiü also explores the connected concepts
of ‘destination’ and ‘destiny’, words that share the same
Latin root. (One may end up in an entirely different place
in life’s journey than the end point originally envisaged).
Poetic visual tropes about what old Chinese
philosophers so tellingly described as ‘crossing the great
water’ act as guiding metaphors in Tadiü’s work in
another sense too, leading viewers towards

understanding the tacit side of the emotions relating to
the migration experience, since emotions also have a
metaphoric structure. In part, Tadiü expresses this
affective dimension by means of the often rowdy,
occasionally argumentative, but mostly joyous
songfulness of Australian native birds, whose songs have
been recorded in Australian backyards. Interspersed by
meaningful silences, these sounds accompany the
exhibition.

Figure 1. Marijana Tadiü, Songlines, (detail, screens 13-16) 2011, recycled wood, computerised LED
lighting, 24 screens, each 45 x 120 x 15 cm
Birdsong (Bird Sounds) was therefore an integral
part of the AC Arts Light Square exhibition, as was its
companion piece, Songlines, comprising 24 wall screens,
all beautifully crafted from recycled Australian
hardwood. Computerised lighting emanated from each
separate panel, suggesting dawn or dusk – the times
when birds are most communicative. They are also the
times of day when early-morning or fading, crepuscular
light flickers through nooks and crannies in the wooded
areas. Each bird song is visually represented by its own
unique sonogram pattern, which appears on an individual
screen. Such visualisation of birdsong within a sculptural
exhibition is original, powerful in affect and rich in
metaphorical association, opening up possibilities for
those working in both fields.
Included in this syncopated avian chatter are the
idiosyncratic, musical sounds of various Australian
native birds. Among those that can be heard are
Australian magpies, three-wattled bellbirds, rainbow
lorikeets, crimson rosellas and laughing kookaburras,
intermixed with the distinctive twittering of various
introduced species. These include an albatross and her
chick, field sparrows, and a spotted turtledove, native to
eastern Asia. All are talking nineteen to the dozen.
Regardless of whether the birds are natives or introduced
species, they are philopatric and migratory at certain
points in their life cycle.
This exhibition entails a songful salute to Australia’s
unique environment and to our cultural diversity.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the occasionally
quarrelsome and belligerent, but mostly joyful,
cacophony of this sound installation.
The sound installations in Wandering Albatross are
also significant insofar as Tadiü deploys bird sounds and
short silences as vehicles for explaining the short bursts
of happiness and the convivial, familial chatter that is
sometimes followed by a soundless lull of self-reflection
on the part of those human beings who brave long,
hazardous voyages across the sea, by plane or by boat.

Often they are traveling to destinations that are only
partially known or even totally unknown. At various
stages of such journeys different emotions will
predominate; hope and fear will ebb and flow according
to circumstance.

Figure 2. Marijana Tadiü, 2011, Suspended
Sanctuary (study) recycled hardwood, resin,
steel cable, 190 cm diameter
Hanging from the AC Arts Light Square Gallery
ceiling was Suspended Sanctuary, a large nest created
from recycled hardwood and resin. This work speaks
eloquently to the need for a place of respite from the
ravages of journeying. It also speaks to the borderless
world occupied by birds. Offering her art works as visual
tropes,
Marijana
Tadiü
emphasises
the
interconnectedness of the human family and the
importance of balanced, mutually respectful and
reciprocal relations in all human interactions. Humans’
relations with the natural environment were also
highlighted.
The centrepiece of this exhibition was undoubtedly
the eponymously named Wandering Albatross on display
at the BMG Gallery. This minimalist, four-panelled
415

exhibit is comprised of acrylic boxes and recycled
acupuncture needles on MDF. The focal point of the
work is an albatross, its distinctive shape delineated by
her wingspan, extended in full flight. The bird’s majestic
form has been traced in outline using acupuncture
needles, and the delicate patterning that results is an
inspired touch. Tadiü’s ‘needlepoint’ albatross soars
across waves, or perhaps mountains, or whatever the

imagination can supply. Outlines of breakers or
landforms cast delicate shadows over the stark white
backdrop, lending this work a quality akin to that of fine
lacework on patterned openwork fabric. Tadiü’s subtle
use of skilfully arranged acupuncture needles to create
pictorial representations affords this work – along with
others in which she uses acupuncture needles – a
calligraphic quality, especially when viewed from afar.

Figure 3. Marijana Tadiü, 2011, Wandering Albatross (detail, Panel 2) recycled acupuncture needles on
MDF, acrylic boxes, 4 panels, each 100 x 150 x 15 cm, BMG Gallery Adelaide. Photograph: Grant
Hancock.
Marijana Tadiü’s refined visual patterning also
provides viewers with a fresh narrative in relation to
particular groups of recent émigrés who are less
fortunate than many other Australians - including the
artist and her immediate family members. Understanding
Wandering Albatross simultaneously as something-initself and also as a coherent visual metaphor - which is
precisely what Tadiü asks of viewers - this work presents
an important counterpoint to the largely populist, raucous
and often ill-informed railing about asylum seekers that
currently prevails on both sides of politics. The elaborate
trans-Pacific and transatlantic networks traced in Tadiü’s
artworks apply to those human beings who seek life and
refuge (temporary or permanent) away from their own
specific points of origin whilst at the same time needing
to retain a concept of ‘home’ relating to their ‘first
place’.

II. Sculpture and Ecological Science:
Applying the Concept of Philopatry to
Human Migrant Groups
While philopatry is a concept most often associated
with non-human animals, insects, and birds, and for
which avian species are known to be neurologically
hardwired, it can also be meaningfully applied as a trope
to describe the behaviour of certain human populations.
The notion is particularly relevant to those members of
migrant groups living in Australia today, who regularly
travel back and forth between their new home and their
places of origin, where they retain strong, often
inalienable,
ties.
That
Australia’s
philopatric
communities are marked by a high level of diversity is
observable in the differing but complementary forms that
Tadiü has created for her Philopatric Colony, another
work that functions as a potent visual metaphor. In titling
this work Tadiü has carefully chosen the word ‘colony’;

416

the concept’s multivalency is purposeful. Formed from
marble dust and white cement, standing erect on black
granite, these distinctive abstract shapes suggest that
notwithstanding the fact that there is considerable
variation between humans, we nevertheless belong to the
same larger family.
Like other birds, albatrosses demonstrate strong
philopatry, returning to the same breeding and nesting
sites for many years. Albatrosses are also colonial, most
often nesting on remote islands free from natural
predators.1. One aspect of Tadiü’s granite-based, cast
bronze sculptures, Sky-pointing ritual I & II, is the
specific allusion that these works make to the complex
courtship rituals of particular albatross species, noisy
events that involve honking, whistling, performing
synchronised dances, bill-flanking, stretching their necks
and pointing their bills vertically, skyward. The latter is
described as ‘sky-calling’ or ‘sky-pointing’ [4, 6].
Following this display, the actual mating is a short-lived
affair, but like (some) humans, albatrosses mate for life
[4]. The sleek, quasi-avian forms that Tadiü has created
in her Sky-pointing ritual sculptures are influenced by
the shapes of the fallen palm leaves that she loves to
collect from the Arboretum at Urrbrae.
Sensing the Way, in which Tadiü uses seagrass and
resin, interwoven bowerbird-like, and related works
Staging the Way, Power of the Group and Reciprocity,
further extend this exhibition’s thématique into the
realms of the social and cultural, while expanding upon
the concept of philopatry. Another sub-theme emerges in
Wandering Albatross: that of the imperative to care
about the welfare of our fellow human beings. Included
in this equation, by implication, is the idea of caring for
those asylum seekers who, in the hope of starting a new
life on Australia’s shores, venture out in rickety boats,
some losing their lives, some arriving safely by sea
(although the numbers who arrive by sea to Australia are
very small compared with other destination countries
[1,5].
Equally significant in terms of the thématique of this
exhibition are the words ‘RECIPROCITY’, and
‘Sanctuary’, the only text-based elements in Wandering
Albatross, sketched out with acupuncture needles that
cast suggestive shadows. While it is overwhelmingly the
concept of philopatry that ties these exhibitions together
and affords them curatorial coherence, the latter are also
key words and concepts in Marijana Tadiü’s artistic
vocabulary. Indirectly they evoke the graffiti-word
‘ETERNITY’ written with chalk around Sydney last
century by the reformed alcoholic Arthur Stace. For
Stace, who continued writing that same, single word for
a period of more than 35 years, it was a means of
spreading the Christian gospel in which he so fervently
believed. While Marijana Tadiü’s worldview is a secular
one, like many others of similar persuasion she seeks an
ethical and meaningful basis for co-existing with others
in today’s complex, highly mobile world. They are
cornerstone word-concepts providing insight into Tadiü’s
core values, especially with respect to the need to accept
responsibility for less fortunate others – including those

others whose worldviews and life experiences that differ
from one’s own.

Figure 4. Marijana Tadiü 2011, Philopatric
Colony, marble dust and white cement, granite
base, individual forms, 60 – 70 x 20 x 20 cm,
BMG Gallery Adelaide. Photograph: Grant
Hancock.
Such a philosophy also comes to mind with respect
to Tadiü’s two Subjective Destination works (Subjective
Destination 1, created from seagrass and resin, and
Subjective Destination 11, sculpted from marble dust and
white cement). Subjective Destination 1 has been
sculpted from seagrass washed up on Carrickalinga
Beach to the south of Adelaide. The sea’s strong currents
twist and twirl the little sticks of seagrass, fashioning
them into compact, interlocking balls. Tadiü has reshaped these into forms that are suggestive of, to use her
own words, “circular migration patterns and navigation
that takes place between the northern and southern
hemispheres”, (Personal Communication, Marijana
Tadiü to author, January 11th 2011) again suggesting
philopatric cycles, whilst remaining redolent of natural
processes. These semi-circular forms, balanced
precariously like small rocking boats or cradles, seem to
embody the expectations and anticipation that migrants
bring with them as they embark on their journeying.
The key word here is ‘anticipation’, which can entail
a range of emotions including expectation, doubt, hope
and fear. When the judge and poet Barron Field (17861846), himself an English migrant, and the author of the
first book of verse to be published in this country,
claimed that in Australia “We’ve nothing left us except
anticipation” [3] he might well have been describing the
mixed feelings of today’s migrants - especially asylum
417

seekers, many of whom have endured firsthand the
miseries of war and exile - as they make their way
towards Australia.

scientifically-based, in which human behaviour is
described as philopatric. Whilst the philopatric migration
cycles may not constitute universal human behaviour,
nevertheless, given the large number of migrants from
other parts of the world who retain strong links with their
countries of birth (‘site fidelity’) and even on occasion
display ‘natal philopatry’, returning to their countries of
birth to find a spouse or partner, this should be regarded
as an interesting aporia.
One can only speculate on the reasons as to why the
phenomenon of human philopatry (very much enabled by
colonisation, which is also associated with non-human
philopatry) and globalisation (something that has always
defined bird behaviour) has not been researched nor
found its way into the literature.

III. Discussion of the Concept of Philopatry
in Marijana Tadiü’s Wandering Albatross
While it is quite clear that the philopatric cycles of
human beings do not exactly replicate those of other
species, in any case the scientific literature pertaining to
non-human species indicates that there is considerable
variation between the philopatric migration patterns of
different species [4, 6, 7, 8, 9]. What is perhaps
surprising is that as far as I have been able to ascertain,
there are no academic publications in Human Ecology,
Sociology or other disciplines, either humanities- or

Figure 5. Marijana Tadiü 2011, Sky-Pointing Ritual I (right) and II, cast bronze, granite base, 125 x 20 x 20
cm.
As Stanley Benn quite openly declared in his
‘Egalitarianism and Equal Consideration of Interest’:
“…not to possess human shape is a disqualifying
condition” [2: 62 ff]. In other words Benn is only willing
to afford ‘equal consideration’ to all human beings, and
clearly does not extend this largesse to other species. It is
possible that it is a function of humans’ claim to a
‘special status’ as a species. Hence we stubbornly resist
our behaviours being defined in terms of animals’ or
birds’ behavioural characteristics. While a substantial
literature exists that exhorts humans to accept other
species as equals [see, for instance, 9], which, from our
perspective involves an elevation of the current status of
non-human species without relinquishing our own
sovereign status, it is only comparatively rarely that the
reverse applies. Humans seem ill-prepared and
insufficiently humble to appraise ourselves honestly as
just one animal species among many, and as, moreover, a
species with many characteristics in common with the
so-called ‘lower species’.

Figure 6. Marijana Tadiü 2011, Subjective
Destination II, marble dust and white cement
cast, 40 x 80 x 20 cm

418

The foregoing is, however, merely speculative and it
is hoped that more research will take place in this field to
determine the applicability of the concept of philopatry
to contemporary post-migratory patterns of human

behaviour. Nonetheless, it is time to begin to consider
human behaviour in the wider field of animal and other
non-human species ethology.

Figure 7. Marijana Tadiü 2011, Wandering Albatross, recycled acupuncture needles on MDF, acrylic
boxes 4 panels, each 100 x 150 x 15 cm, BMG Gallery Adelaide. Photograph: Grant Hancock.
February
2011,
http://www.aph.gov.au/senate/
committee/legcon_ctte/estimates/sup_0910/diac/48_qon.
pdf
[2] Benn, Stanley, 1996, “Egalitarianism and the Equal
Consideration of Interests”, Chapter13, in Equality:
Selected Readings, (Ed. Louis P. Pojman), Oxford
University Press, Australia and New Zealand.
[3] Field, Barron, 1823, ‘On Reading the Controversy
Between Lord Byron and Mr Bowles’, in First Fruits of
Australian Poetry, The Kangaroo and Other Poems,
University of Sydney Library, prepared against the print
edition published by Barn on the Hill, Sydney 1941,
originally published 1819, Second Edition 1923, online
version
published
1998,
viewed
14/2/11,
http://setis.library.usyd.edu.au/ozlit/pdf/v00022.pdf.
[4] Fisher, H.I., 1976, “Some dynamics of a breeding colony
of Laysan Albatrosses”, in The Wilson Bulletin 88:121–
142.
[5] Phillips, Janet and Spinks, Harriet, (Social Policy
Section) 11 February 2011, “Boat Arrivals since 1976”,
Australian Parliamentary Library, Parliament of
Australia, Department of Parliamentary Services,
February
2011,
Canberra,
viewed
11th
www.aph.gov.au/library/pubs/BN/sp/BoatArrivals.pdf
[6] Pickering, S.P.C. & S.D. Berrow, 2001, “COURTSHIP
BEHAVIOUR OF THE WANDERING ALBATROSS
DIOMEDEA EXULANS AT BIRD ISLAND, SOUTH
GEORGIA”, in Marine Ornithology 29: 29–37.
[7] Pomeroy, P.P., S. D. Twiss, and P. Redman, October
2000, “Philopatry, Site Fidelity and Local Kin
Associations within Grey Seal Breeding Colonies”, in
Ethology, Volume 106, Issue 10, pages 899 –919
[8] Rabouam, C., Thibault, J.-C., Bretagnolle, V., 1998,
“Natal Philopatry and Close Inbreeding in Cory's
Shearwater (Calonectris diomedea)” in Auk 115 (2):
483–486.
[9] Singer, Peter, 2003, 'Not for Humans Only: The Place of
Nonhumans in Environmental Issues', in Environmental
Ethics: an anthology, (Eds. Andrew Light and Holmes
Rolston III), Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, p 55-65.
[10] Wheelright, Nathaniel T. and Mauck, Robert A., April
1998, “PHILOPATRY, NATAL DISPERSAL, AND
INBREEDING AVOIDANCE IN AN ISLAND OF
POPULATION OF SAVANNAH SPARROWS”, in
Ecology Volume 79, Number 3: 755-767.

Conclusion
To conclude, Wandering Albatross is a coherent
visual arts exhibition of considerable aesthetic impact.
The themes and issues that it raises are significant at this
time in Australian history and also in our shared human
history, (mostly) characterised as it is now by aesthetic
and conceptual vacuity. Conceptually complex,
rehearsing themes and ideas about migrancy, philopatry,
belonging and ‘unbelonging’, navigation and the
environment, nesting, home-making, kinesis and resting,
the artworks in these two interrelated exhibitions
contribute to our understanding of migrant Australians’
lifeways while speaking eloquently to the extraordinarily
generative effects of dislocation and relocation on
cultures and identity.
In Wandering Albatross Tadiü's complexities are
provocative; evoking the flight of the migratory birds
that daily ply their hazardous courses over strong ocean
currents, eventually nesting in strange, distant lands.
Tadiü's evocation of the concept of philopatry is
particularly challenging, if not confrontational, in terms
of its more normative application to non-human species.
This key concept also makes this pair of interconnected
exhibitions extraordinarily thought provoking. Finally,
this exhibition speaks to those migrants (‘asylum
seekers’) who arrive on Australia’s (and other) shores in
small, leaky boats, seeking a good, or at least, a better
life. That Tadiü has the capacity to realise such subtly
interconnected themes in visual terms is testament to her
originality and artistic power.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the artist, Marijana
Tadiü.

References
[1]

Australian Senate, Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Committee, Answers to questions on notice,
Immigration Portfolio, 20 October 2009, viewed 9th

419

