2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Practice of using virtual reconstruction in the restoration of monumental painting of
the Church of the Transfiguration of Our Saviour on Nereditsa Hill

Petrova, Yulia Anatolievna; Tsimbal, Irina Valerievna; Laska, Tatiana Vladimirovna; Golubkov, Sergey
Vitalievich
Faculty of Arts
Saint-Petersburg State University
St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation
e-mail: office@inform.pu.ru

Abstract— There are many architectural monuments and old
relics, the restoration of which is an unrealizable task. This
may be due to the great amount of hard work to be done,
complexity of the work, lack of information about the object
and other reasons. In such cases, the virtual reconstruction is
an effective tool.

Keywords-virtual, reconstruction, restoration, monumental,
painting, architectural, cultural, heritage

I.

Historical sites of the Russian monumental art, due to
their centuries-long life, undergo inevitable changes in color
and structure of frescoes, destruction or alteration of the
original architecture. Numerous natural, climatic and
anthropogenic reasons bring about significant changes,
partial or complete destruction of works of art. Despite the
fact that it has been 65 years since the end of the Second
World War, many ancient Russian art masterpieces still have
not been restored to an acceptable display state. A
considerable amount of materials is stored in museums
waiting to be reinstalled in interiors of churches.
Nowadays wide experience in the exploration and
restoration of monuments, as well as modern technologies
allow to integrate the information in specific areas of
knowledge, making it easily accessible to the public. In our
case, we refer to architectural monuments of ancient Russia.
Information about this objects is dispersed across many
sources: books, articles, drawings and sketches, located in
different storage locations, and sometimes even in different
countries. An integrated information database will enable the
use of all currently available information. Creation of a
single source of information based on reconstruction of a
monument will help to understand the historical context and
conditions under which the object was built, to reproduce the
lost and missing data on each monument, and to update the
existing traditional art databases. With enough data it
becomes possible to present a monument at various stages of
its construction and development, to analyze and
demonstrate options for its reconstruction, to illustrate the
features and history of its painting. The method of sequential
computer reconstruction allows not just to review the virtual
model of the monument, but also to get details, associated
with the whole life of the object.
Creation and demonstration of historical reconstructions,
as a progressive method of presentation of ancient exhibits,
makes it possible to achieve a new level of preservation and
transmission of cultural heritage.

Saint-Petersburg State University developed a method of
restoration of partially or completely lost monumental
paintings. As an example and a practical application of new
technology there was completed the virtual reconstruction of
fresco paintings of the Church of the Transfiguration of Our
Savior on Nereditsa Hill.
The church was almost completely destroyed during the
Second World War. It appeared to be possible to reconstruct
an architectural view of the church according to the old
drawings, but rare frescos of the XIIth century had been
irretrievably lost. The extant parts of frescoes consist of
325,000 pieces. Although they are being on restoration now,
but this work is still far from completion. In this case the
method of computer-based reconstruction is much more
efficient, it helps us to avoid mistakes and find a compromise
decision on the issue of reconstruction or restoration of the
object.
As a result of the project, a fairly accurate reconstruction of
the object has been produced and a method of reconstruction
of the lost fresco painting has been developed. The basis and
sources of virtual reconstruction were archaeological
materials, archival and contemporary historical, architectural
and art papers, scientific research in this field.
In the process of virtual reconstruction there were used two
main methods: a technology of computer graphics as well as
analog pictorial reconstruction. The first method makes it
possible to complete the work of reconstruction with complete
fidelity, whereas the second method helps us to convey the
artist's style, to reproduce the form, direction and strength of
the artist’s touch and texture of the frescos.
The results of the project can be used for further practical
work for the restoration of the object. The methodology,
developed by authors of the project, may open new possibilities
for the restoration of other fresco ensembles.

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.33

RECONSTRUCTION OF ART AND CULTURAL
MONUMEMENTS

389

II.

ABOUT THE NEREDITSA PROJECT

researcher’s attention was again focused mostly on the
architecture[5].
Many thousands of fragments of frescos has been
collected during restoration, architectural and archaeological
work. At present, they are kept in museum collections. It
does not seem possible to restore the fresco decoration in its
original form[6]. But using methods of virtual restoration, we
can achieve significant results in solving this problem.
Three-dimensional graphics technology, art modeling and
virtual reality provide artistic reconstruction of the lost
(partially or completely) cultural heritage with any specific
scientific precision.

The “Nereditsa. Link of Times” research project
currently takes place under development in the St. Petersburg
State University.
Major museums and cultural institutions, such as: the
State Russian Museum, the State Historical and Architectural
Reserve-Museum of Novgorod the Great, the Institute of
History of Material Culture of RAS, and Ilya Repin St.
Petersburg State Academic Institute Of Fine Arts, Sculpture
and Architecture take part in this research.
The project is dedicated to a unique monument of ancient
architecture and art, the Church of the Transfiguration of Our
Saviour on Nereditsa Hill. In 1992 the Church of the
Transfiguration of Our Saviour on Nereditsa Hill was
included into the UNESCO World Heritage List, along with
several other monuments of Novgorod the Great and its
surroundings[1].
The Church of the Transfiguration of Our Saviour on
Nereditsa Hill is one of the most famous monuments of
ancient Russian culture. The church was built by Prince
Yaroslav Vladimirovich’s order in 1198 and a year later, in
1199, its interior was decorated with fresco paintings.
Exceptional art value, unusual unique iconography of the
monument have earned it a worldwide fame.
Like the Saint Sophia Cathedral, representing the XI
century, and the St. George Cathedral of the St. George's
Monastery, representing the early XII century, the Church on
Nereditsa Hill is considered to be a typological and stylistic
architectural standard of the late XII century[2].
During the Second World War, the temple was almost
destroyed. Only half of masonry and 15% of frescoes were
preserved. According to old drawings it was possible to
restore an upper part of walls, arches and dome, but the rare
frescos which had covered the entire church until the
twentieth century, have been irretrievably lost[3].
Archival material contains of: preserved fragments of
frescoes, photos interior of the temple, detailed descriptions
of the monument, made by experts from the State Historical
and Architectural Reserve-Museum of Novgorod the Great
and historians from Saint-Petersburg State University, copies
of frescos, carefully preserved in the State Russian Museum,
in combination with modern technologies provide a unique
opportunity for a virtual revival of the lost masterpieces of
ancient art - frescoes of the Nereditsa Church.
The Church of the Transfiguration of Our Saviour on
Nereditsa Hill has been an object of scientific art research at
St. Petersburg State University for many years. As a result, a
lot of research materials about the history of the church, it’s
architectural features and frescos has been collected.
Scientific research of this monument has been provided at
the St. Petersburg State University, Novgorod State
Museum, State Russian Museum for several years.
The first expedition was organized by the SaintPetersburg University and the Russian Archaeological
Society in 1910. After the architectural restoration in 19031904, a number of scholars, including M.I. Artamonov[4],
turned to studying its paintings. After being almost destroyed
by the Nazis, the Church was restored in 1958, and

III. VIRTUAL RECONSTRUCTION OF THE CHURCH OF THE
TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR SAVIOUR ON NEREDITSA HILL
In 2008 the materials describing the history of the
Church, stored in various museums and archives, were
collected and investigated under the "Nereditsa. Link of
Times" project.
In 2009 the main publications on the history of the
Church were collected and digitized, its frescos were
analyzed and its restoration history was described.
In 2009 a three-dimensional model of the Nereditsa
Church as well as artifacts and household objects associated
with the history of the Church of Our Saviour on Nereditsa
Hill were produced “Fig. 1”.

Figure 1. A three-dimensional model of the church Spas-na-Nereditse.

At the present time the frescos are being restored.
Restoration of this paintings is a serious problem. The extant
parts of frescos are strengthened and preserved. Many
thousands of fragments, which were collected in the course
of restoration, architectural and archaeological works are
kept in museum’s collections.
The survived parts of painting consist of 325,000
fragments, and now they are being on restoration, which is
still far not complete “Fig. 2”.
According to enormous complexity and lack of
effectiveness of the "manual" method of search and selection
of fragments, it was decided to use a computer reconstruction
of the fresco. This method allows to avoid mistakes and find
a compromise decision on the issue of reconstruction or
restoration of the object.

390

Starting working on restoration of the murals, you need
to develop a methodology for recovery of losses, combining
two methods - using of documentary materials and
restoration of color and form, based on the study of
analogues.
Specialists are attempting to determine the role of
reconstruction in preservation and promotion of monuments.
It is important to develop main principles of virtual
reconstruction, such as:
• Applying the method of complex restoration, when
the monument is taken as a system of architectural,
painting, interior and exterior spaces.
• Development of main theoretical principles of
admissibility and limits of application of modern
technologies in recreating monuments of historical
and cultural heritage in terms of ethical, legal and
aesthetic aspects of reconstruction;.
• Providing further reconstruction in accordance with
these formulated principles on the basis of archival,
historical, design, technical, literary, scientific,
restoration, art, copied and other materials using
computer technology;
This main principles are being tested on the example of
reconstruction of the lost paintings of the Church of the
Transfiguration on Nereditsa in Novgorod the Great.

Figure 2. The process of fresco’s restoration.

The choice of virtual reconstruction answers the practical
needs of science and education. One of the most important
points of the whole research is the question of choosing the
method of reconstruction - analogue or computer
reconstruction.

IV. RECONSTRUCTION METHOD FOR THE CHURCH OF THE
TRANSFIGURATION OF OUR SAVIOUR ON NEREDITSA HILL

A. 1-st method - a documentary historical reconstruction
(virtual restoration).
In this case, reconstruction is the creation of a virtual
object model, based only on extant fragments. This model
can be completed with some objects (fragments of frescos,
interior objects stored in museum’s funds and collections), if
they are mentioned in archival documents.
This method provides keeping historical accuracy, and it
abandons reconstruction of the lost fragments by analogy.

A. Collecting the supporting information for the project:
Searching, analyzing, structuring of archival, historical,
technical, literary, scientific, art and other documents which
contain any information (photos, drawings, pictures,
descriptions) about the frescos of the church.
Basic historical materials of the Nereditsa Church are
kept at the State Russian Museum, the Novgorod State
Museum, the Institute of History of Material Culture
Sciences, methodological foundation of the State Academic
Institute of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture named after
I.E. Repin. The leading experts are: historians, art historians,
restorers, muralists, keepers of these organizations have
assisted authors of the project and helped to find, analyze
and collect a lot of important information.
At the stage of collecting information about the object it
is very important to find as much facts about the monument
as possible, to make the fullest possible description.
Qualitative archival photographic and illustrative material,
knowledge of the exact coloring of paintings, permanent free
access to all fragments of the frescos make the process of
reconstruction more accurate, correct and fast.
Over a thousand archival photos of the church were
investigated. Most of them are stored in the Novgorod State
Museum. These photos capture all stages of restoration of the
temple, which took place at the beginning of XX century.
Collections of unique architectural details and structural
elements of the temple, such as plinfy, brick, stone, etc. were
analyzed in the Novgorod State Museum. According to the
curvilinear shape of the wall surface, these materials are

B. 2-nd method - analog reconstruction.
The monuments of culture which survived to our time,
are often partially lost. Because of a lack of documentary
evidence their recovery is a problem, that could be solved
only through art and historical analysis. This ensures the
authenticity of reconstruction. But in this case, the result can
not pretend to be absolute reproduction of the original.
Moreover, it should be clear that, based on various
documentary sources of information, we can reach several
possible versions of the analog reconstruction, and all of
them will be grounded on theory at the same way.
The practical implementation of the analog
reconstruction requires the involvement of experts in
different fields of knowledge – not only specialists in
computer graphics, but, first of all, artists, architects and
archaeologists. This is due to the fact that without deep
understanding of architecture and proportions of the object,
it’s authentic virtual analogue can not be created.
This work requires high professional theoretical and
practical knowledge of all project developers.

391

before 1941, a single monochrome image of the wall was
produced “Fig. 3”, “Fig. 4”.

needed for correct scaling of photos and liquidation of
distortions. Also this information is important to analyze the
character of wall surface as a basis for painting.
Authors have carefully studied unique materials fragments of frescoes, collected in the restoration workshops
of the Novgorod Museum, which present the process of
actual restoration of the frescos of the church.
Archival material stored at the Institute of History of
Material Culture of the Russian Academy of Sciences were
also studied by authors – this material consists of negatives
and photographs taken in the church before the Second
World War.
The main source of information about the coloring of
paintings were watercolors that have been stored in
collections of the Russian Museum. These images are in fact
the copies of frescoes, made before the war.
Copies of frescoes, created in various Russian churches,
are stored in the methodological foundation of St. Petersburg
State Academic Institute of Painting, Sculpture and
Architecture. These materials are also necessary for
recreation of color palette of fresco painting.

Figure 4. Monochrome image of the wall, completed witn pictures from
archival photographs.

Images obtained from the photographs were corrected
according to the saved fragments of frescos.
Efficiency of this stage depends on the number of
fragments remaining on the wall (reference points). In
practice, it turned out that the main photographs taken before
the war, were not frontal, and they had distortions, so it made
the work more difficult.
The exact place of every fragment was defined according
to concerned author's drawing. It is necessary to emphasize
that at this stage there is no artistic interference. Created
materials may help the restorers to project the image on the
wall and to draw the contour of the lost mural, so that it
would be a base for collecting separated fragments of
frescoes.
The monochrome image, completed with fragments from
photographs is the documentary base for further
reconstruction of color and pattern of lost parts. From this
moment all the activities can be called the analog
reconstruction.

B. Measurements and photographing images of the
existing interior condition and images from museum
collections.
Before starting any restoration it is required to measure
the object and to make various photographic images from
different sides.
The church was measured, the drawings were presented.
The whole interior of the church and fragments of frescos
were photographed. Elements of paintings, which were kept
in museum’s collections were also studied and
photographed.
It is important to take all photos frontally, using the same
scale. All pictures were made in two versions: with lighting
similar to interior’s lighting of the church, and with lighting
which helped to introduce the most accurate reproduction of
frescos.

D. Producing a coloristic painting process map.
The next important stage is the producing of
technological coloristic map of murals. The color system of
paintings was deeply studied and a palette was created, and it
became a basis for further reconstruction, and then
restoration.

C. Making a single tone image based on archival
photographs
The next stage of the process is making a single image of
the wall, using archival documents.
.

E. Producing of linear patterns at a scale 1:1 (performed
only in artistic reconstruction, as the basis for paintings)
After this stage we begin an analog reconstruction of
frescos, which is actually a process of painting of all lost
fragments, based on archive materials and analogues. We
create several templates with outlines, produced at a scale
1:1. These templates repeat the expected author's drawing,
based on previous computer reconstruction.
F. Producing of artistic coloured cardboards the same
size as real frescos or smaller (working models)
The task of this stage is to find appropriate technology of
painting, artistic manner, drawing system. It is very
important to draw complicated parts (faces, hands, clothes)

Figure 3. Monochrome image of the wall.

On the basis of few extant paintings on the walls of the
church and archival black-and-white photographs, completed

392

as well as more simple parts (backgrounds, ornaments) very
precisely “Fig. 5”, “Fig. 6”.

Figure 7. A sweep of the western wall of the church (analog
reconstruction).

Two main methods of reconstruction: a technology of
computer graphics and analog pictorial reconstruction are
used at the same time. Both of them have its advantages and
disadvantages. The method of computer reconstruction
provides maximum documentary accuracy - all
manipulations with shapes and colors are made strictly in
accordance with historical documents. In addition, each
operation can be fixed at any stage of work. At the same time
this method can’t help us to convey the artist's style, to
reproduce the form, direction and strength of the artist’s
touch and texture of the frescos.
So, especially when we deal with completely lost
fragments of frescos, it is better to use the method of
pictorial reconstruction. The main disadvantage of this
method is its complexity. It is very difficult to provide exact
documental accuracy and to find appropriate author’s
stylistic manner at the same time. Painting has become
cyclic: some fragments were redrawn several times
according to produced template until reaching expected
result.
Virtual reconstruction may be used as the basis for
making in future: for producing static images, videos,
interactive models enabling users to choose a camera and
viewing angles when browsing through architecture and
artistic decorations.

Figure 5. Fragment of analog reconstruction.

G. Making sweeps of walls
After the reconstruction of frescos it was made a sweep
of the western wall of the church “Fig. 7”. Lost elements of
the interior were also reconstructed “Fig. 8”. The basis for
the reconstruction was results of scientific research and
archival material.

Figure 6. Fragment of analog reconstruction.

H. Visualisation, producing of three-dimensional colour
modelling
The final stage of work is three-dimensional color
modeling. In future static images, video, interactive models,
which allow a user to choose the viewing angle of
architecture and frescos are planned to be made up.
So, step by step, we have accurately recreate the frescos
of the Church on Nereditsa Hill, which seemed to be lost
forever.

Figure 8. Western wall of the church (result of reconstruction).

393

http://sakai.spbu.ru/portal/site/169dd5df-93bd-41509a01-86f567045218 or http://www.nereditsa.ru in the form
of educational resource Nereditsa.

In contrast to the widespread practice of relative
approach to documentary materials, a specific feature of the
project is maximum approximation of the model to the actual
original appearance of the monument. Documentary
precision of the material provide usage of the results in
practical work for the restoration of the object in future.
Moreover, the method used in the project may open new
possibilities to solve restoration problems of other fresco
ensembles of the medieval Novgorod, also lost during the
War.
The results of the project can be used for further practical
work for the restoration of Nereditsa Church.
Virtual model of the church may be used in future as a
basis for producing virtual exhibition. Using modern
technologies, such as multi-projection systems, holograms,
and augmented reality systems, information about the
monument can be produced in interesting interactive form.
Such information center can be organised in the Nereditsa
Church, the Novgorod State Museum or any other complex.
The results of the work are presented at the educational
portal of St. Petersburg State University

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

394

http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/604/multiple=1&unique_number=716.
Komech, A.I. Novgorod architecture of XII century // Actes du XVe
Congres International d’Etudes Byzantines. Athenes, 1991. Part 2.
Bulkin, V.A. Two episodes from the history of Novgorod architecture
of XII century / Monuments of Medieval Culture: inventions and
versions. St. Petersburg, 1994.
M.I. Artamonov. Craftsmen of Nereditsa // Novgorod Architectural
Collection. Issued in Novgorod the Great, 1939. P. 33–47.
G.M. Shtender. Restoration of Nereditsa // Novgorod Historical
Collection. Issue 10. Novgorod the Great, 1962. P. 169–205.
Lutsiy S.A., Jaworski, L.A. Review of methods of icons recognition
applied to problems of compilation of the fresco fragments - Dep.
VINITI ʋ 1159-V2004 on 07/06/2004.
Pivovarova, N.V. Frescos of the church Spas-na-Nereditse in
Novgorod. St. Petersburg, 2002.
The church Spas-na-Nereditse: From Byzantium to Russia. Ɇoskow,
2005.

