2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Collaborative Augmented Reality Application for
Information Visualization Support
Edson Koiti Kudo Yasojima, Bianchi Serique
Meiguins

Aruanda Simões Meiguins
Centro Universitário do Pará – CESUPA
Belém-PA, Brazil
aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br

Universidade Federal do Para - UFPA
Belém-PA, Brasil.
koitiyasojima@gmail.com, bianchi.serique@terra.com.br

and technology produce ever more data. The storage
capacity of hardware is expanding more and more, as well
as processing of information. Applications of Information
visualization are designed to collect and organize large
amounts of data and show them to the user in a context
where he can understand them. But the contexts generated
are produced by the person who handles, generating
different types of interpretations by other users and can
cause misunderstandings about the data [3].

Abstract— In today's information systems, strategies for
decision making and accurate results in a short time are
crucial in many knowledge areas of industry, economic,
medical etc.. To support this demand to store and interpret
relevant information, the area of information visualization
coupled with several others, such as intelligent systems and
data mining, is increasingly taking place in academic
research and market. Aiming to increase to level of
interaction and accurate results, this article presents a
collaborative augmented reality application for information
visualization support.
Keywords- Information Visualization;
Environments; Augmented Reality

I.

Using the augmented reality together with the
information visualization, enables new ways to organize
and display data to the user a more interactive and
interesting.

Collaborative

INTRODUCTION

B. Augmented Reality (AR)
Unlike virtual reality, which transports the user to the
virtual environment, augmented reality keeps the user in
their physical environment and transports the virtual
environment to the user space, allowing interaction with
the virtual world with more naturality. New interfaces
multimodal and are being developed to facilitate the
manipulation of virtual objects in user space, using their
hands or simple interaction devices. And to achieve its
objectives, the AR needs to integrate the graphical
information in the real environment [4] [5].

Augmented Reality offers new ways of man-machine
interaction, today with the internet and cloud computing
people can share data and knowledge in collaborative
environments. Using information visualization, users can
organize large amounts of data in context and interpret
them for patterns. Using these concepts, this paper
proposes a tool that uses augmented reality and
information visualization tools to manipulate data in a
distributed manner between one or more users, allowing
the sharing of knowledge using dynamic ways to interact
with them.

AR provides new ways of user interaction, creating a
more realistic and interesting application in various fields
of knowledge, like education, marketing, industry,
medicine etc. [6].

A. Information Visualization (IV)
One of the main ideas of information visualization is to
make the user interact with a large amount of data using a
context, creating images which can be interpreted by a
human [1].

With the evolution of hardware devices, more
applications with AR are being developed focusing on the
lay public [7] [8].

According to [2], IV promotes a small but crucial task
in cognitive systems. Through visions, applications open
up a channel for human-machine communication. Humans
have a better interpretation when a context is illustrated by
pictures and interact with it.

C. Collaborative Environments
With the evolution of Internet, multi-user applications
are more and more used by people. This kind of software
provides real-time capabilities that enable manipulation of
data between multiple people within the same context [9].

Applications that use information visualization are
becoming increasingly essential; this is because the human
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.44

170

Server will work to provide synchronization between
clients. It will get the data from the users and synchronize
to the others that have the same view. If one client changes
the data, the others will be notified.

Collaborative environments using augmented reality
have been studied to evaluate and propose improvements
in the forms of interaction and communication. The use of
AR in a collaborative context has been a promising
business when it relates to collaboration. Several ideas
have been implemented in this context. It also reveals
concerns when it says about the interaction, new ways of
interacting emerge, opening new research to usability
testing and user acceptance for the application [10] [11].
II.

For the detailed class architecture we will have as
follow:

RELATED WORKS

Little research attention has been focused in
collaborative information visualization using augmented
reality. Many users still rely on using or implementing IV
tools with new features but not giving attention to the
environment of the user space
A single-user application developed by [12] in
augmented reality using information visualization. Using
the technique of scattering data and other graphics it is
possible to manipulate objects through the use of markers
in the application.

Figure 2 Client Class Architecture

x

Observer: this class will be responsible for
observing for changes in some nodes responsible
for managing certain activities such as changing
the color, shape or performance of the filter. And
communicate to the server and other connected
clients.

x

MessageService: this class will be responsible
for receiving notifications of class Observer,
package them and send to the server; in addition,
it will receive and unpack messages.

x

Visualization: it will hold the organization of
data from the observer and mount the display to
the user; moreover, receive human interactions
inputs through Listeners (ComandListener) like
movement, keyboard, voice etc.

x

Node: are responsible for managing settings and
application data, for example, setting the color
and shape, and perform data filtering and provide
menus for interaction.

Test cases of the tool have shown that the ratio of
success is 80% for tasks considered easy [12].

Figure 1 Information Visualization Tool with AR [12]

III.

ARCHITECTURE
IV.

PROTOTYPE

The project aims to create an environment in RA, in
which multiple users can interact in a vision of data
dispersion. Interacting through configuration of color,
shape and using filters, a context can be construed and
interpreted in real time enabling the interpretation of
several clients at the same time, unlike single-user
environments.

In the context of a collaborative environment, users
can work on a problem and more accurate results or at
least more closely meet the goal compared to a single user
environment. Moreover, collaboration can enhance
interaction in the aspect of communication and discussion
of the problem by manipulating shared objects [14] [15].

The architecture in a global aspect would include a
central server that would have as its main goal, and
synchronize customer data, and receive and forward
messages between clients when any modification is made
in a vision.

The prototype used augmented reality to implement a
3D scatter plot IV technique in a collaborative
environment enabling users to work in the same view,
allowing the manipulation of the displayed data. Main
points of this application are:

171

x

Answer all the basic features of information
visualization tool.

x

Enable the display of data through the technique
of scattering data in three dimensions.

x

Carrying out operations on data such as filtering
and additional settings.

x

Generate a basic architecture for the construction
and expansion of the prototype.

x

Conducting usability tests.

The prototype uses markers to display 3D objects on
the screen through these objects, users can manipulate data
in accordance with menus, pointer and voice. Using a 3D
pointer the user can select the desired action and the
column that will be applied to action.

Figure 4 Discrete attribute color change and Table reference of the
colors

All changes made and applied in the menu are
reflected to all users who share this view. Applications and
changes are optional and free to all users, not necessarily
compelling to interact with the tool, which can only be as a
spectator.

Figure 5 Continuous attribute color change and Gradient color bar

Besides the color setting, you can also configure the
geometric shape of objects; however this operation is
restricted to columns that have discrete attributes.

Figure 3 Main screen of the application

When setting up a color, the user may notice a change
in the 3D scatter plot and the color change by using
another marker, and can view the color legend
accordingly.

172

Figure 8 Selecting attribute with the pointer

If the user does not have a webcam connected to the
computer, the application can be used without it,
providing a simple virtual environment. In this
environment mouse and keyboard are used to make
interactions on the data displayed. Also, details on
demand are displayed like the color marker.

Figure 6 Shape change and Table reference of the shapes

The main menu also allows the realization of filters,
filtered data is removed from the dispersion (are hidden)
and clean the viewing. The filter supports columns that
have discrete values and continuous.
In the continuous filter, the tool makes a categorization
of data according to ranges of values, divided into five
classes: 0% to 19% of the total value is very low, 20% to
39% are down 40% to 59% are medium 60% to 79% are
high, 80% to 100% is too high.

Figure 9 Application without camera

V.

TECHNOLOGIES AND IMPLEMENTATION ASPECTS

A. NyARToolkit
NyARToolkit [17] is an abstraction of ARToolkit
[18]; it was written for Java and provides functions for
integrating 3D objects with the real world using markers.
B. JMonkey Engine
JMonkeyEngine is a game engine written in Java and
provides support for developing 3D games, according to
the official site [19], has the following features:

Figure 7 Filter menu

The user can also select any desired attribute using the
pointer.

173

•

Free and Open Source within the BSD license.

•

Compatibility with different versions of the
OpenGL graphics library, and supports various
operating systems.

•

Uses a shader-based architecture for rendering
3D graphics objects.

•

Has a graphical editor for various development
platforms, besides to have a self.

•

Abstracts and automate different types of routines
and construction of objects as well as the use of
textures.

Further, the augmented reality, allows the use of new
forms of interaction to manipulate or data.
In technical terms, the project aims to assist the search,
data interpretation patterns and generating knowledge for
users in a social and collaborative context.

C. Application Restriction and Evolution
The tool was developed in order to accept new
modules, using a hierarchy of nodes, new IV techniques
can be developed using the JMonkeyEngine and added to
the Observer. Moreover, it is necessary that the view is
adapted to the listeners and actions pre-defined by the
programmer, allowing a better coupling.

As future work, we can highlight the implementation
of new visualization techniques, in addition to improving
operations with existing interactions, and execute the test
cases to improve the usability.
Some issues during the development of the application
are listed below:

Other issue that needs to be taken in mind is the
resolution of the webcam that necessarily must be equal
to or greater than 800x600, otherwise the screen view will
be too small to allocate the objects.
VI.

TEST CASES

To validate the usability and accuracy rate of the
application, according to the evaluation method proposed
by [15], users of the software will be submitted to a short
training and soon after will use the tool to make some
assumptions that involve pre-defined tasks of:
•

Identification

•

Determination

•

View

•

Comparison

•

Study of applications for recognition and voice
processing.

•

Develop and synchronize the command listeners.

•

Improve the accuracy of pointer and improve the
depth (Z axis) of the rendered items on the
screen.

•

Enhance slow due to the generation of 3D text
and selecting items in menus.

•

Installation of tools and libraries for application
execution.

•

Add texture to markers and improve realist of the
application
REFERENCES

[1]

From the results collected, the usability of the features
of the application will be evaluated in a level of severity
which can be:

[2]

•

Level 0 (no importance): Does not affect
usability;

•

Level 1 (mild): No need to immediately fix the
problem;

•

Level 2 (simple): Problem of low priority (can be
repaired);

[5]

•

Level 3 (severe): Problem of high priority (that
need to be repaired);

[6]

•

Level 4 (catastrophic): Too serious (which needs
to be repaired).

[3]

[4]

Changes in the application will be made if there is a
need to adjust to the concepts covered in the project.

[7]

CONCLUSIONS

[8]

As shown by [16] according to some experiments in
augmented reality and IV, showed that end users have an
easy adaptation and learning, as more engaging is the tool,
users have more interest in learning and interpretation of
data.

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

174

Spence, R. Information Visualization: Design for Interaction
Barcelona: ACM Press. 2. ed., 2007.
Ware, C. Information Visualization: Perception for Design.
Elsevier Inc. 2º Edition. 2004.
Valiati, E.R.A.; Freitas, C.M.D.S.; Pimenta, M.S. Using multidimensional in-depth long-term case studies for information
visualization evaluation. Proceedings of the 2008 conference on
BEyond time and errors: novel evaLuation methods for
Information Visualization. 2008.
Regenbrecht, Holger T.; Wagner, Michael T. Interaction in a
collaborative augmented reality environment. CHI '02 extended
abstracts on Human factors in computer systems - CHI '02. 2002.
Kirner, C.; Tori, R. Fundamentos da Realidade Aumentada, In
Fundamentos e Tecnologia da Realidade Virtual e Aumentada.
VIII Symposium on Virtual Reality, 2006.
Medicherla, Padmavathi S.; Chang, George; Morreale, Patricia.
Visualization for increased understanding and learning using
augmented reality. Proceedings of the international conference on
Multimedia information retrieval - MIR '10. 2010.
Hirose, Michitaka; Tanikawa, Tomohiro. Overview of the digital
museum Project. Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGGRAPH
Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and its Applications in
Industry. 2010.
Ren, T.; Wang, Y. A Japanese text based mobile augmented
reality application. ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2010 Posters. 2010.
Diehl, S. Distribued Virtual Worlds. Springer-Verlag. 2001.
Billinghurst, M.; Kato, H. Collaborative augmented reality.
Communications of the ACM Volume 45. 2002.
Billinghurst, M. Usability testing of augmented/mixed reality
systems. ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2008 courses. 2008.
Casseb do Carmo, Ricardo Melo; Meiguins, Bianchi S.;
Gonçalves, Aruanda S.; Pinheiro, Sérgio Clayton V.; Godinho,

.

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

Paulo Igor A. Coordinated and Multiple Views in Augmented
Reality Environment. 2007 11th International Conference
Information Visualization IV 07. 2007.
Nini, B. Batouche, M.C. Virtual object manipulation in
collaborative augmented reality environment. 2004 IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Technology, 2004. IEEE
ICIT '04. 2004.
Büscher, Monika; Christensen, Michael; Grønbæk, Kaj; Krogh,
Peter; Mogensen, Preben; Shapiro, Dan; Ørbæk, Peter.
Collaborative Augmented Reality Environments: Integrating VR,
Working Materials, and Distributed Work Spaces. Proceedings of
the third international conference on Collaborative virtual
environments - CVE '00. 2000.
Pillat, Raquel M.; Valiati, E. R. A.; Freitas, Carla M. D. S.
Experimental study on evaluation of multidimensional
information visualization techniques. Proceedings of the 2005
Latin American conference on Human-computer interaction CLIHC '05. 2005.
Meiguins, Bianchi S.; et al. Multidimensional information
visualization using augmented reality. Proceedings of the 2006
ACM international conference on Virtual reality continuum and
its applications - VRCIA '06. 2006.
NyARToolkit url: http://nyatla.jp/nyartoolkit/wiki/index.php
ARToolkit url: http://www.hitl.washington.edu/artoolkit/
JMonkey Engine url: http://www.jmonkeyengine.com

175

