2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualizing Tags with Spatiotemporal References
Dinh Quyen Nguyen, Christian Tominski, Heidrun Schumann
Institute for Computer Science
University of Rostock
Rostock, Germany
{nguyen|ct|schumann}@informatik.uni-rostock.de

Abstract—Nowadays, a great amount of data is created and
distributed on the Internet. Tagging has become common practice
to structure these data for easy access. Often the data and the
associated tags contain spatial and temporal information.
In this paper, we develop general design strategies for visualizing spatially and temporally referenced tags similar to tag clouds
on maps. Temporal information of tags is encoded through the
visual appearance of text or through additional visual artifacts
associated with the tags, whereas the location of tags on a map
illustrates the spatial references. We demonstrate our solution
based on an interactive visualization prototype for the exploration
of both spatial and temporal references of Flickr tags.
Index Terms—Visualization, Tagging, Spatiotemporal Data,
Flickr, Tag Clouds

interval of interest, or with regard to a speciﬁc temporal pattern
(e.g., consecutive Sundays of a month). Examining how tags
have evolved over time is also an interesting task.
While common tag clouds are useful for visually communicating tags, they cannot convey both spatial and temporal
aspects. Yet, there are tag clouds that are capable of showing
either the spatial or the temporal context of tags. Yahoo! Tag
Maps [1] and Taggram [2] are examples of existing techniques
for the visualization of tags on maps. On the other hand,
Yahoo! Taglines [3] or Twitscoop [4], amongst some others,
provide ways for the visual representation of tags over time.
We develop a ﬁrst solution for the visualization of both
spatial and temporal dependencies of tags. For the spatial
component of the data, we utilize the concept of Taggram.
In order to allow users to recognize temporal information,
we enhance the visual representation of tags in Taggram. In
accordance to McEachren’s list of aspects of time [5], we aim
to support users in answering the following set of questions:

I. I NTRODUCTION
Keywords from an article or a book offer a special kind of
linguistic summary for text. Beyond that, there is the concept
of tagging, where any kind of media (e.g., music, movies,
images) can be associated with textual tags in order to create
such linguistic summaries.
Keywords or tags can be represented visually as tag clouds.
In a tag cloud, not only the words are meaningful, but the
appearance of the words (e.g., size, color, etc.) can be used to
convey information, for example the importance or frequency
of a word. Nowadays, tag clouds are commonplace on many
websites because they efﬁciently communicate an overview of
the site’s content. In this work, we are interested in this topic of
text visualization, but we consider two additional aspects: our
tags are associated with geo-spatial and temporal information.
A photo hosting website such as Flickr is a prominent
application scenario for spatiotemporal tags. When a photo
is taken or uploaded it is automatically equipped with a time
stamp. Additionally, many photos are also outﬁtted with spatial
information such as precise geo-positions (i.e., latitude and
longitude) or coarser areal information (e.g., west coast or
city of Munich). Last but not least, the photographer or the
user community may tag a photo with keywords (simply called
tags) that describe the photo’s content.
In turn, this means that tags are no longer just abstract
linguistic objects. Instead, a tag carries meaning and embeds
this meaning into a spatiotemporal frame of reference. Given
such spatiotemporally referenced tags, a user might want to
ﬁnd out where certain tags occur, or how the tags are linked
across different areas. He or she might also be interested in
exploring the tags with regard to a speciﬁc time point or time
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.43

Tuan Anh Ta
John von Neumann Institute
Vietnam National University - HCMC
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
tuan.ta@jvn.edu.vn

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Q1: Does a speciﬁc tag exist at a particular time?
Q2: When in time does a tag occur?
Q3: How old is a tag at a speciﬁc time point (if existing)?
Q4: For how long does a tag exist?
Q5: How often is a tag used?
Q6: How frequent or strong does a tag change over time?
Q7: Is there any special temporal relationship (e.g., cooccurrence) between some tags in the cloud?

Our goal is to develop general designs for representing the
different temporal aspects of tags. The suggested solution is
two-fold: (i) time is encoded through the visual appearance
of text (e.g., font size, text color, orientation, transparency,
shape), and (ii) time is represented by additional visual artifacts associated with the tags.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we take a
brief look at related work and the fundamentals of Taggram.
Section III introduces our general design strategies for the
visualization of tags associated with temporal references. In
Section IV, we present concrete design examples for the
visualization of spatiotemporal Flickr tags developed based
on our novel strategies and Taggram. Section V describes the
interaction facilities provided to support the visual exploration.
We brieﬂy describe implementation aspects and report on
preliminary user feedbacks in Section VI. Finally, Section VII
concludes the paper.
32

While most approaches rely on basic techniques and show
only one snapshot of a tag cloud at a time, only few attempts
have been made to visualize data of multiple time steps
concurrently or to support the analysis of temporal aspects
such as frequency or rate of change. One such approach is
SparkClouds [12], which combine spark lines with tags. But
still, visualizing time-varying tag clouds remains an interesting
research topic.

II. R ELATED W ORK & F UNDAMENTALS
Because there is hardly any visualization that displays spatial AND temporal references of tags, we summarize previous
work related to either space OR time. We also brieﬂy explain
Taggram, which is the basis for the spatial mapping.
A. Related Work
Tag clouds have become very popular on the Internet over
the past few years. The aim of this kind of visual representation
is to provide users with a simple and expressive overview of
a larger body of content (e.g., a set of online news articles).
Commonly, the basic technique is straight forward: display
a set of words on the screen, where font size, color, and
orientation visually encode some related information (e.g.,
frequency of a word). However, more information can be
visually encoded with tag clouds:
1) Tag Clouds and Space: In the theory of perception,
shape is a prominent visual variable for information acquisition [6]. Therefore, the shape of an area linking with a tag
cloud can be used to represent contextual information of the
tags (without losing the validity of those tags). For example,
in DocuBurst [7], the hierarchical structures of the interrelated
words are visualized as a polar treemap that can be explored
interactively.
Many tag cloud visualization approaches focus on the
question how to spatially layout (aka spatialize) words on the
display? It is also the basic idea behind text typography, a
special kind of information graphics [8]. Interestingly, it is also
relevant to the problem of using tag clouds in geospatial data
visualization. Taggram [2] is a recently developed technique
that addresses this problem. However, Taggram only concerns
the matter of spatial references of tags; temporal features have
not been taken into account.
2) Tag Clouds and Time: Because online communities are
usually dynamic, there are a number of implementations that
integrate the one or the other aspect of time into tag clouds.
The tool Twitscoop [4] uses the slideshow approach. It
updates the visualization every minute to reﬂect the currently
most important keywords in Twitter. Yahoo! Taglines, for
instance, uses animation to visualize changes of topics over
time [3]. The user can choose from two animation schemes
(river or waterfall), where time goes from left to right and
top to bottom, respectively. If a tag cloud spans only a small
number of time steps or if just the latest snapshot of the tag
cloud is relevant, a dynamic visual representation (slide show
or animation) is suitable, because the temporal changes are
usually easily comprehensible.
In order to facilitate more detailed visual analysis, additional
visual cues can be used. Stefaner uses animation as well, but
additionally encodes information about the ”age” of tags [9].
Cui et al. [10] use color to differentiate newer and older
tags in the cloud. But comparisons of different time steps
or different tags are still difﬁcult to conduct. In this case,
combining tag clouds with additional views (e.g., a temporal
bar chart as in [10]) is one option to solve this problem. A
similar implementation is offered by Cloudalicious [11].

B. Taggram
We develop our solutions for the visual representation of
spatiotemporally referenced tags based on Taggram [2]. Taggram is a ﬂexible technique that deals with the spatialization
of geo-referenced tags inside geographic regions. The key
characteristics of this approach are:
•

•

•

Tags are placed on a map according to the tags’ spatial
references. Regions of arbitrary shape are used as visual
containers for the spatialization of tags. Tags that belong
to a geographical region are placed inside that region in
alphabetical order, following the main vertical axis of the
region.
Information related to tags can be encoded through text
attributes (e.g., color or transparency) and also through
additional visual artifacts that can be superimposed on
the map. Note that size – conventionally a basic visual
attribute of tag clouds – is used differently in Taggram:
Tags that are close to the center of the region are enlarged,
and tags with increasing distance to the center become
smaller. The rationale behind this design is that normally
the user prefers to explore tags at the center of a tag cloud
[13].
Because the number of tags in the data is usually
larger than the number of tags that ﬁt the available
display space, tags can be dynamically scrolled inside
the geographic region on demand. This way, users can
stay focused on the region’s center while exploring the
alphabetically ordered tags.

With these characteristics, Taggram represents an excellent
basis for our development. We can conveniently add more
visual artifacts to the tags to represent their temporal aspects.
In the next section, we will present general design strategies
for the visualization of time-oriented tags.
III. G ENERAL D ESIGNS FOR THE V ISUALIZATION OF TAGS
WITH T EMPORAL R EFERENCES
According to Aigner et al. [14], time-oriented data can
exhibit a number of different characteristics, which leads to a
variety of potential visualization designs. So, there are various
ways to visualize temporally referenced tags. In our work,
we focus on adapting the visual representations of the tags
themselves, in order to arrive at designs that are suitable to
answer the questions Q1 to Q7 listed in Section I. Note that
the fact alone that a tag appears in a tag cloud enables users
to recognize existence of the tag (Q1).

33

(a) Brightness encodes tag age.

(c) Distortion encodes tag frequency over time.
Fig. 1.

(b) Size encodes tag age.
(a) The color of background rectangles indicates three different
classes of tags.

(b) Color-coded segments visualize tag frequency over time.

(c) Color-coded cells of calendar
tables help in discerning reoccurring patterns.

(d) Color-coded circular glyphs
are useful to communicate cyclic
patterns.

(d) Transparency encodes tag frequency over time.

Encoding temporal aspects with text appearance.

Next, we discuss two general design strategies for visualizing the temporal aspects: (i) by the visual appearance of the
tags, and (ii) by additional visual artifacts associated with tags.

Fig. 2.

Encoding temporal aspects with additional visual artifacts.

A. Temporal Aspects Mapped to Tag Appearance
Provided that there are no uncommonly short or long tags,
these encodings along the tags’ horizontal axes are suitable
for indicating how tags have developed over time. For a more
detailed exploration, however, varying basic visual attributes
alone is not sufﬁcient. Therefore, we suggest using additional
visual artifacts as described next.

Basic visual attributes such as color, size, or orientation are
normally employed to visually encode information associated
with tags. Visual attributes are also applicable to encode
temporal aspects of tags. For example, one can use hue,
saturation, or brightness to differentiate tags that have appeared
at various points in time. Fig. 1(a) illustrates the encoding
with brightness: more recent tags are darker and older tags are
brighter. Similarly, text size can indicate how recent a word
is (see Fig. 1(b)). For both encodings, the assumption is that
recent tags are more important.
Provided that appropriate legends are displayed, such visual
encodings allow users to discern a tag’s age (Q3), and thus to
estimate a tag’s location in time (Q2). Conceptually, we are
now able to visualize tags and a single data value per tag
(e.g., age). But this is not enough for explicitly visualizing
multiple time steps concurrently or for supporting the analysis
of temporal aspects such as the frequency or rate of change.
In order to arrive at conclusions for the questions Q4 to Q7,
we need to consider other visual encodings.
One option is to modify the text rendering along the tag.
The basic idea is to map individual time axes along the
tags’ horizontal orientation. That is, the beginning of a tag
corresponds to the ﬁrst time step and the end of a tag
corresponds to the last time step. Given this mapping, we can
vary the rendering along the tag. In Fig. 1(c), we show tags
that have been distorted to visualize how frequent the tags
appear over time. For example, the letters of “always” are
larger throughout, indicating that the tag has been important
at all points in time. On the other hand, the letters of “recently”
increase in size towards the end of the tag, indicating a tag of
growing importance. Similarly, one can vary other rendering
parameters such as transparency as shown in Fig. 1(d).

B. Temporal Aspects Mapped to Additional Visual Artifacts
By additional visual artifacts we mean enriching tags with
additional graphical primitives. The main advantage of this
solution, in comparison to the designs of the previous paragraphs, is its ﬂexibility: By encoding temporal information
with the visual attributes of the additional graphical primitives,
we can visualize more complex temporal information. A
positive side effect is that basic visual features of the tags
(i.e., color, size, etc.) are kept for the traditional encoding of
tag importance.
Fig. 2(a) shows a ﬁrst simple example where a background
rectangle has been added to each tag. The rectangle’s color is
used to indicate three groups of tags with different temporal
behavior: appearing tags are green, disappearing tags are
orange, and constant tags are gray.
More complex designs can communicate further information. Again, the basis is to construct an appropriate mapping of
the time axis. For example, one can use color-coded segments
along the horizontal extent of a tag to show the frequency
of the tag over time (see Fig. 2(b)). This design is suited
to visualize time in a linear fashion. Cyclic reoccurrence of
tags can be made comprehensible with the help of table-based
calendars (see Fig. 2(c)) or glyph-based cyclic artifacts (see
Fig. 2(d)). These designs can also help in identifying any
regular temporal patterns (e.g., tags occur only at particular
weekdays).

34

With the aforementioned designs, the remaining questions
Q4 to Q7 can be answered: The duration of tag existence, the
frequency of tags, as well as the rate of change appear vividly
in Fig. 2(b)-2(c), and temporal patterns are recognizable in
Fig. 2(c)-2(d). Moreover, we can visualize time points together
with time intervals, show linear time together with cyclic
patterns, and switch to alternative perspectives, in order to
explore the various temporal aspects of tags.
Further options are to compose different designs to show
different temporal aspects as hybrid visual representations.
However, care has to be taken to avoid cluttering the tags
and to maintain the tag cloud’s legibility. In this regard,
an important aspect is to support user interactions such as
zooming into details, highlighting tags or time points of
interest, or interactive adjustment of the visual encoding.
The next consequent step is to extend these generic designs
to address a more concrete visualization scenario.

(a) Tags masked with gradient ﬁlls visualize tag existence.

IV. V ISUALIZATION OF S PATIOTEMPORAL F LICKR TAGS
In contrast to the generic designs presented before, we now
address the visualization of spatiotemporal tags as provided
by Flickr. Furthermore, we take into account the fact that a
user is usually interested in a speciﬁc time point, the so-called
time of interest (TOI). In Fig. 3, for example, Fri, 8/20/2010
has been selected as TOI. The TOI divides the time domain
into three parts: the time before the TOI, the TOI itself, and
the time after the TOI. Note that the before and after parts
might be empty, if the TOI is the beginning or the end of the
time domain.
Given this additional TOI concept, we have to develop
dedicated visual encodings, for which we again utilize (i) the
visual appearance of tags and (ii) additional visual artifacts.
Again, it is our goal to have at least a set of techniques that
covers the questions Q1 to Q7.

(b) Tags masked with color-coded shapes visualize tag frequency over time.
Fig. 3. Visualization of Flickr tags on maps with temporal aspects represented
by text appearance. (Recall that Taggram shows tags in alphabetical order and
varies text size to attract the viewer’s attention to the center of a region.)

To establish a visual association of a tag with one of the
seven cases, the tag is masked with the gradient ﬁll. This
way, each tag is rendered according to the case it belongs to.
Fig. 3(a) illustrates this with a sample data set extracted from
Flickr: (1) tag “magical”, (2) tag “messe”, (3) tag “launsbach”,
(4) tag “licht”, (5) tag “lowersaxony”, (6) tag “nikon”, and (7)
tag “museum”. Note that the combinatorial eighth case (i.e.,
the tag does not exist at all) must not be handled, because in
that case the tag does not appear at all.
From the encoding presented here, the user can derive only
qualitative information about tag existence (Q1 and Q2). How
quantitative values such as tag frequency can be encoded will
be shown next.
2) Encoding for Quantitative Assessment: Now our goal
is to visualize data values associated with tags such as tag
frequency (i.e., the number of occurrences of a tag over time
per geographical region). What we need is a visual mapping of
the time domain that is capable of showing quantitative values
per time point.
To this end, we create series of visual segments (one for
each time point) along the horizontal orientation of tags. We
continue using the idea of the TOI and use different shapes
for the segments. A diamond shape
is used to represent
the TOI, whereas time points before and after the TOI are

A. Adjusting the Visual Appearance of Tags
The two visual designs that we present next are based
on masking the tags. The designs operate on two different
semantic levels. For the ﬁrst design, we focus on qualitative
statements regarding the existence of tags in the time domain.
In the second design, we extend to quantitative assessments
regarding the frequency of tags over time.
1) Encoding for Qualitative Statements: With regard to the
TOI concept and the existence of tags, our design must be
capable of communicating seven cases. The seven cases can
be represented visually by color gradients, where red stands
for existence, and gray indicates non-existence of a tag. The
following list summarizes the seven cases of tag existence and
the corresponding visual encoding: A tag exists
1) only at the TOI:
2) only before the TOI:
3) only after the TOI:
4) at the TOI and before:
5) at the TOI and after:
6) before and after the TOI:
7) before, after and at the TOI:

35

represented as arrow shapes
and , respectively. We use
colors from the ColorBrewer [15] to color-code each shape
according to the tag’s frequency at the corresponding time
point. As tag frequencies might be distributed unevenly over
time, additional color mapping concepts from [16] can be
applied to redistribute colors for more effective visualization.
For those time points where the frequency is zero, we use a
hueless color to clearly indicate the non-existence of that tag
at that time point.
These mapping steps result in visual representations like
for each tag. Again, we mask the tags to
integrate the visualization of the time-dependent frequency
values with the visual appearance of tags. Fig. 3(b) illustrates
such masked tags for a part of Germany for a time range of 8
days in August 2010. This design is suited to ﬁnd answers to
the questions Q3 to Q6. However, if the time domain is larger,
differentiating the individual time points may become difﬁcult.
In such cases, one could exploit the hierarchical structure of
time and represent aggregated frequencies of weeks or months,
rather than those of individual days. Another option is to
associate additional visual artifacts with tags.

(a) Color and height of bars visualize tag existence and tag frequency.

B. Additional Visual Artifacts Associated with Tags
As indicated earlier, using the visual appearance of tags
alone might not be sufﬁcient for more complex questions or
larger time domains. Therefore, we now consider adding visual
artifacts to the tags on the map. Each artifact can then be used
to visualize the temporal aspects in more detail.
1) Bar Charts Representing Temporal Developments: In
this ﬁrst design, we use bar charts as additional visual artifacts
to visualize the existence and frequency of tags over a period
of time (Q1 - Q6). We chose bar charts because they are
an accepted method for visualizing time-dependent data and
because they are easy to interpret.
The design of a bar chart per tag is straightforward: For
each time point, we create a rectangular bar to show if the tag
existed and how frequent it was. We add a small red dot to
indicate the TOI. Color and height of bars are used to show
tag frequency at individual points in time. The color-coding
is the same as described in the previous section. Using a dual
encoding with color and height has the positive side effect that
we do not have to deal with the special case of non-existence,
because in that case the bar has zero height and is invisible
anyway.
The bar chart design is illustrated in Fig. 4(a) with a list of
Flickr tags for the period of 8/9 to 8/29 in Germany, where
Sat, 8/21/2010 has been selected as the TOI. From the bar
charts in this visual representation, the user can easily see how
tags appeared and if there are any linear temporal patterns.
However, bar charts are not suited to ﬁnd more complex and
possibly reoccurring patterns.
2) Calendar Tables Representing Temporal Patterns:
Color-coded calendar tables, whose horizontal and vertical
axes represent independent levels of time, are promising
alternatives. For example, a common design is to show weeks
as rows of a table, which implies that columns represent

(b) Color of the cells of calendar tables visualize tag frequency.
Fig. 4.
Temporal aspects of Flickr tags visualized by additional visual
artifacts. (Recall that Taggram shows tags in alphabetical order and varies
text size to attract the viewer’s attention to the center of a region.)

individual weekdays. Each table cell’s color indicates tag
frequency (or any other attribute users might be interested in).
The user can now spot more complex patterns (Q7), for
example, tags that frequently reoccur only on particular week
days. At the same time linear trends are discernable, for
example, if the frequency increases from one week to the
next. Several interesting patterns can be seen in the sample
Flickr data visualized in Fig. 4(b) The tag “2010” is signiﬁcant
throughout, but the highest frequencies are on weekends (last
two columns of the table). Quite nicely one can see that the
event “wiesenb¨uhne” appears in the middle of the ﬁrst week
(top row of the table) and disappears toward the weekend.
C. Discussion
The two basic design strategies (i.e., visual appearance of
tags vs. additional visual artifacts) that we suggested have
advantages and disadvantages alike. For both strategies the aim
is to visualize additional temporal aspects while maintaining
tag legibility. By changing only the appearance of tags, our
options for encoding temporal information are limited, and
thus only simple questions are supported. On the other hand,
tag legibility is only marginally affected (provided that appropriate colors are used). Moreover, the encoding of a tag and
its associated temporal aspects is overlap-free.

36

To this end, we mark the concrete positions of one selected tag on the map as shown in Fig. 6(a). However,
indiscriminately showing all locations could clutter the map
with too many markers. Therefore, we restrict the highlighting
to one selected time point, usually the TOI. If the visual
encoding allows the identiﬁcation of individual time points
(e.g., segment-based appearance of tags, bar chart, or calendar
table), the user can chose to select alternative time points for
highlighting of locations simply by hovering the time points.
In that case, the selected time point is additionally labeled with
a tooltip containing date information (see Fig. 6(a)).
Similarly to highlighting spatial aspects, it makes sense to
support interactive highlighting of temporal aspects. Identifying tags that co-occur is an interesting task (Q7) because
it allows users to derive higher-level information from spatiotemporal tags.
Therefore, we allow users to select further time points in
addition to the TOI. The visualization is then adapted so as to
highlight those tags that co-occur on all selected time points
(which is actually done by dimming the tags that do not cooccur). Fig. 6(b) demonstrates that this interactive highlighting
can reveal facts in the data: It appears that there was a
“lasershow” in “lowersaxony” in August 2010.

This is different when using additional visual artifacts. In
this case, there can be signiﬁcant overlap which could occlude
possibly important temporal information, for example, when a
letter occludes the cell with the highest frequency in a calendar
table. This is the price to pay for the additional options that
visual artifacts offer for the visualization.
We cannot tell which of the two strategies is best. But most
likely there is no deﬁnite answer to this question at all. Rather
a suitable solution must be selected depending on the data,
the users’ tasks, and their preferences. Therefore, interactive
selection of encodings and their adjustment are important.
V. U SER I NTERACTION
The visual exploration of spatially and temporally referenced tags involves various aspects, and therefore requires
sufﬁcient means for user interaction. On the one hand, the
user must be enabled to visit different places in space and
to select different time ranges from the data. On the other
hand, the visual encoding must be interactively adjustable to
the users’ needs and preferences.
We support these tasks with a number of interaction techniques. The users can zoom and pan to any place on the map,
they can switch to their favorite visualization mode, and they
can focus on tags with relevant temporal developments.
To make the different options for interaction easily accessible, we provide a custom-made user interface component,
which borrows from the idea of ﬂoating menus. Fig. 5(a)
shows the main menu with options, including home, settings,
color adjustment, map display, photos, and tag selection. When
the user clicks the tag selection, the component switches its
interface accordingly. Fig. 5(b) shows this interface, which
allows users to select the time range for which tags are to be
displayed, the time point of interest, as well as the visualization
mode (i.e., the different encodings introduced earlier).
Besides presenting tags with temporal dependencies on
maps, we also support the users in interacting with the tags
for further information exploration as described next.
One important task is to highlight the concrete locations in
space where tags originate from. This is necessary because
the Flickr database aggregates the spatial information of tags
to larger regions. Our goal is to allow users to reestablish the
connection of tags to speciﬁc locations.

(a) Main menu.
Fig. 5.

(a) Markers highlight concrete geo-positions for a selected tag.

(b) Selecting multiple time points reveals tag co-occurrence.

(b) Time and encoding selection.

Fig. 6.

Controller interface.

37

Options for interacting with time-dependent tags on maps.

VI. I MPLEMENTATION AND P RELIMINARY U SER
F EEDBACKS

interfering with the legibility of the tags, which we expected
to a certain degree. Secondly, some users asked for additional
querying mechanisms, in particular a textual search for speciﬁc
tags of interest.

We implemented a web-based visualization application to
illustrate the concepts introduced in the previous sections
based on the available Flickr tags dataset. While the visualization part in our implementation exploits the graphics and
interaction capabilities of Flash and ActionScript, the data part
is based on MySQL and the Flickr web services APIs.
The Flickr APIs support queries for the relations
of tags and geographical regions of the map using
the services flickr.places.tagsForPlace and
flickr.places.placesForTags. Both calls expect a
range of dates as input and return lists of tags or places as
output, respectively.
The corresponding data is as follows. At a particular date,
a tag can be associated with various geo-coordinates inside
a geographical region (normally concerning many photos).
Because in Flickr a geographical region can be indicated
through various levels of geographical abstraction (i.e., place
types: locality, city, state, etc.), a tag listed for one place
can be listed for other places at other administrative levels
as well. For example, a tag listed for Berlin (level: city) may
also be listed for Germany (level: country). We utilize this for
semantic zooming as users zoom into particular regions of the
map.
For a place (e.g. a city) and a given date, there exists a list of
tags. Consequently, for multiple dates, there are multiple lists
of tags, one for each date. Because our visualization client
requires efﬁcient access and iteration over multiple dates and
geographical regions, we reorganize the retrieved query results
in our own database, which consists of multiple lists of tags
indexed by date and geographical region.
This data backend drives the efﬁcient visualization of Flickr
tags with spatial and temporal references in any Flash-enabled
Web browser. Users can access the data for different places by
navigating the Taggram-based map and different time ranges
can be visited by using the query interface of the controller
menu.
Using our implementation, we conducted a small informal
test to collect ﬁrst feedbacks about our visualization designs.
Seven students (aged 22-26, 2 females, familiar with Tag
Clouds and Yahoo! Flickr) have been asked to use our tool.
As this was not a formal evaluation, we did not focus on any
particular visualization task or question, but rather we were
interested in the general acceptance of our designs for the
visual exploration of Flickr tags.
In summary, six out of seven participants liked the fact that
they can explore tag clouds concerning both space and time.
They were strongly interested in the interactive visualization
that highlights the co-occurrence of Flickr tags on the map
for selected dates. Additionally, the exploration of temporal
patterns (e.g., weekdays in a calendar-based artifact) got
special attention.
On the other hand, there were also negative feedbacks.
Firstly, adding visual encodings to tags was experienced as

VII. S UMMARY AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we have addressed the visualization of tags
with both spatial and temporal references. We apply Taggram
to visualize spatial dependencies of tags on a geographical
map. Our design strategy for visualizing temporal aspects
of tags has been twofold: employ (i) the visual appearance
of text or (ii) additional visual artifacts associated with the
tags. For both strategies, we described generic designs and
developed visualization examples that support the users in
interactively exploring spatiotemporal Flickr tags of userselected time ranges on navigable maps (see Fig. 7). Using our
application, the user can accomplish a number of visualization
tasks, including identifying dates for which tags exist, ﬁnding
local trends in the development of tags, and understanding tag
co-occurrence over time.
Through this development, we have illustrated that incorporating additional visual cues into the representation of the
raw data (i.e., the tags) is a sensible solution to account for
additional spatial and temporal references of the data.
Still, many tasks are open for future work. In the context
of visualizing temporal dependencies of tags, a more general
formal study has to be carried out in order to identify the most
suitable combination of visual variables (shape, size, value,
grain, hue, orientation, and position). This also includes a
comparison of our approaches with existing spatially and/or
temporally referenced text visualization techniques. Another
issue is that our development mainly focuses on the simple
model of linearly ordered time. However, as temporal data
can be multifaceted [14], future work may address other
innovations for more complex and multi-perspective temporal
data. Similarly, one can think of ways to extend our univariate
visualizations to cope with multivariate data associated with
tags.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partly funded by the KAAD. Some of the
colors that appear in this work are taken from ColorBrewer.
Some of the icons that appear in this work are by Yusuke
Kamiyamane.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Ahern, M. Naaman, R. Nair, and J. H.-I. Yang, “World Explorer:
Visualizing Aggregate Data from Unstructured Text in Geo-Referenced
Collections,” in Proc. of the ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital
Libraries (JCDL). New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 1–10.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1255175.1255177
[2] D. Q. Nguyen and H. Schumann, “Taggram: Exploring Geo-data on
Maps through a Tag Cloud-Based Visualization,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV). IEEE Computer
Society, 2010, pp. 322–328.
[3] M. Dubinko, R. Kumar, J. Magnani, J. Novak, P. Raghavan,
and A. Tomkins, “Visualizing Tags Over Time,” in Proc. of
the International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW). New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 193–202. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1135777.1135810

38

Fig. 7.

Visualization of spatiotemporal tags on maps using different encodings.

[11] T. Russell, “Cloudalicious: Folksonomy Over Time,” in Proc. of the
ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL). ACM, 2006,
p. 364.
[12] B. Lee, N. H. Riche, A. K. Karlson, and S. Carpendale, “SparkClouds:
Visualizing Trends in Tag Clouds,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1182–1189, 2010.
[13] S. Lohmann, J. Ziegler, and L. Tetzlaff, “Comparison of Tag Cloud
Layouts: Task-Related Performance and Visual Exploration,” in Proc. of
the IFIP TC13 Conference Human-Computer Interaction (INTERACT).
Springer, 2009, pp. 392–404.
[14] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. M¨uller, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski,
“Visual Methods for Analyzing Time-Oriented Data,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 47–60, 2008.
[15] “ColorBrewer,”
retrieved
Mar,
2011.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.colorbrewer.org/
[16] C. Tominski, G. Fuchs, and H. Schumann, “Task-Driven Color Coding,”
in Proc. of the International Conference on Information Visualisation
(IV). IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 373–380.

[4] “Twitscoop,”
retrieved
Mar,
2011.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.twitscoop.com/
[5] A. M. McEachren, How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization, and
Design. New York, NY, USA: Guilford Press, 1995.
[6] J. Bertin, Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps. Redlands, CA, USA: Esri Press, 2011.
[7] C. Collins, S. Carpendale, and G. Penn, “DocuBurst: Visualizing Document Content using Language Structure,” Computer Graphics Forum,
vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1039–1046, 2009.
[8] J. Clark, “Twitter List Proﬁle Clouds,” retrieved Mar, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://neoformix.com/2009/TwitterListClouds.html
[9] M. Stefaner, “Visual Tools for the Socio-semantic Web,” Master’s thesis,
University of Applied Sciences Potsdam, 2007.
[10] W. Cui, Y. Wu, S. Liu, F. Wei, M. X. Zhou, and H. Qu, “Context
Preserving Dynamic Word Cloud Visualization,” in Proc. of the IEEE
Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium (PaciﬁcVis). IEEE Computer Society,
2010, pp. 121–128.

39

