2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Exploring the Origins of Tables for Information Visualization

Francis T. Marchese
Computer Science Department
Pace University
NY, NY 10038 USA
e-mail: fmarchese@pace.edu
Abstract— This paper considers the deep history of tables as
visualization modalities. It covers four kinds of tables that have
appeared between 1900 BCE and 1300 CE: Sumerian
accounting tables, chronicles, canon tables, and medieval
calendars as representations of some of the earliest milestones
in information visualization. Analysis of these tables
demonstrates as early as 1300 BCE the need to visualize
information had driven the invention of representations that
transformed the way information has been communicated and
used.

algorithms and visual representations as interfaces to their
information.
This paper will discuss four kinds of tables from history:
Sumerian accounting tables, chronicles, canon tables, and
medieval calendars. These tables have been selected because
they represent some of the earliest milestones in information
visualization, and provide a starting point for expanding the
historical narrative. With the exception of mathematical
tables, historians have paid little attention to tables in general
as a mode of information communication [12], mostly
focusing on the history of the periodic table [13]. But, like
the periodic table, the tables covered herein have
transformed the way information has been communicated
and used.
The following section presents a brief introduction to the
gridding of data and the origins of written language. The four
subsequent sections cover the nature and importance of
Sumerian accounting tables, chronicles, canon tables, and
medieval calendars as information visualization modalities.
Finally, these tables are considered from within Wainer's
analysis framework for table design and use [14][15].

Keywords - information visualization, tables, computus,
calendars, medieval art.

I.

INTRODUCTION

This paper considers the deep history of tables as visualization media. The organizational constructs of the tabular
format are ubiquitous, as may be seen in contemporary artifacts such as calendars, agendas, and time tables; as the
foundation for spreadsheets; and for their subsequent support of other information visualization methods [1 - 10]. It is
well understood that tables are important data visualization
tools and the first stage in the information visualization
pipeline, organizing raw data into a form that may be translated into graphics. The table's strength as a visualization
medium derives from its compactly organized, gridded
structure; a format that promotes associations among diverse data elements, and facilitates exploration of relationships among them.
Recently, I have explored the history of the design of
chemical tables [11], particularly the periodic table,
demonstrating how its design has evolved over time to meet
the changing needs of chemists and their increased
understanding of chemical combination. This paper proceeds
in the same way, but steps back in time to focus on the early
history of tables and their uses for the organization of
information. It is concerned with exposing the visualization
community to the kinds of tabular visualizations that
appeared between 1900 BCE and 1300 CE. People
throughout time have needed to extract, reorganize, and
reconnect information, not only for documentation and
communication, but also for usability. As such, the problems
faced were computational in nature, requiring invention of

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.36

II.

BACKGROUND

The history of graphical representation and analysis of
information begins with the grid. The grid is a metric by
which we establish distance and direction of any position
relative to a reference point, line, or plane. It is latitude and
longitude, or the perpendicular x and y axes. It is the
American football gridiron, and Manhattan's east-west streets
and north-south avenues. Twenty-five thousand year old
representations of the grid are found on the walls of Lascaux
cave in southern France. There is an hieroglyphic symbol
resembling an orthogonal grid, which was used to designate
districts of towns. Ancient Egyptian surveyors used the grid
to lay out land. About 140 BCE Hipparchus employed
latitude and longitude to locate celestial and terrestrial
positions. Ptolemy, an astronomer and geographer, utilized
these methods to map the known world in a standardized and
consistent way. By the second century CE Ptolmey published
his Geographia, a collection of 25 geographical maps, along
with methods for constructing and using grids [16]. First
century CE Chinese cartographers used grids to map the
country. The Romans employed a grid system called the
centuration, which, according to David Turnbull, turned “all
Europe into one vast sheet of graph paper” [17]. The ancients

395

created charts and maps to organize their geographical
knowledge. Today, maps and charts have evolved into
general graphic representations designed to facilitate a
spatial understanding of objects, concepts, processes, and
events. Their purpose of ordering knowledge remains central
to their utility.
The gridding of space creates containers – locations that
may hold a variety of information. The contents of elemental
positions within the periodic table and spreadsheet cells are
just two examples. It appears as well that the creation of
containers through gridding was important to the
Mesopotamian origins of written language. With the
agricultural revolution approximately 10,000 years ago came
the need to document and manage economic transactions
related to farming, livestock, fisheries, and the division of
labor of a complex society. This was particularly the case for
the powerful fourth millennium BCE Mesopotamian cities
who traded agricultural and animal products for metals and
luxury goods with geographically distant kingdoms.
Documentary evidence for these accounting practices is
found in over five thousand clay tablets recovered from the
ancient Sumerian city of Uruk and its surroundings dating to
the mid-fourth millennium BCE [18]. The inscribed grid on
these clay tablets created boxes, each of which represented
one accounting unit. Contained within a box was an
ideogram, a symbol that represented a word or idea, and a
numerical value representing a quantity.

Figure 2: Cuneiform tablet, temple of Enlil at Nippur, (CBS 3323,
University of Pennsylvania). Reproduced from [22].

III.

SUMERIAN ACCOUNTING TABLES

The first systematically structured tables (see e.g. Figure
2) originated in Mesopotamia about 1850 BCE [21]. The
evolution of cuneiform from a pictographic into a symbolic
language that supported the phonetics of spoken Sumerian
created a compact language that facilitated accounting
practice as well. In an analysis of Mesopotamian tables from
this period, Eleanor Robson has found striking similarities
with contemporary counterparts [21]. These similarities may
be seen in Figure 2, which shows both the obverse and
reverse sides of a cuneiform tablet from the temple of Enlil
at Nippur. It is a record of sources of revenue and monthly
disbursements to forty-six temple personnel by its bursar
Ḫunabi for the year 1295 BCE [22]. There are column
headings and row titles. Column headings at the top of the
table specify month names. Names and professions are
shown in the right-hand column (e.g. seeress, weaver,
overseer, temple servant). Eighteen of the individuals listed
receive no payment for all or half the year. (Notice the blank
“smooth” cells along rows.) These individuals are classified
as either dead or fugitive. Grid locations within the table
contain numerical information that are part of calculations,
flowing first down a column, and then across a row.
Subtotals for each individual are given every six months,
culminating with a yearly total adjacent to row labels. The
table is annotated with explanatory interpolations under
columns containing totals, and a summary column at the
table's end.

Figure 1: Uruk III Tablet, (MSVO 3, 51, Louvre Museum, Paris, France).
Drawing courtesy of R. Englund.

Figure 1 shows a drawing of a tablet from the Uruk III
period (ca. 3200-3000 BCE) containing an accounting of
deliveries of barley and malt from two individuals for the
production of beer. The bottom row bears the name of the
official in charge. The table is read from right-to-left and
top-down. Each row corresponds to an individual, with the
first two columns containing entries for malt, followed by a
column for barley. Subtotals are given in the third column
(barley groats (top) and malt (bottom)). The left-most box
displays the grand total [19]. No formal language was used
to express the relationship between the signs and symbols in
the tablet. Instead, the grid structure provided that syntax
[20].

396

The utility of this tabular format was cemented with the
invention of the sexagesimal (base 60) place value system of
arithmetic that provided a means for each table cell to be
quantitatively linked in a formal mathematical way. As
Robson has observed, “the new format enabled numerical
data and relationships to be seen and explored in ways
hitherto unimaginable,” creating “conceptual advances in
quantitative thinking” [21].
IV.

tablets, and eventually papyrus and parchment sheets [29].
The codex is more practical than a scroll, given that it allows
random information access, as opposed to a scroll's
sequential access; and unlike the scroll, both sides of a sheet
may be used for writing.
Eusebius began his process of correlation by drawing a
multi-column table on a codex page. Each column
corresponded to a kingdom, and each row to a year in a
king's reign [30]. The leftmost column represented the
dominant empire during a historical time period. It began
with the Assyrians. The Persians took their place, and
eventually the Romans occupied this column. The total
number of columns varied as kingdoms came and went.
There were as many as nine columns, for which Eusebius
used a double-page spread. Eusebius left a space in the
middle of each page to allow for commentary. Finally,
Eusebius decided to set the starting date for his universal
history with the earliest date he felt he could reasonably
compute, that being the birth of Abraham. He marked off
every tenth row with the number of years since Abraham's
birth.
He filled his table by finding correlations between
loosely connected regional years, linking them together by
placing them on the same row of the table. For example, he
determined that Darius of Persia and Alexander the Great of
Macedonia lived at the same time, since the latter overthrew
the former. This linked the Greek and Persian lists. He linked
Jewish and Persian events by noting that the Bible recorded
the second temple in Jerusalem was built in the second year
of the Persian king Darius' reign.
Clearly this was an arduous task, something that could be
easily handled today with computer intervention. But as
Eusebius must have realized, one strength of tables is that all
data are visible, thus making the viewing of inconsistencies
or inaccuracies easily apparent. And there were many errors!
Eusebius dealt with this problem by drawing a line under the
periods of confusion to highlight these errors for future
resolution.
Eusebius’s own Chronicle in the original Greek no
longer exists, but a Latin translation by St. Jerome does. This
bishop and Church scholar translated Eusebius's tables,
adding dates from 325 – 379 CE; publishing his Chronicon
in 380 CE [31]. Figure 3 shows a page from Jerome's
Chronicon, taken from a ninth century CE copy of the
manuscript (MS. 315 fol. 96r, Merton College, Oxford
University). The page is arranged in four columns – Persia,
Rome, and Macedonia, with a column of commentary. Three
ink colors (black, red, and green) were used as a means to
distinguish dynasty lists. Eusebius specified the use of color
to enhance legibility, and Jerome carried this through with
his own version. In the far right column (in red) the rise of
Alexander as King of the Macedonians is noted. To its left,
Eusebius/Jerome recorded that Pythagoras died in the sixth
year of Alexander's rule. On the table's far left column are
two small red roman numerals (MDX and MDXX)
designating the time lapsed in years since the birth of
Abraham. Olympiads are shown in red, preceded by green
roman numerals specifying the 69th, 70th, etc in the sequence.

CHRONOLOGIES

A chronology is a record of events in the order of
occurrence. One of the earliest extant historical records is the
Parian Marble, a Greek chronological table covering the
years from 1581 BCE to 264 BCE, inscribed on a stela (now
at Oxford's Ashmolean Museum) [23]. A later example
decorated the Emperor Augustus's arch in the Roman Forum.
Known today as the Fasti Capitolini Consulares, it is a
collection of marble plaques listing in tabular format all the
chief magistrates of Rome since the Republic’s foundation,
and the victorious leaders from Romulus onward [24].
Although the ancient world had many chroniclers such as
Herodotus, Pliny the Elder, and Josephus, only fragmentary
records exist of attempts to create a synchronous chronology
encompassing all cultures of the known Western world [25].
This was to change with Eusebius of Caesarea.
Eusebius of Caesarea (c. 263 – 339/340 CE), also known
as Eusebius Pamphili, was Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine,
scholar, friend and biographer of the Emperor Constantine I,
and historian who wrote Historia Ecclesiastica, an early
history of the Church [26]. But before he wrote his Church
history Eusebius wrote his Chronicles (ca. 311 CE), a
universal history of the nations from Abraham through
Constantine I [27]. The Chronicles are divided into two
parts. The first part, the Annals, summarizes the history of
each nation individually. The second, the Chronological
Canons, synchronized the historical records of all the
nations.
The challenge Eusebius faced in creating the
Chronological Canons was not only how to link together
chronographical information from Hebrew, Greek, Persian,
and other sources, but also how to translate the relative
chronology of each kingdom or empire into a universal time
line to produce a synchronized succession of events.
Universal dating did not exist during Eusebius's time. The
Anno Domini (A.D./B.C.) system of dating used today was
not created until 525 CE, and not widely used until 800 CE
[28]. Exacerbating Eusebius's problem was that different
cultures based their chronologies on different reckoning
schemes. Ancient Greeks dated years according to
Olympiads, which were on four year cycles. The Hebrew
calendar follows a solar schedule segmented by lunar cycles.
The Macedonian calendar followed a lunar cycle - a year has
only 354 days. And the information reported by early
historians and commentators could be just plain inaccurate!
Eusebius's eventual solution to his problem began with
the codex, the forerunner of the contemporary book.
Invented by the Romans, the codex was originally
constructed by binding together waxed wooden writing

397

Finally, at the top of the Persian column, the roman numerals
mark the 15th and subsequent years of Darius's 36 year reign.
Eusebius recorded all aspects of culture in his Chronicle,
including the real and fictitious: inventions, wars, lives of
poets and scholars, lifespans of gods and politicians, to name
but a few. As such it became a comprehensive cultural
compendium that inspired the creation of future chronicles
and itself lasting until the Protestant Reformation.

and John (232) [32]. The challenge faced by a student of the
gospels is not only how to find those passages that are in
common among the gospels, but also those passages that are
attributable to a subset of the authors or just an individual
author.
Ammonius of Alexandria, an early Church Father,
attempted a correlation around the year 220 CE as part of his
Harmony of the Gospels (now lost) [33]. Taking Matthew's
gospel as a referent, because it was the most comprehensive,
Ammonius placed the corresponding passages of the
remaining gospels adjacent to Matthew’s text. This
arrangement allowed the verbatim gospel commentaries to
be compared in parallel. It was the method’s strength. Its
weakness was that it completely destroyed the narrative
structure of the other three gospels.
The first successful attempt at creating a tool that crosscorrelated gospel passages was made by Eusebius of
Caesarea. He saw the power of Ammonius’s method, but
wanted to preserve the whole of all the texts, not just the
Gospel of St. Matthew. His solution was to create a kind of
tabular index called a canon table, containing information
about where to locate gospel passages that shared content.
Eusebius began his process by numbering all gospel
passages, writing a reference number at the beginning of
each. For example, there are 355 passages in the Gospel of
St. Mathew, so passages were numbered in black ink from 1
to 355 in the gospel margins. Tables were then constructed
that correlated these passages. Four column tables related
those passages shared by all four authors. Three column
tables contained pointers to passages that were shared by
only three evangelists; tables with two column tabular
correlations followed. Finally, a single column table was
created that contained references to passages unique to each
gospel. There were ten tables in all. And they were placed at
the beginning of the gospel book with a description of how
they were to be used.
A representative example of a Eusebian canon table is
exhibited in Figure 4 (MS. Egerton 608, fol. 11, British
Library). It is drawn from a gospel book that originated at
the Monastery of St Willibrord, Echternach, Germany;
produced during the 2nd or 3rd quarter of the 11th century.
This is Canon Table IV, a three column table enclosed within
an architectural arcade. Each column is labeled in Latin with
the abbreviated name of an author (MAT (Matthew), MAR
(Mark), and JOH (John)). Each table row contains the
numbers of three correlated gospel passages. For example,
the first row of this canon table records passage numbers
XVIII, VIII, and XXVI. A reader would interpret this line as
meaning that the passages numbered XVIII in Matthew, VIII
in Mark, and XXVI in John all share commentary about a
particular event in Jesus's life. The reader would then look up
those numbered passages in each of the gospels to study the
commentary.
Now suppose that someone upon reading a passage in
one of the four gospels, say John CXXI, wished to discover
whether other gospels contained similar presentations. The
reader would find a number written in red ink below the
passage number of this text placed there by Eusebius to

Figure 3: Jerome's Chronicon, (Merton MS 315, fol. 96r). Reproduced by
permission of the Warden and Fellows of Merton College, Oxford.

V.

CANON TABLES

A gospel is a New Testament book that describes the life
and works of Jesus. There are four Canonical Gospels that
were written by the evangelists Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John sometime between the years 60 and 80 CE. During the
early Middle Ages these four gospels were often assembled
into their own volume, a gospel book, and used as a teaching
or evangelical tool. The most famous book of this kind is the
Book of Kells created by Celtic monks around the year 800
CE.
Christian Bibles and gospel books had already taken the
form of the codex by the second half of the first century CE
[29]. The codex's design strength of random access
facilitated preaching by providing unfettered access to all
evangelical content. But one significant problem remained.
All four gospels possess many passages in common.
Analysis of the four gospels from nearly all Greek and Latin
manuscripts reveals about 1165 self-contained passages
distributed across Matthew (355), Mark (235), Luke (343),

398

indicate in which canon table a correlation could be found.
The reader would then proceed to the designated canon table,
here table IV, read down John's column until arriving at the
row containing John's passage number, and then read along
that row to find the numbers of the correlated passages.
In the year 331, by the order of the Emperor Constantine,
Eusebius sent fifty copies of the gospels to Constantinople,
the new capital of the Roman Empire, for use in its churches.
By the fifth century they were in common use. In all
probability, Eusebius's seeding of the Roman Empire with
his canon tables ensured their success as a visualization tool.
Indeed, they may be found in nearly all surviving copies of
the gospels up to c. 1200, including gospel books written in
Greek, Latin, Syriac, Gothic, Armenian, Georgian, and
Ethiopian [34].

Figure 5 shows a typical medieval calendar for the month
of November, taken from an English psalter produced during
the first quarter of the thirteenth century (MS. Royal 1DX,
fol. 14, British Library). There are two roundels: a lower
roundel indicating November's zodiac sign - Sagittarius, and
an upper roundel designating the “Labour of the Month” here a man slaughtering a pig. The term “Labours of the
Months” refers to yearly cycles in Medieval art depicting
common rural activities. The contents of cycles varied with
date, location, and the kinds of work. For example, April was
a time of sowing and July was a month for reaping so images
would reflect these labors.
The column to the left of the roundels lists the feast days,
with major feasts written in red. The illuminated “KL”
initials at the table's top stand for the Latin word kalends,
which marks the first day of the month in the Roman
calendar. Below it in blue letters are initials marking in Latin
the nones (5th day), ides (13th day), and remaining days until
the next month's kalends. This column is augmented by a
column of Roman numerals to its left containing a
countdown from November's kalends, to nones, ides, and
finally December's kalends. The calendar's format carries
forth the structure of ancient Roman calendars (e.g. Fasti
Antiates Maiores), including its use of red to highlight
important events (red letter days) [24].

Figure 4: Eusebian canon table for Matthew, Mark, and John, © British
Library Board (MS. Egerton 608, fol. 11, British Library).

VI. MEDIEVAL CALENDARS
Keeping track of time was important to medieval
agriculture, and even more so for the Christian clergy [35].
The Church's liturgical practices involved a complex cycle of
rituals and feasts that were celebrated in varying ways
depending on the calendar day of the event. Since prayer was
an intrinsic part of these celebrations, calendars were
integrated into religious manuscripts such as psalters,
breviaries, books of hours, missals, and almanacs.

Figure 5: Calendar, November, English Psalter, © British Library Board
(MS. Royal 1DX, fol. 14, British Library).

The calendar's first two columns contain roman numerals
and letters respectively. These are related to the computus, a
399

collection of algorithms for determining the date of Easter in
the Christian calendar that were developed during the early
Middle Ages [36][37]. Easter is the holiest feast day in
Christendom, making the correct computation of its date one
of the most important computations of the early Middle
Ages. The Christian calendar contains two kinds of feast
days – immovable, feast days that remain unchanged from
year to year; and movable, feasts, such as Easter, that are
linked to lunar and solar cycles.
Setting a yearly date for Easter was a source of
controversy in the Church as early as the 3rd century.
Although originally linked to the Jewish calendar through its
relation to the Paschal (or Passover) celebration, various
schools of thought within the Church, particularly Rome and
Alexandria, had already developed their own methods of
reckoning. They argued for Easter to be liberated from the
Jewish calender because in some years the Jewish calender
placed Easter's date either before the vernal equinox or not
on Sunday. The First Council of Nicaea in 325 decreed that
Christians should use a common method to establish the date
of Easter independent of the Jewish method, but did not
suggest a mode of computation. It would take several
centuries before a common method was accepted throughout
Christianity.
The problem that Church computists needed to solve was
to find the date of Easter given the requirement that it is to be
celebrated on the first Sunday after the 14th day of the lunar
month that falls on or after the day of the vernal equinox.
Their solutions to this problem were table-based,
incorporating calculations of the cycles of the sun and moon.
Figure 6 displays a sample computistical table known as the
table of Dionysius Exiguus (MS. 17, fol. 30r, St. John's
College, Oxford University) from the Thorney Computus, a
manuscript produced in the first decade of the 12th century
at Thorney Abbey in Cambridgeshire, England. It is a
perpetual table of the great Paschal cycle of 532 years
constructed from a Paschal lunar cycle of 19 years for the
repeat of a full moon (columns) and a 28 year solar cycle of
recurrent weekdays (rows). When the lunar and solar cycles
are combined (19 x 28), a perpetual Great Paschal Cycle of
532 years results. With this table it is possible to predict the
date of Easter up to 532 years in the future.
The Paschal table is set between the two inner margins
(dark boarders) of Figure 6. Color flags designate cells
marking the beginning of solar cycles (yellow), and cells
which signal the beginning of indictions (green) [38].
Indictions is a Roman bureaucratic cycle of 15 years,
established for taxation purposes during the reigns of
Diocletian and Constantine that began on September 1st, the
start of the fiscal year. Justinian made indictions part of the
official dating style for government documents. They were
included in the Alexandrian Paschal tables, migrating via
Dionysius Exiguus into the standard Paschal tables used in
the medieval west [38].
Numerous symbols and encodings envelope this table.
They were intended to be used in concert with mnemonics,
either memory or rhyming schemes, that described how the
table was to be utilized; and with computation employing a

variation of medieval finger reckoning [39]. The complexity
of Medieval computus meant that calendar reckoning could
only be performed by individuals with appropriate training,
such as that received in a medieval monastery. Indeed, many
calenders were expanded to include additional columns for
predicting phases and eclipses of the moon, and for
supporting astrological prognostications. But even medieval
monks found many of these computations too complex. As a
result, simplified versions were designed to make calendars
easier to use (see again Figure 5). By employing only the
first two columns of the table in Figure 5, it became possible
for an average monk to calculate the date of Easter for a
given year. This simplification also made it possible for
educated laity to own calendars. Such examples have been
found in books of hours of rich individuals. One of the most
famous is the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry (c. 1410)
by the Limbourg Brothers.

Figure 6: Computus Table, (MS. 17, fol. 30r, St. John's College, Oxford).
Reproduced by permission of the President and Fellows of St John’s
College, Oxford.

VII. ANALYSIS
Wainer has set forth rationales for table usage and
design: exploration, communication, storage, and illustration
[14][15]. As part of exploration, tables help answer questions
about data. As exemplars of communication, tables provide
effective means for presenting data - each table has a story or
stories to tell. Storage archives data, supporting a historical
400

context, and aiding in data retrieval. As illustration, tables
are used as graphics in support of narrative.
All tables described herein support exploration. The
gridded, spreadsheet-like format of the Sumerian table
makes it easy to ask questions about individuals and their
monthly wages. Eusebius's chronologies and medieval
calendars are arranged to make it easy to find important
dates and events. While the canon table's structure logically
organizes the gospel texts.
If longevity is an effective measure of the
communication capability of these tables, then they are all
highly effective. The Sumerian table structure is used in
spreadsheets today. The structure of Eusebius's Chronicles
remains a standard format for historians. And the medieval
calendar's layout is a standard structure for contemporary
agendas. In addition, the structure of each table supports the
creation of narratives. The temporal structure of Eusebius's
Chronicles and medieval calendars sets forth clear narrative
paths. The correlated index structure of canon tables
provides a means for communicating parallel and
intersecting Gospel narrative threads. And the Sumerian
table allows the creation of stories about the temple's yearly
disbursements to its workers throughout the year.
These tables support ease of information storage and
accessibility. The 532 year Easter cycle of the computus
table, the myriad feast days of the medieval calendar, and
Eusebius's Chronology all imbue these tables with a deep
sense of history as well. Indeed, the Roman bureaucratic
cycle that became embedded within the computus table
(Figure 6), demonstrates the historical evolution of a table
from a purely liturgical tool to a secular tool as well.
Finally, in Wainer's rationale of illustration for table
usage, tables are viewed as graphical objects in support of
narrative. All tables discussed are coherent graphical entities
consistent with Bertin's rules for visual encoding [40]. For
example, color was an important design component clearly
specified by early designers. Eusebius and Jerome dictated
the colors to be used, and how to use them. The
accompanying text to the computistical table shown in
Figure 6 explains a color coding scheme attributed to Abbo
of Fleury (c. 945 – 1004) [38]. Table cells associated with
solar and bureaucratic cycles were highlighted with yellow
and green respectively, in order to highlight their temporal
patterns for ease of visualization. And the specification of
important medieval calendar dates in red, which became
known as red letter days, is traceable as far back as the
Romans.

years. During the late Roman empire, Eusebius of Caesarea
invented respectively, a new representational structure for a
chronology, and the concept of the canon table in order to
organize and access both historical and liturgical texts. The
need to compute a yearly date for the Christian feast of
Easter led early medieval scholars to develop computational
algorithms for reckoning the date of Easter. Expressed as
tables, these algorithms provided a theoretical foundation for
the Roman calendar's temporal structure, and eventually
furnished a means for the integration of computus with
calendral information of a social and religious nature.
Finally, an analysis of these tables employing Wainer's
rationales has shown them to be exemplars of table design.
Their usability has most assuredly secured each of these
table's place in visualization history, ultimately transforming
the way information has been used, stored, and
communicated.

ACKNOLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Professor Robert K. Englund of the
Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative for providing the
drawing of the Uruk III tablet. The assistance of the
following individuals in securing image permissions is
greatly appreciated: Dr. Julia Walworth, Fellow Librarian of
Merton College, Oxford; Stewart Tiley, Librarian, St John's
College, Oxford; and Sandra Powlette, British Library.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

VIII. CONCLUSION

[7]

The five tables investigated here appeared between 1300
BCE and 1300 CE. Sumerian accounting tables, chronicles,
canon tables, medieval computus, and calendars, may be
considered early milestones in the history of information
visualization. Analysis of these tables demonstrates that as
early as 1300 BCE the need to visualize information had
driven the invention of structured visual representations for
information. Ancient Sumerian scribes invented a table
structure that anticipated the spreadsheet by nearly 4000

[8]

[9]

401

E. H.-H. Chi, P. Barry, J. Riedl, and J. Konstan, “A spreadsheet
approach to information visualization,” In Proceedings of the 10th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology
(UIST '97). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1997, pp. 79-80.
F.T. Marchese, “Teaching computer graphics with spreadsheets,” In
ACM SIGGRAPH 98 Conference Abstracts and Applications, ACM
SIGGRAPH, 1998, pp. 84-87.
E. H-H. Chi, J. Riedl, P. Barry, and J. Konstan, “Principles for
information visualization spreadsheets,” IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl.,
vol. 18, 4, 1998, pp. 30-38.
F. Nunez and E. H. Blake, “ViSSH: A data visualization
spreadsheet,” In Proceedings of the Second Joint Eurographics-IEEE
TCVG Symposium on Visualization, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
May 29-31, 2000, pp. 209-218.
H.-W. Hsieh and F.M. Shipman, III, “VITE: a visual interface
supporting the direct manipulation of structured data using two-way
mappings,” In Proceedings of the 5th international conference on
Intelligent user interfaces (IUI '00). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2000, pp. 141-148.
S. Sarni, A. Maciel, and D. Thalmann, “A spreadsheet framework for
visual exploration of biomedical datasets,” In Proceedings of the 18th
IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS '05).
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 2005, pp.159-164.
R. Brath and M. Peters, “Excel visualizer: one click WYSIWYG
spreadsheet visualization,” In Proceedings of the conference on
Information Visualization (IV '06). IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, 2006, pp. 68-73.
M. Itoh, J. Fujima, M. Ohigashi, and Y. Tanaka, “Spreadsheet-based
framework for interactive 3D visualization of web resources,” In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference Information
Visualization (IV '07). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC,
USA, 2007, pp. 65-73.
A.Streit, B. Pham, and R. Brown, “A spreadsheet approach to
facilitate visualization of uncertainty in Information,” IEEE

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]

Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 14, 1,
2008, pp. 61-72.
S. Kandel, A. Paepcke, M. Theobald, H. Garcia-Molina, and E.
Abelson, “Photospread: a spreadsheet for managing photos. In
Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems (CHI '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2008, pp. 1749-1758.
F.T. Marchese, “The chemical table: an open dialog between
visualization and design,” In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Information Visualization: IV'08. IEEE Computer
Society, Washington, DC, 2008, pp. 75-81.
M. Campbell-Kelly, M. Croarken, R.G. Flood, and E. Robson (eds.),
The History of Mathematical Tables from Sumer to Spreadsheets.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
E.R. Scerri, The Periodic Table: Its Story and Its Significance,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
H. Wainer, “Understanding graphs and tables,” Educational
Researcher, vol. 21, 1, 1992, pp. 12-23.
H. Wainer, “Improving tabular displays, with NAEP: tables as
examples and inspirations,” Journal of Educational and Behavioral
Statistics, vol. 22, 1, 1997, pp. 1-30.
J. L. Berggren and A. Jones, Ptolemy's Geography: An Annotated
Translation of the Theoretical Chapters. Princeton and Oxford:
Princeton University Press, 2000.
D. Turnbull, Maps are Territories. Science is an Atlas. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1994.
R. K. Englund, “Texts from the Uruk period,” in Späturuk-Zeit und
Frühdynastische Zeit (ed. P. Attinger and C. Uelinger), Freiburg and
Göttingen, 1998, pp. 15–233.
N. Veldhuis, “The archaic lexical corpus, digital corpus of cuneiform
lexical texts,” University of California, Berkeley. Retrieved April 29,
2011 from http://oracc.museum.upenn.edu/dcclt.
M.W. Green, “The construction and implementation of the cuneiform
writing system, ” Visible Writing, vol. 15, 1981, pp. 345-72.
E. Robson, “Tables and tabular formatting in Sumer, Babylonia, and
Assyria, 2500-50 BCE,” in M. Campbell-Kelly, M. Croarken, R.G.
Flood, and E. Robson (eds.), The History of Mathematical Tables
from Sumer to Spreadsheets. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003,
pp. 18–47.
A.T. Clay, Documents from the Temple Archives of Nippur Dated in
the Reigns of the Cassite Rulers, 3 vols., The University Museum,
Philadelphia, 1906, pls. 25–6.
The Parian Marble, Ashmolean Museum of At and Archaeology.
Retrieved April 29, 2011 from http://www.ashmolean.museum/
ash/faqs/q004/.

[24] D. Feeney, Caesar's Calendar: Ancient Time and the Beginnings of
History. University of California Press, 2007.
[25] B. Croke, The originality of Eusebius' chronicle,” The American
Journal of Philology, vol. 103, 2, 1982, pp. 195-200.
[26] F.J. Bacchus, “Eusebius of Cæsarea,” In The Catholic Encyclopedia.
New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. Retrieved February 24,
2011 from: http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/05617b.htm
[27] F.J. Bacchus, “Eusebius of Cæsarea,” In The Catholic Encyclopedia.
New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. Retrieved February 24,
2011 from: http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/05616a.htm
[28] G. Teres, "Time computations and Dionysius Exiguus," Journal for
the History of Astronomy, vol. 15, 1984, pp. 177-188.
[29] C. Roberts and T. C. Skeat, The Birth of the Codex. British Academy,
1983.
[30] R. Pearse, "Jerome: the manuscripts of the 'Chronicon'," Retrieved
April 29, 2011 from http://www.tertullian.org/rpearse/manuscripts/
jerome_chronicon.htm.
[31] R. Pearse, et al., trans. “The chronicle of St. Jerome,” in Early Church
Fathers: Additional Texts, 2005. Preface to the Online Edition.
Retrieved April 29, 2011 from http://rbedrosian.com/jerome_
chronicle_00_eintro.htm .
[32] F. Bechtel, “Ammonian sections,” In The Catholic Encyclopedia.
New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. Retrieved February 23,
2011 from http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01431a.htm
[33] H.H. Oliver, “The epistle of Eusebius to Carpianus. textual tradition
and translation,” Novum Testamentum, vol. 3, 1959, pp. 138-145.
[34] C. Nordenfalk, “Canon tables of papyrus,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers,
vol. 36, 1982, pp. 29-38.
[35] A. Borst, The Ordering of Time: From the Ancient Computus to the
Modern Computer, Trans. by Andrew Winnard. Cambridge: Polity
Press; Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1993.
[36] T. Morrison, “Computus digitorum for the calculation of Easter,”
Journal of the Australian Early Medieval Association, vol. 1, 2005,
pp. 85-98.
[37] Bede, (translated by F. Wallis), Bede: The Reckoning of Time.
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2004.
[38] F. Wallis, "5. Computus tables and texts II: 18. tabula Dionysii," The
Calendar and the Cloister: Oxford, St John's College MS17. 2007.
McGill University Library. Digital Collections Program. Retrieved
April 29, 2011 from http://digital.library.mcgill.ca/ms-17.
[39] B.P. Williams and R.S. Williams, “Finger numbers in the GrecoRoman world and the early middle ages,” Isis, vol. 86, 4 , 1995, pp.
587-608
[40] J. Bertin, Semiology of Graphics (translated by W.J. Berg).
University of Wisconsin Press, 1983.

402

