2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Mediation of Knowledge Construction of Historic Sites through
Embodied Interaction
Kristine Deray1, Michael Day1,
University of Technology, Sydney1
kristine.deray@uts.ed.au, Michael.Day-1@uts.edu.au
embodied knowledge has advantages. This is in line with
the work of phenomenological archaeologists who have
supported the construction of knowledge systems that
reference embodied sensory experience. Importantly for
this work such experience is situated, considering
interpretation of the past as subjective and relational.
One of the benefits of such a shift in relation to cultural
heritage is, the centrality of the body to create and
engender dialogue based upon how the body represents
the affective, corporeal and sensuous dimensions of
human knowledge [2], [3].
Taking an embodied view of heritage housing
provides the opportunity to decode what is often a static
hierarchical geometry. Rather, the space when
considered somatically becomes a space of bodily
movement and sensory experience. It has been argued
that kinesthetic experience is fundamental to any
experience of space grounding that experience in the
body itself. Through the years researchers have
suggested that: (i) skilled movement is a form of thinking
[4], [5]; movement is predominant in all forms of human
intellectual activity [6], [7], [8], and, children learn to
communicate with gestures before they learn to speak.
There is research supporting the use of metaphoric
thought and schemata based upon motion as a
fundamental basis for the understanding of space by
humans. People constantly create relations in their lives
between physical reality and abstract concepts. People’s
conceptual structure of information space often
references particular metaphors where the underlying
visual schemata are based upon physical motion [9].
These form deep recurrent patterns developing image
schemata. This is in line with recent research in
neuroscience that indicates a neural basis for embodied
understandings, specifically, in relation to mental
imagery, association and memory. Some researchers now
support the perspective that many, if not all, higher-level
cognitive processes are body-based in the sense they
make use of (partial) simulations or emulations of
sensorimotor processes. Such simulation is through the
re-activation of neural circuitry that is also active in
bodily perception and action [10]. The argument is given
that such constructs embodied in sensorimotor processes
will still reference the physical system they are derived
from, even when they are linked to abstract concepts.

Abstract
This paper focuses upon the reframing of cultural heritage
as bodily experience articulated through narrative based
media. The concept of mediation is introduced and explored, as
a knowledge intensive process that integrates the production
and construction of information interfaces. Such interfaces are
negotiated through, and translated by, bodily interaction and
bodily reasoning. As such, the mediation process is shaped
through the reformulation of kineasthetic, somatic and
embodied experiences, that both, customize the interaction
process, and shape the resultant outputs that effect construction
of knowledge. For enhancement of the mediation process,
guidelines for maintaining the integrity of the mediation are
discussed. The approach is demonstrated over several projects
that explore these concerns through low fidelity prototypes
executed in an experimental manner.
Keywords-- - cultural heritage, mediation, embodied
interaction, information visualisation, visual analytics.

1. Introduction
The work in this paper references theoretical
framework drawn from discourses that seek to go beyond
documenting cultural heritage through predominantly
textual modes of representation focused on the
documentation of specific sites. With the rapid growth in
participative media, embodied in Web 2.0, the focus has
shifted to creative production as a primary means of
interaction that overshadows previous modes of
interaction such as basic access with databases, archives
and search engines [1]. As such, meaning is increasingly
expressed in relation to a person’s experience and
interaction with various bodies of information that
provide scenarios for exploration and knowledge
construction. Such a shift, from passive mode of
production to interactive and dynamic production,
generates a different model to merely providing access to
information. For cultural archives, such as Heritage
Housing, this provides issues for representational
strategies and innovative access to archival narratives
within the heritage sites.
The value of interactive narrative for increased
understanding of site - specific cultural content through
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.71

588

visibility and experience of visitors within the physical
boundaries of each site.

Similarly, understandings of basic spatial concepts are
intrinsically linked to how we orientate and move in the
physical world. Such bodily reasoning references the
experience of the structure of our bodily movement in
space.
In this paper we explore three projects that
demonstrate, through low fidelity prototyping, aspects of
these issues and experimental solutions. We report on an
interdisciplinary lab for university design students. The
students were required to respond to the brief of, how
can mediation be ‘framed’ in cultural heritage through
narrative driven interactive media. The aim of the project
was to design and simulate an act of mediation into a
historic house in Sydney, Australia. Two sites were
selected, Elizabeth Bay House and Vaucluse House,
shown in Figs 1, and 2. Both sites are under the
governance of the Historic Housing Trust (HHT) of
NSW, who actively contributed to the dialogue in their
role as an industry partner. HHT is a statutory authority
within Communities NSW. It is “one of the largest state
museums in Australia and is entrusted with the care of
key historic buildings and sites in New South Wales.1
HHT was interested in engaging with archival material
through bodily experience. A focus of the work was to
heighten the experience of the visitors to historic housing
through low budget solutions that still engender creative
production as a primary means of interaction.
Discussions of embodiment are framed from the
perspective of the cultural heritage visitor as end user.
The work was completed over one semester and
involving little, or no budget, allocation.

Figure 1. Elizabeth Bay House

Figure 2. Vaucluse House
Thus, the direction explored centered on augmenting
the physical world, rather than utilizing online
repositories of knowledge. The act of mediation is
perceived as a ‘change agent’, where the experience is
shaped through the visitor’s form and modality (or
modalities) of interaction. It is this process that provides
the individual semantics derived from the context. In this
sense the visitor is also being transformed by the
experience derived from the mediation.

2. Mediation
Mediation in this work is considered a knowledge
intensive process that shapes how information is
retrieved through bodily reasoning. Mediation is
considered site specific and is an interaction with a
previously existing, or present, space that can reflect
traces of habituation, layers of materiality, topologies of
structures, landscapes, atmospherics, and / or artifacts.
Mediation can be mapped through a system framework,
that is, considering the context of the building and its
ecology. The building is reconceived as a multi dimensional information system open to interpretation
from different views rather than investigated through
static image making. The process of information inquiry
and bodily reasoning shape the construction of
knowledge as dynamic events contributing to the
narrative. Through ‘framing’ duration is addressed
providing a certain set of information, one that is
informatic. This set of information is only one in a field
of relations within the whole.
It was central to the approach to keep the mediation
within the confines of the heritage buildings. This was a
deliberate choice given the HHT’s desire to increase the

2.1. Maintaining the integrity of the mediation
Creating well-constructed and consistent visual
representations remains a challenge (see Chapter 3 in
[11] for some of the issues facing designers of visual
representations). Information visualization needs to be
embedded in a framework that provides leverage,
through reasoning, to the human knowledge construction
process. It is important to provide the right tools and
methods for this process to unfold. Concentrating on this
process, of how humans create and communicate
knowledge of cultural heritage through interaction, the
following ways of representing the production of cultural
heritage were explored.
x Sense-scapes. First person methodologies, that is, to
learn through the experience of the self, engender
concepts that value attention to the senses. Dealing
with the body, through its materiality and senses,
provides meaning to experience, and generates the
notion of archival content being explored through

1 http://www.hht.net.au/about

589

sense making. The embodied subject with its multiple
concomitant ways of sensing, feeling, knowing
performing and experiencing offer dynamic routes to
different perceptions of the human relation to the
material. Narrative agency supports personalized
kinaesthetic and haptic experience.
x Soft spaces. Space is perceived as performative and
experiential, capable of constructing and mediating
dialogue. Modelling space as performative and
mutable supports engagement with space as material
presence, represented as flows and interactions.
Space is no longer only described through its
Euclidian geometry.
x Social collaboration. The sharing of experience
enables visitors to explore narrative content through
implicit and /or explicit collaborative encounters,
such as, physical proximity. Semantics can be
derived from social and bodily interaction.
Through these ways, singularly or in combination,
cultural heritage embedded in the sites becomes visible
through the application of broad and accessible digital
technologies. The digital circulation of information,
images, and interaction constitute a mixed reality space,
which can continually produce new and personalized
narratives
for
re-inhabiting,
constructing
and
experiencing cultural heritage. In this process feedback
loops become an integral component in the design
providing the reflective, in addition to, the productive
aspects of design.

processing information that creates the environment and
the means for the visitors to derive knowledge in a
collaborative manner. Convergent media are well suited
to communicate narrative structures, as they offer unique
abilities to converge time and space. Inherent in such
media are design guidelines that inform knowledge
construction.
We can group these guidelines into a group,
namely (i) ambience. Adapted from [13] the ambient
aspects of delivery of information about narrative
interactions through the visualization include the
following principles:
Information capacity: This design principle relates to
the trade-off between the size of the visual elements, the
space for the display of the elements, and the time for
presenting an information segment.
Attention attracting capacity: This design principle
relates to the ability of visualization and respective
media to demonstrate critical patterns in interaction,
capable of rising person’s alert and the need for
immediate consideration during the decision - making.
Expressive power: This design principle relates to the
semiotics [14] of the discrete elements that constitute the
visualisation and their combinations that constitute the
mediation, i.e. how the information about cultural
heritage is encoded into patterns, pictures, words, or
sounds that eventually convey the information about the
site. Such visual semiotics relates directly to how
condensed is the information delivered by the
visualisation. The range is from direct presentations of
low - level data for monitoring visitor interaction to
metaphorical reasoning based on bodily knowledge and
other graphical displays of complex and latent
information structures (see [15] for a survey of diverse
displays) that convey condensed information.
Aesthetics: This design principle concerns to what
extent a graphical display is considered visually pleasing.
Extraction and sense making of information about
interactions relate to the ability to gain insights, hence,
this design principle is closely connected with the
principles of information capacity and attracting
attention capacity.

2.2. Interaction: the central construct
Interaction is placed as the central unit to the
modeling and the visualization of narrative. Interactions
communicated through convergent media generate the
feedback loops noted above. As interaction is placed as
both the representation and the inquiry, an argument can
be advanced that it is necessary to reflect upon the nature
of interaction and the relationship between interaction
and cognition. Pike et al (2009) [12], state that
interaction and inquiry are inextricably connected and
that it is through the interactive co-junction of parties at a
visual interface that knowledge can be constructed,
shared, evaluated and refined. Importantly, such displays
need to be embedded in an interactive framework that
supports human cognitive reasoning based on bodily
knowledge. To accomplish such a task certain tools and
methods are required. In the next section we discuss
design guidelines for visual interfaces. As in visual
analytics the central premise is that human insight is
aided by interaction with a visual interface.

Table 1.
Design
principle
Disjunction

Reflectivity

3. Design Guidelines for Mediation of
Cultural Heritage
Accessibility

In this project mediation implies the process of a
middle agent effecting communication in some innate
way. The mediator is an instrument dedicated to

Design guidelines

Semantics
The degre of disjunction between the medaition and
physical frame, or fames, within the building
requires transitions that people can map to the site.
This design principle addresses the identification of
context. In the process of interaction, parties’
contexts help them identify relevant concepts and
link them into appropriate structures.
Information design needs to be accessible to visitors
for knowledge to be actively constructed.
Information design of the visualizations is indexed
to enabling efficient interaction and analytics
capabilities of respective media.

In addition to these guidelines we consider the

590

following design principles are of value. In Table 1 these
principles are grouped and briefly covered, with
corresponding knowledge semantics.
The quest for implementing these principles acts as
constraints in the development and deployment of the act
of mediation perceived as a change agent. In the next
section these principles are utilized to discuss the
projects produced in the interdisciplinary lab.

experienced. In the design process, noted by [16],
rescaling techniques can be introduced to create
transitions between layers of information. For instance,
the project, ‘In the Dark,’ discussed in this paper, plays
with re-scaling. Through the use of simple technology
the visitor is ‘zoomed in’ to selected tableaux that are
subsequently augmented via projected content as shown
in Fig. 3.
A further way to deconstruct the unified construct of
heritage building can be derived from repositioning
points of view. This is accomplished through different
modes of representation, or, as represented in Fig 4a, 4b,
through spatial proximity of information to infer
connectivity. Here the image of the visitor is added to
those already projected on the floor as they enter into the
performative role of being both in the role of within, and
without, the creative production. The visitor can then,
juxtapose the perspectives of both first and third person.

4. Emergent Narratives
We adapt the notion of delayering applied to urban
design [16]. McGrath sees this process as a way of
deriving archaeological modeling: a method to unpack
embeddedness. Fundamentally delayering deconstructs
complexity. The process of delayering is a three
dimensional operation of uncovering cultural production
in the various strata of the sites as materiality constructed
over time. Delayering can be unpacked through the
application of the method of metaphor that maps a
trajectory from the physical site to the mediation. Recent
work in the application of metaphors has demonstrated
the opening up of metaphor modeling from the linguistic
basis commonly associated with metaphor usage. Current
work is inclusive of cognitive structures that have a
neurological basis upon which such modeling can
function. The notion of conceptual metaphor [17]
considers a conceptual metaphor is a cognitive
mechanism that derives abstract thinking from the way
we function in the everyday physical world. Lakoff and
Nuhez (2000) argue that such conceptual systems align
with our body, that the conceptual system is embodied
and shaped by our physical processes, and by ‘being in
the world.’ The process of delayering enables the
isolation and analysis of the relationships between the
explicit archival content displayed in artifacts, such as
furniture, of the building and the embedded content.

a

b

Figure 4. Inscribing performativity into the
space
The projects considered all shared the common
approach of tracing cultural production through actors
embedded in the archival content of the sites. Actors can
be traced and cross - referenced in time and space thus
providing networks of relations from which to derive
semantics.

4.1. The projects
Three projects executed by design students are
considered. These are:
x Tears
x Butterflies
x In the dark
All projects looked to narratives constructed around the
personas derived from prior human habituation. It was

Figure 3. Playing with re-scaling through the
use of simple technology
This is an act by the designer to change the
boundaries of the site by establishing new sets of
relationships that modify how cultural production is

591

recognized across the projects that the archival content of
the historic houses reflected the presence of the
inhabitants through various artifacts, such as, clothing,
furniture, natural collections, books and so on. Yet the
lived experience of significant inhabitants was noticeably
absent.
The groups selected different aspects of lived
experience of past inhabitants to analyse and explore
through convergent technologies. The retrieval of
information, in relation to these narratives, was deployed
through various perceptual interactions that reflected
metaphorically the form, semantics, and function of the
specific mediation. Formal approaches utilise the concept
of semantic visualisation, defined as a visualisation
method, which establishes and preserves the semantic
link between form of the visual elements and their
function in the context of the visualisation metaphor
[18].

Figure 6. Augmentation of the drawing room
Figure 6 provides an example of the augmentation in
the drawing room of Elizabeth Bay House.
4.1.2. Tears

4.1.1. In the dark

The project ‘Tears’ focused on representations with
strong kinaesthetic associations embedded within the
materiality. The prime leverage to visual display was the
performative basis of the selected artifacts upon which
semantics were founded. Embodied in the form of a
dress two states of spectatorship were presented. The
states referenced the life of a key actor in the heritage
house and her struggle to be recognized by the ‘society
‘of the day. Her ball gown was framed as a conceptual
metaphor for acceptance / rejection of her personage in
society. As such, the state of turning signifying
acceptance (Fig.7) is contrasted to the state of rejection
where the gown lies crumpled on the floor, inert and
motionless. The relationship between the two
performative modes rests on the difference that is
expressed in the sense – scapes, as the project deals with
the body, materiality and the senses. The basis of bodily
knowledge that finds correspondence in these relations
provides the framing for the narrative in this project.

This project defined itself through an interactive
narrative exploring the concept of hierarchy as a
navigational and spatial paradigm. The hierarchy
referenced the ‘upstairs- downstairs’ spatial portioning
between servant and ‘master’. In the simulation visitors
were guided through the narrative by cues perceived as
measures of light - dark. The semantics for light - dark
metaphorically modeled were mapped through
illumination of selected objects in the house. These
objects referenced set tasks associated with the work of
servants. For instance, turning down the bed, winding up
the grandfather clock, or lighting the fire in the drawing
room.
The overriding theme of hierarchy was mapped
through the narrative of life in the house and how this
narrative would have effected spatial partitioning
between owners and servants. Then, as noted, objects
grouped as tableaux, were selected to demonstrate the
daily life for servants as a series of tasks. The project
was performative and theatrical. Each visitor was
provided with a ‘kit’ that included a LED flashlight. The
action of shining this light into darkened rooms, located
through radii set by sensors, triggered the projection of a
task associated with the object(s). The aim of such
layering was to create through the embodied response of
participants the somatic and kinesthetic experience of
such tasks. Fig. 5 shows a simple example of how this
narrative was composed as a series of events.

Object

Event 1 triggered
by the torch

Event 2
projection

Figure 7. Kinaesthetic association constructed
through the materiality of performance

Figure 5. Event driven interaction

592

4.1.3. Butterfly affect

References

Butterfly affect defined boundaries to visual display
through the chorography of traces utilizing multimodal
inputs. Butterfly affect traced the theme of fragility and
decay of the production of heritage culture through the
motif of the butterfly. This referenced Alexander
Macleay‘s (the person responsible for the building of
Elizabeth Bay House) life long obsession with
entomology. Mediation of the space was framed through
the projection of butterflies. The fragility of this was
emphasized by the affect the presence of visitors,
communicated through sensors, had on the visual display
that reflected a progression from birth, to decay, to death.

[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

Figure 8. Knowledge construction through
association
[10]

Conclusions
In this paper we have demonstrated, through an initial
study, that mediation is a knowledge intensive process
that integrates information discovery and embodied
interaction. Mediation provides a method that can be
positioned to deconstruct the layering of archival content
contained in cultural heritage, by reshaping content
through analogical reasoning. The potential of mediation,
for augmentation of cultural heritage, supports further
investigation of the inherent subjective information
generation of cultural heritage. Referencing the
embodied experience of the present through mediated
knowledge can contribute to new strategies of knowledge
construction for the visualisation of heritage sites.

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

Acknowledgements

[17]

This research is supported by the University of
Technology, Sydney. We gratefully acknowledge the
support and advice of, the Historic Housing Trust of
New South Wales, particularly the assistance of Scott
Hill and Scott Carlin; and, the input of the design
students, from the University of Technology, Sydney.

[18]

593

Manovich, L. 2008, The Practice of Everyday (Media)
Lie. In R. Frieling (ed.), The Art of Participation: 1950
to Now. London: Thames and Hudson.
Tilley, C., 1994, The phenomenology of landscape,
Oxford, Berg.
Deray, K., and S. Simoff, 2008, 'Human Movement as a
Framework for Understanding Interactions', Computers
and Philosophy, Lavel, France, May 2006 in Computers
and Philosophy, an International Conference,
Proceedings, 3-5 May 2006 Laval France, (ed) Schmidt,
Colin, European Office for Aerospace Research and
Development, LIUM, Lavel, France, pp. 173-188.
Seitz, J.A. 1994, 'Thinking kinesically: Theory and
practice', 24th Annual Symposium of the Jean Piaget
Society, Jean Piaget Society, Chicago.
Sudnow, D.W. 1978, Ways of the Hand: The
Organization of Improvised Conduct, Harper & Row,
New York.
Laban, R. and Lawrence, F.C. 1974, Effort: Economy of
human movement, 2nd edn, Plays, Boston.
Seitz, J.A., 2000a, The Bodily Basis of Thought,
Department of Political Science & Psychology, York
College, City University of New York, New York.
Seitz, J.A. 2000c, 'Embodied cognition', 12th Annual
Convention of the American Psychological Society,
Miami, FL
Maglio, P.P., and Matlock. T. 1999, ‘The conceptual
structure of information space’, in A.J. Munro, K. Hook,
and D. Benyon, (eds), Social Navigation of Information
Space, Springer-Verlag, London.
Larssen, A.T. 2004, 'Physical computing-representations
of human movement in human-computer interaction',
Computer Human Interaction Proceedings: 6th Asia
Pacific Conference, APCHI 2004, Rotorua, New
Zealand.
Thomas, J. J., and K. A. Cook, 2008, Illuminating the
Path: The Research and Development Agenda for Visual
Analytics, IEEE, CS Press.
Pike, W. A., Stasko, J., Chang, R., and O‘Connnell, T.,
2008, ‘The Science of Interaction’, Information
Visualization, vol 8, 4. 263-274.
Pousman, Z. and Stasko, J. 2006. A taxonomy of ambient
information systems: four patterns of design. In
Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced
Visual Interfaces. ACM, Venezia, Italy.
Chandler D, 2004, Semiotics: The Basics. Routledge,
London.
Chen C. 2004. Information Visualization: Beyond the
Horizon. Springer, London.
Mcgrath, B., 2008, Dgital Modelling for Urban Design
Wiley, Chichester, UK
Lakooff, G. and R.E. Nunez, 2000, Where Mathematics
Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings
Mathematics into Being, Basic Books, New York.
Simoff, S. 2008, ‘Form-Semantics-Function, ‘A
framework for designing visual data representations for
visual data mining, ‘ in S. J. Simoff and M.H. Böhlen
and A. Mazeika (eds), Visual Data Mining: Theory,
Techniques and Tools for Visual Analytics: Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 4404, Springer Verlag,
Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 30-45.

