2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Chameleon – A Context Adaptive Visualization Framework
for a Mobile Environment
Paulo Pombinho, Ana Paula Afonso, Maria Beatriz Carmo
Departamento de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa
ppombinho@lasige.di.fc.ul.pt, {apa, bc}@di.fc.ul.pt

popularity because they allow a user to know, with some
ease, what points of interest exist in their neighborhood
(restaurants, hotels, and so on). However, despite
extensive research with the aim of minimizing some of
the limitations of the visualization of points of interest in
mobile devices, there are still some unsolved problems.
The major limitation of a mobile device is its
reduced screen space. Thus, whatever is shown onscreen
has to be important to the user [3]. Moreover, the
usability of these systems should be taken into account,
since inexperienced users will not enthusiastically adopt
these services if the complexity of the interaction and its
restrictions are not removed [4, 5].
The adaptation to usage contexts is a key feature to
mitigate the limitations in the usability of small screens.
According to the definition of Reichenbacher [6],
adaptive visualization concerns the adjustment of all
components of the visualization process, such as the
interface, the information extracted from the data and the
data codification, according to a particular usage context.
With the growing amount of geo-referenced
information available, the search for visualizations
adapted to the specific usage context of each user will
increase. The adaptive principle is especially important
to increase the usability of the visualization of
information in mobile devices and to reduce the
cognitive load inherent to mobile usage contexts.
In recent years, the search for context-aware
solutions has shown significant advances. However,
research in this area has focused on computational
contexts or device location context. Consequently, in the
information visualization area, for mobile devices, the
applications have explored only these contexts and the
associated adaptations.
However, current context models and adaptive
applications suggest richer and broader context
dimensions beyond location and computation. The
adaptation of information visualization techniques to
other contexts has already been explored in some studies
[6, 7, 8].
Despite the existence of some works that explore a
larger number of different contexts, they are usually
focused in a specific domain, making its reuse in other
domains difficult.

Abstract
The evolution of mobile devices, especially the
integration of sensors, is fostering the development of
context aware visualization applications. The adaptation
to usage contexts is crucial to overcome the diverse
limitations that exist in a mobile device, namely the
screen size. However, most of the currently develop
applications focus on specific contexts. In this paper we
propose an adaptive visualization framework that has the
goal of enabling the development of applications that use
a diverse set of contexts and adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
The rapid evolution, on a global scale, of the
telecommunication infrastructures has allowed the
massification of users with access to wireless
communication networks and to the mobile internet.
According to the International Telecommunication
Union report [1], mobile phone networks presently cover
almost 90% of the world population, and it is expected
that this number should reach 100% in 2015.
On the other hand, people increasingly feel the need
to use, in a mobile environment, tools and applications
that enable them to become productive in scenarios
where they, previously, were not. This need can be seen
in the circa 5 billion mobile network subscriptions and in
the almost 2 billion people with internet access.
The conjunction of the growing desire for mobile
productivity with the new available infrastructures, has
been operating a change in our society.
While in the past, people planned and chose the
various options of their day-to-day, in advance, often in
the comfort of their home, they are now preferring to do
it on the spot, in a mobile environment, using services or
applications available in mobile devices. This need for
more complex applications in a mobile environment can
be seen in the growing demand for smartphones, which
in some countries, in 2011, are expected to exceed the
number of standard phones [2].
One of the features that has been fostered by
advances in mobile phones and the, already frequent,
integration of global positioning devices, are location
based services. These services have gained much
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.34

151

The aim of this work is the creation of a framework
that can facilitate the creation of adaptive applications
for the visualization of points of interest that can deal
with a diverse set of contexts and adaptation methods. To
achieve this objective we adopt the classification and
terminology adopted by Reichenbacher [6], and divide
the main components of the visualization framework into
adaptation objects, adaptation methods and usage
contexts. The fundamental idea is to understand what
adaptation methods adapt which objects depending on
the different usage contexts present.
In the next section we will describe some of the
related work. In section 3 we will review and categorize
the different usage contexts, the adaptation objects and
the respective adaptation methods. In section 4 we
present our proposed framework and in section 5 we
refer some case studies that have used this framework.
Finally, in section 6, we present the conclusions and the
future work.

An ontology based context model was designed that used
a diverse set of contexts to be able to provide a complete
set of data that describes the current situation of the
patient. The proposed framework is composed by six
main components: “Context Providers” that are
responsible for obtaining the diverse context data from
the sensors and external sources; an “Aggregating
Agent” that gathers all the data obtained from the context
providers and analyses which data is useful; an
“Inference Agent” that interprets the data from the
previous component to generate high level contexts; a
“Profile Agent” responsible for managing the profile
information about the patients; a “Service Adaptation
Agent” that queries the two previous agents to decide
which actions should be taken; and finally the “Service
Coordination Agent” responsible for managing the
communication between the different agents present in
the framework.
Despite the existence of the adaptive frameworks
described, they are either too focused on a specific
domain, making their reuse in other domains very
difficult, or they do not have in consideration the
diversity and quantity of the different usage contexts that
are possible to be obtained in a mobile environment.
Thus, it is necessary to create a framework that is
sufficiently generic that it may be reused in different
domains and that has different types of context in
consideration.

2. Related Work
In 2001 Reichenbacher suggested an outline of a
conceptual framework for adapting the display of georeferenced information in mobile environments [9]. In
this conceptual framework, the key elements identified
are the user, the context and the current task. These
elements should be responsible for adapting the
visualization.
In 2008, Reichenbacher differentiates between
adapted visualization, which is a display where tools are
offered for changing the characteristics of the
visualization, and adaptive visualization, in which the
characteristics of the display are automatically changed
according to the current usage contexts [6].
Reichenbacher identifies as basic building blocks of an
adaptive visualization application, the context
dimensions, the objects that can be adapted, and the
adaptation methods. Thus, an adaptation method may
receive one or more objects to adapt and use as
adaptation parameters the values of the different
contexts.
Bradley van Tonder and Janet Wesson [10], propose
a model that incorporates an adaptive interface in the
design of a map visualization system for mobile devices.
Their model consists of four main components: A “Data
Model” that contains the information that is being
visualized in the system; a “Knowledge Base” that
manages and obtains the four different types of context
used (namely user profile, user task, time and location);
the “User Monitoring and Modelling Component” that is
responsible for accepting the user interaction data to try
and automatically determine the user’s preferences and
behavior; and finally the “Adaptation Engine” that
manages the adaptations of the visualization (visual
representations, detail level, zoom level), information
(filtering) and interface (menu options).
Lastly, Panagiotakapoulos and Lymberpoulos [11]
propose an active context-aware platform for the
monitorization of patients suffering from special phobias.

3. Contexts, Objects and Adaptation Methods
To be able to develop a framework that can
effectively manage the adaptation to different contexts, it
is necessary to understand, in advance, what is the
relationship between the different contexts available in
mobile environments, the adaptation objects that
typically exist in mobile point of interest visualization
applications, and the different adaptation methods.
As an example to understand this relationship,
suppose it is late at night and the user is searching for a
gas station in a mobile application, the information that
is presented to the user (the adaptation object) should be
adapted through the use of a filtering function
(adaptation method) that selects locations that are open at
that current time (the usage context)
In the following sections we will present and
categorize the contexts, objects and methods of
adaptation that are the building blocks for the creation of
the adaptive framework.

3.1. Mobile Environment Contexts
We have chosen to categorize context, using a
combination of the categorization that were presented by
[12] and [13], since it represents the most comprehensive
categorization for mobile environments. Thus, we
consider five categories: Computation Context, User
Context, Physical Context, Temporal Context and
Historical Context.

152

Next, we will describe the various context
dimensions identified for each category (as illustrated in
figure 1) and the approaches for acquiring these contexts.
As we have already stated, the identification of the
contexts are crucial for the process of adaptation of the
visualization.

Finally, a crucial context is the knowledge about
what task the user is (or will be) performing. This
context can be specified by the user or automatically
inferred by using information from historical contexts
(described below).
3.1.3. Physical Context. The physical features
surrounding the user can be divided into visual and
sound conditions, weather conditions and surrounding
environment.
The lighting conditions and noise levels at the
location where the user is located may be obtained,
respectively, through the device’s camera and
microphone.
Weather conditions can be obtained by combining
different contexts: temperature, humidity, barometric
pressure and intensity of ultraviolet (UV). This
information can, in turn, be obtained in two different
ways. On the one hand, it is possible to use a set of
sensors (thermometer, hygrometer, barometer, and UV
sensor) integrated on the device, that show the exact
conditions in the location of the user. Alternatively, if it
is sufficient to use approximate information, an online
meteorological web service can be used instead.
The context of the surrounding environment can be
obtained by analyzing, for example, the type of buildings
(for example, public buildings, residential, factories or
tourism), the surrounding terrain (for example, gardens,
buildings, sea or mountain) or traffic conditions. In the
case of traffic conditions, these can be obtained through
the use of available online servers.

Figure 1. Context dimensions categorization
3.1.1. Computation Context. This category
concerns all the technical features of the device, the
device’s connection to a network, and also the collection
of possible resources accessible by the device.
The characteristics of the device can be
automatically obtained during the applications
installation. These specifications include the type and
speed of the CPU, memory and storage capacity, screen
size, resolution, number of colors, and also what input
and output peripherals are available.
The characteristics of the network connection can be
obtained in real time (for example, the available
bandwidth) or specified by the user (for example, the
cost of using the network).

3.1.4. Temporal Context. These contexts
correspond to the time of day, date, day of week, season
of the year, among others. They can be obtained from the
device’s internal clock and calendar. Alternatively,
online time servers can also be used to check if the
date/time definitions are correct.

3.1.2. User Context. The contexts directly related to
the user include his profile, the user’s spatial
characteristics and the task he is doing.
The different characteristics of the user profile can
be configured directly by the user, and include contexts
such as age, language and nationality, experience in
using the device and application, disability, and
preferences.
One of the main contexts that, due to the type of use
of mobile devices, is constantly changing, is the spatial
context. The user’s location has the potential to be the
most important context in mobile visualization
applications. This context can be obtained by a satellite
positioning system like the GPS or inferred through the
use of other integrated sensors. Equally important, the
orientation of the user and therefore his focus of
attention, can be obtained from a digital compass.
Other properties that may be important are the speed
and acceleration of the user and the type of movement he
is doing. This information can be obtained by analyzing
the real-time GPS data and the information obtained
from an accelerometer.

3.1.5. Historical Context. Lastly, the historical
context of the previous choices made in the application
can be obtained through the logs that were stored in the
previous uses of the system. These logs may consist, for
example, in the list of places the user has previously
visited, previous queries, and also the different choices
made by the user.

3.2. Adaptation Objects
Regarding the adaptation objects, we want to
identify what objects commonly exist in a mobile
visualization application that can be adapted depending
on the different contexts.
The approach followed in this work is inspired by
the proposal in [6], in which three distinct categories are
suggested: Visualization, User Interface and Geospatial
Information. This way, our categorization of the
adaptation objects is as follows:

153

3.2.1. Information. Consists on the data presented
to the user. It includes: the type of filtering done to the
information, the amount of information that is presented,
the ranking of their relevance and the area being
considered.

resolution of the screen; and alternate modes of
interaction may be applied depending on the input and
output devices available.
The network connection characteristics may be used
to allow a better use of the available resources, through
the use of a cache and by choosing the best time to
obtain the needed data.
Regarding the cost of using the network connection,
this information allows the application to know whether
to give priority to speed (in case of billing by time) or to
prioritize the reduction of the amount of data (in case of
billing by amount of traffic).
Finally, the use of the information about the nearby
available resources (printers, screens among others) may
allow a better interconnection of the mobile devices with
the different devices in its vicinity.

3.2.2. Visualization. This category contains the
graphical elements directly related to the information
visualization in the device. For instance it includes:
element codification (raster, vector), how the elements
are arranged on the screen (positioning, size, color and
opacity), the characteristics of the maps used (scale,
orientation, legend, projection and center coordinates),
its level of detail, the iconography used, and the use of
generalization operators.
3.2.3. Interaction. Finally, the interaction category
comprises the objects related to the applications
interface. Includes: Use of different mechanisms or
methods for the input of data, using different techniques
for the selection of objects, moving the map and scale
change operations.

3.3.2. User Context. Concerning the user profile,
characteristics such as age, language and nationality may
influence the visualization used, adapting, respectively,
the type of graphics used, the language and time
definitions and the currency.
The type of interaction may also be adapted
according to the experience in using the device and the
application, the disabilities and the preferences of the
user. Through these contexts it is possible to present
more complex interfaces to the users, or more simple
ones, depending on their needs and capabilities.
Lastly, the information presented can also be
adapted according to the user interests, the locations he
has marked as important (for example, his home and
work place) and also cultural and social elements.
In relation to the spatial characteristics, the location
context allows the application to show information about
what is near the user. In the same way, the orientation
context of the user can be used to show only the
information about what is in front of him, or where the
user is looking.
Properties such as speed, acceleration and the type
of movement done by the user, may be used, not only, to
calculate where the user is headed and to estimate how
long he will take to arrive there, but also to adapt the way
information is presented (for example, reducing the
magnification of a map as the speed increases) or the
type of interaction available (for example, using different
techniques to select objects on the screen in the user is
walking or running).
As already happens in systems like Google Latitude
[14], the geographic proximity of friends and family can
be used to assist the search for locations that are in the
proximity of both users.
The knowledge about the task the user is engaged in
is crucial to allow the presentation of the most relevant
information that can be most helpful to aid the user.

3.3. Adaptation Methods
Finally, regarding the adaptation methods, these can
be viewed as an association between the different
contexts and the adaptation objects and are responsible
for adjusting one or more adaptation objects. Thus, these
methods can be classified, not only, in relation to the
different categories of context, but also in relation to the
different categories of object they adapt. This
relationship can be seen in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Adaptation methods categorization
For the sake of simplicity, the examples of
adaptation methods, described below, are grouped by the
context category they adapt to.
3.3.1. Computation Context. The knowledge of the
characteristics of the device may enable the application
to proceed with different types of adaptation: the
computational load of the application may be adjusted by
disabling more complex features if the device is a less
powerful one; the detail and size of the icons used may
be increased of reduced depending on the size and

3.3.3. Physical Context. Information about lighting
conditions and noise levels present at the location where
the user is standing are important to adapt the way
information in transmitted to the user. The lighting
conditions context can enable the application to adapt the

154

colors used and the screen’s brightness and contrast in a
way that it can be easier for the information displayed to
be correctly understood. Concerning the noise levels, it is
possible to increase or reduce the volume of the device
depending whether he is, respectively, in a noisy or silent
location.
The information about the weather conditions can be
used to show different information depending on the
current conditions. If the user is, for example, looking for
a restaurant, if it is a sunny day with comfortable
temperature , the application may raise the relevance of a
restaurant with a terrace, and the reverse if it was cold
and rainy.
Using information about the surrounding
environment it is possible to filter the information
presented to the user taking into account such
surroundings. If the user is near the sea the application
could show beaches, or museums if the user is near a
touristic area.
Traffic conditions can be, as is already done in
systems like TomTom HD Traffic [15], used to suggest
alternative information that avoids crossing locations that
have traffic congestion.
Figure 3. Chameleon Framework (detailed view of
each layer in Figure 4, 5 and 6)

3.3.4. Temporal Context. The temporal information
may allow different types of adaptation.
The way the visualization of information is done (for
example, the colors and icons used) can be altered
depending on the time of the day (for example, using
different colors whether it is night or day).
Using the local time context, it is possible to filter
the presented information, taking into account the
schedules of the locations and whether they are open or
closed. Similarly, the presentation of information about
events may take into account the current date and filter
information that is still a long time away.

In the next subsections we will describe these three
layers.

4.1. Adaptation Objects Management Layer
In the developed framework, the user can interact
with three distinct primary interfaces (Figure 4): one
consisting on a display of information on a 2D map
representing the neighborhood of the user, another in
which the information is presented using augmented
reality techniques and, finally, a mixed interface in
which a 2D map is presented simultaneously with an
augmented reality view.

3.3.5. Historical Context. The analysis of the logs
recorded over the previous uses of the application may
allow, in combination with other contexts, to anticipate
the needs of the user and automatically display the most
relevant information at each moment.

4. Framework
To be able to make an effective management of the
relationship between usage contexts, adaptation objects
and adaptation methods, we propose the Chameleon, a
Context Adaptive Visualization Framework for Mobile
Environments.
This framework (Figure 3) consists of three main
components, which correspond to the adaptation objects
(in blue, on top), the adaptation methods (in green, on the
middle) and the usage contexts (in red, on the bottom).
The focus of our work is on the adaptation of the
information and the visualization and not on the
adaptation of the user interface. The modules that will
not be focused on our work are presented with a black
background.

Figure 4. Adaptation Objects Management Layer
Thus, the elements that compose these distinct
interfaces form the set of adaptation objects. For these,
management is divided in two modules: User Interface
Controls (which will not be the focus of this work) and
the information presentation module (corresponding to
the information and visualization categories of
adaptation objects).
From a programmatic perspective, each adaptation
object will be responsible for knowing and calling the
different adaptation methods it relates to.

155

Regarding the latter modules, they are divided into
five groups: an internal database in which historical
records are stored, a set of dynamic files that contain
personalization information and information about the
user’s current task, fairly static files created in
installation time and configuration, a set of hardware
sensors integrated with the mobile device and, finally, a
set of context servers available via the Web.
Thus, the modules corresponding to each context
should be responsible for obtaining the data required,
from the Context Information Retrieval Modules, that
allows them to calculate the value of the context.

4.2. Adaptation Methods Management Layer
Regarding the Adaptation Methods Management
Layer, it consists in three modules that manage the
different types of adaptation (Figure 5). This way, the
interaction adaptation module is responsible for
managing the adaptations of objects directly related with
the user interface control.
The information adaptation module and the
visualization adaptation module will manage the
information and visualization adaptations, respectively,
requested by the adaptation objects that correspond to the
information presentation module.

4.4. Flow of Information
As an example of a possible flow of information,
considering the adaptation of a map image to the location
context: we have an adaptation object “Map” that will
communicate with the required adaptation method, so
that it may adapt the map picture to a new location.
This adaptation method will then request the
“Location Context” module for its value. The “Location
Context” module will then be responsible for asking the
GPS sensor module the new coordinates or, if GPS is not
available, use alternate sensors that may allow it to
calculate the new location.
After obtaining the necessary information, the
context module should calculate its value and return it to
the adaptation method that called it. This method, after
receiving the context information will then be able to
adapt the map picture to the new location, returning it to
the interface.

Figure 5. Adaptation Methods Management Layer
Thus, each adaptation method will be responsible for
implementing different versions of the adaptations,
allowing for some flexibility according to the type and
value of the available contexts.

4.3. Usage Contexts Management Layer
Lastly, the layer responsible for managing the
contexts is composed of two main sets of modules
(Figure 6).

5. Application of the Framework
Parts of the proposed framework have been applied
in some case studies that explore different types of usage
contexts and some visualization and information
adaptation methods that adapt some objects from the
information presentation module. The different
visualization applications developed are describe below.
In [16] an application for the visualization of points
of interest on a 2D map interface was tested. This
application used some adaptation methods that filtered
the points of interest shown to the user depending on the
location context and the user’s search preferences, to
show only the most relevant ones. Additionally, the icons
were also adapted, taking into account the relevance of
the points of interest associated with them and their
location relative to other icons, by changing their
graphical symbols to represent more than one point of
interest and also conveying the most relevant ones.
In [17] a location and orientation aware application
for the search of points of interest in mobile devices that
uses, not only the location of the user, but also his
orientation was presented. The location and orientation
contexts are obtained through the use of position (GPS)
and orientation (digital compass) sensors.
The developed application uses an augmented
reality interface and adapts the way the different points

Figure 6. Usage Contexts Management Layer
The Context Management Modules are responsible
for managing, calculating and communicating the
contexts themselves. The Context Information Retrieval
Modules communicate the required data to obtain /
calculate the different contexts with the previous
modules.

156

of interest (and their information) are shown, according
to their relative orientation. The interface also includes a
dynamic adaptation of the indication of the device’s
orientation, complemented with the capture of real time
pictures, using the device’s integrated camera.
Finally, the choice of which stored picture (for each
point of interest) should be shown is adapted by
automatically selecting the one that most closely
resembles the user’s current location and orientation
contexts. The addition of these pictures helps the user to
compare what he is currently seeing in the real world,
and correctly identifying the shown point of interest.
In [18] we have presented a point of interest aware
application that uses the user’s indoor location context to
adapt the information displayed about the points of
interest that exist in the vicinity of the user. To be able to
correctly identify the position context of the user, we
have proposed an indoor positioning method that does
not need previously installed physical infrastructures in a
building. Furthermore, this approach does not need
external sensors, avoiding the restriction of the user’s
natural movements when using a mobile device and
walking indoors.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

6. Conclusions and Future Work

[9]

In this paper we have presented a review of the
different types of adaptation objects, adaptation methods
and usage contexts that may exist in a mobile scenario
and categorized them.
Using this insight, we developed an adaptive
visualization framework that has the goal to allow an
efficient management of the relationship between objects
of adaptation, methods of adaptation and usage contexts.
The proposed framework is composed of three main
layers that correspond and manage the usage contexts,
adaptation methods and adaptation objects. This
framework aims to be sufficiently generic so that it can
be used to a very diverse set of domains, and also to
allow the knowledge and use of the very diverse types of
context that exist in a mobile use scenario.
Although we have already done some case studies
that use parts of this framework, we still need to create it,
in a more global approach. To do this, we intend to
create a more complex case study that uses a diversified
set of contexts, objects and adaptation methods.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

Acknowledgements

[16]

The work presented here is based on research funded
by the FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia
(Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation)
through the SFRH/BD/46546/2008 scholarship.

[17]

References
[1]

[18]

International
Telecommunication
Union.
World
Telecommunication / ICT Development Report 2010 –
Monitoring the WSIS Targets, A Mid-Term Review.
Geneva, Switzerland, 2010.

157

Entner, N. Smartphones to Overtake Feature Phones in
U.S.
by
2011.
[online]
Available
in
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/consumer/smartphon
es-to-overtake-feature-phones-in-u-s-by-2011/ [accessed
in 30 January 2011].
Holtzblatt, K. Designing for the Mobile Device:
Experiences,
Challenges,
and
Methods.
In
Communications of the ACM, 48 (7), pp. 33-35. 2005.
Chittaro, L. HCI Aspects of Mobile Devices and
Services. In Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
Springer-Verlag,8 (2), pp. 69-70. 2004.
Burigat, S. and Chittaro, L. Visualizing the Results of
Interactive Queries for Geographic Data on Mobile
Devices. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual ACM
International Workshop on Geographic Information
Systems, ACM Press, pp. 277-284. 2005.
Reichenbacher, T. Mobile Usage and Adaptive
Visualization. In Encyclopedia of GIS, part 16.
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 677-682. 2008.
Nivala, A. –M. and Sarjakoski, L. T. User Aspects of
Adaptive Visualization for Mobile Maps. In Cartography
and Geographic Information Science, Towards
Ubiquitous Cartography, 34 (4), pp. 275-284. 2007.
Cai, G. and Xue, Y. Activity-Oriented Context-Aware
Adaptation Assisting Mobile Geo-Spatial Activities. In
Proceedings of the 11th IUI, pp. 354-356.2006.
Reichenbacher, T. Adaptive Concepts for a Mobile
Cartography. In Journal of Geographical Sciences, 11,
pp. 43-53. 2001.
Tonder, B. v. and Wesson, J. Using Adaptive Interfaces
to Improve Mobile Map-Based Visualization. In
Proceedings of the SAICSIT, pp. 257-266. 2008.
Panagiotakopoulos, T. C., and Lymberopoulos, D. K.
Monitoring of Patients Suffering from Special Phobias
Exploiting Context and Profile Information. In
Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference on
BioInformatics and BioEngineering – BIBE 2008, pp.
1-6. 2008.
Schilit, B., Adams, N. and Want, R. Context-Aware
Applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE WMCSA,
Santa Cruz, California, pp. 85-90. 1994.
Chen, G. and Kotz, D. A Survey of Context-Aware
Mobile Computing Research. In Technical Report,
Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College.
2000.
Google
Latitude.
[online]
Available
in:
http://www.google.com/latitude/ [accessed in 30 January
2011].
TomTom HD Traffic. [online] Available in:
http://www.tomtom.com/services/service.php?id=2
[accessed in 30 January 2011].
Pombinho, P., Carmo, M. B., and Afonso, A. P.
Evaluation of Overcluttering Prevention Techniques for
Mobile Devices. In Proceedings of the Information
Visualization (IV2009), pp. 127 – 134. 2009.
Pombinho, P., Carmo, M. B., Afonso, A. P., and
Aguiar, H. Location and Orientation Based Queries on
Mobile Environments. In Proceedings of the Computer
Graphics, Visualization, Computer Vision and Image
Processing 2010 International Conference. 2010.
Pombinho, P., Afonso, A. P., and Carmo, M. B. Point of
Interest Awareness Using Indoor Positioning with a
Mobile Phone. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Pervasive and Embedded Computing and
Communication Systesm. 2011. (to appear).

