2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Digital Photo Painting as an Artistic and Cultural Phenomenon
Vladimir Geroimenko
School of Art and Media
University of Plymouth
Plymouth, UK
vladimir.geroimenko@ plymouth.ac.uk

In her book ‘Painting Great Pictures from
Photographs’ [2], Hazel Harrison states that “although
there is a lingering prejudice against using photographic
references, to many professional artists the camera is
essential”. She also points out that there is a considerable
difference between taking photographs for their own sake
and taking them as painting references. Good paintings
can be made from such particular photographs but seldom
by direct copying.
Digital photo painting has opened new opportunities
for the use of photographs. Artists can still use them as
painting references in a traditional way, just by looking at
them and painting digitally from scratch. But they are also
able to put them into the underlying layer of specialist
software in order to paint ‘over them’. Furthermore,
amateur painters can use popular software or plug-ins for
turning their digital photographs into paintings
automatically, with a single mouse click.

Abstract—Digital photo painting is a newly emerging
phenomenon in both fine art and everyday life. The latest
versions of specialist software, such as Corel Painter or
Adobe Photoshop, allow anyone to turn their selected
photographs into enchanting paintings, produced in any
style desired. The first book on this subject ‘The Art of
Digital Photo Painting’ by Marilyn Sholin was published
quite recently, in 2009.
This paper explores the conceptual, creative and
cultural aspects of turning photos into paintings using
popular software and plug-ins. It argues that the mass
production of original digital paintings and fine art prints
may signal a new era in the relationship between
photography and painting. The paper discusses why digital
photo painting might be the ‘next big thing’ in digital art
and become a new hobby for millions.
Keywords - digital art; digital painting; photo painting;
digital photography; fine art

B.
I.

Digital photo painting is a form of digital art.
Without doubt, digital art has changed the landscape of art
forever. But are those changes serious enough to be
considered as a new revolution in art?
Scott Ligon in the book ‘Digital Art Revolution’ [3]
analyses five key reasons why digital art is causing a
revolution: (1) Everything is connected, (2) Endless
experimenting, (3) Process, not product, (4) Eliminate the
middleman, (5) No limitations.
More specifically, digital technology is redefining the
creative process because it: “(1) blurs the boundaries
between mediums to the point of irrelevance, (2)
possesses potential for endless experimentation and
variation, (3) allows for infinite duplication with no loss
of quality, (4) is able to reach large audiences directly
with no middleman, and (5) contains no inherent aesthetic
or technical limitations” [3, p.13].
Of course, it is possible to name several other factors
that define the nature of the digital revolution, such as, for
example, the scope and the depth of the ongoing changes.
The digital revolution in art is affecting not just a
particular small group of artists, but everyone who deals
with either professional or amateur photography or fine

A NEW REVOLUTION IN ART

The latest developments in digital cameras and
image-editing software have dramatically changed the
very nature of both photography and painting. As a result,
digital photography has moved toward the next level of
expression, removing the boundary between photography
and painting. A new field of digital photo painting has
been born which combines the artistic tools found in
photography and painting.
A.

Digital Photo Painting vs. Photo Painting

Although digital photo painting is a newly emerging
field in both amateur and professional art, the use of a
camera as a sketchbook is as old as photography itself.
The development of paintings from photographs to
completed works of art is a very common approach in
traditional painting, despite the well-known fact that many
painters prefer not to talk about it. By using a camera as a
sketchbook, artists are able to collect unique visual
references in order to inform and inspire their creative
work.
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.26

The Nature of the Revolution

461

art. Also, the revolutionary changes are going so deep that
it is difficult to name any artistic form or technique that
might not be influenced by digital technologies.
C.

handmade brush strokes on a digital canvas. The act of
painting is very similar to the act of traditional painting,
only with electronic media instead of physical media…”
[5, p.xvi]. The main idea of today’s digital painting is to
produce a piece of art that looks human made, but to do
this using computer-generated brushes and digital paint.

Painting vs. Photography

The birth of digital painting has raised many
questions about a new relationship between photography
and painting. What is going to happen to them in the
future? Is photography dead, and is it just a first step in
the production of digital photo paintings? Is traditional
physical painting dead and to be replaced with the digital
techniques?
To answer those questions, a deep and essentially
philosophical reflection is required. Putting the
relationship between photography and painting in a
historic perspective will make the whole picture much
clearer. Ever since the invention of photography, the
proportion of ‘paintings to photographs’ has constantly
changed in the same direction as an ever increasing
number of photographs were being produced worldwide
each and every day.
As of today, almost everyone seems to be a digital
photographer and millions and millions of the resulting
photographs are uploaded to the Internet. Comparing this
with the number of paintings produced at the same period
in time, the complete dominance of amateur photography
is obvious. According to Hegel’s dialectical method, such
monotonous development cannot continue forever. At a
certain point in time, a transition from quantity to new
quality has to take place. Usually, such transitions happen
in the form of a sudden jump that in some cases can more
properly be called a revolution. The jump from traditional
photography to digital painting is just such a revolution,
and it is worth considering the concept in more detail.
II.
A.

B.

Between Photography and Painting

Digital photo painting takes photography to the next
level of expression, allowing us to turn digital
photographs into artworks that look hand-painted rather
than created on a computer. With popular software and
little effort, everyone can alter digital images so that they
will replicate traditional media like oils or watercolours.
But when all desired painterly effects are applied and
photographs are successfully transformed into paintings,
are the final pieces genuine digital paintings or do they
remain essentially digital photographs?
This question reflects the intimate goal and the main
issue of digital photo painting. As Marilyn Sholin pointed
out in her book ‘The Art of Digital Photo Painting’, “It is
always the goal of the digital painter to create paintings
that do not look either too photographic or too computer
generated” [4, p.13]. In other words, the answer to the
philosophical question ‘To be or not to be’ could in this
particular case be as follows: To be a masterpiece, your
digital photo painting should not be too photographic and
at the same time it should not be too computer generated.
The art of digital photo painting is that of treading the
narrow path between clearly computer generated and
clearly photographic appearances of artwork.
C.

Going beyond Digital

Digital paintings are digital only by their birth. With
the latest technologies, they can be printed on a solid
physical substrate, such as paper or canvas, using
practically any medium, such as Giclée, acrylic,
watercolour or oil. This allows digital paintings to exist in
the physical world of art in the same way as any
traditional paintings on canvas or paper. After such
‘materialization’, digital paintings are no longer just files
on a computer; they are something physical that can be
held in galleries and private collections around the world.
Jeremy Sutton concludes that “digital painting is now
established as a respected and accepted medium, or
collection of media, with digital paintings being exhibited
in galleries and museums worldwide” [4, p.xvi]. Also,
Marylyn Sholin emphasizes that “digital painting is one of
the most popular and fastest growing art forms, and digital
art is finding its way into galleries around the world,
creating an entirely new niche of art and art prints that are
being sold and collected worldwide” [4, p.7].
The digital revolution has changed the nature of the
relationship between physical and virtual, between the

THE CONCEPT OF DIGITAL PAINTING
Computer-generated Art?

In general, digital painting is associated with the
process of painting on a computer using Corel Painter or
similar software and some specialist hardware, such as a
pressure-sensitive Wacom tablet and pen. This process
results in an image that is visually manifested on a
computer display as an array of coloured pixels. Each
digital painting is born in this initial ‘virtual’ form. It can
stay in it forever or it can be physically rendered on paper
or canvas using a printer.
Is digital painting therefore a kind of computergenerated art? Since the main goal of digital painting is to
simulate traditional painting using new electronic tools,
the answer is negative. It is formulated very well by
Jeremy Sutton in the Preface to his book ‘Painter 11
Creativity’: “The digital painting referred to in this book
is no more ‘computer-generated’ than a Van Gogh
painting was ‘oil brush generated’. It involves original

462

With digital art, everyone can create unique handpainted images from their photographs because the
possibilities of exploring different creative solutions are
virtually endless. Digital artists can be fearless because
they can always restore the original image. In the digital
world, there are no mistakes because several hits of the
Undo button can correct them immediately.

original and reproduction. If you have scanned a famous
oil or watercolour painting, it will enter the world of
digital imagery and will be in exactly the same form as
any digital painting. Only an external relationship to the
physical original makes us to think that this is something
completely different.
The question of the originality has also become more
difficult to answer in the digital era than in all the
previous history of art. “What can we classify as the
‘original’, anyway, in digital art? Surely, it’s not the file
itself, which is simply a collection of ones and zeros… Is
it the image we see on screen? Is it a physical print made
from the artwork? None of these possibilities offers a
satisfying and definitive answer” [3, p.17].
The world famous Corel Painter master Jeremy
Sutton writes: “I describe my completed artwork as a
painting, not a digital painting or computer art. The literal
description, as I may put on a label in an exhibition,
depends on the media I use. An example is: ‘pigment ink
and acrylic on canvas.’” [5, p.xvi].
Indeed, if, for example, an acrylic painting is the
print of ‘a limited edition of 1’, does it really matter that a
digital copy of this painting existed before it’s production
and was actually it’s digital original?

B.

The current painting software and hardware is
affordable and easy to operate. It can all be controlled by
the artist to achieve truly unique paintings and to create
interesting and realistic painting effects.
But which software and hardware to use?
“Combining multiple programs is the best method to
create personalized digital art that does not look like it
was created in a computer” [4, p.17]. “Corel Painter is
your digital art studio in your computer. It is a
complement to, not a competitor with, Adobe Photoshop,
your digital darkroom. I recommend, as a minimum, that
your digital painting toolbox includes both Painter and
Photoshop” [5, p.xvi].
In terms of hardware, a Wacom graphic tablet and its
pressure-sensitive pen is the key interface between artist
and computer. ‘Wacom’ actually means the harmony
between human and computer (‘wa’ is a Japanese word
for harmony and ‘com’ stands for computer).
Let’s take a look at one of my digital photo paintings
that was created from a photo reference in Corel Painter
and Adobe Photoshop using a mix of techniques with the
help of a Wacom graphic tablet. The painting emulates the
work of the impressionist masters, leaving out details and
using a particular colour palette.

III.
CULTURAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL
ASPECTS OF DIGITAL PHOTO PAINTING
A.

Software and Hardware for All

Can everyone be an Artist?

Surprisingly, the most likely answer to this question
is positive. At least from the technological point of view,
all limits seem to be removed and everyone can easily
afford and try to be a digital artist. Of course, to succeed
as an amateur or a professional artist, they must have not
only painting software and hardware, but also
imagination, creativity and talent.
The digital revolution makes it possible for
everyone to try to be artistic. New affordable software
boosts creativity, allowing endless options for
experimentation. Now it is easier than ever, Marylyn
Sholin points out, to take your photographs and digitally
transform them into works of art that engage and mystify
the viewer. The latest software programs on the market
today are so sophisticated in their capabilities and so easy
to use that anyone can be an artist and create their own
style for their body of work [4].
The creative process of digital photo painting begins
even before the shutter of the camera is clicked. The artist
has to see the potential paintings as if they are ‘embedded’
into the real world. An alternative strategy is that the artist
takes as many reference photographs as possible, but in
this case, he or she faces the problem of selecting the
photographs that will be rendered into paintings, but this
selection itself is a difficult and mysterious process.

Figure 1. The original photograph.

Figures 1 to 3 show the original photograph and final
digital results of a painting entitled ‘Fowey II, Cornwall’
and painted in 2010. These black and white images lack
the main feature of the impressionist style – the creative
use of color but they may nonetheless give some idea of

463

material for digital manipulation and transformation helps
them enormously, and also fully guarantees that each of
them is able to complete their artwork. If digital photo
painting was not available, most of those people would
never have been thinking about any contribution to visual
art. Of course, not many of their artworks are
masterpieces, but because of a dramatic increase in the
number of people involved, the chances of finding new
talents and producing real masterpieces are very high.
The Internet and its numerous photo-sharing
websites, such as Flickr, make it possible to present your
achievements in digital painting not only to your friends,
but to the rest of the world as well. All the major photosharing websites have many specialised groups that state
“No photos please, digital paintings only”.
From a technological point of view, all the necessary
painting tools are widely and easily available and they are
good enough to move digital photo painting to a
revolutionary new level of popularity similar to the
current use of digital photography. From a cultural point
of view, it is highly possible but not yet quite clear,
whether digital photo painting will become a mass hobby
on this planet.
Current research indicates that the answer is more
likely ‘yes’ than ‘no’. The historical and conceptual
perspective of the relationship between photography and
painting supports this positive claim. The dominance of
photography has reached the point of dialectic negation
and transformation into the form of art that was dominant
before the invention of photography, namely painting.
Digital photo painting leads us ‘back to the future’,
where a huge proportion of visual artworks will be not
photographs but truly unique paintings produced from
reference photographs.

the impressionist-style brush strokes. To see this digital
photo painting in color, please visit http://bit.ly/fowey-2.

Figure 2. Impressionist-style digital photo painting.

IV.

Digital photo painting is an emerging phenomenon in
fine art and everyday life that has the potential to be ‘the
next big thing’. Since at the moment it is in its juvenile
stage, the main body of research into its features and
development still lies ahead, forming a novel and exciting
field for in-depth analysis and theoretical reflection.

Figure 3. A detail view of the digital painting.

C.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

From Photography to Painting: Back to the Future

It is easier than ever to create unique digital artwork
from photo references using popular software. “The
bottom line is that digital paint is just another art medium
(or collection of media), albeit an immensely powerful,
efficient, versatile, non-allergenic, non-toxic and fun
medium to use” [5, p.xvi].
Digital paint is gradually replacing the physical one
and becoming the medium of choice for millions of
people. It is affordable, always available on the computer
and fun to try. This is why more and more ordinary people
are getting involved in the production of digital paintings.
The use of their own photographs as visual references or

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

464

M. Addison, Painter X for Photographers: Creating Painterly
Images Step by Step. Focal Press, 2007.
H. Harrison, Painting Great Pictures from Photographs. David &
Charles PLC, 1999.
S. Ligon, Digital Art Revolution. New York: Watson-Guptill
Publications, 2010.
M. Sholin, The Art of Digital Photo Painting. New York /
London: Lark Books, 2009.
J. Sutton, Painter 11 Creativity: Digital Artist's Handbook. Focal
Press, 2009.

