2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Analyzing Soccer Goalkeeper Performance using a Metaphor-Based Visualization
Adrian Rusu1, Doru Stoica2, Edward Burns1
Department of Computer Science, Rowan University, U.S.A.
2
Department of Physical Education, University of Craiova, Romania
rusu@rowan.edu, doru_stoica_2005@yahoo.com, burnse15@students.rowan.edu
1

Abstract
The dimensionality of soccer statistics relating to
goalkeeper specific data can be difficult to interpret.
Leveraging our existing statistical analytics tool, Soccer
Scoop, we developed a goalkeeper visualization add-on
that can assist a team manager. With the newly
developed goalkeeper visualization tool, a team manager
can compare a single goalkeeper between two games,
measure the overall performance of the goalkeeper both
for games played at home or away, as well as to devise
the appropriate training exercises needed to strengthen
any visible weakness. To keep with the continuity of the
visualization styles of our first tool, Soccer Scoop, the
goalkeeper visualization applies similar techniques, such
as glyphs, details on demand, color, and Gestalt
principles.

specific to various field positions within the game of
soccer, it does not provide a visualization for the data as
related to the goalkeeper position.
To further enhance the data and analytics
capabilities of the Soccer Scoop application, we
developed the goalkeeper visualization that allows for
managers of a team to view soccer goalkeeper specific
performance attributes. The goalkeeper visualization
application presents a single visualization that maintains
similar metaphoric and usability characteristics
established within our Soccer Scoop application.
Leveraging similar visual cues and appealing visual
styles allows for team managers to adapt easily to the
goalkeeper visualization without the need to learn an
entirely new tool. The goalkeeper visualization is called
the Goalie Viewer and shows vital information on a
single player. Additionally, the goalkeeper visualization
allows for the comparison of the vital statistics of the
individual player with other games in which they have
played, as well as a comparison of two different
characteristics for the same goalkeeper for the same
games. It can also allow for the comparison of different
goalkeepers on other teams for the same game or
between different games. The visualization represents the
goalkeeper’s attributes as an actual soccer goal with
various data entities adorned throughout.
Our combined Soccer Scoop and Goalie Viewer
visualization tool provides features for soccer statistical
field data, gathered by soccer managers based on
players’ characteristics. We are not aware of any other
tool used for the same purpose. Other soccer tools that
allow for simulation of pre-game training initiatives for
play-by-play analysis exist: “Grass Roots Coaching” [2]
is a drill viewer visualization tool that encompasses the
overall sequences of play drills related to both offense
and defense, and “TactFOOT: Soccer Coaching Tactical
Software” [1] is a visualization tool that allows for the
creation of training exercises and drills through
simulation animations.
Since the goalkeeper visualization is integrated with
the original Soccer Scoop visualization application, the
user is able to toggle between the various available
visualizations, including the Goalie Viewer. Toggling
between the other visualizations and the newly
developed Goalie Viewer visualization is performed by
clicking on the appropriate view button as available
within the application, a technique which facilitates easy
transitions between visualizations within the same tool
[9].

1. Introduction
The interpretation and relation of data collected by team
managers in the field of athletics, for purpose of
developing pre-game objective scenarios such as tactical
set plays, drills, or other player performance monitoring
tasks, can be daunting considering the high
dimensionality of the data. Managers of a team can
gather data using many disparate methods that relate to
specific player attributes such as speed, precision, or
other performance values, however relating this data in a
unified manner may be hard to achieve. The analysis of
this data may be useful in determining the success or
failure of a team or players as they progress, however
with the high dimensional and disparate nature of most
data collected in athletics, many team managers continue
to ignore, hide, or inaccurately interpret data that would
otherwise be beneficial if presented appropriately.
Our first step with introducing a solution to this
dilemma was Soccer Scoop, a visualization tool that
fulfills the need for player-to-player comparisons relating
to team performance and dynamics by providing a
metaphorically unique way to visualize and interpret data
[3]. With Soccer Scoop we used a variety of natural field
elements to represent several data categories that cross
reference specific key player elements and allowed for
the quick visualization of data. The overall goal achieved
was to create a metaphor-based data visualization [10],
that was appealing to the manger of the team thus
minimizing overall cognitive effort surrounding team
player and attribute analysis. Although Soccer Scoop
solves the problem for analysis of data for players
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.57

194

Our application is intuitive and innovative in design
and allows for the presentation of all goalkeeper
attributes and key elements associated with performance.
These qualities allow for even the most technically
deficient team managers to quickly adopt the system.
The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we
define categories, attributes, and characteristics as
established in our tool, in Section 3 we present principal
elements of our visualization, in Section 4 we provide
implementation details, in Section 5 we present actual
field data as it is being interpreted in our program, in
Section 6 we provide future enhancements ideas, and
conclusions are described in Section 7.

possession of the ball, plunged and the ball stayed with
his own team, managed to extricate game space (players
unwind and go after the ball), diverted the ball’s
trajectory outside of the goal area, safely sent the ball to
a teammate who managed to receive the ball and keep it
under his control, went out of the goal to block the
striker and decreased his shooting angle, controlled the
ball with his foot in order to waste time, and kicked the
ball beyond midfield.
The common mistakes in execution category is
comprised of specific goalkeeper data for foot or hand,
trunk, and slow execution of movement attributes. These
attributes are all represented using a similar,
corresponding Likert scale; however, foot or hand, and
trunk values are more specific to the physical
performance characteristics of an individual player. Foot
or Hand attribute is broken down into the following
representative elements: wrong position with arms and
elbows apart, as well as ball catch which does not cover
the back of the ball enough and does not provide it’s
amortization (corresponding to ball catching), while in
plunge momentum does not resort to added steps, or
arms are spread apart during flight, or landing is made
with hands outstretched (corresponding to plunge), the
jump from the ground is performed with whole foot or
arm is not sufficiently extended from the elbow joint
when the ball is hit (corresponding to boxing ball), the
ball is amortized with the palm of the hand
(corresponding to diverting ball), the ball is released late
from the hand, making a curved path or for long distance
throws, the center of gravity is not transferred from the
back foot onto the front foot (corresponding to hand
throwing), throwing feet first or does not choose the right
time of the attack (corresponding to blocking), ankle is
tense when the ball is touched (corresponding to
dribbling), and impetus is too short (corresponding to
ball kick). The trunk attribute of the goalkeeper data
represents the following element values, respectively,
corresponding to each of the characteristics listed above:
trunk is not tight, contact with the ground is not made on
the side of the trunk and not in natural sequence of its
segments, during the flight trunk muscles are not tense to
help hit the ball with more power, there is no
synchronization between the trunk and the arms which
divert the ball depending on the ball’s trajectory and
velocity, trunk does not execute a twisting motion after
the ball leaves the hand, blocking the ball is executed
with the trunk - thus the risk of injury is high, the trunk is
not bent forward and is rigid, and the trunk is leaning
backwards.
As with the original concept as followed by our
earlier soccer player visualizations, our goalkeeper
visualization tool was designed to encapsulate and
integrate all of the three categories and respective data
elements into a single viewing instances. This was
accomplished by implementing a goalkeeper metaphor
which uses a variety of unique visual cues, objects, and
color styles; goal posts, goalkeeper player, and various
sections of the goalkeeper player body model [4]. A
simple glyph-based system [7] was incorporated by

2. Background
We first define specific attributes (data model) that
characterize goalkeeper performance, and then present a
solution for goalkeeper analysis, both for individual
comparisons between games and player-to-player
between games. The overall goalkeeper dynamics of a
specific player are represented and modeled using
specific structure of data elements provided for the
requested goalkeeper visualization. The data model
contains three main data categories with attributes, with
the target of allowing for the observation of both
offensive and defensive goalkeeping, establishing a
determination of performance level, and exposing
specific performance characteristics that would otherwise
remain hidden without a proper method of presentation.
We define the data model for goalkeeper to be
similar to that of the original data model as provided for
the original player visualizations, as presented in [3]. The
main categories are: execution mechanics, tactical utility,
and common mistakes in execution. What differs is that
each of the categories are crossed by characteristics
specific to goalkeepers: ball catching, plunge, boxing
ball, diverting ball, hand throwing, blocking, dribbling,
and ball kick. Execution mechanics for goalkeeper is
comprised of precision, fluency, coordination, easiness,
and rapidity.
The precision attributes for a goalkeeper elements
are denoted by a corresponding percentage value,
corresponding to each of the characteristics specific for
goalkeepers: percentage of success related to ball
catching (from long, medium, or short range shots),
catching the ball during a plunge, boxing the ball to the
side, diverting the ball to avoid goals, hand throwing to
teammates, removing the possession of the ball from the
opponent or removal of danger during blocking,
percentage of time when the ball is 50 inches from the
leg, and the percentage of success of ball kicking to
teammates.
Fluency, coordination, ease, and rapidity are all
Likert values represented by a scale of: unsatisfactory,
satisfactory, good, and very good.
Tactical utility of an individual goalkeeper is distinct
for each data element as described above and denoted by
the following aggregation value totals respectively:
number of times the goalkeeper manages to take

195

leveraging the natural objects of the player model in
order to represent common mistakes in execution such as
foot or hand and trunk attributes.

coded [6] regions to represent the category of common
mistakes in execution. By default, if data is not available,
color white is used. Otherwise, the Likert scale
corresponding to the attributes of this category is
assigned color values as follows: green represents very
good, yellow represents good, orange represents
satisfactory, and red represents unsatisfactory. Hand and
foot is considered one attribute, so goalkeeper’s hands
and feet will always have the same color. For example,
in Figure 2, the goalkeeper on the right side performs
very good on one or more of the following actions:
resorts to added steps while in plunge momentum, arms
are close to each other during flight, landing is made
with arms bent (the value associated to plunge for hand
or foot attribute). The trunk of the goalkeeper is
associated with the trunk attribute. For example, in
Figure 2, both goalkeepers have good evaluations for
making contact with the ground on the side of the trunk
and in natural sequence of its segments (the value
associated to plunge for trunk attribute). Slow execution
of movement attribute is represented by the thighs of the
goalkeeper. For example, in Figure 2, both the right and
left goalkeepers have white thighs, which represents that
data is not available for this attribute.
The category of tactical utility is represented in the
visualization by the angle of a player model directly
positioned from a gradient meter model that is color
coded to red, yellow, and green to represent numerical
ranges such as 0-5 for poor, 5-10 for good, and 10-20 for
great, respectively. The player model works like a meter
that will allow a team manger to visually recognize the
performance of the goalkeeper during a specific game
based on appropriate skill category. A straight
goalkeeper is naturally associated with great work, so the
player-meter metaphor would lead a team manager to
understand goalkeeper’s performance without much
effort or knowledge of the data. For example, in Figure
2, the goalkeeper on the right side has been able to
plunge and keep the ball with his team more than ten
times (the value associated to plunge for tactical utility
category).
Within the execution mechanics category, precision
attribute is represented using the scale of the player
model. Scale of the player model relative to size of the
goal is associated to a percentage value for each skill
attribute. The larger the player model the greater (and
thus better) the precision; smaller models have poorer
precision. This visualization technique allows for a team
manger to quickly compare an individual goalkeeper or
goalkeepers by associating precision with the idea that a
taller goalkeeper relative to goal height will ultimately
possess more precision performance overall. For
example, in Figure 2, the goalkeeper on the right side has
more precision in catching the ball than the goalkeeper
on the left side.
Within the execution mechanics category, the right
goal posts (or left depending on the side) and the top goal
posts within the visualization represent the attributes of
fluency,
coordination,
easiness,
and
rapidity,
respectively. The posts (right or left) are separated into

Figure 1. Goalie Viewer is integrated within the
new version of the Soccer Scoop

3. Goalie Viewer Visualization
The goalkeeper visualization as presented in this paper
was designed to be integrated within the original Soccer
Scoop visualization software (see Figure 1).
The Goalie Viewer visualization, as shown in Figure
2, allows the manager of a soccer team to review an
individual goalkeeper on a given team for a specific
game. Additionally, it allows for the comparison of two
goalkeepers of different teams for same or different
games. Like our previous work, this visualization can be
toggled to show different goalkeeper-specific
characteristics: ball catching, plunge, boxing ball,
diverting ball, hand throwing, blocking, dribbling, and
ball kick. For example, in Figure 2, Plunge characteristic
has been selected, and the same goalkeeper is projected
in the same visualization twice to compare his
performance in two different games.
Overall, Goalie Viewer comprises of several
visualizations with varying cues and visual styles that
present information for execution mechanics (divided
into its associated attributes of precision, fluency,
coordination, and rapidity), tactical utility, common
mistakes in execution, and slow execution of movement
(divided into its associated attributes foot or hand, trunk,
and slow execution of movement) for the respective
characteristic.
It is important to recognize that the complete
visualization is integrated into a soccer goal model. This
is to keep with the continuity of our other player
visualizations by providing the key aspect of familiarity
[5]. In it is a necessary usability factor that the user must
feel connected with the overall visualization and must be
able to realize the various abstractions as related to
goalkeeper data. If the presentation is foreign or not
recognizable to the team manager or general user, the
overall information may be misinterpreted or even not
visible to the viewer.
To implement comparative goalkeeper analysis, the
visualization uses two instances of the same
visualization. The mesh goalkeeper model uses color

196

three sections; fluency at top of post, coordination in
middle, and easiness at base of the post. Each attribute is
color coded to denote the appropriate Likert scale value.
For example, in Figure 2, the goalkeeper on the right side
has very good values for his rapidity and fluency, and
good values for coordination and easiness of plunge.
When developing a visualization, the main goal is
making it as intuitive as possible for the target user. By
leveraging the natural elements of a goal such as posts,
or the mesh goalkeeper model positioning, a team
manager is able to deduce the many performance
characteristics as associated with a particular goalkeeper.
When the team manager observes that the goalkeeper
model is small compared to another model for blocking,
they should be able to deduce that they need to practice
at blocking. Finding the connections between the data
and the overall visualization by the use of metaphors
makes our visualization an effective analysis tool.

animation. In WPF, the presentation or UI layer can be
written in XAML, which is a derivative of XML, to
define the many elements or models; however, it is also
possible to define these models within the business logic
layer with traditional graphics using the C# programming
language. For the purposes of our design, we
implemented the 3D models using XAML and
implemented any transformations or animations using C#
graphics programming. Version control was supported
by Microsoft’s Visual Studio Team System (VSTS)
platform through Team Foundation Server.
Integrating field data into the Goalie Viewer is
achieved through uploading a user created CSV file or by
means of form field input within the main Soccer Scoop
application
before
accessing
the
goalkeeper
visualization.

5. Results
The application and analysis of actual goalkeeper data is
critical in determining the usefulness of the Goalie
Viewer visualization tool. In this section we explore the
overall functionality of our goalkeeper visualization by
presenting several case studies that leverage captured
goalkeeper data. The data consists of a single goalkeeper
of a second division team from Romanian soccer
championship as an observation over a fifteen game
period. These games were played both home advantage
and away. Each data table comprises specific data
attributes that provide for a detailed description of the
goalkeeper within a single game, so a total of fifteen data
tables have been collected. The data tables contain
specific values for categories, attributes, and
characteristics, as described in Section 2.

Figure 2. Goalie Viewer allows the manager of a
soccer team to review or compare goalkeepers

5.1 Observing performance deficiency
In this analysis, as seen in Figure 3, a goalkeeper was
observed to have a performance deficiency with
diverting balls that remained consistent between games.
This deficiency lies within the tactical utility category
required for the technique. The angle of the goalkeeper
shows that he has diverted less than five balls outside of
the goal area in both games considered (left and right).
Upon viewing the visualized data specific for diverting
the ball from the goal, one can see that although the
player may possess this deficiency within the tactical
utility attribute, overall fluency, rapidity, coordination,
easiness, as well as precision appear to be improving
from the game depicted on the right side to the game
depicted on the left side. These attributes are represented
as the green and yellow colored left goal posts in contrast
to the orange colored posts relative to the right
goalkeeper. Improvements in precision can be observed
by comparing the size differences of the player models.
Similarly, by comparing goalkeeper's performances over
several matches, it has been observed that he is also
deficient in his blocking characteristic spanning several
categories (not shown in Figure 3).

4. Implementation Details
The initial release of our Soccer Scoop application was
designed and written using the Java language framework
and using JOGL, a Java implementation of the OpenGL
graphics library, and implemented in the Netbeans IDE.
Although this suited well for cross platform deployment,
we decided to take the original design into the realm of
3D while leveraging a more unified programming model
that could incorporate UI, data, and media. We chose
Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF), implemented
in the Visual Studio 2010 IDE, for the Soccer Scoop
redesign, as well as for implementing the Goalie Viewer
as presented in this paper. WPF is a development
platform available within the .NET 3.0 Framework that
provides a consistent programming model for building
next generation software applications. It uses DirectX for
graphics processing and provides a separation between
both the user interface and the business logic layers
which are generally written in the C# programming
language. It was designed to unify some of the common
elements of user interfaces such as documents, text, 2D
and 3D rendering, vector graphics, and runtime

197

games home or away. Even considering the fact that a
team manager may collect data between remote games,
accurately interpreting this data may be still unclear as it
is sometimes difficult to cross reference matrices [8].
Additionally, detecting performance improvements or
deficiencies just by glancing at the numbers may not be
easy. Our goalkeeper visualization solves this problem
by providing the team manager insight into how their
goalkeepers perform in games played at home relative to
games played away. In this case study, we show how
Goalie Viewer can be leveraged to determine
performance gains or declinations between home or
away games.
Results for one home (left side) and one away (right
side) game for the ball boxing characteristic are
presented in Figure 5. At first glance, it can be observed
that there is a clear advantage when a goalkeeper plays at
home versus away. It is evident that for some games
there is a decline in the performance areas of tactical
utility, precision, and rapidity as related to ball boxing.
Additionally, the goalkeeper is much more prone to foot
or hand mistakes. The only attributes that seem to remain
consistent for the ball boxing characteristic are fluency,
coordination, easiness, and trunk mistakes. Although
specific of an individual goalkeeper, a performance may
also be dependent on the performance of the overall
team. Playing away may require the goalkeeper to
contribute much more during the match, thus leading to
more mistakes. As such, an evaluation of the general
performance of a goalkeeper may in fact be indicative of
team play. These discoveries can ultimately assist with
the development of coaching exercise or other training
practices that focus specifically on the performance
deficiency that may be in need of improvement.

Figure 3. This figure represents a comparison of
a goalkeeper between games in order to
determine a performance deficiency.
5.2 Observing hidden performance qualities
It is as equally important to discover performance
qualities as it is discovering deficiencies. In this case
study, the performance attributes of an individual
goalkeeper were compared between several games in
order to detect exceptional qualities. Observation and
analysis of the data through the goalkeeper visualization
exposes ball kick as an exceptional performance
characteristic (see Figure 4). It is evident through the
visualization that the goalkeeper exceeds expectations
for the two games selected, as shown by the mostly green
and yellow coloring associated with the various elements
of the metaphor. This is an important feature; by
focusing in on performance qualities, the manager of a
team is able to discover hidden talents of a specific
goalkeeper.

Figure 5. This figure represents a comparison
between a goalkeepers performance at home
(left) versus performance at away (right) games.

Figure 4. Goalie Viewer reveals the hidden
performance qualities of a goalkeeper

5.4 Results Summary
5.3 Comparison of an individual goalkeeper
characteristic between home and away games

We presented three case studies that use various
scenarios in order to find hidden information, such as
performance deficiencies or qualities, as well as
comparison between home and away matches, for
selected characteristics. These scenarios represent a

Managers of soccer teams are sometimes limited to
visual or statistical memory when attempting to compare
and evaluate the performance of a goalkeeper between

198

small subset of what the Goalie Viewer can be used for,
in terms of evaluating the performance of a goalkeeper.
The main intent of the Goalie Viewer visualization
tool is to empower team managers with the ability to
evaluate, analyze, and observe the performance of an
individual goalkeeper between games or with other
goalkeepers of other teams between games so that
decisions regarding the development of appropriate
training or practices exercises can be devised. Our
goalkeeper visualization tool quickly presents not only
the best performance attributes of a goalkeeper, but also
highlights any deficiencies that can be encouraged by the
coach to develop, thus ultimately improving overall
goalkeeping performance.

observation as implemented by our goalkeeper
visualization, team managers benefit with the ability to
evaluate the goalkeeping with focus on performance
qualities or deficiencies, and thus empowering them to
not only take control of their team, but perhaps allowing
them control over the outcome of the game.

References
[1] TactFoot: Soccer Coaching Tactical Software.
Retrieved from http://www.tactfoot.com, 2010.
[2] Soccer & Football Coaching, Drills, & Training in
the UK, Europe, & America. Retrieved from
http://www.grassrootscoaching.com, 2005.

6. Future Enhancements
[3] A. Rusu, D. Stoica, E. Burns, B. Hample, K.
McGarry, and R. Russell. Dynamic Visualizations
for Soccer Statistical Analysis. Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV), pages 207-212, 2010.

In this section, future enhancements to the goalkeeper
visualization, as well the overall Soccer Scoop
application are considered. First, the possible future
inclusion of object animations using several animation
principles within the Soccer Scoop software will allow
for additional visual cues that may represent other
various data elements not yet considered. For example,
the animation principle of timing may represent a
player’s specific attribute such as coordination, while the
principle of slow-in/slow-out may be representative of
attribute related to easiness or rapidity. Second, allowing
for the input of the data by the team manager on the field
in real-time could be made possible by implementing a
mobile, web-enabled version of the system that would
send data ideally through a XML Web Service allowing
for data that can be analyzed during a training session or
game already in progress. Last, integrating other methods
of data input such as accelerometers and/or gyroscopes
devices worn by the players into the Soccer Scoop
software package would allow for real-time input that
would possibly eliminate the need for traditional data
entry methods, thus allowing team mangers to focus on
analysis through real-time monitoring.

[4] Jack Ox. Visualization and the art of metaphor.
Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on
Creativity & cognition, pages 307-308, 2007.
[5] Phil Turner. Being-with: A study of familiarity.
Interacting with Computer, Volume 20, Issue 4-5,
pages 447-454, 2008.
[6] Haleh. H. Shenas and Victoria Interrante.
Compositing color with texture for multi-variate
visualization. Proceedings of the 3rd international
conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques in Australia and South East Asia, 2005.

[7] Beth Yost and Chris North. Single complex glyphs
versus multiple simple glyphs. Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1889-1892,
2005.

7. Conclusions

[8] A. Telea, P. de Hillerin, and V. Valeanu.
Visualization of multivariate athlete performance
data. The Seventh IASTED International Conference
on Visualization, Imaging and Image Processing,
pages 123-128, 2007.

In this paper we presented the Goalie Viewer addition to
our original Soccer Scoop visualization application that
is centric around goalkeeping performance data. Our tool
represents individual goalkeeper dynamics specific to a
particular game, however like our previous efforts in the
realm of player visualizations, the goalkeeper
visualization allows for establishing an analysis of
goalkeeper-to-goalkeeper between games, as well as
between teams. This fulfills the need for team manager
coaching analysis related to specific goalkeeper
performance data. Leveraging our unique quick-glance
observation technique, we are able to metaphorically
encapsulate and represent a complete set of skill-set
categories centric around goalkeeping with their
associated attributes and cross referenced elements by
establishing a goal model that uses natural objects to
represent the data. With analysis through quick

[9] Darius Pfitzner, Vaughan Hobbs, and David
Powers. A unified taxonomic framework for
information visualization. Proceedings of the AsiaPacific symposium on Information visualization,
Volume 24, pages 57-66, 2003.
[10] Miller, Todd and Stasko, John, "The InfoCanvas:
Information Conveyance through Personalized,
Expressive Art", Short Paper, CHI 2001 Extended
Abstracts, Seattle, WA, April 2001, pp. 305-306.

199

