2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Contract Clarity through Visualization
Preliminary Observations and Experiments

Helena Haapio
Lexpert Ltd
Helsinki, Finland
helena.haapio@lexpert.com
functions of contracts, of which only a small fraction seems
to be related to the law. Instead of “contracts in court” or
“contract law in the books”, we explore “contracts in action”,
as they appear in the commercial world, from both business
and legal perspectives. Here, when used proactively,
contracts communicate crucial information inside and
between organizations; they help share, minimize and
manage cost and risk; and, in case of a dispute, contracts
work as a record and evidence of what has been agreed and
provide a means to resolve the dispute. Further, when used
preventively, contracts communicate the deal and its terms
clearly so as to avoid future disputes over their meaning. [3,
p. 111]

Abstract— In the crafting of commercial contracts, many
participants are involved, often professionals from different
countries and backgrounds. The challenge, then, is to achieve a
balance between the business and legal requirements and to
facilitate communication and coordination. While some
contracts may need to work as evidence in court, most
contracts do not. Instead, they need to work as business tools
for the parties so they get the results they want to accomplish.
This paper presents preliminary observations of research work
in progress, aimed at developing new methods to improve the
clarity and usability of commercial contracts. It proposes a
new field of research and practice, contract visualization, and
invites cross-professional dialogue to explore the opportunities
that exist for industry-changing innovations in this area.

II.

Keywords-commercial contracting; contract visualization;
invisible terms; legal risk; visualizing legal information

I.

Contracts are expected to provide businesses with
predictable outcomes. Still contract interpretation remains
the largest single source of contract litigation between
business firms [4]. While empirical research is needed to
enhance our understanding about the reasons for this, one
thing is clear: Contracts do not make things happen – people
do.
After negotiating and signing, the parties must follow
their contract. Understandability is a prerequisite in order for
users to perform any task. For a vast majority of contracts,
courts, arbitrators, and lawyers are not the primary readers
and users – people in the operational and delivery teams
implementing the contracts are. These people are seldom
lawyers. They need information contained in contracts to
coordinate in-house and outsourced functions, manage
budget, scope, schedule, resources, and so on.
Today’s commercial contracts can be viewed through the
analogy of a jigsaw puzzle. With a complex project in mind,
Fig. 1 shows a contract as a puzzle of 1) technical and
contextual, 2) performance and delivery, 3) business and
financial, and 4) legal and risk management related parts,
with 5) project and contract management as the center piece.
If correctly assembled – and only if correctly assembled –
the pieces of the puzzle form a complete, synchronized
picture. Ideally, the supplied solution will then meet the
customer’s requirements, while the project will satisfy the
supplier’s needs in respect of profitability and risk
management. [3, p. 124; 5, p. 121–123]

CONTRACTS IN THE COMMERCIAL WORLD

When hearing the word “contract,” people have a
tendency to think of formal, legal documents. Many tend to
categorize “contracts” under “law” and think that contracts
are best left for lawyers. Traditional management literature
seems to have a rather legalistic view of contracts also. Up
until recently, most managers and researchers outside the
legal field have ignored contracts, despite the fact that the
ability to understand and use contracts is increasingly
important in today’s business.
In every collaborative venture where two or more
companies work together, a contract is present. It may be
written or unwritten, formal or informal. In manufacturing
industries, the move from goods to services and solutions
makes contracting increasingly complex and time
consuming. At the same time, the current business climate
requires companies to act quickly. Opportunities are lost if
contract creation and negotiation take too long or if contracts
are hard to interpret and to implement.
This paper draws from the early results of a recently
started research project where contracts are seen as an
important part of collaborating companies’ value creation. It
builds on research that proves the growing importance of
contracts and contracting capabilities for today’s
interconnected enterprises [1, p. 1061] and competitive
advantage [2, p. 667–668]. It looks into the many different
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.70

CONTRACT PUZZLE: IT TAKES A TEAM

337

of the research is to strengthen participating companies’
contracting capabilities and to enhance their ease of doing
business.
The first months into this research have shown some
major challenges: on the business side, the way contracts are
perceived and often ignored, and on the lawyers’ side,
unease in working with other than text or “tested language”
(often meaning language tested in court).
The early results of our literature review confirm the
preliminary findings from our interviews with participating
companies: visualizations have an impact on attitude and
behavior, and they can be used in business to leverage both
the emotional response of the readers and to enhance their
cognitive abilities to understand the content [9; 10, p. 2].
Contracts seek to regulate future conduct. To work as
intended, as privately-made rules, contracts need to be read,
understood, and followed. Our early experiments and
preliminary discussions with participating companies suggest
that the use of images can lead to better access to and
understandability of the rules, making complex information
easier to find, more interesting, and easier to work with. The
early examples discussed in the following Sections suggest
that visualizations have the potential to bring clarity and
beyond: when the chosen visualizations are right for the
context and audience, they can also lead to better rules and
better rulemaking, both in commercial contracting and in
public lawmaking.
To gain wider acceptance among business and legal
professionals, more examples are needed, from both
publicly-made rules (administrative and legal codes) and
privately-made rules (commercial contracts). Research is
required into what kinds of visualizations are most helpful
for different audiences, contexts and goals; what tools are
available to convert text into images; and what principles
should guide the selection of the tools and visualizations.

Figure 1. The Contract Puzzle [3, p. 124; 5, p. 122]

Such contracts are seldom planned or crafted by one
person. Rather, they are put together by a team. Research
into high-technology firms’ contract design capabilities
confirms the fact that the input of managers and engineers is
needed in key areas, in order to lay the foundation for the
deal and construct operationally efficient contracts. [1]
Interaction and cross-communication are required, as each
stakeholder only has a fragmented understanding of the
issues involved [6, p. 6].
Even if the contract is as clear as it can be, major issues
can arise from a disconnect between the pre-contract sales or
procurement process and post-contract implementation and
management. One reason for this is that people are reluctant
to read contracts [7, p. 133]. Few managers have formal
training in how to read contracts or why they should do so [7;
8].
Yet many people are expected to read contracts and work
with them. The buyer’s solicitation team and the supplier’s
proposal team may consist of people different from those on
the contract negotiation team, none of whom may be part of
the operational or delivery team. The teams may not meet,
they may just “inherit” from their predecessors the contract
documents that they are expected to master and work with.
Without guidance, delivering on the promises made in
such documents is not easy. On the sell-side, the operational
team may not only need to implement the supply contract but
also pass on to subcontractors the applicable terms (and
risks) of that contract. Things get even more complicated
when dealing under global umbrella agreements –
framework agreements made between group parent
companies designed to be implemented at local level in
several countries, all with their own jurisdictional, language,
and other requirements.

IV.

CLARITY THROUGH VISUALIZATION: EXAMPLE

Clarity in communication requires clarity of thought. To
achieve desired results, the results should be clear. If they are
not clear, how can they be shared, articulated in a contract, or
achieved? The path to results begins from clarity of thought
and expression and, then, ideally, flows as follows [11]:
Clarity ĺ Understanding ĺ Fast decisions ĺ Action ĺ Results

The following example illustrates lack of clarity and how
visualization could have helped to prevent it. This is a reallife case where the text of a single clause in a contract cost
the parties a bitter 18 months’ dispute, with more than a
Million Canadian Dollars at stake [12; 13]:
In 2002, Rogers entered into a contract with Aliant, in
which Aliant gave Rogers access to around 91,000 poles that
carried its cables to homes across Canada. In order to raise
the rates in 2005, Aliant gave Rogers one year’s notice to
terminate the contract. Rogers objected, stating that the
contract could not be terminated before it had been in force
for five years. The misunderstanding revolved around a
single clause:

III. RESEARCH GOALS AND EARLY OBSERVATIONS
The initial theoretical aim of the research in progress is to
review existing literature related to designing, organizing and
communicating complex business and legal information,
with an emphasis on potential solutions offered by
visualization. Through the literature review and by exploring
and prototyping approaches towards visualizing contracting
processes and documents, the goal is to provide conceptual
clarity to the subject. Working together with corporate case
owners, the information designer and contract lawyer of the
core research team will use the findings to determine the
framework for empirical case study research that will follow.
In addition to the expected theoretical contributions, the goal

338

© 2011 Stefania Passera & Helena Haapio

Figure 2. Different understandings of a contract clause. Visualizations courtesy of Stefania Passera, Aalto University [13].

“This agreement shall be effective from the date it is
made and shall continue in force for a period of five (5)
years from the date it is made, and thereafter for successive
five (5) year terms, unless and until terminated by one year
prior notice in writing by either party.”
As regards the initial term of the contract, Rogers thought
that it had a five-year deal. Aliant was of the view that even
within this initial term, the contract could be terminated at
any time with one year’s notice. The validity of the contract
and the money at stake all came down to one point: the final
comma. In 2006, the Canadian authority CRTC (Canadian
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission)
sided with Aliant: “Based on the rules of punctuation,” the
comma in question “allows for the termination of the
contract at any time, without cause, upon one-year’s written
notice.” [14]
However, the dispute did not end there. In response to
Rogers’ appeal, the CRTC later reviewed the Frenchlanguage version of the contract, which provided a different
solution. In 2007, the CRTC sided with Rogers: the contract
ran for the full five-year initial term, until May 2007, and
could not be terminated. [13; 15]
If during the pre-contract phase, the parties would have
used visualization to share and double-check their view on
the duration of the deal, this could have resulted in mutual
clarification. Simple timelines, as in Fig. 2, could have
shown the parties’ different understandings and made
abstract terms visible and easier to compare. Using
visualization during their negotiations, the parties would
have had a chance to work out a mutually acceptable solution
and, when drafting the deal documents, they could have
included the selected picture so as to avoid ambiguity in
future interpretation. [13]
In this case, a simple timeline could have prevented the
dispute and saved the parties from spending management
time and legal fees on solving it. In the words of Louis M.
Brown, known as the Father of Preventive Law: “It usually

costs less to avoid getting into trouble than to pay for getting
out of trouble” [16, p. 3].
V. VISUALIZING LEGAL INFORMATION
In Central Europe, visualizing legal information has
developed into a research field in its own right. In the
German-speaking countries, the terms legal visualization
(Rechtsvisualisierung), visual legal communication (Visuelle
Rechtskommunikation), visual law (Visuelles Recht) and
multisensory law (Multisensorisches Recht) have been used
to describe this field of growing research and practice. [17;
18] So far, while some aspects of contract law (publiclymade rules and court cases) have attracted this field’s
researchers’ attention, commercial contracts (privately-made
rules) do not seem to have done so. One of the reasons may
be the latter’s focus on business aspects (such as scope,
deliverables, schedule, and pricing) rather than legal aspects.
In the United States, the use of visualizations has been
studied, for instance, in the context of improving the
comprehension of jury instructions [19; 20] and facilitating
the making of complex decisions related to dispute resolution
[21, p. 154–161; 22]. Visualization has also been noted to
play a role as a persuasion tool in various settings, from the
court room [23; 24] to the board room.
In Canada, recognizing the need for new ways to inspire
public access to the law, the Government commissioned a
White Paper in 2000 proposing a new format for legislation.
The White Paper [25] by David Berman, a communication
designer, also introduced the concept of using diagrams to
help describe laws, stating that this concept is “revolutionary,
and likely the most innovative information design feature in
the new design” [25, p. 23]. Among the people who would
find diagrams useful the author mentions individuals needing
to know if the general provisions of a piece of legislation
apply to them and senior government officials who need to
gain a quick appreciation of a particular piece of legislation.
In the process of creating a flow chart diagram Berman’s

339

team also discovered inconsistencies that were not accounted
for in the legislation, suggesting that if rendering laws into
diagrams was part of the process of drafting, the resulting
legislation would in some instances be substantively
improved. [25, p. 24]
Another example of visualizing the law is the work of the
Street Vendor Project carried out by Candy Chang, a
designer, urban planner and artist, in collaboration with the
Center for Urban Pedagogy in New York. Having noted that
the “rulebook [of legal code] is intimidating and hard to
understand by anyone, let alone someone whose first
language isn’t English”, they prepared a visual Street Vendor
Guide called “Vendor Power!” that makes city regulations
and rights accessible and understandable. The Guide features
diagrams of vendors’ rights and the most commonly violated
rules along with some text. [26] Fig. 3 (“Before”) and Fig. 4
(“After”) illustrate the difference between text and visual
guidance.
In the Wolfram Demonstration Project, the use of
visualizations has been explored in the area of legal rules
applicable in a Battle of the Forms situation. Such a Battle
arises in the not uncommon situation in which one company
makes an offer or bid using a pre-printed form which
contains its standard terms, and the other party responds with

its own form and standard terms. Both parties then hope that
a contract will be based on their terms rather than those of
the other party. The applicable law may lead to a negative
surprise to one party or both, including the possibility of no
contract being formed. The visual demonstration contributed
by Seth J. Chandler illustrates Article 2 of the Uniform
Commercial Code that governs domestic sales of goods in
the United States. The user can choose various details, and
the output shows the most likely judicial finding as to
whether a contract exists and the terms of that contract, along
with a graph that explains the argument that will be advanced
in support of the judicial finding. [28]
VI.

VISUALIZING CONTRACTS: EARLY EXPERIMENTS

Unlike visualizing legal information, visualizing
contracts (or the visual communication of contracts) remains
an almost unexplored research area. Research related to legal
risks in the context of contracts offers an exception: In a
recent case study, a group of lawyers, managers, and
engineers were asked to analyze the risks related to a
contract proposal using a method based on graphical
language and diagrams. The case study showed that
graphical language was helpful in communicating risk
amongst the case study participants. However, the need for
simplicity and usability also led to some limitations and the
need for a combination of graphical and natural language for
improved decision-making. [29, p. 237–262]
Knowledge visualization in the context of risk
management in itself is not new. It has been researched, for
instance, at the University of St Gallen Institute for Media
Communications and Management. Their research findings
related to risk communication and communication of
knowledge between experts and decision makers [30] are
likely to prove highly relevant for our continued research,
where ways to enhance communication between managers
and their legal advisors and managerial-legal decision
making are focus areas.
A noteworthy example of using visuals to guide the use
and interpretation of complex contracts comes from the UK:
the NEC family of contracts. This family consists of several
contracts designed for procuring a diverse range of works,
services and supply and their associated guidance notes and
flow charts. The latter two are not part of the contract
documents but assist in their understanding. Originally
launched in 1993, and then known as the “New Engineering
Contract”, the NEC has been praised for its collaborative and
integrated working approach to procurement. It has been said
that the implementation of NEC3 contracts has resulted in
major benefits for projects both nationally and internationally
in terms of time, cost savings and improved quality. [31; 32]
The findings of legal and business practitioners, too,
show that flowcharts and other non-textual tools can add
value and improve productivity and efficiency in the
corporate contracting process [33; 34; 35]. Published
examples include the Outsourcing Contract Dashboard
developed by DLA Piper’s UK Office: a web-based contract
assessment and reporting tool designed to help provide a
simple, visual answer to the question “how good is this
contract?” [36].

“Before...”

Figure 3. Typical page from New York City Administrative Code [27]

“After...”

© 2011 Candy Chang

Figure 4. Street Vendor Guide. Accessible City Regulations.
Visualization courtesy of Candy Chang [26]

340

VII. CONCLUSION

When teaching cross-border contract law to business
managers and students, the Author has experimented with
visualizations and visual metaphors, with the aim of curing
contract phobia, changing attitudes, and making contracts’
invisible terms visible [37; 38; 39; 22]. Here, the concept
invisible terms is used to refer to terms (such as implied
terms, implied warranties, and statutory default rules) that do
not appear in the contract but become part of it, unless they
are expressly excluded or amended. A lawyer familiar with
the context knows and “sees” the invisible terms, while a
non-lawyer does not. [37; 38; 22] Many legal problems could
probably be prevented, if visualizations would show the
presence and impact of such terms. Especially in
international dealings, problems are often encountered not
because of what the contract says, but because of what it
does not say. Such gaps can be risky, especially for a
supplier who wants to balance risk with reward and avoid
excessive, unlimited liability exposure. [38, p. 32–33]
Not all tools need to be sophisticated. Let us use task
allocation as an example: an important area that needs to be
captured and articulated in a contract. The Author’s simple
“hand tool” (Fig. 5) lists the trivial-sounding but crucial
questions that must be answered when creating or reviewing
contractual rights, responsibilities, and remedies: who/which
party shall do – what – where – when – how – and, last but
not least, what if/what if not. Often it is also worthwhile to
ask who bears the risk and cost of doing things.
Like the contract puzzle (Fig. 1), the “hand tool”
illustrates that risk and contingencies are not what contracts
are made for; contracts are made to help get things done and
establish a framework for success. While it is important to
have safeguards and minimize the negative consequences of
failure, a contract can not and should not be developed in
isolation from the overall scope, business deal, and
relationship. Success requires managerial-legal collaboration
and communication. Future research will show how
visualization can help in this endeavor.
The “hand tool” (Fig. 5) lacks professional polish. It
confirms the fact that lawyers (like the Author) need
partners, tools, and guidance in order to create visualizations.
With few exceptions, lawyers are typically accustomed to
conveying their thoughts and ideas using words only. [5, p.
146] If our research in progress reaches its goals, this may
start to change. The early findings from our experiments
suggest that many benefits can follow, both for the legal
profession and for its clients.
How
What if...
What if
not...

When

Where

Where

When

Contrary to common belief, contracts are not taught at
law school; contract law is. Contracts do not equal contract
law. Contract-related issues do not end at the boundaries
between academic disciplines or industrial professions. This
is even more true in the context of communicating
contractual information.
What works for judges or other lawyers may not work for
business and project managers, or vice versa. The goal of this
paper is to present and test contract visualization as an
emerging topic for research and practice and to initiate
discussion with scholars in related fields to explore and
develop the topic further. In addition to management, legal,
and information design scholars, cognitive psychologists and
communication experts will be needed to assure that the
visual representations of contractual information provide
optimal communication and decision support for the
different users and messages. User studies will also be
needed in order to recognize the opportunities and challenges
and to establish good practices. Before this can happen,
many researchers’, business managers’, and lawyers’
attitudes towards contracts need to be changed. Visualization
seems to offer tools for this purpose also.
In contract visualization, questions are likely to arise that
have not been asked before. Our research in progress is a
first step towards asking those questions and providing some
early answers. This paper invites new questions, suggestions
and insights from the field of knowledge visualization.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

How
What if...
What if not...

What What

[7]
Supplier

Buyer

[8]
Who/Which party?
At whose risk?
At whose cost?

Figure 5. Hand Tool for Better Contracts [3, p. 135; 5, p. 114]

341

N. Argyres and K. J. Mayer, “Contract Design as a Firm Capability:
An Integration of Learning and Transaction Cost Perspectives,”
Academy of Management Review, vol. 32, issue 4, 2007, pp. 1060–
1077.
G. J. Siedel and H. Haapio, “Using Proactive Law for Competitive
Advantage,” American Business Law Journal, vol. 47, issue 4, Winter
2010, pp. 641–686. Available as a Working Paper at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1664561, 4.5.2011.
H. Haapio, “Innovative Contracting,” in A Proactive Approach to
Contracting and Law, H. Haapio, Ed., Turku: International
Association for Contract and Commercial Management & Turku
University of Applied Sciences, 2008, pp. 105–152.
A. Schwartz and R. E. Scott, “Contract Interpretation Redux,” Yale
Law Journal, vol. 119, issue 5, March 2010, pp. 926–965,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1504223, 4.5.2011.
G. Siedel and H. Haapio, Proactive Law for Managers: A Hidden
Source of Competitive Advantage. Farnham: Gower Publishing,
2011.
M. J. Eppler, “Knowledge communication problems between experts
and managers. An analysis of knowledge transfer in decision
processes.” Paper 1/2004, May 2004, University of Lugano, Faculty
of Communication Sciences, Institute for Corporate Communication,
unpublished, http://doc.rero.ch/lm.php?url=1000,42,6,20051020101
029-UL/1_wpca0401.pdf, 4.5.2011.
S. J. Burnham, “How to Read a Contract,” Arizona Law Review, vol.
45, no. 1, 2003, pp. 133–172.
G. Berger-Walliser and H. Haapio, “Promoting Business Success
through Proactive Contracting and Visualization,” Acad. Legal Stud.
In
Bus.
Nat’l
Proc.,
vol.
41,
2010,
http://alsb.roundtablelive.org/Resources/Documents/NP%202010%20
Berger-Walliser_Haapio.pdf, 4.5.2011.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25] D. Berman, “Toward a new format for Canadian legislation – Using
graphic design principles and methods to improve public access to the
law.” Human Resources Development Canada and Justice Canada
Project Paper, 30 November 2000, http://www.davidberman.com/
NewFormatForCanadianLegislation.pdf, 4.5.2011.
[26] Candy Chang, Street Vendor Guide. Accessible city regulations,
http://candychang.com/street-vendor-guide, 4.5.2011.
[27] New York City Administrative Code § 20–465 Restrictions on the
placement of vehicles, pushcarts and stands; vending in certain areas
prohibited,
http://24.97.137.100/nyc/AdCode/Title20_20-465.asp,
4.5.2011.
[28] Visualizing Legal Rules: Battle of the Forms. The Wolfram
Demonstrations
Project,
http://demonstrations.wolfram.com/
VisualizingLegalRulesBattleOfTheForms, 4.5.2011.
[29] T. Mahler, Legal Risk Management – Developing and Evaluating
Elements of a Method for Proactive Legal Analyses, With a Particular
Focus on Contracts. Doctoral Thesis. Oslo: Faculty of Law,
University of Oslo 2010.
[30] USI
HSG
Knowledge
Communication
–
Publications,
http://www.knowledge-communication.org/publications.html,
4.5.2011.
[31] What is the NEC? Achieving excellence in the procurement of
Works, Services and Supply. Promoting best practice procurement,
http://www.neccontract.com/documents/WhatistheNEC.pdf,
4.5.2011.
[32] NEC Products, http://www.neccontract.com/products/index.asp,
4.5.2011.
[33] H. W. Jones and M. Oswald, “Doing deals with flowcharts,” ACCA
Docket, vol. 19, no. 9, October 2001, pp. 94–108.
[34] H. W. Jones III, “Envisioning visual contracting: why non-textual
tools will improve your contracting,” Contracting Excellence,
August/September 2009, pp. 27–31, http://www.iaccm.com/
userfiles/file/CE_2_6_press_new.pdf, 4.5.2011.
[35] K. Rekola and H. Haapio, “Better business through proactive
productization and visualization of contracts,” Contracting
Excellence, June/July 2009, pp. 17–19, http://www.iaccm.com/
userfiles/file/CE_2_5_press_C2(1).pdf, 4.5.2011.
[36] Outsourcing
Contract
Dashboard,
DLA
Piper,
http://www.dlapiper.com/uk/content/onlineservices/outsourcing_contr
act_dashboard, 4.5.2011.
[37] H. Haapio, “Invisible Terms in International Contracts and What to
Do about Them,” Contract Management, July 2004, pp. 32–35.
National
Contract
Management
Association
NCMA,
http://www.ncmahq.org/files/Articles/81EEB_cm_July04_32.pdf,
4.5.2011.
[38] H. Haapio, “Invisible Terms & Creative Silence: What You Don’t
See Can Help or Hurt You,” Contract Management, September 2009,
pp. 24–35. National Contract Management Association NCMA,
http://www.ncmahq.org/files/Articles/CM0909%20-%2024-35.pdf,
4.5.2011.
[39] Visualization, Lexpert Ltd, http://www.lexpert.com/en/visualisation/
index.htm, 4.5.2011.

J. H. Larkin and H. A. Simon, “Why a Diagram is (Sometimes)
Worth Ten Thousand Words,” Cognitive Science, vol. 11, 1987, pp.
65–99.
S. Bresciani, M. Tan and M. J. Eppler, “Augmenting communication
with visualization: Effects on emotional and cognitive response.”
Paper for IADIS ICT, Society and Human Beings 2011 (ICT 2011)
Conference, 20.–26.7.2011, Rome, Italy, unpublished.
M. Eppler, “Why care about Clarity? Because it leads to results” in
his presentation How to be CLEAR in Complex Corporate
Communication at Aalto University Business School on 24 January
2011, citing Xplane, Inc.
I. Austen, “The Comma That Costs 1 Million Dollars,” New York
Times, 25 October 2006, http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/25/
business/worldbusiness/25comma.html?_r=1, 4.5.2011.
S. Passera and H. Haapio, “Facilitating Collaboration through
Contract Visualization and Modularization.” Paper for the European
Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics ECCE 2011, 24.–26.8.2011,
Rostock, Germany, unpublished.
Costly Drafting Errors, Part 1—Rogers Communications and Aliant.
AdamsDrafting, 7 August 2006, http://www.adamsdrafting.com/
2006/08/07/costly-drafting-errors-part-1/, 4.5.2011
Rogers Victory in the Comma Case, AdamsDrafting, 20 August 2007,
http://www.adamsdrafting.com/2007/08/20/rogers-victory-in-thecomma-case/, 4.5.2011
L. M. Brown, Preventive Law. New York, NY: Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
1950.
C. R. Brunschwig, Visualisierung von Rechtsnormen – Legal Design
[Visualization of Legal Norms]. Doctoral Thesis. Zürcher Studien zur
Rechtsgeschichte, vol. 45. Rechtswissenschaftliche Fakultät d.
Universität Zürich. Zürich: Schulthess Juristische Medien, 2001.
C. R. Brunschwig, “Multisensory Law and Legal Informatics – A
Comparison of How these Legal Disciplines Relate to Visual Law,”
Jusletter
IT,
22
February
2011,
http://jusletterit.weblaw.ch/_104?lang=de, 4.5.2011.
C. Semmler and N. Brewer, “Using a Flow-Chart to Improve
Comprehension of Jury Instructions,” Psychiatry, Psychology and
Law, vol. 9, no. 2, 2002, pp. 262–270.
F. Dattu, “Illustrated Jury Instructions: A Proposal,” Law &
Psychology Review, vol. 22, 1998, pp. 67–102.
G. J. Siedel, “Interdisciplinary Approaches to Alternative Dispute
Resolution,” The Journal of Legal Studies Education, vol. 10,
Summer/Fall 1992, pp. 141–169.
G. Berger-Walliser, Gerlinde, R. C. Bird, and H. Haapio, “Promoting
Business Success through Contract Visualisation,” The Journal of
Law, Business & Ethics, vol. 17, Winter 2011, pp. 55–75. Available
as a Working Paper at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1744096, 4.5.2011.
N. Feigenson and C. Spiesel, Law on Display. The Digital
Transformation of Legal Persuasion and Judgment. New York, NY:
New York University Press, 2009.
S. H. Solomon, “Visuals and Visualisation: Penetrating the Heart and
Soul of Persuasion.” DOAR Litigation Consulting, October 2006,
http://tillers.net/solomon.pdf, 4.5.2011.

342

