2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Prisma Maps – A Geovisualization Support for
Prisma Multiple Coordinated View Information
Visualization Tool
Edson Koiti Kudo Yasojima, Bianchi Serique
Meiguins, Nikolas Carneiro, Rafael Veras

Aruanda Simões Meiguins
Centro Universitário do Pará - CESUPA
Rede Informática Ltda.
Belém-PA, Brazil
aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br

Universidade Federal do Pará - UFPA
Belém-PA, Brazil
koitiyasojima@gmail.com, bianchi.serique@terra.com.br,
nikolas.carneiro@gmail.com, rafaveguim@gmail.com

Abstract— This paper presents a new view for PRISMA
information visualization tool; this new visualization will provide
support for analyzing data on maps. The use of maps will provide
a way for geographical data analysis by using coordinates.
Geographic analysis becomes important when it comes to
verification of database that uses the location as a key factor to
create contexts. This paper will describe the new integrated view
and main features of the map.

B. Information Visualization (IV)
As well as information data grows up, IV provide ways to
organize and create views that show a context about this data
accordingly to the user interaction. Information visualization
takes advantage of the human cognitive capacity to isolate and
show data in visual presentations. [4]
Human interactions and views can be extended to various
techniques, IV already quite advanced and is now possible to
find and use various techniques to manipulate data. [5]
Identified a start point of what is essential for interactions that
must exist in a visualization tool: overview, zoom, filter, and
details-on-demand.

Keywords- Information Visualization; Geographical Analysis;
Map View

I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Abbreviations and Acronyms
Geovisualization can be described as a combination of
geographical information systems, information and scientific
visualization, virtual environments and data analysis. [1]

C. Equations
PRISMA is an information visualization tool based on
multiple coordinated views to explore multidimensional
datasets using the following techniques: treemap, pie, graph,
scatterplot and parallel coordinates. It is extensible, portable
and easy to maintain since it has been developed in Java using
design patterns. [4] [6]

As the result of technology evolution, manipulation of data
through maps has become a very important factor in making
decisions through the analysis of cartographic data. Geospatial
data are relevant to a large number of applications. Examples
include weather measurements such as temperature, rainfall,
wind-speed, etc., measured at a large number of locations, use
of connecting nodes in telephone business, load of a large
number of Internet nodes at different locations, air pollution in
cities, etc. [2] [3]

Users may analyze data in each view individually or
simultaneously in all views. Data can be modified and
reflected to the others views. [6]

According to [2], Map interaction techniques can be
categorized based upon the effects they have on the display.
Navigation techniques focus on modifying the projection of
the data onto the screen, using either manual or automated
methods. View enhancement methods allow users to adjust the
level of detail on part or all of the visualization, or modify the
mapping to emphasize some subset of the data. Selection
techniques provide users with the ability to isolate a subset of
the displayed data for operations such as highlighting,
filtering, and quantitative analysis. Selection can be done
directly on the visualization (direct manipulation) or via dialog
boxes or other query mechanisms (indirect manipulation).
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.56

Figure 1 PRISMA Multiple Views

294

II.

IV.

RELATED WORKS

An application using tag maps and tag clouds was
developed by [7]. By using text and maps, they combine
geography and text to create and plot geo-referenced text
strings on the map.

A. Overview
The application module provides all the operations cited
by [5]. On the main screen, it’s possible to see the summary of
all the data of the database, like how many tuples the base has,
how many distinct values each column has. The map support
dynamic zoom.

Also, [8] have developed the GeoDDupe an application for
reconciling and treatment of multiple location references on a
map, to resolve similar data positions.
III.

PRISMA MAPS AND STATE OF ART

ARCHITECTURE

The application, in a global context, dock with PRISMA
and it is divided in three layers that cooperate to each other. It
was developed to be a module that can easily attach to it.

Figure 4 Main screen of the module

First of all, it is possible to select the column of the
database that will represent the coordinates on the map, only
double valuable columns are possible to select.

Figure 2 Prisma Maps module overview

PRISMA will provide synchronization
modification on a different view.

between

an

Also, it is possible to reuse instances of the map, to other
applications that support this kind of view. For example, if we
want to create a web or desktop application that uses
geographical data like longitude and latitude, the module can
be used to retrieve this data and return a view of the map as an
image to be used on these applications.
Figure 5 Latitude and Longitude selection

B. Configuration
After the markers were put on the map, it’s possible to
manipulate the data such as color or label selection. Each value
can represent a color previously selected by the user.

Figure 3 Module Reuse

295

Figure 9 Label selection
Figure 6 Color configuration

C. Filtering
The module supports multiple filters; it’s possible to select
more than one value that will be filtered from the map. Users
can select the values they want to show on the map, other
values will be hidden after the operation.

Figure 7 Color selection
Figure 10 Filter operations

D. Details on demand
It is possible to see the details of each item on the map, as
well as configure the visible columns that will appear in the
details pop-up. This feature helps if there are too many
columns in the database.

Figure 8 Label configuration

Figure 11 Details on demand

296

This paper presented a new module for PRISMA, based on
geographic visualization, using Google Maps and GWT
support.
Maps are very useful in many knowledge areas, based on
the study made [9] and the test that will be applied [6] [10].
We’ll aim to provide an even better interaction for the user and
getting better results.
For future works we aim to:

Figure 12 Selecting visible columns

V.

GOOGLE WEB TOOLKIT (GWT) AND GOOGLE MAPS
API

GWT is a toolkit for Java developers, it provide various
pre-made components that can be used to build web
applications using the Google infra-structure. It is possible to
use other google Gadgets as well. When Java code is compiled
in GWT, Javascript code is generated, creating the webpage
with standardized code. [11]

TEST CASES

As shown by [6] and [10] it will be used pre-defined tasks,
and analysis of some characteristics such as:
User profile: users will have a little or none
knowledge in information visualization.

x

Evaluation procedures: users will have some time to
study and get familiarized with the application.

x

Dataset: the dataset selected will be compatible with a
geographical context.

x

Tasks: users will have to accomplish some tasks that
will evolve identification, visualization, comparison,
inference, configuration and location.

x

Provide the possibility to create custom label for
markers.

x

Be able to load more than one dataset at the same
time.

x

Make a route system between two or more selected
markers.

x

Comparative case study with other geographical
information visualization systems.

Faeth, Adam.; Oren, Michael.; Harding, Chris. Combining 3-D
geovisualization with force feedback driven user interaction.
Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSPATIAL international conference on
Advances in geographic information systems, 2008.
[2] Dykes, Jason.; Maceachren, M. Alan.; Kraak, Menno-Jan. Exploring
Geovisualization. Elsevier Inc. 1º Edition. 2005.
[3] Haug, Dan.; MacEachren, A.M.; Hardisty, Frank. The challenge of
analyzing geovisualization tool use: Taking a visual approach. 20th
International Cartographic Conference. 2001.
[4] Meiguins, Bianchi Serique.; Gonçalves, Aruanda Simões. Multiple
Coordinated Views Supporting Visual Analytics. IEEE ICDM
Workshop on Visual Analytics and Knowledge Discovery – VAKD.
2009.
[5] Shneiderman, B.; "The eyes have it: a task by data type taxonomy for
Information Visualizations", Proceedings IEEE Symposium on Visual
Languages. 2006.
[6] Godinho, Paulo I.; Meiguins, Bianchi S.; Gonçalves, Aruanda.; Casseb
do Carmo, Ricardo.; Garcia, M.; Almeida, Leandro.; Lourenço, Rodrigo.
PRISMA – A Multidimensional Information Visualization Tool Using
Multiple Coordinated Views. 11th International Conference Information
Visualization (IV '07). 2007.
[7] Slingsby, Aidan.; Dykes, Jason.; Wood, Jo.; Clarke, Keith. Interactive
Tag Maps and Tag Clouds for the Multiscale Exploration of Large
Spatio-temporal Datasets. 11th International Conference Information
Visualization (IV '07). 2007.
[8] Kang, Hyunmo.; Sehgal, Vivek.; Getoor, Lise. GeoDDupe: A Novel
Interface For Interactive Entity Resolution in Geospatial Data. 11th
International Conference Information Visualization (IV '07). 2007.
[9] Wisniewski, P.K.; Pala, Okan.; Lipford, H.R.; Wilson, D.C. Grounding
geovisualization interface design: a study of interactive map use.
Proceedings of the 27th international conference extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems. 2009.
[10] Pillat, R. M.; Valiati, E. R. A.; Freitas, C. D. S. Experimental Study on
Evaluation of Multidimensional Information Visualization Techniques.
Proceedings of the 2005 Latin American conference on Humancomputer interaction (ACM). pp. 20-30. Cuernavaca, Mexico. 2005.
[11] Google
Web
Toolkit
url:
http://code.google.com/intl/ptBR/webtoolkit/overview.html
[12] Google
Maps
url:
http://code.google.com/p/gwt-googleapis/wiki/MapsGettingStarted.

Also, it’s possible to create custom components to be used
or attached to the map, like videos, other webpages etc.

x

Provide a better color configuration, like using a color
pallete.

REFERENCES
[1]

The Google Maps API library provides a way to access the
Google Maps API from a GWT project without having to
write additional JavaScript code. The library gives full control
using the standard Maps components such as InfoWindows,
Markers, MapTypes, and Geocoding. [12]

VI.

x

By analyzing the results, any interaction on the map module
will be rated based on the case study evaluated by [9].
CONCLUSIONS

297

