2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

What is Knowledge Visualization? Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline
Stefan Bertschi,1 Sabrina Bresciani,2 Tom Crawford,3 Randy Goebel,4 Wolfgang Kienreich,5
Martin Lindner,6 Vedran Sabol,5 Andrew Vande Moere7
1
loginb consulting, {knowledge}@loginb.com, 2Università della Svizzera italiana (USI),
{bresciani.sabrina}@gmail.com, 3VizNetwork, {tom}@viznetwork.com, 4University of Alberta,
{rgoebel}@ualberta.ca, 5Know-Center, {wkien, vsabol}@know-center.at, 6MicroWeb,
{martin.lindner}@gmail.com, 7KU Leuven, {andrew.vandemoere}@asro.kuleuven.be

Abstract

…about communication – fundamentally
(Tom Crawford)

This paper collates eight expert opinions about
Knowledge Visualization; what it is and what it should
be. An average of 581 words long, topics span from
representation, storytelling and criticizing the lack of
theory, to communication, analytics for the masses and
reasoning, to trendy Visual Thinking and creativity
beyond PowerPoint. These individual views provide a
picture of the present and the future of a discipline that
could not be more timely, aiming for a common understanding of the visualization of knowledge.

While classically, the word communication implies
that it is from one person to at least one other, it can
also be communicating to yourself as a way of understanding and remembering what you have learned.
The process of Knowledge Visualization contains
steps such as gathering, interpreting, developing an
understanding, organizing, designing, and communicating the information. While the previous sentence
implies a linear flow, it is hardly a linear process. In
fact, any step can link to any other step in any number
of iterations until a “final” representation is created. Of
course, it never is quite final. Even if we were able to
come up with the perfect visualization, our knowledge
changes and with it changes the visual. In fact the visual often provides so much insight that our knowledge
changes and thus the visual needs to change creating a
fascinating recursive loop.
Strangely, while we have learned much about
Knowledge Visualization over the last 100 years, we
still have yet to re-think and redesign some of the most
common forms of communication. For example, the
lowly recipe, which has been around and largely unchanged for over 3,600 years, is a form of communication from one person to another. The original assumption of the recipe designer was that anyone who needed
to read it shared a specialized language and process,
which often now is learned either as an apprentice or in
culinary school. However, that language breaks down
when the same information design goes from chef to
home cook. The assumptions of terminology and
process break down when the home cook has not had
the same education or experience as the professional
chef.

Knowledge Visualization is…
The International Symposium on Knowledge Visualization and Visual Thinking is now in its seventh
year, and it is about time to assemble a selection of
expert opinions on where we are today and where the
discipline should be heading.
Therefore, members of the Advisory and Review
Committee were invited to participate in a joint paper,
and seven co-authors have accepted the invitation. The
requirements were: to contribute a personal view of no
more than 625 words, with no illustrations allowed,
using a few references if needed. The topical requirement stated that these personal opinions had to reflect
on the current and/or future state of what the authors
consider to be Knowledge Visualization.
The result is a set of individual vistas on a multifaceted discipline. Each view sheds a different perspective on the notion of knowledge visualization and highlights specific theoretical or practical aspects. As a
whole, they lead beyond the diversity of visualization.
Stefan Bertschi
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.58

329

So, what would happen if we were to re-think the
design of the recipe and apply Knowledge Visualization techniques to the problem?
During the early stages of Knowledge Visualization
we would conclude that the recipe contains four basic
types of information: ingredients, process, and equipment which are combined in particular ways via a series of techniques. In analyzing the current recipes, we
would find that the design mixes the four types of information somewhat randomly which leads to the possibility of mistakes.
For example, the list of ingredients also contains
process steps (e.g. 200 grams onion, diced). These are
two different pieces of information. An ingredient list
is essential for making sure that what is needed to
make the recipe is present. However, what you do with
those ingredients should all be handled in one place. It
becomes even more complex when understanding that
“dicing” an onion is not one but actually five steps (cut
in half, top, peel, plus at least two cuts).
Knowledge Visualization would not only make it
clear what kind of onion, but also what then needs to
be done with it. No longer would cloves be confused
with garlic cloves because they look nothing alike.
Photos could be used to show what a ripe banana looks
like in comparison to one that is past its prime to help
the home cook choose not only the right ingredient, but
the freshest and best ingredients. The same idea could
be applied to the equipment which is rarely, if ever,
shown in a recipe. Food mills, reamers, mandolines
and many other infrequent, but valuable tools could not
only be shown, but demonstrated directly in the context
of the recipe.
The recipe is only one of the common forms of
communication that could use a much closer look. By
using the tools and process of Knowledge Visualization, we can begin looking deeply at the recipe’s components, who it is used by, and what they are using it
for, and therefore create more effective tools that reduce errors and increase satisfaction. That is Knowledge Visualization.

knowledge, data trends can be explained, rather than
simply discerned. Knowledge, therefore, is not about
knowing the facts, but knowing the causal factors and
context in which the facts have come about.
Stories are a powerful means of providing context.
Not surprisingly, knowledge is often shared and communicated through the process of storytelling [1]. Storytelling tends to place information (e.g. activities,
events, facts) within a commonly accepted contextual
framework, often by exploiting the qualities of internalization and socialization. While a story aims to convey
a series of specific truths, it is the narrative that provides a context in interpreting the overarching meaning, which potentially transforms it into actionable
knowledge.
While Knowledge Visualization is recognized as an
independent scientific discipline [2], the relevance of
storytelling towards its scientific goals is still relatively
unexplored. Early research proposed some simple “actions” like animation, mood and place as particularly
effective storytelling techniques in data visualization
[3]. A more recent study has investigated several design dimensions like genre and visual or narrative
structure to categorize the existing methods of visual
storytelling in the domains of online journalism, graphic design, comics, business, art, and visualization research [4]. In the context of Knowledge Visualization
research, the emerging popularity of online visual storytelling [5] presents at least two new challenges.
First, the use of storytelling in visualization has
been primarily considered on a phenomenological level, as a set of design techniques that have the ability to
direct a viewer’s attention through a sequential narrative, or a series of visual transitions. This experiential
viewpoint seems to miss the role of context in the visualization practice, and how providing rich context can
augment the visual sense-making process from observing eventual data patterns and trends into reasoning
about the meaning of their occurrence. If context drives
data-driven knowledge acquisition, then how is it best
represented? Second, it might be equally revealing to
analyze visual storytelling techniques in the context of
Knowledge Visualization, or vice versa, investigate
Knowledge Visualization design methods. Such wide
analysis should at least provide a better understanding
in successful design strategies. Alternatively, one
might discover promising but under-explored approaches to Knowledge Visualization.
While Knowledge Visualization might be less entertaining and eye-catching than most popular forms of
currently existing visual storytelling, both approaches
focus on conveying context, and therefore a form of
knowledge, to an increasingly information-hungry audience. What might make data visualization different
from other types of visual storytelling is the complexi-

…storytelling (Andrew Vande Moere)
Knowledge is information that has been made part
of a specific context. In order for information to transform into knowledge, one must share some context,
some meaning, in order to become encoded and connected to preexisting experience. In that sense, Knowledge Visualization can be considered as data visualization “in context”. While Knowledge Visualization
facilitates people to explore trends, patterns and outliers in data, it does not necessarily aim to discover
them, but rather attempts to unravel the driving principles that influence these data phenomena. With such

330

ty and scale of the content that needs to be communicated [3]. However, with the emerging popularity of
data visualization in current online media, expectations
will inevitably shift from simply delivering information to conveying the causally influencing factors that
drive the events in our world today.

Again from my own viewpoint, not uniformly
shared, I believe that it is scientifically useful to view
pictures as inductive inferences about the data and data
relationships from which they arose. Within that
framework, we can not only design experiments that
evaluate the quality of inference that a visualization
method provides, but can also reflect on how easy it is
for humans to reach conclusions intended by visualization methods application.
So, take Alan Kay’s generic advice to heart, and
invent the future of visualization. This requires a
stronger role for good scientific reasoning to guide the
connection of visualization research components: clever graphics, scientifically justified “art,” innovative
multi-dimensional rendering, all coupled with evaluation with respect to the efficacy of making insightful
inferences.
Prognosis – Perhaps Knowledge Visualization is a
kind of maturing teenager, slowly emerging out of the
eclectic chaos of graphics cleverness, scientific modeling art, and overly specific multi-dimensional rendering? I think the best evidence is the continued diversity
of visualization ideas, coupled with an increasing volume of work on visualization evaluation. After all, if
the goal of visualization is to amplify our visual systems’ ability to draw inferences from visual representation of data, then we need to develop scientific discipline about how to assess alternative visualization
methods. From that will emerge aspects of a theory of
visualization, and the future will be invented.

…inductive transformation from data to
visual space (Randy Goebel)
Current – The current state of the art in Knowledge
Visualization is pretty well represented by the distribution of papers in [6], which I claim shows a healthy
diversity of ideas on how to transform data into pictures. There is balance between the development of
new ideas for rendering objects in a visual space, and
on the application of existing methods to a variety of
application specific data, including health, bioinformatics, geography, and a broad spectrum of web data.
There remains opportunity for the articulation of insight into visualization semantics and the role of cognitive science in drawing inferences from pictures; I suggest these aspects should be stronger, because, after all,
visualization is about how the human visual system can
be inferentially amplified by rendering data in appropriate visual spaces.
The overall scientific interest in visualization is also growing, for example, by the seven years of the
Science Visualization Challenge [7, 8], which has
brought the role of visualization into the scientific
mainstream. The continued problem here, however, is
that while the Science challenge raises awareness and
interest in visualization, it still has the flavor of a kind
of “beauty contest,” instead of a disciplined assessment
of the quality of visualization techniques. The question
should always be about how well a particular visualization technique supports visual inference.
Future – With respect to the future of visualization,
I think an appropriate approach is captured by Alan
Kay’s assertion that “The best way to predict the future
is to invent it.” [9] One strong personal motivation for
inventing the future of visualization arises from an
assertion I recently read in a paper I was refereeing,
which wrote “…as the theory of visualization tells
us….” I balked, as there is no theory of visualization.
But there should be.
To invent the future of visualization is not to abandon the current state in pursuit of some fundamentally
different paradigm, but just to bring a little more scientific thinking to what a theory of visualization should
be? If the simply stated goal of visualization is to amplify the human visual system’s ability to draw inference from complex data, then we need much more
work on what kinds of inferences can be made, and
how well they can be made.

…expressing concepts through meaningful
graphical mapping (Sabrina Bresciani)
Visualizing knowledge means mapping concepts
graphically, by structuring text and visuals in a meaningful way. Visual representations are used to organize information and concepts in order to convey knowledge, to amplify cognition and to enhance
communication. Examples include conceptual diagrams, knowledge maps, visual metaphors and
sketches.
Knowledge Visualization can overcome the limitations of textual/verbal communication and of visual
representations alone. Through the use of spatial distribution, it leverages on both the textual and the visual
abilities of the brain to express meaning (Dual Coding
Theory [10]). Knowledge Visualization can provide the
big picture, give an overview and show the relationships between concepts. It structures conceptual knowledge [11, p. 7] and provides salience, thereby facilitating the focus on certain information at the expense of
other. Images have an impact also on the emotional
attitude of the user, by providing engagement and motivation. Visualizing knowledge is useful for collabora-

331

tive work: mapping the group dialogue can facilitate
the integration of knowledge and it can surface misunderstandings more prominently than text.
A relevant aspect is the relationship between
Knowledge Visualization and Information Visualization. The two concepts overlap in their common aim to
offer insights to the user [12]: “Knowledge visualization […] designates all graphic means that can be used
to construct and convey complex insights.” [13, p. 551]
Yet the uniqueness of Knowledge Visualization lies in
the content that is being mapped, posing a stronger
emphasis on knowledge and experiences rather than on
numerical information. Adopting the definition of
Chaomei Chen, “[t]he term information visualization
refers to computer generated interactive graphical representations of information.” [12, p. 387] By contrast,
Knowledge Visualization is not necessarily computer
generated, nor interactive. A mind map drawn with pen
and paper is a common example of Knowledge Visualization which is not computer generated. However,
recent developments in Information and Communication Technology (ICT) enable a widespread use of
Knowledge Visualization by empowering any user
with limited drawing skills to easily create conceptual
visualizations.
Visualizing knowledge is not without risks. Typical
challenges and mistakes committed while creating or
using knowledge visualizations include, for example,
oversimplification and ambiguity of meaning.
In recent years, reflecting a trend in society, we
witness a growing number of case studies and theoretical conceptualization, and thus the emergence of
Knowledge Visualization as a new discipline. Yet, the
lack of a solid theoretical background is a significant
limitation for the development of this particular field.
Future directions of development for Knowledge
Visualization and its potentials are seen along the following three main paths. Firstly, the discipline would
benefit from rigorously studying and measuring the
impact of visualizations, especially in emerging forms
of collaborative interactions, including visual groupware, Group Support Systems and social media. Secondly, the diffusion of innovative input devices such
as (multi-)touch screens is enabling new ways of interaction with software and particularly in groups. The
field of Knowledge Visualization could benefit from
understanding the implications of these fluid forms of
interaction. Finally, it could expand its horizon of applications by introducing and testing knowledge visualizations in new domains, including for instance intercultural communication, a context where visual representations can be particularly useful to overcome linguistic and cultural barriers.

…the link between visualization and information overload (Wolfgang Kienreich)
Knowledge Visualization is the missing link between the expert tools developed in the thriving field of
Visual Analytics and the frantic demand of the general
public for intuitive ways to cope with increasingly
large and complex personal digital universes.
Visual Analytics, the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive visual interfaces, combines automated analysis, visual representation and
user interaction in a closed loop intended to provide
users with new insights [14]. This approach has been
successfully applied in domains like business intelligence or genetics. Visual Analytics emphasizes the use
of visual abstractions to represent aggregated information and facilitate the formulation and validation of
hypothesis by expert analysts.
Knowledge Visualization utilizes visual representations to foster the communication of knowledge between two or more people. Clear benefits of this approach have been demonstrated for common situations
like presentations and discussions [15]. Knowledge
Visualization emphasizes the use of visual metaphors
to represent relevant information and facilitates collaborative dissemination and decision making by domain
experts.
Phenomena like the advent of social and consumer
generated media or the prevalence of personal imaging
devices have vastly increased the size and complexity
of personal digital universes. As a consequence, many
analytical tasks which have traditionally been performed by experts have become a concern for the general public: When a private photo collection is comprised of many gigabytes of image data, locating
relevant images requires facetted multimedia search
and retrieval techniques. When a personal social network is comprised of hundreds of individuals, identifying who could contribute to a problem or benefit from
a piece of information requires methods of social network analysis. A plethora of services and applications
enables users to share content and media and to build
networks. However, simple, accessible means for analyzing, evaluating and, ultimately, utilizing the wealth
of knowledge thus created are sadly lacking.
We propose that Visual Analytics and Knowledge
Visualization join forces in order to tackle this problem. Visual Analytics could contribute techniques for
the automated analysis of large amounts of information
and the closed loop approach which integrates analysis,
visualization and interaction. For instance, consumergenerated media could automatically be analyzed for
sentiment and quality. User feedback provided through
a visual interface could adapt the model of what constitutes sentiment and quality on a personal level.

332

Knowledge Visualization could contribute the practices and methods required to design domain and user
specific visual representations. Such representations
would be comprehensible for users with limited visual
literacy. For instance, media analysis results could be
presented using a map, meter or aquarium metaphor.
Appropriate knowledge visualizations have already
been proposed for supporting discussions. In the outlined scenario, they would be backed by aggregated
information computed from massive repositories.
Multi-touch surfaces could turn out to be a driving
technological factor for a closer integration of Visual
Analytics and Knowledge Visualization. Recent applications of Visual Analytics acknowledge the benefits
of collaborative approaches and utilize multi-touch
tables to support joint analysis of complex problems by
groups of experts [16]. Knowledge Visualization already has accumulated a wealth of experiences and
findings on how to visually support such group situations. Both disciplines could only benefit from a closer
exchange of ideas and of an integration of approaches
in applications to solve real world problems.

patterns and extraction of knowledge from raw data
and information. Visual Analytics builds upon Information Visualization to facilitate analytical reasoning
by combining automated discovery and interactive
visualization [18, 19].
While Visual Analytics focuses on discovery of
new knowledge from raw data and information, and
targets analysts in application domains such as business intelligence, Knowledge Visualization deals with
expression and creation of knowledge, targeting areas
such as knowledge management and strategic management in general. Although different in their conception and areas of application, both fields share several
common properties: they breed new knowledge, deliver support for decision making, and provide a common
basis for collaboration.
Knowledge Visualization is a powerful resource
which could be used outside of its traditional application domains. Knowledge Discovery is a data
processing chain consisting of, roughly speaking, data
selection, transformation, and mining and presentation
steps, where at the end of the process new knowledge
arises from raw data [20]. Visual Analytics has been
successfully applied in the context of Knowledge Discovery, where it serves as the final stage of the process
chain, supporting users in visually identifying patterns
and extracting new knowledge. Because knowledge is
the final product of the process, it appears as a compelling idea to integrate Knowledge Visualization as the
final stage of the Knowledge Discovery process chain.
Moreover, in this final stage Knowledge Visualization
could build upon and be combined with Visual Analytics. Therefore, a unified process would be created
where visual interfaces are used for discovery, creation
and communication of knowledge. Management support, which is provided by Knowledge Visualization,
would now be closely integrated with analysts’ output,
which is supported by Visual Analytics.
Many questions remain open though, for example:
How could findings provided by Visual Analytics be
incorporated in Knowledge Visualization representations? How could Knowledge Visualization and Visual
Analytics be combined to generate synergies in a
Knowledge Discovery process which not only provides
means for unveiling hidden facts, but also delivers
knowledge as its final product including all its accompanying facets such as experiences, attitudes, perspectives and opinions?

...the crucial stage in knowledge processes
(Vedran Sabol)
To define Knowledge Visualization, it is important
to agree on a definition of knowledge: knowledge is an
acquired, established set of facts, recognized to be valid and valuable within a specific domain. It can be
represented by a formal model consisting of concepts,
relationships and logical conditions. Knowledge Visualization deals with creating and applying visual representations with the purpose of constructing and communicating useful knowledge [17]. Knowledge
Visualization includes both static visual representations, such as panels or posters, as well as interactive
visualizations, offering possibilities for exploration of
visualized knowledge depending on users’ needs.
Knowledge in visual form not only facilitates remembering and transfer, it also provides the fuel for reasoning processes where new knowledge is derived and
created from previously acquired knowledge.
Knowledge Visualization is contrasted by the fields
of Information Visualization and, more recently, Visual Analytics. Both disciplines operate at a lower level
of abstraction than Knowledge Visualization, focusing
mainly on raw data and information. In this context,
data is understood as sequences of numbers or characters, representing qualitative or quantitative attributes
of specific variables. To obtain information data is
processed and brought into a context within which it
gains a specific meaning and becomes understandable
to users. Information Visualization makes use of human visual perception capabilities for recognition of

…the doodle revolution (Martin Lindner)
Visual Thinking is a big trend, particularly in the
age of the “micro-web”. Its main exponents are Dave
Gray (CEO of consulting firm XPLANE, co-author of
“Gamestorming” [21]), Dan Roam (author of “Back of

333

All in all, new visual languages and new cognitive
styles are emerging. This has many facets. I am especially interested in new formats that can be discovered
and observed in the World Wide Web: simple visual
objects that can be produced with little effort by almost
anyone, like a doodle or a napkin sketch. They are part
of what Lev Manovich called “micro-media” in 2000,
and what is now the evolving trend towards “micromedia convergence”. Because they only require a small
attention span to get their ideas and messages, these
simple user-generated objects can be easily circulated
in the cloud: in blogs, via flickr, SlideShare or YouTube.
This is part of a paradigm shift from “published
ideas” to “circulating ideas”. What people formerly did
on their desks is now part of collaborative thinking
processes enabled by the Web 2.0 ecosystem. It was
web intellectual Steven Johnson who described this
ecosystem in some detail. He even made a fascinating
animated “graphic recording”-video to promote his
book quite successfully [26]. It is 4:07 minutes, the
length of a pop song. Possibly, this is not mere coincidence. It just may be the natural format for the hive
mind.

the Napkin” [22]), Lee LeFever (creator of the simple
explanation videos “…in Plain English” that became
popular via YouTube) or Sunni Brown who coined the
term “Doodle Revolution” (book forthcoming, cf.
[23]). “Enterprise 2.0” consultancies like XPLANE or
the more mainstream Root Learning use visualizations
collaboratively created by workshop participants for
change management processes [24].
The wider context, I think, is a new wave of visualizations and Visual Thinking that was started in the
1990s. Of course we had revolutions in visual language
before: Otto Neurath invented modern “infographics”
around 1930, and Quentin Fiore, who collaborated with
Marshall McLuhan in the 1960s, may also stand for
early revolutions. However, this wave reached new
heights in the 1990s: digital data, Apple-driven graphic
engines and, finally, the Web 2.0 have changed the
game.
We have discovered whole new possibilities to collect, organize and manipulate digital data, but this has
opened the view on new abstract facts, new complex
realities. Meanwhile, human understanding is still
stuck in the primary world of physical objects, face-toface communication and people doing things to each
other in direct ways. In a world of massively mediated
interaction and communication this cognitive model
must fail. As mass “macro-media” become grassroots
“micro-media”, they reach beyond entertainment and
pop culture. What we see emerging is a new mode for
new ways of collective thinking, networked conversations and knowledge creation.
Certainly, there are a lot of trends in visualization
that run back to the “Big Bang” caused by personal
computing and digital networking. A presentation by
designer Peter Morville gives a good and visual overview of Visual Thinking [25]. On the “richer” side, we
have Hans Rosling’s famous performances explaining
the world through statistical visualizations (see the
stunning BBC Four video “200 Countries, 200 Years, 4
Minutes”). This is in line with Al Gore’s effort to visualize the ungraspable reality of Global Warming in
his “illustrated talk” that was finally turned into a movie.
Back in 2000, Al Gore was basically using PowerPoint as visualization tool, which then was criticized
by Edward Tufte in 2003 for its inherent tendency towards “Stalinist” visual New Speak: corporate salespeople silencing their audience with a power play of
curves, bullets and pies. But at the same time, artist
David Byrne introduced new ways of using PowerPoint. In the last five years, this has become the mainstream: A bunch of Web 2.0 pioneers has developed a
new style of well-designed Visual Thinking (although
most are using Keynote, the presentation software for
Macs).

…visualization beyond PowerPoint (Stefan
Bertschi)
The roots of Knowledge Visualization, as it is presented annually at the International Conference Information Visualization, are in business and management.
Therefore, we learn from research into visualization
that strategic and operational processes rely on communication and interaction. Visualization of any kind
significantly improves communication and therefore
business processes. Knowledge Visualization caters for
refined and aggregated information commonly used in
planning and implementation practices as well as
projects and change processes [2]. Though not solely
confined to business, Knowledge Visualization aims to
understand how the sender’s intended meaning can be
transferred in such a way that it is not distorted in the
recipient’s perception, therefore allowing effective and
efficient communication to take place.
The human mind is a strange thing, however, for
most people we may state that complex dependencies
and interactions can more easily be understood when
illustrated: an intelligent process flow chart makes
more sense than a numbered list describing the same
process in words, a project (Gantt) chart showing timelines and interdependencies allows for better understanding than a project scope, even if structured. The
difficulties are to be found in how to make best use of
the understanding of others, their intentions and perceptions, simply because there is no direct way to look

334

inside their heads. Visualization and Visual Thinking
subsequently allow us to reveal these “understandings”
because they provoke discussion, allowing the alignment of opinions and arguments.
If organizations in need of successful transfer of
knowledge are to ensure they benefit most from current
knowledge, then the single most important advice
would be: “listen”, but also “listen with your eyes”.
Think of illustrations and visualizations beyond PowerPoint and Project; think why “pencil selling” just
using pen and paper is so much more effective than
words alone in selling anything, ranging from goods to
projects. Do not be afraid to draw and sketch in front
of a live audience, or even better, sketch collaboratively and experience how much better ideas are being
generated, ideas that stick in all participants’ heads.
Speaking and listening with your eyes also means
making full use of the available methods (see the Periodic Table of Visualization Methods [27]). Knowledge
that can be seen can be used effectively and efficiently.
It is important to keep a critical mind, if used incorrectly visualizations can be risky [28]. Furthermore, the
activities of knowledge workers (like attorneys, marketers, scientists and senior executives) are “too variable
or even idiosyncratic to be modeled or structured with
a defined process”. Basically, their need for access to
knowledge sources, ranging from online databases and
social media to spreadsheets, presentation tools and
business intelligence analytics “is presumed to be
equally eclectic and unpredictable.” [29, p. 90f.] The
range of tools used does not ease the knowledge
process.
Does this mean the complexity of some of the tools
and software available is a barrier to creating visuals? I
would not necessarily blame the complexity of software but the lack of complexity or willingness for creativity in creating these visuals. I have personally had
great experiences with visual co-creation both in strategy and in operational processes. Visuals stimulate
discussion, and discussion creates knowledge. Arguing
this way, full use of methods does not mean to use
them all at once, but to use and combine them as necessary. Less is many times more because the average
human brain can process far less information than we
anticipate: four complex arguments in one go are too
many, rather make your three points, but make them
right and sustainably. Transparency and simplicity are
the answer – visibly and visualized for business purposes and far beyond.

and Visual Thinking. The aim of this joint paper was to
span the discipline by provoking a range of individual
vistas. Therefore, let us revisit what we can learn
through the eyes of others.
Tom Crawford highlights the communicative function of Knowledge Visualization; in his opinion, the
non-linear process of representing knowledge is a recipe for success, if handled correctly and by using visuals as an effective tool.
Andrew Vande Moere identifies the importance of
storytelling and meaning. In his opinion, Knowledge
Visualization allows to explore patterns by putting
them close to their context. The “story” is the perfect
visual carrier for knowledge, rendering it actionable.
Randy Goebel offers a reflection on the theoretical
and methodological foundation of visualization. In his
opinion, the strength is in the diversity to achieve insightful inferences. He criticizes the lack of a theory of
visualization and argues for inventing the future.
Sabrina Bresciani organizes her insights around the
need to amplify cognition and to enhance communication; visuals should also consider emotions and experiences. Knowledge Visualization has to question the
actual impact of visualizations across all methods.
Wolfgang Kienreich promotes Visual Analytics as
a way of managing the complex digital universe of
today’s knowledge and network society. Driven by the
closed loop of representation and interaction, he pleads
for analytical means for the masses.
Vedran Sabol sees Knowledge Visualization as the
most important stage of knowledge processes. In his
opinion, it not only provides fuel for reasoning but
operates at the highest level of abstraction, allowing
sound perspectives, effective decisions and valuable
synergies.
Martin Lindner introduces Visual Thinking as the
main trend of Enterprise 2.0. Whilst visual revolutions
are nothing new, we see new efforts to overcome the
failing cognitive model of objects and physical interaction, promoting collective thinking in the cloud.
What can be learned from all contributions is that
visualization improves communication, in particular
the interaction around cognitive processes. Knowledge
Visualization and Visual Thinking fabricate the necessary understanding of these processes because knowledge needs to be “seen”. If there is one common truth
contained in all eight perspectives, then it would be:
without successful and sustainable transfer, knowledge
is meaningless.
Beyond the diversity of visualization and of these
views, it becomes apparent how all eight contributions
(at least implicitly) emphasize a process-driven concept of visualization. The act of visualizing is more
important than the image itself: medium > message.
Stefan Bertschi

What is Knowledge Visualization?
By reading “only” eight opinions on Knowledge
Visualization, it seems difficult to find a unifying definition that says it all about Knowledge Visualization

335

[16] Burkhard R., Schneider C. and Meier M. (2009), The
ETH Value Lab and Two Software Tools for Knowledge Creation in Teams, Proceedings of the 13th International Conference Information Visualisation, Barcelona, 15-17 July 2009, Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press, 469-473.
[17] Eppler M. J. and Burkhard R. A. (2004), Knowledge
Visualization – Towards a New Discipline and its
Fields of Application, ICA Working Paper 2/2004, Institute for Corporate Communication, Università della
Svizzera italiana.
[18] Thomas J. J. and Cook K. A. (eds) (2005), Illuminating
the Path: The Research and Development Agenda for
Visual Analytics, Richland, WA: National Visualization and Analytics Center. http://nvac.pnl.gov/
agenda.stm.
[19] Keim D. A., Mansmann F., Oelke D. and Ziegler H.
(2008), Visual Analytics: Combining Automated Discovery with Interactive Visualizations, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, No 5255, Proceedings of the
11th International Conference Discovery Science, Budapest, 13-16 October 2008, 2-14.
[20] Fayyad U. M., Piatetsky-Shapiro G. and Smyth P.
(1996), From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, AI Magazine 17, 37-54.
[21] Gray D., Brown S. and Macanufo J. (2010), Gamestorming: A Playbook for Innovators, Rulebreakers,
and Changemakers, Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
[22] Roam D. (2008), The Back of the Napkin: Solving
Problems and Selling Ideas with Pictures, New York:
Portfolio.
[23] Brown S. (2011), The Miseducation of the Doodle, A
List Apart Magazine, 25 January, http://www.
alistapart.com/articles/the-miseducation-of-the-doodle.
[24] Eppler M. J. (2011), Change Images for the Head,
Heart and Hand: What Visual Thinking Can Do for
Change Communication. An Interview with Dave
Gray, OrganisationsEntwicklung 1/2011, 16-22.
[25] Morville P. (2010), Experience Maps: KM and Visual
Thinking, Presentation, http://www.slideshare.net/
morville/xmaps-upload.
[26] Johnson S. (2010), Where Good Ideas Come From:
The Natural History of Innovation, New York: Riverhead Books. Promotional video: http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=NugRZGDbPFU.
[27] Lengler R. and Eppler M. J. (2007), Towards A Periodic Table of Visualization Methods for Management,
Proceedings of the IASTED International Conference
on Graphics and Visualization in Engineering
(GVE’07), 83-88. http://www.visual-literacy.org/
periodic_table/periodic_table.html.
[28] Bresciani S. and Eppler M. J. (2008), The Risks of
Visualization: A Classification of Disadvantages Associated with Graphic Representations of Information,
ICA Working Paper 1/2008, Institute for Corporate
Communication, Università della Svizzera italiana.
[29] Davenport T. H. (2011), Rethinking Knowledge Work:
A Strategic Approach, McKinsey Quarterly, Number 1,
89-99.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

Swap W., Leonard D., Shields M. and Abrahams L.
(2001), Using Mentoring and Storytelling to Transfer
Knowledge in the Workplace, Journal of Management
Information Systems 18 (1), 95-114.
Burkhard R. (2005), Knowledge Visualization: The
Use of Complementary Visual Representations for the
Transfer of Knowledge – A Model, a Framework, and
Four New Approaches, D.Sc. thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH Zurich).
Wojtkowski W. and Wojtkowski W. G. (2002), Storytelling: Its Role in Information Visualization, ResSystemica 2, Proceedings of the Fifth European Systems Science Congress, Crete, 16-19 October 2002,
http://www.afscet.asso.fr/resSystemica/Crete02/Wojtk
owski.pdf.
Segel E. and Heer J. (2010), Narrative Visualization:
Telling Stories with Data, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16 (6), 1139-1148.
Schmitt G. (2009), Data Visualization is Reinventing
Online Storytelling – And Building Brands in Bits and
Bytes, AdvertisingAge, 19 March, http://adage.com/
digitalnext/post?article_id=135313.
Banissi E. et al. (eds) (2009), Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference Information Visualisation,
Barcelona, 15-17 July 2009, Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press.
Griggs J. (2010), Visualization Challenge: Prizewinning
Pictures,
NewScientist,
18
February,
http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn18548visualization-challenge-prizewinning-pictures.html.
Nesbit J. and Bradford M. (2010), Visualization Challenge 2009, Science 327, 19 February, 945-953.
Kay A. C. (1989), Predicting the Future, Stanford Engineering 1 (1), 1-6.
Paivio A. (1969), Mental Imagery in Associative
Learning and Memory, Psychological Review 76 (3),
241-263.
Keller T. and Tergan S.-O. (2005), Visualizing Knowledge and Information: An Introduction, In Tergan S.O. and Keller T. (eds), Knowledge and Information Visualization: Searching for Synergies, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Berlin: Springer, 1-23.
Chen C. (2010), Overview: Information Visualization,
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics 2 (4), 387-403.
Eppler M. J. and Burkhard R. (2006), Knowledge Visualization, In Schwartz D. G. (ed), Encyclopedia of
Knowledge Management, Hershey, PA: Idea Group
Reference, 551-560.
Thomas J. J. and Cook K. A. (2006), A Visual Analytics Agenda, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 26 (1), 10-13.
Bresciani S. and Eppler M. (2009), The Benefits of
Synchronous Collaborative Information Visualization:
Evidence from an Experimental Evaluation, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
15 (6), 1073-1080.

336

