2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

CoViz: cooperative visualization to facilitate sense making by groups of users
Bérenger Arnaud, Guillaume Artignan, Jérôme Cance, Gabriel Delmas, Mountaz Hascoët, Nancy Rodriguez
LIRMM, UMR 5506 CNRS
Univ. Montpellier II
Montpellier, France
{arnaud, artignan, mountaz, nancy.rodriguez}@lirmm.fr

Abstract
Coviz is a tool that uses visualization to
support spontaneous construction, organization and
exploration of collections. We use the term
collection to identify a set of documents gathered
for a given purpose by one or several individuals.
Coviz facilitates creation, organization and update
of collections by providing multi-scale visualization
and interaction techniques. Coviz has been tested in
several informative case studies involving small
groups of users. In these situations, Coviz has
fulfilled several important aspects of both groups
and personal organization needs. Our initial
experiments indicate that Coviz can even encourage
unusual and interesting forms of cooperation
among people.

collaborative sense making implies supporting very
challenging issues such as group decision making,
multiple search coordination, and merging of multiple
personal information spaces, organization styles, and
practices.
A key issue in organizing information spaces is to
find a way of conciliating both group and personal
perspectives that may differ widely. An interesting study
by Abrams and Baecker [4] investigated the ideal
organization of personal information spaces. Meanwhile,
a huge literature has investigated group information
organization. As noted by Halpin et al. [10] , “optimal
means by which to organize information often pits
formalized classification against distributed collaborative
tagging systems”. Group needs and especially
consistency and stability over time is well embodied in
formalized
classification
whereas
distributed
collaborative tagging systems are better suited to
personal organization needs such as reactivity,
spontaneity and rapidity. Our approach in Coviz consists
in trying to conciliate both group and personal
requirements for the organization of collections of
documents and collaborative sense making.
The major contribution of this paper consists in (1) a
transparent interaction model that combines different
visual analytics techniques to facilitate creation,
organization and update of collections and (2)
informative experiments of the use of Coviz in realworld situations.

Keywords--- Visualization, collaborative sense
making, spontaneous coordination.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years numerous research efforts
have been made to help people to search and organize
the information they have to handle every day. Web
search, web navigation, sense making, annotating,
organizing, recommending and sharing have all been
studied intensively. Advanced solutions have been
proposed for each of these information management
related activities. However, combining complementary
yet separated approaches in a transparent and seamless
way seems necessary to support knowledge emergence
and is still a challenging problem.
Our objective with Coviz is to provide a tool
supporting a broad range of information management
activities. Based on advanced interaction and
visualization techniques, Coviz integrates searching,
bookmarking, annotating, harvesting, recommending,
clustering, classification and sharing.
Coviz is designed for relatively small groups of
users involved in cooperative sense making from web
resources. Even though recent efforts have brought to the
scene tools that support for collaborative web search,
these approaches do not solve the problem of sense
making and even sometimes they increase its complexity
as noted by Paul and Morris [13] . Indeed, supporting
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.48

2. Coviz overview
Coviz handles textual data and metadata coming
from heterogeneous sources (search engine, harvesters,
personal web references, etc) and shared among a group
of users involved in information management related
tasks. Data handled in Coviz is mainly made of
documents, uniquely identified by URLs. Coviz
metadata is considered as a set of dimensions along
which Coviz data can be annotated. Coviz is limited to a
static set of dimensions to better focus on the design of
the appropriate user interface for cooperatively handling
several different dimensions. This has to be considered
as an initial step necessary to reduce the complexity of
the problem, but our longer term objective is to handle
any arbitrary set of dimensions to represent any relevant
metadata.
255

From the observation of user practices we have
determined which initial dimensions could be chosen as
mostly relevant. Amongst all possible dimensions, we
chose dimensions that suit the following requirements:
genericity,
discrimination
power,
orthogonality,
heterogeneity, simplicity and utility. The resulting set of
preliminary chosen dimensions is (1) tags, (2) people, (3)
collection, (4) quality ratings, (5) free text comments, (6)
document kind. These dimensions are generic enough
and were found useful for most data collections handled
in Coviz experiments. The dimensions are very different
in nature which makes them complementary to
adequately annotate the data.
Tags can be seen as flat lists, or can be organized as
hierarchies. Since all users handle their own tags
personally, Coviz is designed to handle a set of
hierarchies along which data can be annotated. This

People dimension is simpler since it is represented
by a flat list of nominal values consisting of the name of
commentators or authors referenced in the system.
Quality rating is a simple single-valued numerical
dimension.
Free-text comment is a single-valued unstructured
text dimension similar to description or people
comments.
Document kind is a single valued categorical
dimension similar to the content-type of mime metadata
but while mime content-type describes low-level
categories of documents, Coviz types of documents are
higher-level categories such as research paper, talk,
course, thesis, etc. As with other dimensions, the purpose
of this dimension is to meet the requirements above for
supporting the design of the user interface and in term to
be replaceable by any other categorical dimension.

Figure 1: Coviz visualization and interaction window

dimension is also interesting because it is a multi-valued
dimension. Several tags can be associated explicitly with
documents or can be implicitly deduced. As a result the
tag dimension is both multi-hierarchical and multivalued.

Collection name can be considered as a multivalued dimension that aims at providing direct access to
the documents contained in collections. This dimension
can be considered as an articulation or transversal
dimension used to make it possible to support reuse of
browsing results and combination of faceted browsing
with other types of information gathering. The specificity

256

Another important issue with faceted browsing is the
exploration of the interrelations between dimensions.
This type of exploration is quasi impossible for a user
given the default user interfaces, like those found on
most faceted based web site, for example. Rarely cited in
the literature this apparently minor problem has, in fact,
significant and negative impact on both exploration of
data and overall sense making from it. Indeed, missing
cues about how values are distributed and related across
dimensions in a given data set constitutes a real
hindrance in understanding what the content of a
collection is. We call this problem the lack of metadata
insight.
We have addressed the lack of metadata insight by
combining two different modes of faceted browsing in
Coviz. The first mode is similar to the default mode
where the selection of items in the fisheye list views of
dimension values filters the data in the document view
(cf.Figure1) the item selected are displayed in purple.
The selection of items on different dimensions is
interpreted as a conjunction of disjunction when the
dimensions are multi-valued and a simple conjunction
when they are single-valued. We call this mode the
selective mode that directly filters the data.
The second mode of browsing is called the highlight
mode and was design to address the lack of metadata
insight problem. It consists in highlighting related values
in all dimensions when the user moves over items in the
fisheye list. For example, if the mouse goes over a
specific collection in the fisheye list displaying
collections, all the tags found in the data of that
collection will be highlighted in the fisheye list
displaying tags whatever other selected criterions. As for
tags, all other values appearing in the data will be
highlighted in the other fisheye lists displaying other
dimensions. This highlighting can be seen as a very
simple type of brushing and was found so useful by users
that one user asked to save these highlights. Enriching
interaction in order to capture dynamic highlighting and
transform it into a selection is in the roadmap of our
future work.

of this dimension can be formally presented. First, let’s
recall how a set of data is defined. By extension it
consists in enumerating the items in the data set. By
intension it consists in exhibiting the set of features
which are shared by the data contained in that set and
that are sufficient to identify it. The specificity of the
dimension collection is that it helps to define subsets of
data both in extension, and in intension, whereas all other
dimensions can only retrieve sets in intension. The
experiments showed that this dimension was very useful
for a user eager to merge subsets of “manually” selected
documents with otherwise intentionally defined
collections.

3. Graphical coding in Coviz
The visual representation of document is based on
the graphical encoding of a multivariate clustered graph
[3] . Nodes represent the Coviz documents, and edges
represent a similarity relation between documents. Each
node contains the following attributes: an identifier, a
title, a URL, a date of insertion and a date of
modification.
Edges are computed from the similarity between
nodes – e.g. documents. Document are represented in a
vector space using Term Frequency (TF) and Inverse
Document Frequency (IDF) [13] to compute their
coordinates in that space. TF corresponds to the
frequency of apparition of a word in the document. IDF
correspond to the frequency of apparition of a word in
the entire corpus of documents. The TF-IDF measure
corresponds to the ratio of these two measures. A
Pearson’s correlation is further computed between
vectors representing documents in order to compute their
similarity [14] .
Graphically, documents are represented by
thumbnails. Links are represented by lines between
documents. The more the color is opaque and the more
similar are the documents. Links between documents are
visible on mouse over. A bubble shape surrounding the
documents represents the clusters. Mouse allows direct
actions on documents while keys shortcuts help
supporting interaction for sets.
The graphical encoding is further implemented using
STOOG [3] , a graphical graph drawing API. The main
originality of STOOG is the explicit declaration of style
sheets for graph visualization. Fig. 1 illustrates the
resultant visualization of documents in Coviz.

5. Multi-scale visualization and clustering
Two kinds of clustering are proposed in Coviz, the
interactive clustering and the automatic clustering.
The interactive clustering consists in letting the
user construct its own clusters of documents. The
documents must be selected from one or several groups.
The selection is the result of a search or a manual
selection. Fig.3 presents a sample of selection. The
documents colored in blue, red and green are
respectively in three selection groups. The execution of
the clustering could transform these three groups of
selection in three clusters. A cluster is considered as an
element which can be moved or removed.
The automatic clustering takes the graph of
documents and returns the clustered graph. We use the
MCL algorithm [5] for clustering our weighted graph.

4. Tightly coupled fisheye lists for faceted
metadata browsing
One important issue with faceted browsing [11] is
the curse of dimensionality [7] . Coviz addresses this
problem in three complementary ways: (1) a
visualization of dimension values combined with
advanced browsing and multi-level scrolling, (2) multiscale visualization of documents, collections and
relations and (3) tight coupling between (1) and (2).

257

The algorithm is based on Markov chains and random
walks [5] .

option is also costly because it requires processing each
time a tag is selected. Finally, we choose the first option
that favors fast response for visualization and data
scaling.

6. Architecture and implementation
Coviz system is implemented with Web
technologies. The system is composed by (1) a server
which providing services data storage, generation of
dynamic pages and extra computation, and (2) a client
part supporting visualization and interaction. In this
section we present the system architectures and our
implementation choices.

7. Experiments and lessons learned
We have experimented Coviz in two different
contexts: (1) a research project involving approximately
20 persons including researchers, engineers, designers,
and PhD students, (2) a entire class of 30 undergraduate
students. We describe the context, the objectives, the
problems and lessons learned in this section.
In the first experiment, Coviz was used as an
experimental tool and our objective was mainly to test
very different user interfaces to best suit user needs.
Several prototypes of the user interface based mainly on
hierarchical list displays were initially designed to
support sense making related tasks in a collection of
documents coming from the social science community.
These preliminary user interfaces were favored by people
that were exposed to them, over alternative designs
found in more popular systems. However, we found
these preliminary user interfaces very frustrating because
it did not meet two objectives: (1) a fast and fluid way to
interact both at the item level and at the collection level
and (2) a good way to conciliate visualization and
interaction for groups and visualization and interaction
for individuals. Clearly, even with advanced drag-anddrop based interaction, hierarchically displayed lists were
far from meeting the challenges of handling both items
and collections in a fluid interaction model. Secondly,
another frustration came from the current state of the art
of most frequently used default roles found in social
systems that determine who is entitled to
create/edit/delete what resource. Models that are based
mainly on permission rights appeared as a real breaking
point for the emergence of any significant spontaneous,
fluid and cooperative interaction model useful for
collaborative sense making related tasks.
Concerning the challenges of the visualization of
both items and large collections, we designed the last
version of Coviz (cf.Figure1) by combining of (1) graph
visualization, (2) cluster visualization, (3) faceted
browsing and (4) fisheye lists displays. This last version
was used successfully and was way closer to meet the
requirements we had than previous ones. However, it
was obvious from usage that it still suffers from minor
usability pitfalls mostly due to technological limitations
and easy to fix in the future versions. Another lesson was
learned from this experiment with the last version. The
experiment raised interesting questions about the direct
manipulation model of faceted based browsing. The
combination of fisheye list display, multi-grain scrolling,
highlighting and selecting modes of faceted browsing
and the coupled graph based visualization was found to
support fluid interaction pretty well according to our
criteria. However, several filtering interaction strategies
were tested and more experiments would be useful to

Architecture
The server has three components: database, web
server and application server. The database enables data
storage such as online documents, user account and tag
hierarchies. It can be queried using the SQL relational
language. The Web server provides generation of HTML
pages and connection to database by the means of PHP
language. The application server provides thumbnail
generation and computes all necessary transformations
on the data. This second server is powered over Java.
Results are cached in database for future queries.

Figure 2: Overview of Coviz architecture

The client part consists mainly of HTML pages
which is enough to do basic interaction and visualization.
To avoid the basic limitation, web pages embedded two
rich internet applications: (1) Flash modules, written
with Adobe Flex language, for tag handling, and (2) a
Java Applet for the multi-scale visualization of
documents.
The figure 2.a presents the server architecture and
2.b the client architecture.
Implementation choices
Given the architecture properties, we made choices
for implementing the user-oriented folksonomy approach
and for keeping the user-centered context. Our choices
impact features such as tags and documents meta-data.
An important issue concerns implicit tagging
mechanism implementation, extracted from explicit
tagging and sharing. We consider two options: (1)
physically storing implicit tags or (2) computing implicit
tag on-the-fly. The first option requires checking implicit
tag integrity each time a tag is updated. The second

258

collaborative tagging systems, recommendation systems
[1] , etc. These research efforts have mainly focused on
providing either the analysis of used systems and design
recommendations for the next generation or systems that
perform collaborative information and knowledge related
tasks. Our focus in Coviz is very different from those
approaches as our aim is to provide a transparent,
consistent and flexible user interface that can handle
most information or knowledge management tasks in a
consistent and spontaneous way. As a consequence,
Coviz features in terms of search features, bookmarking
services or data analysis are minimal. At the same time,
our experience with the inconsistency between systems
that perform best in each area is maximal and the focus
of Coviz is to help with conciliating the different
approaches.

adjust those strategies to better suits personal and group
needs.
This version of Coviz was experimented to support
resource gathering and annotating in a class. For this
second experiment, students were undergrads and Coviz
has provided help to them with their last and most
important assignment. For this assignment students had
to work in a both cooperative and competitive mode. The
competitive mode was that they were asked to work by
groups of two and each group had to perform the same
project. The project consisted in creating a 3Dinteractive
and graphic scene involving visual representations of
Nao, a humanoid from Aldebaran [9] and reproducing in
a virtual scene all the moves that Nao could perform for
real. The cooperative mode consisted in using Coviz to
gather and annotate all the resources necessary to
achieve the projects. We made it clear from the
beginning that both the administration and usage of
Coviz were open to all students. Any student could
add/remove/edit any resource. The only two simple
guidelines were announced before they started: (1) if the
system breaks you are all responsible and will have to fix
it and (2) only high quality resources should be included
and individuals are responsible for the quality of the
resource they include in the system.
By using Coviz, and these very simple indications,
the 30 students made an impressive job at collectively
gathering high quality resources very rapidly. There was
an impressive diversity in the ways that lead different
students to different high quality resources. In less than
one hour, a set of very highly relevant resources were
collected and made available for all students at once. Our
experiment with using other approaches in other classes
is that this collaborative resource gathering takes several
weeks without ever reaching that level of quality. This
result was very encouraging and even beyond our initial
expectations. Based on students comments and
observations our speculation is that the next important
step is to investigate how the editing and scaling factors
should be adjusted. Indeed, one important problem was
that no student dared comment the resources of the
others. They spoke about them but did not write about
them. We speculate that this is because the annotation
tool was too formal and definitive to suit the need for
politeness or solidarity among students. One student
suggested that a forum be associated with Coviz so that
casual discussion about the resources can be separated
from the set of annotated resources.

Figure 3: Clustering of data using Coviz

Faroog et al. [6] have analyzed two years of
CiteUlike data and proposed 6 metrics for a better
understanding of tagging behaviors. Their results
indicate that (1) the number of tags used in CiteUlike is
consistently growing as well as the number of new users.
This model of tag growth is exactly the opposite of the
results found by Marlow and David reporting a study
with Flickr data. With Flickr data, tag growth is
diminishing as time goes by. One speculation to
conciliate these contradictory results is that tag growth is
a consequence of growth of new users. This explanation
would be consistent with the well-known vocabulary
problem [8] , which states that the probability that two
different users use the same label to describe the same
concept is very low. The study of Farooq et al. brings to
the scene very interesting questions and ends with
recommendations for the next generation of social
tagging systems. One of them is to facilitate tag reuse
and our own study of user behavior corroborates this
finding, so our approach in Coviz accounted for this
recommendation carefully. Farooq et al. also insisted on
recommending tags that are informationally powerful –
e.g. with a high discrimination power and a high level of
non-obviousness [6] . We found this recommendation
more debatable considering our observations of users at

8. Related work
Knowledge emergence from social networks
The emergence of knowledge from social networks
either directly or after analysis is a very active field of
research and has gained popularity with the apparition of
social web sites such as Delicious, CiteUlike or others. In
this area, systems, algorithms and studies have been
proposed in a variety of domains including collaborative
web search[7] , collaborative sense making [13]

259

for fruitful cooperation. The variety of alternative models
that have been proposed so far is probably a good
indicator of both the need for a change and the size of the
challenge to find the next model.

work and their tagging motivations. We speculate that
such a strategy would only result in creating a scale free
network e.g. the distribution of tag usage would be a
stabilized power law similar to what can be found in
[10] . Our experiment in designing Coviz showed the
importance of conciliating two conflicting usages of tags:
the personal and the group perspectives. Conciliation of
personal and group perspectives is achieved by
supporting tag sharing over multiple personal tag
hierarchies.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Benoit, Antoine, Paul and all the
people that provide fruitful comments and help in
achieving this project. This work is partially funded by
the TGE Adonis, from the French national research
funding programs. Avec le Soutien du TGE Adonis.

Social bookmarking and tagging systems
Social bookmarking principle can be described by a
tripartite graph composed of users, bookmarks and web
resources and links between those elements.
Since tagging in social bookmarking systems is
central and has been extensively studied. Tagging is also
included in every document oriented application, in
which it is usually considered as one among others
metadata. In [12] , three kinds of tagging are suggested
(1) blind tagging where users do not know others user’s
tags, (2) visible tagging where the user can see the others
user’s tags and (3) suggested tagging where the system
proposes tags to the user.
However, current social bookmarking systems have
some important limitations. The vocabulary problem is
one of them and was mentioned previously in this paper.
Disambiguating tags when polysemic tags are used is
another well-known challenging problem. Collaborative
construction of consistent tag hierarchies to improve
Folksonomies or tag-based ontologies is also very
preliminary and often considered as an open issue [16] .
While most of the proposed approaches focus on
system support of tag processing, our approach in Coviz
is to integrate these processes in a visual system and to
focus on interaction and cooperation among users. By
first letting users construct their individual hierarchies of
tags, shared hierarchies are further created progressively
from individual ones. A direct benefit of our approach is
to avoid the vocabulary problem since users can keep
their own vocabulary, and share it explicitly with others
while preserving the control over sharing processes.
Similarly, multi-lingual tagging, as well as the polysemy
problem can benefit from this visual analytics approach
and the combination of interaction, visualization and
automatic processing.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

9. Conclusion
[13]

In this paper we have presented Coviz, a system to
collaboratively visualize and interact with collections.
We have reported lessons learned from real case studies
that have shown that the combination of visualization
and advanced interaction techniques was a difficult yet
fruitful approach to collaborative sense making
challenges. The experiments have also shown that
meeting these challenges requires a deeper analysis and
re-design of models of human cooperation that
determines how people share things. Most frequent
permission rights based models are clearly not suitable

[14]

[15]

[16]

260

Adomavicius, G.; Tuzhilin, A. "Toward the Next Generation of
Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and
Possible Extensions", IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering 17 (6): 734–749, 2005.
Amershi, S. and Morris, M.R. CoSearch: A System for Colocated Collaborative Web Search. Proceedings of ACM CHI,
ACMPress 2008.
Artignan, G., Hascoët, M.: STOOG - Style-Sheets-based Toolkit
for Graph Visualization. ICEIS'10, Portugal. 2010.
David Abrams, Ron Baecker, and Mark Chignell. 1998.
Information archiving with bookmarks: personal Web space
construction and organization. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI '98).
Dongen, S. V. Graph Clustering by Flow Simulation. PhD
thesis, University of Utrecht. 2000.
Farooq, U., Kannampallil, T. G., Song, Y., Ganoe, C. H.,
Carroll, J. M., and Giles, L. 2007. Evaluating tagging behavior
in social bookmarking systems: metrics and design heuristics. In
Proceedings of the 2007 international ACM GROUP '07, 351360, 2007.
Freyne, J. and Smyth, B. Cooperating search communities. In
Proc. Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems
2006, 1--10.
Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T. K., Gomez, L. M., and Dumais, S.
T. The vocabulary problem in human-system communication.
Commun. ACM 30, 11 1987.
Gouaillier David, Hugel Vincent, Blazevic Pierre, Kilner Chris,
Monceaux Jérôme, Lafourcade Pascal, Marnier Brice, Serre
Julien, Maisonnier Bruno: Mechatronic design of NAO
humanoid. ICRA 2009
Halpin, H., Robu, V., and Shepherd, H. The complex dynamics
of collaborative tagging. WWW '07. ACM, New York, NY,
211-220. 2007.
Ka-Ping Yee, Kirsten Swearingen, Kevin Li, and Marti Hearst.
Faceted metadata for image search and browsing. CHI '03.
ACM, 2003
Marlow, C., Naaman, M., Boyd, D., and Davis, M. HT06,
tagging paper, taxonomy, Flickr, academic article, to read. In
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Hypertext and
Hypermedia (Odense, Denmark, August 22 - 25, 2006).
HYPERTEXT '06. ACM, 2006
Paul, S.A., and Morris, M.R. (2009). CoSense: Enhancing
Sensemaking for Collaborative Web Search. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
2009), Boston, MA.
Pearson, K. Mathematical contributions to the theory of
evolution. Regression, heredity and panmixia. Philos. Trans.
Roy. Soc. London Ser. 1896.
Sparck Jones, K. A statistical interpretation of term specificity
and its application in retrieval. In Document Retrieval Systems.
P. Willett, Ed. Taylor Graham Series In Foundations Of
Information Science.1988
Wu, X., Zhang, L., and Yu, Y. 2006. Exploring social
annotations for the semantic web. WWW '06. ACM, 2006

