2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Some Drivers towards 3D Digital Master-plan Visualisation in the UK

John Counsell,
Cardiff School of Art and Design, University of Wales Institute Cardiff
{JCounsell@uwic.ac.uk}
quality.”[1] It is argued that English planning departments
will need to move towards implementing 3D Planning
constraint exploration tools and standards for which they have
little experience. In German planning in particular there have
been many initiatives that point the way towards standards for
masterplan visualisation. Many cities have 3D digital models,
and there is a move to standardising these models using
CityGML. SmartCodes in the US indicate a similar approach
for regulatory checking.
This paper discusses in particular the XPlanung EGovernment project, and CityGML, as well as SMARTcodes
and automated compliance checking. The Localism Bill is
likely also to require substantial inclusive consultation and
collaboration with neighbourhood groups. Tools for inclusive
collaborative engagement in the context of 3D digital
visualisation of planning proposals were trialled in the VEPs
Interreg IIIB project described below. The paper concludes by
predicting that a combination of such standards, smart codes,
and collaborative commenting tools will become necessary to
cope with the demand.

Abstract
Master-planning in general, more particularly 3D
interpretative visualisation of Master-plans, has not been the
norm in the UK planning process. However the advent of the
new Localism Bill, proceeding through the UK parliament,
gives some indication that these will become much more
common in English practice. It is argued that English
planning departments will need to move towards
implementing 3D Planning constraint exploration tools and
standards for which they have little experience. In German
planning in particular there have been many initiatives that
point the way towards standards for masterplan
visualisation. SmartCodes in the US indicate a similar
approach for regulatory checking.
The Localism Bill is likely also to require substantial
inclusive consultation and collaboration with neighbourhood
groups. Tools for inclusive collaborative engagement were
trialled in the VEPs Interreg IIIB project. This paper predicts
that the combination of these or similar approaches will
become necessary to cope with the demand.

2. Background and Context
The UK coalition Government introduced the Localism
Bill into Parliament on 13 December 2010. Among its
ambitions is that it will introduce “reform to make the
planning system clearer, more democratic and more
effective”. [2] “Instead of local people being told what to do,
the Government thinks that local communities should have
genuine opportunities to influence the future of the places
where they live.
The Bill will introduce a new right for communities to
draw up a “neighbourhood development plan.”..”These
neighbourhood development plans could be very simple, or go
into considerable detail where people want.”[2] The Bill’s
provisions include that these neighbourhood plans “would be
approved if they received 50% of the votes cast in a
referendum”. [3] Local Authority Planning Departments are
likely to be required to facilitate a local pressure group
seeking to implement such a plan.
To this end a
“Neighbourhood Planning Vanguards scheme” is being
trialled in advance of the Bill becoming law. [4] The
minimum size of such a neighbourhood group was discussed
in Parliament as perhaps about 20 persons. A neighbourhood

1. Introduction
Over the past few years the rise of Information Masterplanning in general, more particularly 3D interpretative
visualisation of Master-plans, has not been the norm in the
UK planning process. However the advent of the new
Localism Bill, proceeding through the UK parliament, gives
some indication that these will become much more common
in English practice. The Minister, Greg Clark said that the
Government wants “to restore the reputation of planning as a
service that works for the public, and that the public feel is on
their side. Instead of being principally a means of arbitrating
disputes, it should be a positive process, where people come
together and agree a vision for the future of the place where
they live…. we want to create more options for local
communities to exercise influence in the planning process.
Neighbourhood planning will let people come together at
a very local level and decide, together, where the new homes,
shops and businesses should go, and what they should look
like. The local authority will provide technical support so that
the proposals that local people draw up are of decent technical
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.81

552

itself was thought to be possibly smaller or larger than or in
the region of an electoral ward.
Master-planning has been a feature of selected key
developments in the UK for many years, at times at City level,
at times for a specific key site. For example in 1945 the
projected outcomes of the Manchester City plan were
illustrated in three dimensions. More recently in Birmingham
the Brindley Place development was visualised during the
lengthy planning negotiations. However master-planning in
general, and 3D interpretation in particular have not been the
norm.[5]
In Germany by contrast the statutory plan at local level is
the Bebauungsplan (B-Plan), a plan which contains legally
binding designations, drawn up to a scale of 1:5,000 or
1:1,000, regarding the proposed development and structure,
and consequently it provides the basis for other measures
required to allow planning to proceed. [6] In many cases the
B-Plan contains sufficiently clear definition of the constraints
in all three dimensions that it can in fact be visualised in three
dimensions, showing massing and form and potential
footprint. Similar detail can be derived in 3D from the French
regulatory Plan Local d’Urbanisme (PLU) where these have
been completed. [7]
The Virtual Environmental Planning system (VEPs) was
an Interreg IIIB NWE funded project, with additional funding
from the UK government to the UK partners, which ran from
2005 to mid-2008. [8] The project proposed an alternative
approach to planning consultation by allowing people to view
and leave comments about planning developments using 3D
visualisation software in a web browser, within the context of
an existing landscape or cityscape. It was held that comments
could be as broad ranging as alternative planning proposals to
instigate discussion, illustrate a point, or demonstrate a
superior approach.
Some of the Case Study applications in the UK, Germany
and France focused on a top-down authoritative delivery of
information about the proposal (described later as 1 way
access), together with at best the collation of comments to
inform the decision makers. However the tools developed did
not per se have this limitation and could be used by grass
roots pressure groups. (It has been predicted [and some fear
that] that the Localism Bill will open the flood gates to such
pressure groups!) Thus the project also focused on easing the
task of creating and comparing 3D modelling of proposals
that do not already exist, within the bounds of an existing
context. To this end both data about the proposals and intent
were required and the tools then allowed modelling by any
user to be created within the designated zone and in the
context of the varying height of a 3D Digital Terrain Model
(DTM). The consequent possibility of multiple alternatives
was handled by version management.

major area of application. However research now indicates
that recent moves towards computer generated visualisation
models reflect the acknowledgement that conventional
techniques fail to communicate environmental information
either effectively or clearly. Pietch argues that with
“increasing participation of non-design professionals such as
elected council members and members of the public, the
demand is there for a better communication medium than
conventional 2D drawings”. [9]
In the 2006 IV Paper on the VEPS project we held that the
importance of visualisation is being recognised as crucial for
almost all environmental and planning professionals who need
to represent, communicate and evaluate design ideas and
planning proposals. [10] According to Sawczuk “the design
and planning process revolves around client’s needs and
therefore the client should be part of the team…” [11] It is
thus significant that his findings revealed that while skilled
participants appreciate traditional media, such as outline
drawings, unskilled participants prefer more photographic
representation. Similarly, it has been reported that when laypeople are exposed to architects’ drawings the “plans had
little meaning as the people could not understand what was
represented”.[12]
Some research suggests that threedimensional and interactive computer visualisation (based on
using 3D VRML in research into community based 'Planning
for Real') is one of the “most important developments in
visual communication for urban planning and urban design
since the development plan”. [13][14]
There have been a number of initiatives in the UK to place
planning application information in the public domain on line
as part of a move to more transparent government. The UK
Central Government has now started actively to seek ways to
improve both the planning process in general and public
participation in that process, since its e-Planning Blueprint,
published in August 2004.[15][17] Among the resulting
initiatives were the national PARSOL (Planning and
Regulatory Services Online) project, a range of ‘Pathfinder’
projects and the Implementing e-Government (IeG) initiative.
The main focus of these initiatives was to develop a set of
toolkits, standards and ‘demonstrator’ projects with the aim of
assisting planning authorities to implement e-Planning in
forms that citizens will both comprehend and use in their
dealings with the councils. New online planning portals aimed
to introduce partnership working, bringing together planning,
building control and licensing services.
Yet in several of the UK case study applications
undertaken during the VEPs project it proved difficult to
obtain digital data that shows the proposals, even in plan
form. Despite the initiatives referred to above the approach
taken most of the time to uploading planning applications to
these new portals still remains the digital equivalent of paper,
often PDF format, plans and elevations, but no 3D. In many
instances the documents clearly state that they are not to scale.
In others the scanning process has altered any original scale
that the plans might possess, and there is not quality assurance
to avoid dimensional shrinkage that is different in different
axes. In these cases it takes some time and significant trial
and error to rubber sheet stretch the proposed plan to fit as an
overlay on the existing. Without this plan data it is difficult to

3. Public Visualisation of Planning
Architectural practice has been greatly influenced by
computer technologies such as computer-aided design (CAD)
software packages. Similarly planning practice has been
influenced by Geographic Information Systems (GIS) that
have been extensively developed with urban planning as a

553

binding planning process, more along the lines of virtual
‘planning for real’. The VEPs tools did restrict exploration to
within the development site boundary, but did not encompass
other likely constraints such as height, position on plot,
materials. In this respect work within the XPlanung EGovernment project by Stuttgart Technical University
[23][26] provides a useful indicator as to how an exploratory
3D planning constraint tool might work. For such tools to
work comprehensively there need to be standards for the
underlying description of the planning constraints.
The XPlanung approach offers promise, although it does
not perhaps go as far in terms of materials and colour
constraints as is promised to neighbourhood groups in the
Localism Bill. In addition the tools need to work within the
constraints of the existing context, including existing
buildings, that is not part of the proposed area for change, and
cannot therefore be modified. In this respect the German
CityGML initiative [24] appears to point the way to a
promising standard. However these standards do not in
themselves include a facility for digital commentary by those
participating. This perhaps is the other significant contribution
of the VEPs project, the prototype Comment Mark-Up
Language (COML) standard.
So the question remains as to where this leaves those who
wish to comment on the emerging master plan for an area or a
specific proposal, and perhaps suggest modifications or
alternatives. The VEPs e-Planner tools were developed partly
in response to this. These tools offered the ability to set a
boundary only within which new buildings can be digitised or
existing buildings ‘modified’ or ‘deleted’ allows a focus to be
kept on a specific redevelopment site or area. Users could
interactively sketch in new buildings or download template
buildings from libraries. The system allowed those with
administrator rights to upload new layers and overlays into the
scene over the aerial photo. These could be the draped plan
proposal, to serve as a context for discussion and digitising
and debating new massing. The evaluation showed that these
tools were still not sufficiently intuitive for many users. It
remained apparent that any system analogous to CAD is likely
to require some conceptual grasp and understanding or skill in
the user.

model the proposals or to fully address the visual and massing
implications, even with toolsets such as VEPs e-Planner or
traditional CAD.
The VEPs project also argued that many people find it
difficult to: access and comment on planning proposals during
office hours; visualise what a proposed planning development
will look like from looking at two-dimensional plans only;
understand how planning decisions are made and how their
comments are taken into account during the decision-making
process. The software developed by VEPs was intended to
overcome these difficulties. It allowed users to freely explore
and interact with 3D models and make comments directly via
an online system, which could be accessed from their 'home'
PC over a 'normal' broadband connection at any time. Anyone
accessing the web applications would be able to view & share
comments online. The technical and 3D visual aspects of
VEPs were presented at IVO5, IV06 and IV07
[6][15][16][25][18][19] and the evaluation outcomes at IV09.
[20]

4. Resources and Tools
This paper argues that among the likely implications and
intent of the Localism Bill is that Master-planning akin at
least to the B-Plan or PLU will become much more common
in England. Consequently Local Authority Planning
Departments will be under pressure to acquire the expertise to
facilitate this process effectively, and that in turn will require
more digital engagement with the public, along the lines
forecast by the VEPs project. It is also suggested that the 3D
expression of Master-plans as implemented in some instances
in Germany and France are a similar interpretation that is
useful for informing discussion.
At a 2006 Workshop [21] entitled ‘Preserving Our Past’
was held by various UK research councils (AHRC, EPSRC,
ESRC, NERC) together with English Heritage. In its 3rd
Theme of ‘Engagement and Interpretation’ the crossdisciplinary experts present confirmed the continuing need for
research to: move away from the concept of access (1-way) to
participation / inclusion (2-way); and embrace social
inclusion, interpretation, storytelling, authenticity, and
interactive design.
Interpretative ‘visions’ of how a master plan might
develop in practice are useful for provoking discussion. But
this tends (due to the expertise required to use the tools and
develop the illustrations) to be a one way communication
from planners to the public, the approach critiqued as ‘access’
above! Planning for Real, and similar approaches to
community engagement such as those implemented by the
Princes Foundation ‘Enquiry by Design’ process, require
significant facilitation by trained staff physically present with
the community group. [22] This is highly resource intensive.
In straightened circumstances Planning Departments in the
UK are unlikely to have these resources available for many
schemes.
The VEPs project explored in various case studies and
with its partner Groundwork in particular the facility for
neighbourhood groups to digitally explore the range of
possible outcomes that could emanate from the legally

5. XplanGML expressed in 3D
“XPlanGML is being developed for loss-free exchanges
among IT systems of zoning plans, regional plans, and land
use plans, which supports internet-based availability of plans,
and allows evaluation and visualization of the contents of
different plans.” [23] Coors et al within this project
developed an interface that read the maxima and minima of
each parameter from the XPlanGML data and expressed it as
an interactive 3D visualisation, with sliders to modify the
proposed building form and footprint within the set
parameters. [26] This approach requires interactive parametric
objects. These are commonplace in recent architectural CAD
programs, however use within a 3D master plan context may
require specific libraries of downloadable or web based
parametric objects suited to urban planning, such as dwellings

554

the information necessary to assess compliance.” The
approach has been tested in software case studies in the USA.
Due partly to a desire to address climate change
performance issues in the UK at the time of applying for
planning approval, performance previously measured at a
later building regulation approval stage are now increasingly
checked at the earlier stage. There is therefore a convergence
in the UK between planning and building performance
regulation. Thus although a master-plan implementation
would perhaps focus more on mass, form, height, position, in
principle it could be similarly coded as minimal and maximal
regulatory constraints. Some of the performance
characteristics checked in the SMARTCodes project via
building regulation would in fact need to be checked at this
earlier stage. Compliance could be checked in the same
manner.

trees and landscape features. Such libraries would also need to
be customisable to suit local cultural variations and habitats.

6. CityGML as an emerging standard
CityGML defines 4 levels of detail for City
Modelling.[28] The headings underlined on Levels of Detail
(LOD) below are summarised from the more detailed
description in ‘Appraisal of standards for 3D City
Models’.[24]
•
LoD 0: Regional model (2.5D) contains only the
DTM with Texture or Orthophoto. (See Image 1)
•
LoD 1: A simple city model where buildings are
modeled as blocks with flat roofs.
•
LoD 2: A City model with roof shapes and textures
for buildings and terrain, and with vegetation.
Freiburg University, one of the partners in the VEPs
project have had significant success in automatically
generating roof morphology from a LiDAR dataset. There
remain limitations due to occlusion by overhanging or
masking elements, together with complications of internal
courtyards.
•
LoD 3: This LoD includes highly differentiated,
architectural models of buildings, Vegetation, and street
furniture.
•
LoD 4: Model of the interior of buildings, which
includes constructive elements and openings such as windows
and doors.

Figure 1 Xplan Constraint Based Model [22]
An alternative approach that is currently perhaps not quite
so interactive is the US International Code Council
SMARTcodes project, facilitated by British consultants
AEC3.[27] They state that “the actual rules against which
submissions will be checked can be automatically generated
directly from the code mark-up. In fact, what results is a
'requirements model' that is captured in the form of a series of
constraints”. They state that the vision for the project is that
“IFC based submissions from architects, engineers,
contractors or others that are regulated should be able to be
automatically checked for code compliance using computer
systems before submission to building regulatory authorities.
Within the terminology of the SMARTcodes development, an
IFC file representing the building model is considered to be a

7. Comment Markup Language (COML)
The international partners in the VEPs project extensively
debated how best to support tagging and commentary, leading
to formulation of a standardised approach implemented across
a range of prototypes termed COML. [29][30] Schill et al
described COML as including geospatial comments that
included “distinct types of comments: Comments that are
attached to an object, comments that are attached to a view,
and comments that are attached to the consultation as a whole
(this is a special case of a "view comment).”
For example the requirements of the ‘object’ comment
could be met as follows. “When the user navigates the 3D
scene and wants to add an "object comment" (i.e. a comment
attached to a specific object like a building), a ray tracing
algorithm calculates the point of interest (the point where the
ray from the camera intersects the surface of the object). This

Figure 2 VEPs Frome Bare Earth DTM LOD0
'solutions model'. The intent is to test it against the
SMARTcodes derived 'requirements model' and identify any
conflicts or areas where the building model does not contain

555

is the point geometry of the comment, the Point of Interest.
The "direction of view" (DOV) is stored from the Point of
Camera’s point of view in yaw, pitch, distance, angle of view
(roll is unnecessary..) Also the position of the POC is stored
in real world coordinates. Most clients will use their own local
coordinate system, so when loading a comment from the
WFS, the client has to transform the position of the camera
(POC - point of camera) and the PO1 from real world
coordinates (e.g. epsg:4326) to the local coordinates of the
virtual reality model, which uses a computer graphics
coordinate system.” [29]
In addition consensus was reached by the project partners
that it should more broadly apply not only to tagging objects
(CAD-like, so that selecting one or more objects invoked the
comments or vice versa), and to comments associated with
viewpoints making possible narrative sequences; but also
encompass comments in the form of additions to or
suppressions of parts of the model itself, enabling
interventions and alternative proposals to be ‘comments’ as
well.

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

8. Conclusion
The VEPs project was predicated on the basis that many
people find it difficult to: access and comment on planning
proposals during office hours; visualise what a proposed
planning development will look like from looking at twodimensional plans only; understand how planning decisions
are made and how their comments are taken into account
during the decision-making process.
This paper has thus argued that a highly probable outcome
of the new Localism Bill is that much more ‘Master-planning’
will be required. Devolution means that the Localism Bill will
not necessarily have such an immediate effect in Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland, but it is predicted by the
Coalition Government to have a major impact on the nature of
planning in England, and thus on the bulk of the UK
population.
Due to decreasing resources in all sectors of local
government Planning Departments are already limited in
resources. Current models of community engagement in
planning at this stage are it is argued resource intensive. It has
been suggested that the likely solution is that digital tools and
3D Visualisation and interpretation will be part of the
solution. The models for those tools are likely to follow the
leadership of Xplanung, CityGML, SMARTCodes and
COML.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Acknowledgements

[17]

The VEPS project work presented in this paper was cofinanced through the INTERREG IIIB North West Europe
programme.

References
[1]

[18]

G. Clark speech to Adam Smith Institute 2/2/2011
http://www.communities.gov.uk/speeches/newsroom/plannin
ggrowth accessed 1May 2011

556

A plain English guide to the Localism Bill available at
http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/localgovernment/
pdf/1818597.pdf accessed 1 May 2011.
http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2010-11/localism.html
accessed 1 May 2011
www.communities.gov.uk/planningandbuilding/planningsyste
m/neighbourhoodplanningvanguards/ accessed 1 May 2011.
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20110118095356/h
ttp://www.cabe.org.uk/case-studies/brindleyplace/info
accessed 1 May 2011
N. Bates-Brkljac, S. Duhr, J. Counsell “The VEPS project,
Planning Information Visualisation”,
proceedings of IV'05, the 9th International Conference on, the
IEEE Computer Society, California, pp 145-150, 2005.
http://cartographie.issy.com/cartes/ accessed 1 May 2011
Virtual Environmental Planning system ,funded Dec 2004 to
2008, by INTERREG IIIB NWE-ENO (a Community
Initiative Programme funded by the European Regional
Development Fund www.nweurope.org )
Pietch S.M. (2000) Computer visualisation in the design
control of urban environments: a literature review,
Environment and Planning : Planning and Design, volume 21,
pp 521-536
McKechnie, G. E.(1997) Simulation techniques in
environmental psychology in Stokols, D.(ed.) Psychological
perspectives in environment and behaviour, Plenum
Publishing Corp. New York
Sawczuk, B (1992) The management of the design process, in
Nicholson, M. (ed) Architectural management, E&FN Spon,
London, pp 84-89
Harrlichack M.A, (1993) The effect of rendering technologies
on the evaluation of computer generated design simulation,
Master thesis, College of Env. Science and Forestry, State
University of New York, Syracuse, NY
Smith., A.H. et al. (1998) Visual communication in urban
planning and urban design, Paper 2, Online Planning Journal ,
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk
Shiode, N.(2001) 3D Urban models: recent developments in
the digital modeling of urban environments in
threedimensions, GeoJournal 52, pp 263-269
J. Counsell, S. Smith and N. Bates-Brkljac. “Web 3D Based
Dialogue for Public Participation and the VEPs Project”.
Tenth International Conference on Information Visualisation
(IV 06), pp. 343-348, 2006.
Arayici Y, Hamilton A, 2005 ‘Modelling 3D Scanned Data to
Visualise the Built Environment’ in proceedings of IV05 9th
Intl Conference on Information Visualisation London, edited
by Banissi et al, published by the IEEE Computer Soc. Los
Alamitos California
ODPM: Office of the Deputy of Prime Minister, E-Planning
Programme
Blueprint,
2004
Available
online
http://www.odpm.gov.uk/stellent/groups/odpm_planning/doc
uments/downloadable/odpm-plan_o30468.pdf
accessed
8/4/2007
A. Richman, A. Hamilton,. Y. Arayici, J. Counsell, B.
Tkhelidze. “Remote Sensing, LiDAR, Automated Data
Capture and the VEPS Project” in: proceedings of IV'05, the
9th International Conference on, the IEEE Computer Society,
California, pp 151-156. 2005

[19] J. Counsell, S. Smith, A. Richman, “Overcoming some of the
issues in Maintaining Large Urban Area 3D Models via a
Web Browser” in: proceedings of IV'06, the 10th
International Conference, IEEE Computer Society, California,
pp 331-336. 2006.
[20] J. Counsell, A. Richman, A. Holding “Evaluation of 3D
Visualisation in the Virtual Environmental Planning systems
Project” in: proceedings of Viz'09, the 2nd International
Conference in Visualisation Barcelona, IEEE Computer
Society, California, pp 108 – 113. 2009
[21] The Preserving Our Past workshop was held at the Hilton
Birmingham Metropole Hotel, NEC, Birmingham on 29
March 2006. The workshop was funded by AHRC, EPSRC,
ESRC, NERC and English Heritage as a need was identified
to build effective working relationships across discipline
barriers in the historic environment research community.
[22] www.princes-foundation.org/content/princes-foundationreceives-grant-engage-local-communities accessed 1 May
2011
[23] XPlanGML
http://www.iai.fzk.de/wwwextern/index.php?id=679&L=1 accessed 1 May 2011
[24] Ewald K, Coors, V. 2005 : ‘Appraisal of standards for 3D
City Models’ in proceedings of IV05 9th Intl Conference on
Information Visualisation London, edited by Banissi et al,

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

557

published by the IEEE Computer Soc. Los Alamitos
California.
Counsell, J, Smith, S, Richman A 2006: ‘Overcoming some
of the issues in maintaining large urban area 3D models via a
web browser’ in proceedings of IV06 10th Intl Conference on
Information Visualisation London, edited by Banissi et al,
published by the IEEE Computer Soc. Los Alamitos
California.
V. Coors, K. Hünlich and G. On “Constraint-based
Generation and Visualization of 3D City Models” in Lecture
Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography, Part II, pp 365378, Chapter 23. Springer. 2009.
AEC 3 - Projects International Code Council
http://www.aec3.com/5/5_013_ICC.htm accessed 1 May
2011
CityGML http://www.citygml.org/ accessed 1/5/2011
C. Schill, B. Koch, J. Bogdahn, V. Coors , “Public
Participation Comment Markup Language and WFS 1.1” in
proceedings of the UDMS Annual Conference 2007
published by Taylor and Francis, p. 85 – 9 2007.
P. Limbrick, Manchester Digital Development Agency
‘Comment Markup Language’ technical report on line at
www.veps3d.org/site/files/28-feb-2007/16-3237/13%20CoML%20Presentation_PL_200607.pdf accessed
April 2009.

