2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualization for Changes in Relationships between Historical Figures
in Chronicles
Masahiko ITOH

Mina AKAISHI

Institute of Industrial Science
The University of Tokyo, Japan
imash@tkl.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Faculty of Computer and Information Sciences
Hosei University, Japan
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency
mina@hosei.ac.jp

Abstract

Our framework ﬁrst provides a mechanism for extracting networks of historical ﬁgures from historical data and
for visualizing time-varying changes in the structure of networks along with a timeline in a 3D space. It also allows
users to extract networks of people with multiple aspects
such as “battle” or “gift” and to compare the differences
and similarities in their evolutions. Users can observe the
appearances of groups of people, the important persons in
these groups, and changes in the structure of the groups.
It is desirable to grasp not only structural changes but
also characteristics of relationships between people, such as
friendly or unfriendly relationships. We therefore provide
mechanisms for extracting components of relationships and
visualizing them by coloring them different colors. This enables users to observe what kind of characteristics a group
of people had. It also enables users to observe temporal
changes in characteristics of relationships between two people, e.g. the users can ﬁnd out that two generals changed
from being allies in 1561 to opponents in 1564.
The contribution of our system is that it interactively enables users to explore temporal changes in networks of historical ﬁgures and in the details of relationships between
ﬁgures in the networks.

A huge number of historical documents that have been
accumulated for a long time are currently being digitized.
However, it is difﬁcult for us to analyze and obtain insight
into the past from such documents. This paper proposes
an interactive visualization system to extract networks of
historical ﬁgures from historical data and to show timevarying changes in their relationships. It enables users to
explore changes in the structure of the network interactively.
Moreover, it extracts characteristics of each relationship,
such as hostile or friendly relations, and visualizes them on
the network. It enables us to understand changes in past society better by exploring changes in relationships between
people.

1

Introduction

A huge number of historical documents that have been
accumulated for a long time are currently being digitized,
enabling us to search for and access such documents easily
and rapidly. However, it is difﬁcult for us to analyze and
obtain insight into the past from such documents by simply using statistical techniques. Exploring such data from
various viewpoints requires an interactive environment.
In this paper, we propose an interactive visualization
framework for exploring changes in relationships between
historical ﬁgures that are extracted from historical documents. It enables us to support understanding of changes in
past society through exploring changes in relationships between people, such as the appearance of groups of people,
or whether such groups had friendly or unfriendly relations.
The proposed system allows us to check whether visualization results accurately represent already-known knowledge
and explore novel phenomenon or patterns that are not already well-known.
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.55

2

Framework for Visualizing Changes in Relationships between Historical Figures

This paper proposes a framework for extracting networks
of historical ﬁgures and characteristics of relationships between such ﬁgures from historical documents and for visualizing and interactively exploring temporal changes in such
relationships (Figure 1).
Figure 1 shows an overview of our visualization framework. A historical document database (Figure 1(a)) stores
records of events that have attribute values such as names of
people, keywords, and dates related to the events. Users can
283

Viewpoint

select records related to a speciﬁc viewpoint in which they
are interested by specifying ranges of years, lists of people, and/or keywords. The system then generates a network
of historical ﬁgures from the selected records by extracting
co-occurring people in the same events (Figure 1(b)). If two
people have a high co-occurrence ratio, they have a connection. Users can extract networks related to speciﬁc people
such as ODA Nobunaga, who was the best-known feudal
lord in Japanese history, or TOKUGAWA Ieyasu, who was
the founder and ﬁrst shogun of the Tokugawa shogunate, by
inputting their names. They can also extract networks related to a battle in the warring states period in Japanese history (called Sengoku Jidai) by inputting the range of years
related to Sengoku Jidai and keywords such as “battle”, “attack”, and/or “rebellion”. Moreover, they can extract and
compare networks related to various viewpoints.

㻨㻱㼞㼍㻘㻌㻼㼑㼞㼟㼛㼚㼟㻘㻌㻷㼑㼥㼣㼛㼞㼐㼟㻪

b

connecƟonƩbetweenƩpeopleƩ
asƩanƩedge

c
d e
g

f

a
b

(b)ExtracƟngƩaƩƟmeƩsequenƟalƩ
networkƩofƩpeople

䞉䞉䞉䞉䞉
䞉䞉䞉䞉䞉
䞉䞉䞉䞉䞉
䞉䞉䞉䞉䞉
䞉䞉䞉䞉䞉

c
g

baƩle

(d)ƩVisualizaƟonƩofƩchangesƩ
inƩrelaƟonships

rebellion

㻨㻱㼞㼍㻪

1560
1561
1562
h

c
d e

(a)ƩHistoricalƩDocƩDB

peace
present

AssigningƩclusterƩtypeƩtoƩ
colorsƩofƩedge

(c)ƩExtracƟngƩclustersƩofƩkeywordsƩforƩ
represenƟngƩrelaƟonshipsƩbetweenƩpeople

Figure 1. Overview of our visualization framework for changes in relationships between
historical ﬁgures.

Our framework allows users to extract a network of a
speciﬁc viewpoint with a speciﬁed time window, e.g. every
year. It enables users to observe sequential changes in the
network of people.
The historical document database stores keywords summarizing events. We can extract information about why two
or more people have connections by using events and keywords related to them. However, keywords are too diverse
for visualizing the reasons for connections. We therefore
extract clusters of keywords and assign colors to extracted
clusters (Figure 1(c)).
Our framework then visualizes a time-varying network
extracted in Figure 1(b) with assigning a person to a node
of the network and a connection between people to an edge
(Figure 1(d)). It also assigns colors to the edge that has
characteristics deﬁned by co-occurring clusters of keywords
between two people (Figure 1(d)). This enables users to
explore temporal changes in relationships between people.

4

Extracting a Network of Historical Figures

Our framework enables us to extract networks of people
from a speciﬁc viewpoint. We ﬁrst ﬁlter records out from
a database by keywords, range of date, and/or persons for
specifying the viewpoint and then aggregate ﬁltered records
every year. We next extract the networks of people for every
year on the basis of co-occurring people in the same event.
More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a connection between people depending on person dependency. The following formula deﬁnes the person dependency from one person to another in a particular year y, which is an extension of term
dependency described by Akaishi et al. [2, 1].
pdy (p, p ) =

3

1560
1561
1562 RepresenƟngƩaƩpersonƩasƩaƩnode,Ʃ

a

㻔㻮㼍㼠㼠㼘㼑㻘㻌㻳㼕㼒㼠㻘㻌㼑㼠㼏㻕

Historical Document Database

recordsy (p ∩ p )
recordsy (p)

(1)

recordsy (p ∩ p ) represents the number of records representing events in which persons p and p both appear
in year y. recordsy (p) represents the number of records
in which only person p appears. If pdy (p, p ) ≥ α and
pdy (p , p) ≥ α, then we deﬁne a bidirectional edge between
people p and p . If pdy (p, p ) ≥ δ and pdy (p , p) ≥ μ, then
we deﬁne a edge from person p to person p 2 .
Size and color of a node represent the importance of a
person. The size of node is deﬁned by an attraction power
of person p described by p ∈p pdy (p , p), which means
the summation of other people’s person dependency on person p. The color of the node is deﬁned by the ratio of the
number of inlinks to outlinks of the node. We use the following colors as default colors that can be modiﬁed by a
visualization system mentioned at Section 6.1.

We utilize the historical database Dai-Nihon Shiryo
Database1 . The Dai-Nihon Shiryo is a collection of historical documents arranged chronologically and dating from
the ninth to the seventeenth centuries. It has been published
by the University of Tokyo since 1901. Currently, it is being digitized and compiled into a database. Each record in
the database represents one event. It includes the date of
the event, a list of people related to the event, a list of these
people’s ofﬁcial titles, a list of place names related to the
event, a list of keywords representing the event, and text as
attributes. The current database consists of about 230,000
records.
1 http://wwwap.hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ships/db.html

2 We

284

use α = 1 and δ = μ = 0.8 in this paper.

• #In Link > #Out Link : dark purple

Cluster label
Battle

• #Out Link > #In Link : light purple
• #In Link = #Out Link : gray

Gift
The length of an edge represents the strength of a relationship between two people. It is deﬁned by the difference
in person dependencies pdy (p, p ) − pdy (p , p). If person
dependency is strong, the edge shortens. If one person onesidedly depends on another, the edge lengthens.

Allowance
Grant
Conferment
Succession

5

...

Extracting Characteristics of Relationships
between Historical Figures

Table 1. Example of keyword clusters.

We ﬁrst extract keywords in events related to two people
to represent characteristics of their relationship. We then
add such keywords as labels to their relationships and attach a color to every label. This enables us to investigate
characteristics of relationships between two people.
The number of keywords is 3034 in only 20 years (from
1560 to 1580). It is therefore difﬁcult for us to distinguish
colors. Moreover, it is difﬁcult for us to understand relationships between keywords, e.g., most keywords are related to
battles, and the rest are related to peace.
To solve the problems mentioned above, we ﬁrst extract
clusters of keywords on the basis of co-occurring keywords.
We then extract common clusters of keywords related to two
people for every year. Such clusters of keywords represent
components of the relationship between people.

5.1

of keyword clustering described in Section 5.1. Table 2
shows an example of extracted clusters and frequencies for
the edge between ODA Nobunaga and TAKEDA Katsuyori4 every year.
Year
1574
1575
1576

Cluster name : frequency
Battle: 2, Allowance: 1, Unknown: 1
Battle: 5, Unknown: 1
Peace: 1

Table 2. Clusters and frequencies for the edge
between ODA Nobunaga and TAKEDA Katsuyori every year.

Extracting Clusters of Keywords

We ﬁrst extract a network of keywords from 1560 to
1580 by replacing a person with a keyword in Formula 1
in Section 43 .
We extract a set of nodes (keywords) that are directly
connected by edges as a cluster. We categorize 3034 keywords in 70 clusters. Table 1 shows examples of clusters of
keywords. We use the keyword that has highest frequency
as a cluster label.

5.2

Keywords
Ikko, Shin Buddhism, Follower, Battle, Rebellion, Cruciﬁxion, Naval battle, Navy,...
Whale meat, Gift, Persimmon, Wild
goose, Garden lantern, Present,...
Loyalty, Allowance, Supply,...
Incense, Grant,...
Commission, Conferment
Successor, Succession, Head of family
...

6

We propose a visualization system that interactively enables us to explore time varying changes in the structure of
person dependency networks and changes in characteristics
of relationships among people.

Extracting Clusters for each Connection between Historical Figures

6.1 Visualizing Changes in Structure
We visualize networks of people, which are extracted in
Section 4, by using TimeSlice [6] as a platform for visualizing temporal changes in the structure of a network in a 3D
space.
A TimeSlice is a 2D plane for visualizing a snapshot of a
network with a speciﬁed timing (Figure 2). The TimeSlice
only displays the network belonging to a selected year. It
can be dragged along the timeline, which is represented by

We next extract clusters and their frequencies every year
related to each person dependency (edge) that is extracted
in Section 4.
More speciﬁcally, we collect records, in which two people related to the edge appear in the same time. We then
obtain keywords appearing in collected records and obtain
clusters and frequencies for the edge by using the result
3 We

Visualization of Changes in Relationships
between Historical Figures

use α = δ = μ = 0.8 in this case.

4 TAKEDA

285

Katsuyori was a famous rival lord of Nobunaga

AD 1573

MIYOSHIƩYasunaga

AD 1615

TOKUGAWAƩIeyas
PersonƩdependency

ODA Nobunaga
Viewpoint1
䠄BaƩle䠅

StrengthƩofƩpersonƩ
dependency

TOKUGAWA
Ieyasu
TOKUGAWA
Hidetada

ODA Nobunaga

ImportanceƩofƩpersonƩ1:
aƩracƟonƩ=>ƩsizeƩofƩnode

PersonƩdependency
(bidirecƟonal)

ODAƩNobunaga
ImportanceƩofƩpersonƩ2:
RaƟoƩofƩnumberƩofƩ
inlink andƩoutlink=>Ʃcolor

Figure 3. Visualization of connection between
people.

Timeline

Emperor Ōgimachi
Viewpoint2
䠄GiŌ䠅

TimeSlice

TOKUGAWA
Ieyasu
TOKUGAWA
Hidetada

at the top and bottom (in Figure 2, “battle” and “gift”) to
compare multiple viewpoints. Common people in different
viewpoints are represented as light green.
Multiple TimeSlices visualize networks of people related
to different viewpoints and with different timings. They arrange the same nodes in different TimeSlices in the same
positions. The positions of nodes on different TimeSlices
can be completely synchronized with one another even if
users drag a node. Interactions such as selecting and highlighting nodes are propagated to other TimeSlices. Panning
and zooming operations are also propagated to other TimeSlices. These mechanisms help users to compare multiple
situations easily.
To compare people and clusters of people in different
TimeSlices in detail, our framework utilizes mechanisms
for a parallel view [6] in a 3D environment as shown in
Figure 5. This enables us to change the normal 3D view to
a parallel view seamlessly and explore information interactively through different aspects using multiple views. We
can see an overview by using the normal 3D view to ﬁnd areas of interest and then change the view mode to a parallel
view to explore the area in detail.

Figure 2. Comparing networks of people related to “Battle” and “Gift” in 1573 and 1615.

the third dimension. Users can seamlessly change the positions of the TimeSlice along the timeline to change the year
being visualized. Such manipulation generates an animated
temporal change in the structure of a network.
Each node in the network on the TimeSlice represents a
person, and each edge represents a person dependency. Figure 3 shows the directed edge from MIYOSHI Yasunaga5
to ODA Nobunaga, and the bidirectional edge between
TOKUGAWA Ieyasu and ODA Nobunaga. The size of
nodes represents attraction power of people, and the colors
of nodes represent the ratio of the number of inlinks to outlinks of the nodes described in Section 4. Suitable length of
edges is deﬁned by the difference in person dependencies
as described in Section 4. However, the layout algorithm
deﬁnes the ﬁnal length of edges.
We adopt automatic and dynamic graph layout algorithms based on a force-directed model [4] to visualize the
structures of networks. Users can select and drag nodes to
change their positions for interactively checking details on
linkage between nodes.
Moreover, a user can incrementally add new TimeSlices
on the timeline side by side to compare different years (in
Figure 2, 1573 and 1615) by clicking the timeline. They
can also add TimeSlices to represent different viewpoints

6.2 Visualizing Components of Relationships
We visualize components of relationships extracted in
Section 5 by assigning color to a cluster such as “battle” or
“gift”, width of an edge to frequency of the cluster appearance, and length of the colored edge to constitution ratio of
clusters. Figure 4 shows how to represent the components
of relationships between ODA Nobunaga and TAKEDA
Katsuyori every year described in Table 2.
In the example in Figure 4 and Figure 6, we use shades
of red for clusters related to “adversarial relationship” or
“battle”, shades of blue for clusters related to friendship,
shades of green for other clusters, and gray for keywords
that are not categorized in any clusters. Users can specify

5 MIYOSHI Yasunaga was a military commander who fought against
Nobunaga.

286

䠖

1

the 15th Shogun of the Ashikaga shogunate. We can also
ﬁnd out the node of Nobunaga becomes the center of clusters of various nodes, and there are two clusters of people
around Nobunaga in 1570. That is because Nobunaga was
involved in two battles in 1570. The ﬁrst was the “Battle
of Anegawa”. We can ﬁnd out some big, dark purple nodes
(key people) in the upper cluster around Nobunaga because
they were commanders or daimyo6 who directly fought for
Nobunaga. The second is “Ishiyama Hongan-ji War” which
was the war against Nobunaga caused by a network of commanders around Osaka, temples, and communities belonging to the Ikko, which was a powerful faction of religious
zealots. We can ﬁnd a complicated cluster of people including some huge, dark purple nodes of people at the bottom
in 1570 in Figure 5 (a). Since this war continued for over
10 years, this cluster and key people appear over again.
Figure 5 (b) shows networks of people around ODA
Nobunaga in 1572, 1573, and 1574 from left to right. We
can see some huge, dark purple nodes of people around
Nobunaga in 1572. We assume that is because some famous
daimyo and commanders created an anti-Nobunaga encircling net to counter Nobunaga around 1572. We can recognize most of these nodes as key people in the anti-Nobunaga
encircling net. However, we can observe some other big
nodes of people such as UESUGI Kenshin and MOURI
Terumoto7 who did not belong to the anti-Nobunaga net.
It is difﬁcult for us to conceive why these nodes are near
Nobunaga, e.g. because they formed an alliance with or
fought against him. We can see the node of ASHIKAGA
Yoshiaki shrinks and becomes gray from 1573 to 1574.
We assume that is because ASHIKAGA Yoshiaki was deposed as Shogun by Nobunaga, who brought the Ashikaga
shogunate to an end in 1573. We can see a huge cluster of people in 1573, and two big nodes (“AZAI” and
“ASAKURA”) in the 1573 cluster disappear in 1574. That is
because there was huge battle (Nobunaga vs. AZAI Nagamasa and ASAKURA Yoshikage8 ), after which the AZAI
and ASAKURA clans fell. Their nodes never appear after
1574.

䠖 1

2

TAKEDAƩKatsuyori
1
1
Unknown
1
Allowance
䠖
2
TAKEDAƩKatsuyori
FrequencyƩ
5
1
BaƩle =>Ʃthickness
TAKEDAƩKatsuyori
5
ClusterƩtype
Unknown
ODAƩNobunaga =>Ʃcolor
1
BaƩle

ADƩ1574

Peace

ADƩ1575

ODAƩNobunaga
ADƩ1576

ODAƩNobunaga

TimeƩline

Figure 4. Visualization of components of clusters relationship between two people.

arbitrary groups and clusters in groups and assign arbitrary
colors to such groups in the current system. Figure 3 shows
an example of grouping.
We can also visualize a set of edges arranged on the timeline to overview changes in relationships between two people every year as shown in Figure 4 and Figure 7 by selecting an edge on the network to specify a person dependency.
group of clusters for adversarial relationship or
battle (shades of red)
battle, death, Ikko-ikki,
hostage, plunder

group of clusters for
friendship (shades of
blue)
peace, gift, prayer, grant,
celebration, conferment

Table 3. Example of grouping

7
7.1

Examples
Changes in Structure of “Battle” Network

7.2 Comparing Structures of “Battle” and “Gift”
Networks

Figure 5 shows a visualization of temporal changes in
structure of network of people related to the viewpoint of
“battle” from 1568 to 1574.
We adapt keywords for “battle” such as “war”, “attack”, “surrender”, “reconciliation”, “formation”, “reinforcement”, “invasion”, “subjugation”, and “retreat” for selecting records from the database, and extract the network
every year from 1550 to 1650.
Figure 5 (a) shows networks around ODA Nobunaga in
1568, 1569, and 1570 from left to right. We can see that
the node of ODA Nobunaga ﬁrst appears in 1568 and that
it is bigger than others. That is because Nobunaga entered
Kyoto with ASHIKAGA Yoshiaki to help Yoshiaki became

Figure 2 is an example of simultaneously visualizing two
networks related to different viewpoints, “battle” and “gift”,
from 1550 to 1650. The “gift” network is extracted by inputting keywords related to “gift”. TimeSlices at the top
visualize networks related to the viewpoint “battle”, and
the bottom ones visualize networks related to the viewpoint
6 The

powerful territorial lords in pre-modern Japan
Kenshin and MOURI Terumoto were two of the most powerful daimyo of the Sengoku Jidai
8 AZAI Nagamasa and ASAKURA Yoshikage were Japanese daimyo
of the Sengoku Jidai
7 UESUGI

287

BaƩleƩofƩAnegawa
ODAƩNobunaga
ASHIKAGAƩYoshiaki
(15th Shogun)
Ishiyama Hongan-ji War
(a)ƩNetworkƩofƩpeopleƩaroundƩ“ODAƩNobunaga”ƩfromƩ1568ƩtoƩ1570
UESUGIƩKenshin

AZAIƩandƩASAKURA
downfall
MOURIƩTerumoto

anƟ-NobunagaƩ
encirclingƩnet

ASHIKAGAƩYoshiaki
defeat

ODAƩNobunaga

(b)ƩNetworkƩofƩpeopleƩaroundƩ“ODAƩNobunaga”ƩfromƩ1572 toƩ1574
Figure 5. Changes in structure of network of people related to “battle” from 1568 to 1574.

7.3 Visualizing Characteristics of Relationships
between People Related to a Battle

“gift”. Figure 2 also visualizes TimeSlices with different
timings. We place TimeSlices at the left in the position for
1573 and TimeSlices at the right in the position for 1615.

In Figure 6, we add colors to represent characteristics of
relationships mentioned in Section 5 to the network related
to “battle” described in Section 7.1 and then visualize their
changes.
Figure 6 (a) shows there are many edges with a high ratio
of blue around ODA Nobunaga and ASHIKAGA Yoshiaki.
We can imagine they tried to build friendly relationships
with other people. People around Ishiyama Hongan-ji are
connected by blue edges in 1573 in Figure 6 (c). In this case,
these people are known as an anti-Nobunaga group. We can
then see many red edges appear in 1576 in Figure 6 (d) and
can recognize some famous commanders under Nobunaga
in the same cluster of people (around Hongan-ji). These
represent Nobunaga attacking Hongan-ji with many commanders. Figure 6 (c) shows that there are many red and
thick edges around AZAI and ASAKURA. These represent
the battle (Nobunaga vs. AZAI and ASAKURA) described
in Section 7.1.
In Figure 6 (b) and (d), we can see people belonging to
the anti-Nobunaga encircling net as huge nodes. We ex-

In 1573, we can observe big communities around ODA
Nobunaga in the “battle” TimeSlice, but a small cluster with
few nodes around Emperor Ogimachi in the “gift” TimeSlice. In contrast, TimeSlices (both at the top and bottom)
in 1615 have big clusters around TOKUGAWA Ieyasu and
have many common nodes (light green nodes).
We can assume from these results that only a few daimyo
such as Nobunaga connected with the Emperor through exchanging presents, and most of them connected by ﬁghting around 1573. However, most daimyo connected by exchanging gifts with the Tokugawa family in addition to battles around 1615.
These visualizations enable us to show changes in clusters, key people, and differences and similarities among different viewpoints. However, it is difﬁcult for us to recognize
the detailed information about relationships between people
and characteristics of clusters of people from these results.
288

(a)ƩASƩ1569

UESUGIƩKenshin

(b)ƩADƩ1572

anƟ-NobunagaƩ
encirclingƩnet
Around
ASHIKAGAƩYoshiaki

Around
Mōri clan

(c)ƩADƩ1573

UESUGIƩKenshin
(d)ƩADƩ1576

Around
AZAIƩandƩASAKURAƩ(red)

anƟ-NobunagaƩ
encirclingƩnet

Around
Ishiyama
Hongan-ji
(blue)

Around
Ishiyama
Hongan-ji
(red)

Figure 6. Changes in relationships between people around ODA Nobunaga (blue circle) from 1569 to
1576.

7.5 Related Work

pected they would have red edges to Nobunaga, but some famous daimyo do not. Moreover, although UESUGI Kenshin
changed from being an ally of Nobunaga to an enemy, the
edge between Kenshin and Nobunaga does not change from
blue to red. We assume that the historical documents we
use in this paper do not include enough descriptions about
hostile relationships between Nobunaga and these daimyo.

7.4

There have been many studies for extracting networks
of people from the Web [7, 8] or literature [3] on the basis
of co-occurrence of extracted named entities. Itsubo et al.
extracted networks of historical people from historical documents using co-occurring place names among people [10].
They also added labels to people in the network by using
clustering results of people. Akaishi et al. provided a system for visualizing networks of terms from chronological
data called WordColony [1]. However, these researchers
did not focus on extracting temporal changes in structures
of networks of people or characteristics of each relationship
between people. Moreover, most of them did not provide an
interactive environment for exploring extracted results.
Many systems and/or much researches have attempted
visualizing relationships between people in social networks [5] and co-authorship networks [11, 9, 12]. BiblioViz [11] visualizes research topics using SOM to explore research topics related to co-authorship relation-

Example of Changes in Relationships between
two People

Figure 7 visualizes details of temporal changes in characteristics of selected relationships between people. Figure 7 (b) shows red edges between TOKUGAWA Ieyasu and
TAKEDA Katsuyori. These represent their relationships in
continual battles. Figure 7 (c) shows changes in the relationship between ODA Nobunaga and UESUGI Kenshin for
each year. Figure 7 (d) visualizes complex relationships between Nobunaga and ASHIKAGA Yoshiaki.
289

References
[1] Mina Akaishi, Yoshikiyo Kato, Ken Satoh, and Koichi
Hori. Narrative based Topic Visualization for Chronological Data. In Proc. IV 2007, pages 139–144, 2007.
[2] Mina Akaishi, Ken Satoh, and Yuzuru Tanaka. An Associative Information Retrieval based on the Dependency of Term Cooccurrence. Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3245:295–206, 2004.

(b) TOKUGAWA Ieyasu - TAKEDA Katsuyori

[3] David K. Elson, Nicholas Dames, and Kathleen R.
McKeown. Extracting social networks from literary
ﬁction. In Proc. ACL 2010, pages 138–147, 2010.

(c) ODA Nobunaga - UESUGI Kenshin

[4] Thomas M. J. Fruchterman and Edward M. Reingold.
Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Placement. Software Practice and Experience, 21(11):1129–1164,
1991.

(a) Network around
ODA Nobunaga at 1576

[5] Jeffrey Heer and Danah Boyd. Vizster: Visualizing
Online Social Networks. In Proc. INFOVIS 2005,
pages 32–39, 2005.

(d) ODA Nobunaga - ASHIKAGA Yoshiaki

Figure 7. Details of temporal changes in relationships between people.

[6] Masahiko Itoh, Masashi Toyoda, and Masaru Kitsuregawa. An Interactive Visualization Framework for
Time-Series of Web Graphs in a 3D Environment. In
Proc. IV 2010, pages 54–60, 2010.

ships. NeL2 [9] enables us to interactively explore temporal changes in co-authorship relationships. In contrast,
our system enables us to explore both temporal changes in
networks and characteristics of relationships.

[7] Yutaka Matsuo, Junichiro Mori, Masahiro Hamasaki,
Keisuke Ishida, Takuichi Nishimura, Hideaki Takeda,
Koiti Hasida, and Mitsuru Ishizuka. POLYPHONET:
An Advanced Social Network Extraction System.
Journal of Web Semantics, 5(4):262–278, 2007.

Conclusion

[8] Peter Mika. Flink: Semantic Web Technology for the
Extraction and Analysis of Social Networks. Journal
of Web Semantics, 3:211–223, 2005.

The objective of this research is to provide tools for visualizing a large number of historical and chronological documents to support searches for new knowledge. In this paper,
we have proposed the framework for visualizing time varying structural changes in networks of historical ﬁgures and
for visualizing characteristics of relationships between them
extracted from records about their activities.
This paper has only treated historical events from 1560
to 1580 for extracting clusters representing characteristics
of relationships. We plan to expand data for extracting clusters from the Sengoku Jidai (from around 1450) to the early
stage of Edo period (around 1650).
In future work, we plan to evaluate the effectiveness of
our system with expert historians. We will try to check
that our system can visualize already-known knowledge
and can extract new knowledge such as different activities
from well-known knowledge about particular people or unexpected relationships between people.

[9] Nagayoshi Nakazono, Kazuo Misue, and Jiro Tanaka.
NeL2: Network Drawing Tool for Handling Layered
Structured Network Diagram. In Proc. APVis 2006,
pages 109–115, 2006.
[10] Takahiko Osaki, Sho Itsubo, Fuminori Kimura, Taro
Tezuka, and Akira Maeda. Visualization of Relationships among Historical Persons Using Locational Information. In Proc. W2GIS 2011, pages 230–239,
2011.
[11] Zeqian Shen, Michael Ogawa, Soon Tee Teoh, and
Kwan-Liu Ma. Biblioviz: a system for visualizing
bibliography information. In Proc. APVis 2006, pages
93–102, 2006.
[12] Lei Shi, Chen Wang, and Zhen Wen. Dynamic network visualization in 1.5D. In Proc. PVIS 2011, pages
179–186, 2011.

290

