2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Research of Styles and Visualisation Characteristics on Chinese Engraved Ancient
Book Typeface Culture – Sample Study on Point Size for Ancient Books of the
Wangli Reign of Ming Dynasty

Hung I- TZU

Thzeng Chi-Shiung

Graduate School of Design
National Yunlin University of Science & Technology
YUNLIN, TAIWAN, R. O. C.
moon0621@ms57.hinet.net

Graduate School of Design
National Yunlin University of Science & Technology
YUNLIN, TAIWAN, R. O. C.
tsengch@yuntech.edu.tw

Abstract
This research mainly conducted a study on the point size
for Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign engraved books of China. This
is a research focused on the subject of typeface point size. A
study on editing elements among different typefaces in Chinese
ancient engraved books was conducted in order to clarify if
there was a specific rule on point sizes used. We also tried to
understand if there was any absolute connection between point
size and the size of version. This research investigated 217
Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign engraved books collected by the
National Central Library of Taiwan. We have derived point
size rules applied to various editing items and the popular
forms in the time of specific engraved versions from these
engraved books. We than analyzed and integrated overall
factors that had constituted point sizes on engraved books. The
result indicated that there were no limits on point size when it
comes to application of typeface. However, there were certain
connections existed between the width of columns and point
size on these ancient books. The following characteristics were
observed when we explored Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign
typeface size: 1. For point sizes on the Ming Dynasty Wangli
Reign version, most of them are distributed in the segment
from size 38 to size 50. The number for size 44 ranks as the
highest. 2. The largest size is 56 while the smallest is 20. Size 56
accounts for the biggest number of sizes. 3. For point sizes on
volume names, most of them are in the segment from size 38 to
size 50. With this, we came to the conclusion that point sizes for
Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign version engraved ancient book
poses special characteristics on Cultural Heritage Knowledge
Visualisation.

of our countryϗs engraved book business. From central to
local government and from public offices to private schools,
there were numerous engravers in these institutions.
Engraving had become a trend at that time. This was
especially true during the years after Jia Jin and Wagnli
Reigns. Fields of politics, economy and culture all enjoyed
relatively prosperity. As a result, culture businesses, which
included publishing business of engraved books and printed
books, had all obtained distinctive developments. First of all,
the number of types for engraved books increased. This had
enabled Ming dynasty engraved printing business to obtain
newer and more mature developments under the base of
achievements from previous generations.
If we observe forms and contents of Chinese ancient
books from the perspective of Cultural Heritage Knowledge
Visualisation, we’ll find that numerous different forms of
books had been created from the combination of practical
values and artistic appreciation values. Such combination
enriched the long lasting Chinese history of culture. From the
unique chapter structures of these books, we also observe
perfect presentation on layout editing and binding. All these
elements constituted an important chapter on the history of
Chinese traditional editing. That is also the motive for this
research. Consequently, this research utilizes Ming Dynasty
Wangli Reign version as its subject for study in an attempt to
understand visual characteristics and phenomenon presented
by Chinese ancient books.

Keywords- Typeface, Printing , Han Tze.

Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign rare books, a total of 217
volumes which include 21 volumes for Jing Section, 68
volumes for Shih Section, 71 volumes for Zi Section, 54
volumes for Ji Section and 3 volumes for Cong Shu,
collected by the National Central Library of Taiwan were
selected as subjects for this research. These books were
looked into one by one and actual observation, photo taking,
measuring and calculation were conducted. This research
actually focused on engraved printing versions. Therefore,
manually-written versions were not included in the scope of
this research.
Here, we need to explain a little bit on why this
researchϗs sampling of time mainly focused on Wangli
Reign of Ming dynasty. Development of Chinese books

I.

II.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND

Engraved printing dated back roughly to Sui and Tang
dynasties and it reached the peak during Sung and Yuan
dynasties. Although typography began to show up in Sung
dynasty, printing business at that time still focused on
engraved printing. The printing influence on Chinese editing
visual styles from the ways of using engraved plates is still
faintly visible as of today such as the column width and
numbers on ten-line paper. Later, the so-called number one
printing exclusive typeface for Ming Typeface emerged
during the Ming dynasty. Ming dynasty is actually the peak

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.94

555

SUBJECT AND STEPS OF THE STUDY

various editing items, or styles of prevailing social practices
at the time of publication, from engraved books in order to
have an understanding of overall phenomenon that
constituted point sizes on these books.
Research steps were conducted in two ways. One was
with assistance from the National Central Library of Taiwan
and consultation with related philologists. Actual
observation, photo taking, measuring and calculating were
conducted on each sample in a hope of obtaining quantitative
statistics on forms and styles and using these statistics as
foundations for theory. On the other hand, this study also
utilized actual research results on philology to serve as
categorization references on research phenomenon. The
purpose is to consolidate representative Chinese Han Tze
form characteristics in order to provide references on editing
and design education as well as design practices.

experienced a huge leap in Ming dynasty. At that time, not
only did engraved books enjoy rich contents with astonishing
large quantity, but technologies in typography, registering
and woodblock also achieved distinctive advances. This was
because economy was booming in Ming dynasty and average
people were eager for books. Additionally, technologies in
paper making and printing improved dramatically. All these
contributed to the extremely favorable environment for the
development of book culture business. Specifically,
stereotyped writing system was drafted to serve as the
standard for recruiting public service officials. This had sped
up the need for books. In the meantime, public sectors also
began to collect books from all times. As a result, both
private and public sectors of Ming dynasty treasured their
collection of books and were proud of their engraved books.
During the period from Wangli Reign to the end of Ming
dynasty, typefaces for engraved books had become even
squarer. This trend had eventually evolved into the Ming
Typeface with the characteristics of Ϙthin horizontal strokes
and thick vertical strokes.ϙMethod of binding also had
changed from back-wrapping to thread-binding. All these are
signs that indicated the astronomical number and richness in
styles for engraved books in Ming dynasty. Through the
guidance of philology, this research has come to the
conclusion that most Ming dynasty printed materials, with
originally such a large quantity and later being tested by
times and screened by book collectors, survived as of today
are master pieces and representation of times.
When practicing actual investigation, extreme caution
must be exerted during measuring and sampling. This is
because papers for ancient books are fragile and their
historical values are beyond measurement. Therefore,
historical relics must not be damaged. During the study of
typefaces on samples, measurements were conducted using a
vernier scale. Numbers obtained from measurements were
verified, one by one, against ϘNational Central Library
Rare Book Catalogue Initial Editionϙ published by the
National Central Library before serving as a statistical
foundation for the study. As for typeface sizes on ancient
engraved books, photo typing scales were used to replace
average rulers to avoid over wearing on the layouts of
ancient books and reduce damages caused when flipping
pages of these ancient books. As a result, sizes of points are
expressed in grades. However, most engraved typefaces from
Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign of China are influenced by
Sung Dynasty engraved books. Therefore, as far as typeface
sizes are concerned, sometimes these typefaces will come
with characteristics of long, short, tall and flat simply for the
sake of presenting typeface individuality and sense of beauty
from respective calligraphers. This research selected books
that account for the majority of volumes as samples. The
expectation of this research is, despite the awareness of
something missing, to obtain some statistics from existing
studies in order to compensate philologistsϗ lack of
explanation on Chinaϗs Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign
typeface size application. In order to study and analyze
actual point size application on ancient books, this research
tries to summarize and integrate point size rules applied to

III.

STUDY ON ENGRAVE BOOK TYPEFACE SIZE

For typeface on modern day layout editing and designing
for books and publications, their applications include point
size changes and rich and diversified typefaces. Visually, this
leads to more possibilities. Typefaces can be regarded as
pure typefaces while, in the meantime, they can also be
treated as parts of graphs depending on the changes in point
sizes. As for typeface application on Chinese Ming Dynasty
Wangli Reign ancient books, there were several engraved
books written in Xiao Tze such as Ϙ New Edition for
Scholar Hsu, Xuan Fuϗs Compilation on Mao Poem Six
Chapter Jiang Yi,ϙ ϘNew Edition for Shih Gan Li Dai Jun
Duan,ϙ ϘXing Li Xuan Cuiϙ and so on. In Sung dynasty,
there were books with mini size pages and large size pages.
For Jin Chang Ben in Ming dynasty, however, most of them
have large size pages with relatively wider and larger
calligraphy, about 20 to 30 centimeters of height and 15 to
28 centimeters of width. Most typefaces are Zhao typeface
with the size of ancient coins. For application of large/small
size typefaces on ancient books, the purpose of using Ϙlarge
size typefaceϙ is, as compared with todayϗs application of
different sizes of typeface in printing, presumably for
engraversϗ convenience in engraving and printing, or for
readersϗ convenience in searching while reading. Whether
itϗs engraved printing or typography printing, ancient
people would impose careful calculation on layout to ensure
low cost and exquisite layout while enhancing editing
effectiveness. However, are these really the reasons for
ancient peopleϗs application of different size typefaces on
engraved books? Among various factors that influenced the
application of typeface size in Chinese Ming Dynasty
Wangli Reign ancient books, there were no specific materials
in various related documents that can offer explanation on
this issue. This research tries to explore if there are any
specific rules of application or other factors remain to be
discovered. Accordingly, this research is focused on the
discussion and analysis on the presentation of visual
phenomenon.
Typefaces used in Chinese ancient books evolved from
large/small Zhuan in the early days to Li Shu which was then

556

followed by Shin Cao and Kuang Cao that move like clouds
and water in a flat space and Jen Shu, also known as Kai
Shu, which has a rigorous space structure. From the
perspective of rich and changing flat space utilization for
Chinese typeface, it will not be persuasive to claim that
column width of ancient books is the only reason that limits
point size. Furthermore, the size of typeface on books will
influence the setting and planning on the lines of layout and
becomes a long-practiced rule simply because of typeface
structure relationship and visual needs. In fact, we can find
from Chinese Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign ancient books
that applications of typeface on each of these books were
rich and diversified. In some cases, there were even
applications of different typefaces on the same layout. Take
ϘChu Xue Jiϙin illustration 1 for example. Notes written
in Xiao Tze were listed side by side with contents in the
same column. Typefaces for contents are flat while the ones
for notes are relatively slender. Furthermore, most printed
typefaces on Chinese Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign ancient
books were written by calligraphers before being engraved
by engravers later. Therefore, there should be no specific
size limits on typeface utilization.

IV.

ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION ON WANGLI ENGRAVED
POINT SIZE

Most words in the lines of each edition of Chinese
ancient books have fixed patterns. However, there are some
cases that don’t have fixed patterns. For instance, if we
examine the size of words in ancient books from the
perspective of modern day printing editing concept,
generally the size of words for volume name on the first line
of each page is the largest. Size of words for contents comes
in the 2nd place while the one for notes is the smallest.
Nevertheless, this way of categorization seems to be slightly
sloppy and simple and there is no reference from a more
accurate comparison. Accordingly, this research tries to
further explore and understand this issue. This research
investigated 217 Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign engraved
books collected by the National Central Library of Taiwan.
An investigation was conducted by taking measurements on
first volumes and contents of first pages. Basic contents for
measurement in this phase include the followings in the first
pages of the first volumes for each of Ming Dynasty Wagnli
engraved books: 1. point size for volume name; 2. point size
for large typefaces in content; 3. point size for notes.
Explanation on basic forms is presented in illustration 2.
Based on measurements from the survey over Chinese
Ming Dynasty Wangli version ancient books, we have come
to the conclusion that “point size for volume name is bigger
than the one for content,” “point size for content is bigger
than the one for notes” and “point size for volume name is
bigger than content point size which is bigger than notes
point size.” On the other hand, we have also found that
“point size for volume name is smaller than the one for
content,” “point size for content is smaller than the one for
notes” and “point size for volume name is smaller than
content point size which is smaller than notes point size.”We
have also learned if point sizes for various different elements
are the same. Through cross observation and analysis on
these statistics, we are then able to discover numbers, among
numerous statistics, that can serve as our references. Our
findings are presented in table 1 below.

Figure 1. Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign “Chu Xue Ji”

TABLE 1 Presentation of Comparisons among Point Sizes for Editing
Elements of Ming Dynasty WangliVersion
Point Size Comparison on Various
Number of
Editing Elements
Books
1 Volume Name Point Size Ї Content Point Size
56
2 Volume Name Point Size Ј Content Point Size
117
3
180
Content Point Size Ї Notes Point Size
4
12
Content Point Size Ј Notes Point Size
5 Volume Name Point Size Ї Content Point Size
48
Ї Notes Point Size
6 Volume Name Point Size = Content Point Size =
3
Notes Point Size
7
Volume Name Point Size < Content Point Size
36
8
Content Point Size < Notes Point Size
0
9 Volume Name Point Size < Content Point Size <
0
Notes Point Size
10
No Notes
25

Figure 2. Ming Dynasty Wangli Reign “Chu Sao Chi Yu
”- Illustration on the Study of Point Size

(statistics compiled from this research)

557

parameter editing on engraved books all originated from the
imitation of Jan Ce books which were composed of strips of
bamboo books. That was why these books were edited into
using the same size typeface for both volume names and
content in order to go with the form of one bamboo strip for
one line of words. As for application of notes in content,
most of them were edited in the form of two lines of notes
listed side by side in one column and their sizes were smaller
than the ones for content. No typefaces for notes are bigger
than the ones for content. Furthermore, typefaces for notes
were squeezed and lengthened when two lines of notes were
crammed side by side into one column. This characteristic of
slender typeface has become its most distinctive feature such
as ϘChou Yi Gu Jin Wen Quan Shuϙ in illustration 5 and
ϘMao Shih Ju Shuϙ in illustration 6.

We learn from the survey and analysis above that, for the
first volumes of Chinese Ming Dynasty Wangli Version
ancient books, books with volume name point size bigger
than content point size outnumbered those with content point
size bigger than volume name point size. Take illustration 3
“Liu Jin Tu”for example. Its volume name point size is
bigger than content point size and its editing presentation
also comes with the function of decoration and reminding.
As for illustration 4 “Da Ming Hui Dian,”its content point
size is bigger than volume name point size. However, there
are not many differences if observed in naked eyes. Their
differences will only appear under the measurements with a
gauge.

A. Volume Name Point Size Distribution
The total number of books for volume name point size
measurement is 217 which are listed in table 2 below after
being organized and calculated.
TABLE 2 Volume Name Point Size Distribution for Chinese Ming
Dynasty Wangli Version
Volume Name
Point Size
Number of
books

32

38

44

50

56

62

70

80

100

7

28

83

65

14

7

6

1

2

(statistics compiled from this research)

Figure 3. Ming Dynasty Wangli
Version “Liu Jin Tu”

Figure 4. Ming Dynasty Wangli
Version “Da Ming Hui

Figure 5. Ming Dynasty Wangli
Version “Chou Yi Gu Jin Wen
Quan Shu”

Figure 6. Ming Dynasty Wangli
Version “Mao Shih Ju Shu”

ʳʳ

Figure 7. Ming Dynasty Wangli
Version “New Edition ʳfor
Scholar Hsu, Xuan ʳFu’s
Compilation on Mao PoemʳSix
Chapter Jiang Yi”ʳ

During our comparison and analysis, the number of
books with point sizes for volume names same as the ones
for content accounts for the most part. There are a total of
117 of them. This explains why there is a certain connection
among column width, parameter and typeface size. For all
engraved typefaces on ancient books, almost all of their sizes
followed the parameters of column width. Typeface sizes are
almost the same as column width. Formations of such

ʳʳʳ

Figure 8. Ming Dynasty Wangli
Version“Xing Li Xuan Cui”

Measurement result indicates that, for point size utilized
on volume name, the smallest is about size 32 with width
and height of about 0.7-0.8 centimeters such as illustration 7
of “New Edition for Scholar Hsu, Xuan Fu’s Compilation
on Mao Poem Six Chapter Jiang Yi” and illustration 8 of
“Xing Li Xuan Cui.”The number of books with point size
44 accounts for the biggest part, a total of 83, with the size

558

TABLE 4 Ming Dynasty Wangli Version Notes Point Size Distribution

of about 0.9-1.1 centimeters. However, size 44 is never a
representative point size used for ancient book volume
names because, after all, it only stands for 83 books out of a
total of 217 books. This is not an absolute majority and
therefore, it cannot become a representative point size. The
truth is that sizes 38 to 50 are the most commonly used
point sizes such as the one in illustration 9.

Volume Name
Point Size
Number of Books

20

24

28

32

38

44

50

56

2

2

7

12

25

23

27

29

(statistics compiled from this research)

ˉˈ
ˉ˃
ˈˈ
ˈ˃
ˇˈ
ˇ˃
ˆˈ
ˆ˃
˅ˈ
˅˃
˄ˈ
˄˃
ˈ
˃

ˋˈ
ˋ˃
ˊˈ
ˊ˃
ˉˈ
ˉ˃
ˈˈ
ˈ˃
ˇˈ
ˇ˃
ˆˈ
ˆ˃
˅ˈ
˅˃
˄ˈ
˄˃
ˈ
˃

˄˃

ˆ˅

ˆˋ

ˇˇ

ˈ˃

ˈˉ

ˉ˅

ˉˋ

ˊˇ

ˋ˃

ˋˉ

ˌ˅

ˌˋ

Version
32

38

44

50

56

62

70

5

37

99

45

24

4

3

(statistics compiled from this research)

˄˃˃
ˌ˃
ˋ˃
ˊ˃
ˉ˃
ˈ˃
ˇ˃
ˆ˃
˅˃
˄˃
˃
ˇˇ

ˈ˃

ˈˉ

ˉ˅

ˉˋ

˅ˉ

ˆ˃

ˆˇ

ˆˋ

ˇ˅

ˇˉ

ˈ˃

ˈˇ

ˈˋ

ˉ˅

CONCLUSION

From the existing Chinese Ming Dynasty Wangli ancient
books we find that there is no size limit on the utilization of
typefaces. It is observed that, in the first volumes of ancient
books, the number of cases with volume name point size
larger than content point size is larger than the ones with
content point size larger than volume name point size.
During our comparison and analysis, it is observed that most
books have same point sizes for their volume names and
content. This indicates that there is a certain connection
between column width and point size on ancient books.
Regarding typefaces for volume name and content, there
were no differences in point sizes during editing. They all
follow the rule of one bamboo book for one line of words.
As for applications of notes in content, in most cases, two
lines of notes were written, side by side, in one column. Most
typefaces for notes are smaller than the ones for content and
none of them are larger than the ones for contents. In the
case of two lines of notes listed side by side in one column,
their typefaces would shrink and lengthen from squeezing.
Such a characteristic of long typefaces had become its most
distinctive feature which is presented in illustration 12.

TABLE 3 Content Point Size Distribution for Ming Dynasty Wangli

ˆˋ

˅˅

V.

B. Distribution of Content Point Sizes
Point size distribution for content is more aggregated as
compared with the one for volume name. Most of them
aggregated in the range of sizes for volume names. Their
sizes ranged from size 32 to size 70. Differences in width
and height between two typeface sizes are about 0.9
centimeter which is not big. Most point sizes distributed in
the range from size 38 to size 50. This is roughly the same as
finding from comparison and analysis on the survey
mentioned above. Most of them are size 44 as presented in
table 3. An obvious sharp curve can be observed from the
examination of distribution curve on illustration 10.

ˆ˅

˄ˋ

Figure 11. Notes Point Size Distribution Curve

Figure 9. Curve for Volume Name Point Size Distribution

Volume Name
Point Size
Number of Books

˄ˇ

ˊˇ

Figure 10. Curve for Content Point Size Distribution

C. Notes Point Size Distribution
For notes presentation on ancient books, most of them
were presented in the form of two lines written in one
column. Therefore, typefaces for notes became relatively
taller and longer. As compared with point sizes for above
mentioned two items, the overall point size for notes is
much smaller, with the largest of size 56 and the smallest of
size 20. The number of books with size 56 is the biggest
with a total of 29 books as presented in table 4. However,
the total number under size 56 accounts for the majority of
samples from the perspective of the analysis as a whole.
This indicates that, as compared with other typefaces, point
size for notes is the smallest among all typefaces in a layout.
This is presented in illustration 13.

559

[9]

Figure 12. “San Guo Ji” Notes

[10]

It is observed from the survey in this research that it
was a common phenomenon that volume name point size
for Chinese Ming Dynasty Wangli version ranged from
size 38 to size 50. Point size distribution for content is
more aggregated as compared with the one for volume
name. Most of them aggregated in the range of sizes for
volume names. Most content point sizes distributed in the
segment from size 38 to size 50, with the number for size
44 accounts for the most part. The largest point size for
notes is size 56 while the smallest is size 20. The number
of size 56 accounts for the most part. Overall, the number
of point sizes smaller than size 56 accounts for the
majority of samples. This indicates that, among all
typefaces in a layout, point sizes for notes are the smallest
as compared with the ones for other typefaces.
If we compare this with point sizes on Chinese Sung
dynasty version, we can find that most point sizes for
volume names on Sung dynasty version ranged from size
44 to size70 and most content point sizes are also
distributed in the segment from size 44 to size 70. The
largest point sizes for these two are all size 70. There are
very few cases with point sizes larger than size 70.
However, for point sizes distribution on Ming Dynasty
Wangli version, most of them are distributed in the
segment from size 38 to size 50, with the number for size
44 accounts for the biggest part. With this, we can find
that, for volume name and content point size distributions
on both Sung dynasty and Ming Dynasty Wangli version,
sizes for volume name and content are the same. As for
notes point sizes for Sung dynasty version, most of them
are in size 38. There are also a lot of cases with sizes
smaller than size 38 but only a few cases with sizes larger
than size 38. The largest point size for Ming Dynasty
Wangli version is size 56 while the smallest is size 20,
with cases of size 56 account for the biggest part. As a
result, it is observable that there are some differences in
point sizes between the two.

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

Chinese Printing Museum, “Collections of Chinese Ancient
Printing History, ”Cultural Relics Press, City University of Hong
Kong,1998.
Chinese Printing Museum, “ Pride of Printing, ”Zhe Jiang People’s
Fine Arts Publishing House, Hang Zhou, 2000.
Wang, Shin-Fu, “Wang, Shin-Fu on Philology, ” Shanghai Gu Ji
Publishing House, Shanghai, 2000.
Shih, Mei-Cen, “Printing Development History in China, ” The
Commercial Press Limited, Taipei, 1986.
Sung, Yuan-Fan, Li, Bai-Jen, “Publishing History of China, ”
China Publishing Company, Beijing, 1991.
Li, Bai-Jen, “General Perspective on Chinese Publishing Culture, ”
Guangxi Education Publishing House, Guangxi, 1999.
Li, Ji-Zhong, “General Perspective on Ancient Book Philology, ”
National Library of China Publishing House, Beijing, 1998.
Li, Ji-Zhong, “General Perspective on Ancient Version Printing,
”Forbidden City Publishing House, Beijing, 2000.

560

Li, Chin-Ji, “Authentication Research on Ancient Book Version, ”
Wenshizhe Publishing House, Taipei, 1986.
Li, Rei-Liang, “Circulation History for Chinese Ancient Books, ”
Shiji Publishing, Shanghai Renmin Chubanshe, 2000.
Li, Wan-Jen, “Ancient Printing in China, ” Daxiang Chubanshe,
Zhengzhou, 1997.
Du, Ze-Xun, “General Perspective on Philology, ” Chunghua Book
Company, Beijing, 2002.
Hong, Ron-Hua, “Origination of Engraved Printing, ” Printing
Industry Publishing House, Beijing, 1990.
Written by Qu, Wang-Li and Chang, Pi-De, Modified by Pan, MeiYue, “General Perspective on Philology, ” Chinese Culture
University, Taipei, 1986.
Compiled by Collection Division of the National Library, “Initial
Edition on Rare Book Collection of the National Library,”
National Library, 2000.

