2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Design Decisions for a Brazilian t-Commerce Application
Nikolas Carneiro1, Anderson Marques1, Ranieri Teixeira1, Aruanda Meiguins2, Bianchi Meiguins1
Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA)1, Rede de Informática Ltda.2
{nikolas.carneiro@gmail.com, anderson.gmarques@gmail.com, ranibtx@gmail.com,
aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br, bianchi.serique@terra.com.br}
applications, as security functions, inventory control,
account tracking, etc.
Similarly to what happened to trade on the web, it is
expected that the t-commerce, which is the marketing of
products through interactive TV, to popularize. At first
look, the major utility of t-commerce is the ability of the
viewer to purchase a product that being released through
a commercial, been this for general public or oriented
through profile associated with set-top boxes [3].
But for this popularization to happen, it is necessary
to evaluate the development of applications in this new
scenario and further validate the decisions made based
on user tests. To this end, this paper presents the research
made for developing a t-commerce application using a
visualization technique. We conducted non-oriented user
tests in order to evaluate the development decisions and
point which strategies are suitable for the Brazilian iDTV
environment.
Section 2 briefly describes the Brazilian scenario of
iDTV. Section 3 list works that contribute to the
development of this project. Section 4 approaches some
of the problems faced during this work, and the logic
behind its resolution. Section 5 presents the tests
designed to an preliminary evaluation of the application
and the user results on the proposed tasks. Section 6
bring some final considerations about the application
effectiveness and its use as an entry point for IV
(Information Visualization) and iDTV.

Abstract
Digital TV interactivity implies a great potential for
social and digital inclusion, especially in a country like
Brazil, where 95% of households have at least one TV.
Due to the importance of Interactive Digital TV in this
scenario, it is necessary not only to provide new
applications to support services on TV, but also to
evaluate the technological challenges and development
practices, in order to provide viewers suitable
interactivity considering the environment limitations.
This paper presents the design process of a t-commerce
application for the Brazilian iDTV middleware, the
theories that based the development and an analysis of
its appliance in a real scenario test.
Keywords: Interactive Digital TV,
commerce, Information Visualization.

Ginga, t-

1. Introduction
The digital and social inclusion is a problem that
Brazilian government has been investing in ways to
solve. One of these ways is the definition and adoption of
one middleware for digital interactivity on TV (iDTV),
once that new environment, bring a high potential of
popularization since 95% of Brazilian houses has at least
one TV [1]. This approach also aims to add most of
benefits provided by the web environment, as the rapid
availability of applications, content and updates,
possibility of access to content available from several
sources and the ability to make collaborative the
applications on the platform.
As well as the internet popularization took the
migration of applications to web platform, the
dissemination of interactive systems for TV, whether
they are connected to TV (set-top boxes - STB) or
embedded into them (interactive TVs), produce a proper
environment to the migration of applications to support
the services on iDTV platform. As an example has the ecommerce, a service widely used on web environment
[2] which are linked to several auxiliary services and

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.39

2. Interactive Digital TV in Brazil
To provide a better understand about the decisions
made during the design process we should first look at
the scenario in which the application was designed.
To avoid excessive costs, the Brazilian Digital TV
System was based on the Japanese system (ISDB-T), but
with architectural changes to fit it for the Brazilian
needs. One of these changes is the middleware, which
was entirely defined in Brazil and focus on interactivity,
the Ginga middleware [4].
Ginga is a free middleware which provides support
for both declarative and imperative applications,
respectively through its sub-systems, Ginag-NCL and
Ginga-J.

176

environment. The main contribution from this work was
present a commerce application that is directly
interactive through the TV.

Although the Ginga-J is a procedural environment,
and then, more suitable for an application that generates
the user interface dynamically, its late development stage
makes the adoption of this system a problem, since it is
not fully implemented in all Ginga supporting STBs [4].
On the other hand, the Ginga-NCL is well defined,
consolidated and all the Ginga STBs are demanded to
fully support it.
In Brazil, the concept of interactive TV may be
slightly misplaced, once there are programs where the
viewer are able to participate in the program using other
means, like phone calls, sms messages, etc. Other
noticeable situation is that some users are very restrictive
about the use of the TV, these ones keep themselves
strictly to the change channel and volume of the TV,
showing difficulty to perform other interactions.
Considering the number of Brazilian households
with TV access [1], the actions from the Brazilian
government to facilitate internet access and the under
development laws to force Ginga support in TV devices
to be produced, there is place for this kind of access
become a great entrance for digital inclusion.

3.4. A Visualization Interface Applied in the
Brazilian T-Commerce Scenario
Marques [8] presents an application in t-commerce
support that uses the treemap [9] [10] [11] technique to
provide a better way for viewers to compare and chose
products.
This work is an extension on Marques research to
offer an information visualization application for tcommerce support. While [8] focus on the application
itself, this paper is mainly about the decisions that guided
the development and the validation of these decisions
through user tests. The interface of the application are
show in Figure 1.

3. Related Work
By the time we are working on this project, no other
work that uses information visualization on iDTV was
found. Even so, we select some works that were valuable
to this research and in the end, the work that originated
this paper.

3.1. LuaOnTV
Figure 1: the Marques [8] version for the
interface, presenting configuration of colors but
absent captions.

The LuaOnTV [5] project is a Lua framework that
offers gui components to be rendered on Lua, allowing
developers to dynamically generate user interfaces. The
great challenge to overcome in this work was implement
and use object oriented components with acceptable
performance. Unfortunately, the project version 1.0
shows performance issues and bugs and its development
is now discontinued.

There are a few differences in the user interface of
the application from what is seemed in [8] and how it is
presented here.
The main differences are about the inclusion of
captions to help the viewer to remember previous
configurations and the removal of the option to configure
colors.
The colors configuration was removed because there
is no proper control to handle continuous data that fit the
interactions available using the remote control. To not
interfere with the test we decide to take this functionality
out for these tests.
Other change is that the interface now provides
feedback about products that are in the cart. There is a
counter indicating the amount of items in the cart and
these items are drawn in a different color from the rest of
the items in the treemap.
Figure 2 shows the interface as used in this paper's
tests. The areas that changed are highlighted. In the
control's area there are no longer buttons for setting color
(since this functionality are no longer available) and to
exit (this functionality is now activated in a context

3.2. Conceptual Models for T-Commerce in
Brazil
Ghisi [6] defines a t-commerce model based in three
characteristics: presentation, payment form and
associative content. The author's definitions about
presentation and associative content were important in
order to define a scope for this work prototype.

3.3. Development of a System Providing a
Personalized Yellow Page Service Based on an
Interactive Video Application Service
This work [7] presents a personalized yellow page
service through the IPTV (Internet Protocol Television)
177

•

colored control key). The "Buy" button in the interface is
now "Cart" and it also counts the number of products in
the cart. The highlighted differences are in the bottom of
the interface, controls in the right and caption below the
treemap.

Usage scope: it defines how to handle the
application in terms of storage, according to its
relation with content being transmitted through
TV. Morris [12], propose a classification for
iDTV applications based on this relation.

4.1. Life cycle
Being an application for sales, there is no reason for
keeping it into the STB once its content is out.
Discarding the app after use is also useful to free space
into the STB, once it is very limited on these devices.
The application suits for the Service Bounds
applications class, according to Morris [12]. Even its
usage is dependant from the content show on TV, the
application generates its interface according to the data
loaded and its process is independent of the meaning of
these data, allowing the application to be transmitted
many times, even sequentially, with no code changes.
Considering this, the application is only available to
be started during the commercial its data is related to. If
it is started its available until the user decide to end it.
Besides the memory consumption question, the
application should not remain in the viewer STB because
its data can run outdate and the product information on
the STB may be no longer correct.

Figure 2: the new interface, captions and less
buttons.

4. Design Decisions
This paper presents a prototype to easy the choose of
products while buying through the TV, using an IV
technique. However, this project also intends to evaluate
and validate techniques to develop IV tools for the
Brazilian iDTV scenario.
In order to use IV concepts we have to adapt them to
the environment particularities, since these concepts
usually demands lots of computational power and precise
interaction mechanisms, which ones are not available in
the iDTV environment.
To guide these adaptations we considered both
technical and contextual particularities, listing the
following five characteristics as major guides during the
design of the prototype:
• Environment functionalities: to assure the
prototype would work properly in every device
supporting GINGA, it was necessary use only
pure resources from NCL and Lua languages. It
prevents the use of third part APIs, once some
of them make use of non-native resources.
• Environment limitations: once there are severe
hardware limitations on GINGA Set-top Boxes,
it was necessary to keep the processing and
memory consume as low as possible.
• Untrained user: because of the nature of the
application and the way it is made available,
there will be a huge variety of user profiles and
this one's should possibly get the application
without any prior training, since they will get it
together with the TV programs.
• User motivation: due to the limitation in the
interaction device, navigate over lots of items
can become tiring for the user and represent a
discouraging factor for using the prototype.

4.2. Navigation
In tree visualization techniques [13] the most
common way to navigate is using pointing devices (mice,
touchscreens, etc..), through the actions of drag and drop,
click and mouse hover. However, the Ginga does not
foresee any pointing device in its definition, making the
arrows on the remote control the most friendly way to
navigate on the display.
Taking into account the motivation and the lack of
prior user training, we defined a unique navigation model
for both visualization and controls in the user interface.
This model is an adaptation based in the tree hierarchy
[14], where a hierarchical level of the tree only becomes
accessible through its parent node.
In this model, each interactive component in the
GUI of the prototype is a node in the tree and you can
walk across the nodes of a tree level using the arrow keys
on the remote control, to interact with the children of a
node, it is necessary to "enter" at that node.
Each node is a rectangular area and sibling nodes are
located based on the direction of the arrow pressed and
its position in the interface. When an arrow is pressed,
the sibling node that is at mid-height and in the direction
of the arrow is selected. In case there is no eligible node,
i.e., there is no node who fit in the characteristics of the
"move", the selected node remains the same.
Beside the fact that this approach allows to handle
visualization and controls in the same way, it is also
useful, in some cases, for reducing the number of

178

interactions required to navigate from a an item in the
treemap to another.
The number of interaction navigating hierarchically
over treemap falls as much as the data is grouped
compared to navigating plainly. The following example
demonstrate the decrease in interaction effort using the
same treemap configuration using hierarchically
navigation. Once there is no prior training to the viewer,
both paths are traced in reading order, i.e., from left to
right and from top to bottom.

arrow keyes It use the following set of key pressings:
LEAVE, ĺ, Ļ, Ļ, ENTER, ĺ, ĺ, Ļ and ĺ. In a total of
9 key pressings.
Generally while using hierarchical navigation, as
more grouped the treemap are and more items it
represents, increase the diference of number of
interaction to go from one item to another in other group.

4.3. Viewer support
Once the viewer has no previous use of the
application and there is the possibility of configuring the
visualization technique, it becomes necessary to provide
run-time instructions and subtitles to guide the viewer.
As the subtitle refers directly to visualization, we
chose to keep it right below the treemap, as show in
Figure 1. They are intended to remind the user of the
settings made. The instructions for use are in the area
above the configurations buttons.
The application also keep track of the products in
the cart for the user. The user is told how many items,
are in the cart and these items gain a different color in
the treemap. To spare space, this information is
displayed as a simple counter in the chart button.
In addition, the viewer does not lose the visibility of
what is being shown on TV. The video programming is
scaled to the top right corner of the application,
occupying approximately 10% of screen space, and
audio is maintained. Thus, even if the viewer spend a lot
of time choosing products, the channel programming will
always be present.

Figure 3: path from nodes A to B in plain
navigation.
Figure 3 exemplifies the path needed to go from an
A item to a B item in plain navigation. The following set
of key pressings are needed: ĺ, ĺ, ĺ, ĺ, ĺ, Ļ, Ļ, Ļ, Ļ,
Ļ, Ļ, Ļ, Ļ, ĺ, Ļ and ĺ. In a total amount of 16 key
pressings.

5. User tests
The tests were conducted with nineteen users, from
5 different age ranges: from 15 to 25 years, from 26 to
35, from 36 to 45, from 46 to 55 and finally beyond 55
years. In order to establish user profiles, the users were
inquired about their amount of familiarity with iDTV, if
they had already made use of e-commerce and if they
would buy products over TV.
The dataset used for the test contains cell phones
data like characteristics and prices, and it was get from a
local store. The dataset contains information like cell
phones dimensions, weight, display size, camera
resolution, GPS and wi-fi functionalities, price and
others. There are twenty records in the dataset, divided in
ten attributes, five categorical and five continuous.
The proposed test was not oriented, which means,
the user did not get instructions on how to perform the
tasks in the test. The user got just information in which
context the application will be used, its functionality and
the set of keys to interact with an Ginga application.
We chose to conduct the test that way because in a
real use scenario, viewers will not have any prior training
to use the application. The test is made of five tasks, each
one delimited by a time and with an additional time
tolerance of one minute, except for the first task.

Figure 4: path from node A to B in hierarchical
navigation
Figure 4 demonstrate the path along the same two
items using hierarchical navigation. Since we use the
hierarchy of the treemap the keys for entre a group
(ENTER) and leaving it (LEAVE) are used with the
179

ones who started the application the longest time
registered for this was 180 seconds and shortest time was
5 seconds. 75% from these 5 seconds users claim they do
not have any previous knowledge/experience using
iDTV, and none of these users were above
In the third task only 53% of the users were able to
find, add and percept that one item was added to the cart,
32% of the user were not able to find and add an product
to the cart at all.
63% of the users succeeded in finishing the task 4 in
the given time. However, we notice that some of them
did not realize any treemap configuration, the task was
realized only navigating, observing on demand details
and remembering the prices of already visited items.
Despite the fifth task is an extension of the previous
one, 47% of the users were not able to succeed in it. 20%
of the users who failed task 4 completed task 5 correctly.
From the users who completed this task, only 10%
completed it by configuring the treemap to display
graphical information about both attributes analyzed. The
other users completed the task by navigating, looking
into on demand details and remembering the
characteristics of visited items.
At the end of the test each participant was asked to
fulfill an NASA-TLX assessment [15], in order to
evaluate the test subjective workload, which an average
value of 37,31.

5.1. Proposed tasks
The first task intends to identify if the users are able
to start the application in a given time. We used two
minutes as this time. No additional time was given since
the application is no longer available to start once the TV
commercial have ended. The second task consisted of
two minutes for the user interact with the application at
will. The intention here is to give the user a time to
explore and get more used to the ways of interaction with
the application. As task two is just a free time, it is not
determined in section 5.2, but the impressions gathered
from users in this task are mentioned in section 5.3.
The third task gives 4 minutes for the user to take a
look at the offered products, using any interaction ways,
choose one and add it to the "cart" for later purchase. The
objective here is verify if the feedback given by the
interface is enough to catch user's attention for the
product added to cart.
In the fourth task, the user are supposed to be able to
find the cell phone with the higher value for a continuous
attribute, in this case, the price. This task wants to verify
the way user are able to complete it, since configuring
the size of items in the treemap will lead to the answer
with only one interaction. The time for thgis task was
also four minutes.
The fifth task is an extension of the previous one,
but slightly more difficult since it combines two
attributes one categorical and one continuous. In this task
the user are asked to find the cell phone with higher price
that has touchscreen display. Once the configurations
made are reset for each task, this task required the
configuration for the last one to be remade, justifying the
time of 4 minutes for this task.

5.3. Conclusions
We noticed that the captions were not used by most
of participants, some of them do not even notice it. When
asked about, some users report that it was not enough
visible, while orders claimed to have noticed and did not
understand the meaning of the words in the caption. We
connect this fact to two factors: the use of words very
close to IV, like "hierarchy", but not so common in other
contexts and the decision to keep the captions under the
visualization. We believe that the small size of the
captions and the visual appeal of the treemap cooperate
to "hide" the captions.
The major problem reported by the users was the
navigation. Users do not see the treemap as a tree, but as
a plain arrangement of rectangles, and so, most of them
showed difficulty to use the hierarchical navigation.
Even after having successfully navigating inside and
outside the treemap levels, some users apparently forgot
that need and tried to go from one item in a group to
other in another group only using the arrows. In this
cases the instruction of use in the right side of the
interface also does not seems to be enough to aid the
user.
Again, the terms used for the instructions were not
clear enough to user understand. Some users reported not
being able to easily figure the keys to enter and leave an
group, while others complained that hierarchical
navigation only difficult the interaction.
During the test, most of users did not make use of
the instructions or captions. In general, they used

5.2. Results
Figure 5 shows the success and failure rates for each
task. Even we choosing users who claim to use TVs at
least daily, some of them show resistance to the way of
interacting with the application. When asked about this
resistance, users come up with the information that they
use very few resources of the TV, most of them only use
the channel and volume turn buttons. This factor was
mostly noticed in users from higher ages. 26% of the
users are from 46 to 55 age range, 11% from 36 to 45,
the other ranges has 21% of the users each.

dĂƐŬ ϭ dĂƐŬ ϯ dĂƐŬ ϰ dĂƐŬ ϱ
^ƵĐĐĞĞĚĞĚ ϳϵй ϱϯй ϲϯй ϱϯй
&ĂŝůĞĚ
Ϯϭй ϰϳй ϯϳй ϰϳй
Figure 5: percentage of users that succeeded
and failed in each task.
In the first task, 21% of the users could not start the
application in the given time, from these 75% are in the
46 to 55 range and 25% in beyond 55 range. Among the
180

memory to keep track of the configurations made.
Another point was they prefer to navigate through the
visualization and check characteristics on details, instead
of reconfigure the visualization.
The users expressed to like the treemap technique
and the use of the grouping options, using this feature
was identified as a key in the task 1. However, the lack o
perception over the captions usually made users return to
configurations to remember what was previously
configured.

[5]
[6]

[7]

6. Final Considerations

[8]

Even with the environment limitations and the lack
of prior training for the users we considered the test
results as positive. It is important to highlight that most
users had never saw an IV tool before and had little,
some had none at all, experience with any kind
interactive graphics.
In every task more than half of users succeeded in
completing it in the given time, implying that the
application can be successfully used as an mean of
digital inclusion.
Another positive factor was that no user pointed the
application performance was an issue, even in interaction
that forced full treemap redrawing. Nevertheless an
evaluation to determine until what amount of data (being
in number of items or in number of attributes) the
performance is acceptable, remains to be done.
The issues mostly pointed by users were the
hierarchical navigation and the viewer support. The
research now on might focus in develop an way to
navigate more easily and not as costly for the user as
plain navigation. The viewer support, as caption and
usage instructions, are to be made more visible or
explore other ways to call the user perception.
As a future work, we intent to have a similar group
of users to perform similar tasks in a computer based
information visualization tool. The idea is to compare
both quantifiable and non-quantifiable, as users
impression, between both environments (computer and
TV). It will also serve to validate or not the premise if
the iDTV, considering TV popularity in Brazil, is a better
entrance point for digital inclusion.

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

IBGE Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios Síntese de Indicadores. ᜜IBGE - Instituto Brasileiro de
Geografia e Estatística.Rio de Janeiro.᜚s.n.᜚2009.
Baladhandayutham T., Venkatesh S. B2B e-commerce:
An Integrated Approach for Construction Industry –
ICFTE᜜2010.
Jensen J. F. Interactive Television: New Genres, New
Format, New Content. Proceedings of the Second
Australian Conference on Interactive Entertainment.
2nd᜚2005.
SBTVD Fórum SBTVD. [Online]2010᜜[Citado em: 01
06 2010] http://www.forumsbtvd.org.br.

181

LuaOnTV᜜[Online]2011᜜[Citado em: 20 Setembro
2011] http://luaforge.net/projects/luaontv/
Ghisi B. C., Lopes G. F., Siqueira F. Conceptual Models
for T-Commerce in Brazil. Anais do Workshop on
Interactive Digital TV in Emergent Countries at EuroITV
– Emergent iDTV.2010᜚pp.22-27.
Hur S. J., KANGS.J., Choi W. A Development of a
System Providing a Personalized Yellow Page Service
Based on an Interactive Video Application Service.
Proceeding of International Conference on New Trends
in
Information
and
Service
Science
NISS’09.2009᜚pp.1154-1157.
Marques et al. A Visualization Interface Applied in the
Brazilian T-Commerce Scenario. Conference on
Information Visualization (IV)᜜2011᜚15th᜚pp.188193.
Bruls M., Huizing K., van Wijk J. Squarified Treemaps
Proceedings of the Joint Eurographics and IEEE TCVG
Symposium on Visualization᜜1999.
Shneiderman B. Tree visualization with tree-maps: a 2d
space-filling approach.ACM Transactions on Graphics.
September 1992᜚Vol. 11᜚No 1᜚pp.92–99.
Shneiderman B., Wattenberg M. Ordered Treemap
Layouts᜜April 2001᜚pp.73-78.
Morris S., Smith-Chaigneu A. Interactive TV Standards.
2005.
Shneiderman B. et al. Innovation trajectories for
information visualizations: Comparing treemaps, cone
trees, and hyperbolic trees. Information Visualization
16 11 2011.
Chen C. Editorial – Information Visualization.
Information
Visualization᜜2002᜚Vol.
1᜜—᜜
Information Visualization Beyond the Horizon
London᜚Springer᜚2᜚2006.
Hart S. G., Stavenland L. E. Development of NASATLX
(Task Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical
research. s.l.᜚Elsevier᜚1988᜚pp.183-139᜚7. Book
Section.

