2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Playing with Reconciliation: engaging primary school students with the values of
reconciliation using a video game.
Theodor Wyeld, Belinda MacGill, Faye Blanch and Pam Thompson
Flinders University of South Australia, Australia
{theodor.wyeld@flinders.edu.au}
Abstract

concepts in a visually stimulating way. This paper
expands on the background in this field reported in [13]
and an earlier pilot study reported in [15].

The use of games in educational contexts is not new
[see 22, 12, 10, 17, 8, 11, 6]. However, the exploration of
evoking the values of reconciliation through a 3D
interactive game for primary students is novel. This short
paper outlines a recent video game development that
explores notions of reconciliation in the context of a
shared culture between non-Indigenous and Indigenous
peoples of colonised lands. The game is designed to
address the key concepts of reconciliation that is, trust,
empathy and collaboration. Evaluation of 29 schoolaged children suggests there is much efficacy in this
approach. The study forms the basis for ongoing
collaborative research with national education
authorities to include the game in the national
curriculum. The framework developed will be
transferable to other contexts and countries facing
similar issues.
Keywords--reconciliation,
colonialism, video game, pedagogy.

2. A Reconciliation Game
The goal of the reconciliation game is for students to
develop an understanding of collaboration through
working together and sharing resources. The key values
of reconciliation namely, trust, empathy and
collaboration have been built into game play and created
as part of the exploratory pathways to challenge students.
Significantly, players need to develop a clear
understanding of these concepts to be successful in
playing the game [3, 4, 5, 18].
Events in the game are structured to simulate the
harshness of the outback Australian environment. In
gameplay, this harshness translates into the rapid loss of
‘health’ – players need to constantly attend to healthgiving acts to preserve their avatars. Throughout the
gameplay they discover they also need help from others
to maintain health-preservation, thus developing notions
of trust, empathy and collaboration.
Any number of players can play the game at the
same time from different machines – optimally, however,
12 players play on 2 teams of 6. Players are randomly
spawned in the game as either a sheep or a kangaroo.
Hence, they do not know, in advance, which team they
will be on. Kangaroos and sheep have an equal number
of, but different, healing and destructive powers or spells
they can cast on each other (see figure 1). For example,
kangaroos can cast the fire spell which takes away the
food source, but they can also invoke rain which puts out
the fire and stimulates new growth. Sheep can foul or
poison the waterholes and create erosion pits, but they
can also be contained behind fences which prevents them
from spreading their damage. And, all players can
voluntarily cast healing spells on each other to
reinvigorate their health, thus avoiding an early exit from
the game.
A subplot of the game is to collect treasure and bring
it back to the team base. Once the maximum number of
treasure items (same as the number of players on a team)
have been collected the game is over. However, as

indigenous,

1. Introduction
Reconciliation between colonised countries and
Indigenous peoples is a global issue [1, 16]. Australia is
in the process of developing its understandings of
reconciliation between non-Indigenous and Indigenous
people [7, 9]. Reconciliation in Australia has come some
way towards understanding the need for a shared culture
[14, 20]. However, in the education sector, attempts to
include Indigenous perspectives in the curriculum
continue to be taught in fragmented and inconsistent
ways [21]. In an attempt to address this fragmentation in
the Australian education system an innovative approach
has been trialled that focuses on the core values of
reconciliation with promising results.
A 3D interactive computer game has been developed
to assist school-aged children to experience firsthand
notions of trust, empathy and collaboration, arguably the
key values enacted in any reconciliation process.
Leveraging school-aged children’s prior knowledge of
using computer games, the reconciliation game provides
a fun environment for students to explore complex
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.81

471

players’ health deteriorates quickly, much time is spent
on health preservation tasks rather than treasure
collecting alone. This provides players time to reflect
upon and discuss strategies for helping each other. The
different teams have different types of treasure.
‘Boomerang treasure’ is used to represent land claims
and is associated with kangaroos. ‘Scroll treasure’ is
used to represent land titles and are associated with
sheep. There is no limit to how long a single session of
the game can be played before all the treasure has been
returned to base.
Once the game is complete students gather in a
circle sitting on the classroom floor and discuss their
feelings about the game: strategies, teamwork, and when
they discovered they needed to work together to succeed
(if they did). This is then discussed in more general terms
around notions of empathy, trust and collaboration.
Finally, the history of Reconciliation is revealed to bring
these notions into the context of a shared Australian
culture [2].

strategies they had discovered for retrieving treasure for
their team and preserving health. Many of the games
played were short and purposeless – other than for one
team trying to destroy the other team. Coming out of
their discussions, however, were notions of alternative
strategies for prolonging the gameplay which required at
least some cooperation with the competing team.
In the second trial, within the first 12 minutes of
gameplay, one student identified the need to assist
another in protecting them from harmful spells and thus
maintain their health levels so they could retrieve the
necessary treasures and win the game. This was the first
explicit evidence of collaboration. This was quickly and
independently replicated by other teams, and hence, the
game-play shifted from the “kill-em’ all” gameplay to a
more empathetic game of role negotiations. In time, this
included members of the other team who were willing to
be co-opted for a common good. In discussions after the
game, some of the students described how they protected
themselves and others in the game by “working
together”, “caring about each other” and “cooperating”.
They highlighted those salient moments when they felt
“hopelessly doomed”, such as when one player was
trapped in a ditch and needed help getting out, or elation
when “saved by rain” after having a fire spell cast upon
them.
In general, there was consensus that:
x the game brought players together rather than
divided them
x teams were fluid – players could help each other
out regardless of which team they were on, and
x winning was not the main goal.

3. Evaluation
In April 2011 the game was trialled with a combined
year six and seven class of 29 primary school students,
ages 11-13 (FUSA ethics approval 4939). Prior to the
trial, an open forum survey was conducted with the class
on notions of reconciliation. This revealed a high level of
confusion amongst the students as to what the core
values of reconciliation were. After the game trial, a
second survey was conducted on the same topic. The
second survey showed that, of the 25 students who
completed the survey, 21 answered all three questions
correctly:
x Q1. What do you think Trust is?
o A1. Rely on others to help you.
x Q2. What do you think Empathy is?
o A2. Feeling someone else’s pain and/or
happiness.
x Q3. What do you think Collaboration is?
o A3. Cooperating with others to achieve the
same goal.
Compared to the confusion the class had expressed
prior to the game trial, this survey result shows that after
the game trial most students were able to correctly
identify the core values of reconciliation. In an open
forum students were asked when they experienced these
core values. Most contextualised their experiences within
the gameplay and interactions with other players in the
game. This further suggests the core values were
experienced, recognised and reinforced by the game trial.
The game trial was conducted in 2 parts. The first
part was used to familiarise the students with the game
interface and its features. In the second part, students
were more focussed on gameplay strategies. Following
the first game trial, students openly discussed the

Conclusion
The importance of a national Reconciliation
pedagogy for colonised countries cannot be understated
[19]. A shared culture without prejudice is only possible
when empathy, trust and collaboration towards a
common future are assured. The computer game
developed by the authors of this paper provides a vehicle
for these notions to be explored. It does so in a way that
provides a risk-free, non-threatening, environment for
school-age children to engage with the concepts at a
level with which they are familiar – video games. It
promotes reflection on their role as a member of a
collective rather than focusing on the individual.
Whether this game proves to be a sustainable method to
engage primary aged students in understandings of
Reconciliation remains to be fully tested. After further
evaluation and improvements, the authors of this paper
propose to introduce the game as part of a National
Reconciliation pedagogy and monitor its effectiveness
over the next 24 months.

472

Figure 1. Screengrab of ‘Aussie Recon’ Reconciliation pedagogy game interface.

[10] Handler Miller, C., 2004, Digital Storytelling: A
Creator's Guide to Interactive Entertainment, Focal
Press.
[11] Hjorth, L. and Chan, D. (Eds.) 2009 Gaming Cultures
and Place in Asia-Pacific, Routledge.
[12] Iverson K. M., 2004, E-Learning Games: Interactive
Strategies for Digital Delivery, Prentice Hall.
[13] MacGill, B & Wyeld, T 2009 ‘The need for a
Reconciliation pedagogy: educating for a more holistic,
shared Australian cultural heritage’, in Proceedings of
the 4th “Cultural Heritage Knowledge Visualisation
Symposium” in the 13th European Conference,
Information Visualisation, IV09, Barcelona, Spain, July
14-17.
[14] MacGill, B 2008, Apology to the stolen generationexperts response, Australian science media centre,
<www.aussmc.org/ApologytoAboriginalAustralia.php>.
[15] MacGill, B.M., Wyeld, T., & Blanch, F., 2010. ‘ReWriting Recent History: developing a National
reconciliation pedagogy using a video game for school
age children’. Proceedings: 2010 14th International
Conference Information Visualisation, 397-402.
[16] McConaghy, C 2000, Rethinking Indigenous Education:
Culturalism, Colonialism and the politics of knowing,
Post Pressed, Flaxton.
[17] Prensky, M., 2000, Digital Game-Based Learning,
McGraw-Hill.
[18] Schon, D. A., 1995, The Reflective Practitioner: How
Professionals Think in Action, Ashgate Publishing.
[19] Smitz, P, Ashworth, S, Bain, C & Bedford, N 2004,
Lonely Planet Australia, Lonely Planet Publication.
[20] Tannoch-Bland, J 1997, Identifying white race privilege,
viewed
11
February
2007,
<www.mailarchive.com/recoznet2@paradigm4.com.au/msg02617.ht
ml>
[21] Taylor, T & Clark, A 2006, ‘An Overview of the
Teaching and Learning of Australian History in Schools’,
prepared for the Australian History Summit, Canberra,
August 17th 2006.
[22] Williamson Shaffer, D., 2008, How Computer Games
Help Children Learn, Palgrave Macmillan.

Acknowledgment
The Torque game engine application used as a
prototype for the ‘Aussie Recon’ Reconciliation
pedagogy game interface is based on the game engine
developed by the Canadian-based i-mmersion
organisation, Stacey Spiegel CEO and his team in 2004,
called Mystic Maze. A joint workshop was held at the
Brisbane Institute of Modern Art in 2005. Many of the
scenes and assets created at that workshop have been
used in this game.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

Armitage, A 1995, Comparing the policy of Aboriginal
Assimilation: Australia and New Zealand, UBC Press,
Vancouver.
Blainey, G, 1982, Triumph of the Nomads: A History of
Aboriginal Australia, Overlook TP.
Bourdieu, P 1990, The Logic of Practice, (trans.) Nice,
R., Polity Press, Cambridge.
Caillois, R, 2001, Man, Play and Games, University of
Illinois Press.
Dewey, J 1997, Experience and Education, Free Press.
Edvardsen, F. and Kulle, H. (Eds.), 2010, Educational
Games: Design, Learning and Applications, Nova
Science Pub Inc.
Foley, D 2000, 'Too white to be black, too black to be
white', Social Alternatives, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 44-49.
Gibson, D., Aldrich, C. and Prensky, M. (Eds.), 2006,
‘Games and Simulations’ in Online Learning: Research
and Development Frameworks, IGI Global.
Groome, H 1994, ‘Education: the search for relevance’,
Aboriginal Studies: Windows on Indigenous Australia,
Reader, The University of South Australia Press,
Adelaide, pp. 161-177.

473

