2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Design of Urban Space at Pedestrian Scale: A Method for Parameterization of
Urban Qualities
Anastasia Koltsova, Antje Kunze, Gerhard Schmitt
Chair of Information Architecture
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
koltsova@arch.ethz.ch, kunze@arch.ethz.ch, gerhard.schmitt@sl.ethz.ch
In order to simplify the data management and facilitate
the communication process between stakeholders our
research group develops parametric and procedural design
support tools. These tools aim at visualizing, analyzing, and
generating virtual urban design scenarios at various levels of
urban scale (including pedestrian scale). One of the great
challenges that is crucial for the development of design
support tools is that much of the data in the design process
has a non-mathematical nature. It is hard to identify the
parameters of urban form that are quantifiable and that can
be implemented within parametric/procedural software. This
paper presents a method for parameterization of urban
qualities at pedestrian scale developed through collaborative
workshops with practicing architects and urban designers,
teaching exercises and the review of urban design literature.

Abstract—This
paper
focuses
on a
method
for
parameterization of urban space at the pedestrian scale. There
is a growing demand for new design approaches that would
help to slow down urban sprawls, move away from modernist
urban planning models and improve the quality of urban
centers overall [15]. One important aspect that contributes to
the overall sustainability of contemporary cities is the quality
of pedestrian space. To enhance urban environment at
pedestrian scale new design strategies must be investigated.
Contemporary urban centers must provide various options for
public transport, contain fine-grained urban functions, mixeduse building types and good-quality public open spaces to
facilitate their use by pedestrians. The aim of this paper is a) to
identify the initial set of design parameters of urban form at
the pedestrian scale and b) to demonstrate the exemplary
implementation of these parameters within parametric
software, e.g. Grasshopper for Rhinoceros [26] and Esri
CityEngine [25] for analysis, optimization and evaluation of
urban settings.

II.

A. Decision support tools in urban planning
According to Erhan [28], design support research
emphasizes (a) how computers can assist designers, and in
what area, (b) how design problems can be represented for
computational support, (c) how computers can generate
solutions using these representations, and (d) how computers
can help to evaluate the quality of the generated solutions. In
architectural and urban design, several design decision
support tools exist [29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 38, 46]. However, new
requirements arise for decision support tools that enhance the
community design, e.g., in the field of participation, new
urbanism and sustainability [34].
Kim and Clayton [8] describe the use of BIM and ObjectOriented Programming to support Form-Based Codes (FBC).
FBC is a set of regulations that is used in the US to control
urban development, primarily physical urban form. The
parametric urban model is created to overcome existing
limitations by using shared databases and relevant
visualization. This tool can be used by the public sector to
ensure that density and block geometry regulations are
satisfied. At the same time, the private sector can use threedimensional FBC to obtain a clearer understanding of
regulations and design feasibility.
Müller et al. [24] introduced an attributed shape
grammar, called CGA shape grammar targeted at the
architectural design. It is the basis for the Esri CityEngine
System. CityEngine can rapidly produce and visualize 3D

Keywords-urban design; parametric modeling; procedural
modeling; design tools; pedestrian design

I.

INTRODUCTION

The goal of the research work presented in this paper is
to provide architects and urban designers with the design
support tools that would facilitate the creation of qualitative
urban space at the pedestrian scale. The provision for
qualitative pedestrian space would reduce the need for
private transportation, and, subsequently reduce fuel
consumption and environmental pollution and contribute to
the overall sustainability of contemporary cities.
Urban design is a complex process that encompasses a
number of disciplines and activities such as landscape and
architectural design, town planning, property development,
illustrating design principles and many more. It operates
across various spatial scales: from a single settlement to
architecture. Urban designers need to be constantly aware of
scales above and below the scale at which they are operating,
and also of the relationships ‘fragments - whole entity’ and
‘whole entity - fragments’ [40]. Urban design is a
collaborative and interdisciplinary process. It involves an
integrated approach and uses skills and knowledge of a wide
range of participants (later in the text referred to as
stakeholders). Such an approach implies collection and
management of considerable amount of data.
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.73

RELATED WORK

403

urban environments of any size. Integrating shape grammars
into the urban planning process offers unprecedented
opportunities to understand and encode urban patterns [20,
23] and to generate and visually assess urban design
scenarios [19, 21, 22].
Smart Solutions for Spatial Planning (SSSP) is another
example of digital applications for urban design with more
emphasis on large urban scale. Derix [2] described a ‘digital
chain’ (set of disintegrative tools) that covers geographic
information system (GIS) mapping, accessibility and routes,
urban structure generation, land-use and mix generation, and
massing and density visualization.
Some initial decision support tools have been developed
as urban simulation models and implemented in regional
planning processes [35, 36]. A further development is an
environment supporting the interactive design of urban
spaces that integrates behavioral and geometrical city
modeling [37]. Urban design variables can be more
intuitively accessed and visualized within such an
environment, resulting in urban scenarios that consider the
design of highways, accessibility studies, population and
projected employment distribution.
In general, the integration of the temporal scale along
with 3D rendering could provide a very powerful and even
more meaningful exploration of urban models.
III.

worked to derive desirable qualities of effective urban
places.
In the course of our research we have reviewed the work
of the aforemntioned design theorist in order to formulate the
preliminary list of urban design qualities that we later
translated into a set of design parameters for parametric and
procedural models.
IV.

METHOD FOR PARAMTERIZATION OF URBAN
QUALITIES

This section presents a method for parameterization of
urban qualities and their subsequent evaluation through
parametrically and procedurally generated urban models
(Figure 1).

URBAN DESIGN DISCIPLINE

First, confirm that you have the correct template for your
paper size. This template has been tailored for output on the
US-letter paper size. If you are using A4-sized paper, please
close this template and download the file for A4 paper
format called “CPS_A4_format”.
The segregation of urban elements that followed the
expansion of cities in the period after the WWII resulted
from the planners` overreaction to complexities of the new
industrial city and their aspiration to control it. The focus of
modern planners was on individual city sectors and on
private development while the design of public spaces was
left intact and its quality rapidly deteriorated [41].
The discipline of urban design as we know it today was
born in 1960s while searching for quality of urban space.
During the course of the discipline development there
emerged several schools of thought [40]:
• The visual-artistic tradition (for the most part end
product-oriented, it followed visual qualities and
aesthetic perception of urban space rather than any
other factors such as social, economic, political, or
spatial; Camillo Sitte);
• The social usage tradition (such traditions emphasize
the way people use space and cover issues of
perception and sense-of-place; Kevin Lynch, Jane
Jacobs);
• The place-making tradition (combines the two
earlier traditions)
As a part of the place-making tradition, a few design
theorists and practitioners such as Lynch [15, 16], Jacobs and
Appleyard [9], Ewing and Handy [5, 6] and Tibbalds [39]

Figure 1.

Diagram of the method for parameterization of urban qualities.

In the first step, the urban design literature related to
urban space quality was analyzed. The literature analysis
resulted in an accumulative list of urban design qualities. In
order to translate the selected qualities into parametric urban
models we formulated a set of design parameters describing
the urban form at the pedestrian scale. The last step was the
implementation of the derived parameters in parametric
software together with our students for the evaluation and
revision of the selected quality criteria. The preliminary list
of design parameters was added by our students in the course
of their work on the design projects which will be described
later in the text.

404

V.

DERIVED URBAN DESIGN QUALITIES AND
PARAMETERS

Table 1 presents the selected urban design qualities and
the derived parameters.
TABLE I.
LIST OF URBAN DESIGN QUALITIES
PARAMETERS FOR URBAN FORM AT THE PEDESTRIAN SCALE
Urban Design
Qualities

Accessibility

Accessibility of
green areas
Degree
openess

of

Permeability of
the edges
Imageability

Design Parameters
Distance between major functions
(e.g. housing, retail and leisure
facilities
and
transportation
hubs); landscape undulation and
pedestrian path configuration
Area (amount) of building
frontage obstructing an open
space
Area (amount) of building
frontage obstructing an open
space
Physical access, noise penetration
and emission
Number of courtyards, plazas,
and parks [#]
Noise level [very quiet/quiet/
normal/loud/very loud]

Legibility

Memorable architecture [y/n]
Limited view [y/n]

Enclosure

Proportion sky [% sky ahead/sky
across]

Linkage

Connectivity of green and open
spaces [(no connectivity) --||0|+|++ (high connectivity)]

AND

DESIGN

Author

Kevin Lynch
(1981)

Figure 2. Case study area “region Limmattal” with the two focus areas:
Schlieren and Altstetten, Zurich.

The “region Limmattal” is associated to the Zurich
metropolitan area. The Zurich region is the most important
economic Swiss region and has developed from an industrial
city to a polycentric metropolitan region in the last 50 years
[43].
More cities and villages close to Zurich get a
metropolitan character [43]. The “region Limmattal” in the
west of the city center has evolved from small villages along
the river Limmat like a pearl necklace to a traditional
expansion and industrial area. Today according to Diener, et
al. [43] the Limmattal becomes more heterogeneous and
fragmented. Although all 14 municipalities of the “region
Limmattal” have their specific population and growth
characteristics, they all share similar profiles such as a cardominated transit corridors and a valley that is densely
covered with infrastructure facilities, settlements and that has
only few protected green spaces inside [44]. In this paper we
will focus on the two local case studies Schlieren (6.38
sq.km / 16’100 people) and Altstetten (7.47 sq.km / 28’300
people).

Tibbalds et
al. (1993)
Stiles et al.
(2009)
Stiles et al.
(2009)
Ewing and
Handy
(2009)
Ewing and
Handy
(2009)
Tibbalds et
al. (1993)
Ewing and
Handy
(2009)
Ewing and
Handy
(2009)

The terminology used in this paper is derived from the
classification of urban quality criteria encountered in the
literature: for example (a) the classification of environmental
quality factors provided in Tibbalds et al. [39], which
include: legibility, identity and accessibility of green areas;
(b) the classification of Ewing and Handy [5], which
concentrates on the design qualities related to walkability,
such as: imageability (e.g. noise level, major landscape
features); enclosure (e.g. proportion street wall, proportion
sky across); linkage (e.g. connections between public urban
spaces); (c) the list of factors important for design of good
urban space provided in Stiles et al. [42], which include:
permeability of the edges (e.g. physical access, noise
emission); and (d) one of the performance dimensions of
urban space according to Lynch [15]: the accessibility.
VI.

VII. IMPLEMENTTATION OF PARAMETERS AND RESULTS
For the evaluation of the derived urban qualities the two
case study areas Altstetten and Schlieren, situated in the
“region Limmattal”, were selected. Both case studies were
introduced as project areas in the teaching exercises
supervised by our research team. The focus of the first
exercise was on the development of the procedural model for
Altstetten. The second exercise concentrated on the
development of parametric tools for the analysis of urban
space qualities for the case study in Schlieren.
A. Development of design guidelines
The urban structure of “Altstetten” was analyzed during
the field trips of the student course “New Methods in Urban
Simulations”. The analysis resulted in a compilation of
building and street types, open spaces, vegetation and
zoning. The urban design qualities and design parameters in
Table 1 were used as a reference to gather the design
parameters for urban form at the pedestrian scale.

CASE STUDY AREA: REGION LIMMATTAL

Our case study area the “region Limmattal” (Figure 2) is
an example for regions with strong attraction of medium
size,
linearity,
dominant
traffic
infrastructure,
industrialization, strong growth in inhabitants and jobs.

405

Scope

Building form
Figure 3. Public and private frontages of Rautistrasse, Zurich Altstetten

Qualitative and quantitative parameters were documented
in a survey and urban design qualities were measured and
identified during a site visit to the local case study area
Altstetten, Zurich.
As a base for the survey of the qualitative parameters the
SmartCode approach for the analysis of transect zones was
used [27]. The method of Ewing and Handy [5] for
identifying and measuring urban design qualities was
adapted and extended with ecological, socio-economic and
design parameters. Students documented their site visit
(Figure 3).
Design parameters of the street profiles, blocks, building
geometries, facades, open spaces and vegetation were
captured as conceptual sketches (Figure 4). Based on the
derived parameters the design guidelines for the urban
setting at pedestrian scale were established (Table 2).

Facade

Design parameters
Lot Depth [m]
54
Lot Coverage [%]
38.64
Block Dimension [m x
m] 19.5 x 39.6
Lot Width [m]
30
Lot Depth [m]
54
Lot Coverage [%]
38.64

First Floor
Grade [m]
2.5

above

Design guidelines
All buildings have
a
east-west
orientation.
Floor
plan
influences volume.
Balconies on south
and west side or
east side.

Entry and building
is orientated to the
yard. One entry
per building.

Open space

Number of courtyards,
plazas, and parks [#]
4
Noise level normal

Parking area and
green
organic
allotment area.

Vegetation

Proportion of native
vegetation [%]
50
Connectivity of green
and open spaces
[--|-|0|+|++]
0

Few trees 40 to 50
years old.
Grass &
shrubberies.

B. Generation of urban patterns and synthesis in one
parametric urban model
A set of specific urban typologies was formulated and
combined in urban patterns. Subsequently, a procedural
urban model was developed in Esri CityEngine (Figure 5).

Figure 4. Zurich Altstetten, Rautistrasse building form and east facade

TABLE II.
LIST OF THE USED DESIGN PARAMETERS AND DERIVED
GUIDELINES FOR THE CASE STUDY, ZURICH ALTSTETTEN, RAUTISTRASSE
Scope

Street profile

Block

Design parameters
Spatial Width [m]
~30
Street Width [m]
14
Moving Lanes [#]
2
Parking Lanes [#]
2
Sidewalk Width [m] 2
Proportion street wall: illdefined
Proportion sky [% sky
ahead]
50%
Block Dimension [m x
m] 19.5 x 39.6
Lot Width [m]
30

Design guidelines

Raised pavements.
Planted
central
dividing strip 1.50
(with
road
lighting).

Figure 5. Examples of the implementation of the case study Altstetten,
Zurich (Hefti and Grewe-Rellmann)

C.

Analysis tools of urban settings
Our second teaching exercise concentrated on the
development of parametric urban analysis and design tools in
the Grasshopper plug-in for Rhinoceros [26]. These tools

A block consists
of
a
building
cluster
(3-6
buildings).

406

were applied to a case study in Schlieren located in the
Limmattal Valley.
The old part of the city developed on the slopes of the
valley and was later extended by the industrial zone built
between the river and the railway running through the city.
Apart from the railway there are two major roads crossing
the city, the Badenerstrasse and Bernstrasse (connecting
Baden and Bern to Zurich respectively). As a result the city
is split into separate zones, which makes pedestrian travel
highly inconvenient. Therefore, we asked our students to
look for the ways in which the city structure can be enhanced
in order to facilitate its use by pedestrians. After the
introduction students were asked to identify the design
problem that they would like to explore. To a large extent the
choice of students was dictated by the problems lying on the
surface such as accessibility/navigation and the noise
emission. The next sections present several examples of
analysis tools that were developed by our students.
5.2.1. Urban space openness analysis. This parametric
tool helps to visualize the “openness” of urban public spaces
on a project site. The curves that represent the boundaries of
the open space are subdivided into a number of points (point
set 1). These points are then connected with lines to the set
of points on curves that represent the rooftop boundaries of
the surrounding buildings (point set 2). The algorithm checks
that lines are created only between the point set 1 and the
closest points in the point set 2. The lines connecting the two
point sets are then used to create surfaces. Figure 6 illustrates
the result where one can see the length of the vistas from
different open spaces on the project site.

The propagation of noise f(d) along the facade surface is
assumed to be proportional to the inverse of the square root
of the distance d :
To get the amount of noise for each face of the façade
surface we can calculate it as follows:

where K is the constant amount of noise. The faces of
building facades are colored based on the amount of received
noise. In the next step students combined the 2D and 3D
analysis to attain a complete picture. In the next steps we
plan to incorporate the absorption of the facade surface and
reflection as additional parameters.

Figure 7. Traffic noise analysis in central Schlieren (Hefti, Meier, Zahno):
(left) calculation of the 24-hour day cycle map of the traffic noise
propagation, (right) 3D analysis of the noise load on simplified building
facades and development of design iterations considering traffic noise, e.g.
noise pushes the facades back and behind existing buildings, the volume
expands.

E. Bicycle route design
Schlieren is bounded by the forest from the South and the
river with promenade from the North. The distance between
the two areas is too long to be covered on foot, however, it is
perfect for bicycle trips. In order to link these two natural
resources one of our students developed a tool that takes into
account the terrain undulation and the existing streets to
analyze the possible options for bicycle routes (Figure 8 and
9). The main parameters that are used in the system are:
slope angle (defined threshold from 0 to 15 degrees),
direction of movement, and number of intersection of the
bicycle route with traffic roads. The tool uses the bicycle
route drawn manually by designer in Rhino and provides
visual feedback on the design actions. More specifically, it
uses gradient colors from green to red to visualize the
accessibility of the proposed route by bicycle. Potentially, it
would be possible to categorize the routes by the required
amount of individual physical effort by considering the
weight of the bicyclist and the slope height relative to a
starting point of a bicycle trip.

Figure 6. Connection between point set 1 (open space) and point set 2
(roof top), right: Visualization of the space “openness” on the project site in
Schlieren (Bingyi Li, Christopher Choi, Yanchen Liu)

D. Noise propagation
This tool was developed by our students for the analysis
of traffic noise propagation on a project area. The noise
sources were the streets on a project site to which the
corresponding traffic volume and subsequent amount of
noise emission was linked (the data was taken from the GIS
website). Students developed a Grasshopper definition that
calculates the noise propagation on the 2D plane without any
obstacles and in 3D on building facades (Figure 7). The
calculation of the noise impact in 3D is based on the distance
from the mid-point of each face of the facade surface to the
closest point on the road.

407

Christian Grewe-Rellmann, Hans Leidescher, Patrick Meier
and Raymond Zahno. This work was supported by the SNF
Grant 130578 of the National Research Program NRP 65
‘Sustainable Urban Patterns (SUPat)’. Also, we are very
grateful to the reviewers for their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
Figure 8. The linkage between the two natural resources (river and the
forest) (Leidescher)

[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

Figure 9. The resulting bicycle routes connecting the river and the forest
(Leidescher)

[7]

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

[8]

In this paper we presented a method for parameterization
of urban design qualities and the implementation of
parameters in parametric and procedural software and
demonstrated some results of the case study. The paper also
provided an overview of the related work on the decision
support tools for urban design. Since urban revitalization and
enhancement of urban environment are likely to become
significantly challenging tasks for urban planners in the
coming decades, new design approaches are required.
The presented method provides an example of combining
the qualitative measurements of urban design qualities with
interactive decision support tools in urban planning. For the
evaluation of new urban qualities multiple city dimensions
have to be considered. In the future work the ecological,
socio-economic and design factors will be incorporated in
the interdisciplinary design guidelines and additional set of
parameters will be derived.

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

[17]

We would like to thank Jan Halatsch, Lukas Treyer,
Tobias Wullschleger, Luis Gisler, Ulrike Wissen, Noemi
Neuenschwander, Timo von Wirth and Julia Dyllong for
their continuing support and for many helpful discussions as
well as our students from the spring and fall semester 2011,
who participate inside the workshop “Articulating Urban
Complexities” and the major course “New Methods in Urban
Simulations” at the ETH Zurich, especially Sebastian Hefti,

[18]
[19]
[20]

408

J.N. Beirão, J.P. Duarte, R. Stouffs. Grammars of Design
and Grammars for Design: Grammar-based patterns for
urban design, Joining Languages. In Cultures and Visions:
CAAD Futures, PUM Canada. 2009.
C. Derix. Smart Solutions for Spatial Planning, Digital
Cities: London’s Future. The Building Centre, London,
2009, ‘Digital Masterplanning’, In The Complete
UrbanBUZZ, Jualiana O’Rourke (ed), University College
London Press, 184-190. 2009.
DETR (Department of the Environment, Transport and the
Regions). By Design, Urban design in the planning system:
Towards better practice. 2000.
J.S. Gero, Architectural Optimization – A Review, In
Engineering Optimization, Vol I, 189-199. 1975.
R. Ewing, S. Handy. Measuring the Unmeasurable: Urban
Design Qualities Related to Walkability. In Journal of Urban
Design, 14(1), 65–84. 2009.
R. Ewing, T. Schmid, R. Killingsworth, A. Zlot, S.
Raudenbush. Relationship between urban sprawl and
physical activity, obesity, and morbidity. Am J Health
Promot 2003, 18(1), 47–57. 2003.
H. Frumkin, L. Frank, R. Jackson. Urban sprawl and public
health: de-signing, planning, and building for healthy
communities. Island Press. 2004.
J.B. Kim, M.J. Clayton. Support Form-Based Codes with
Building In-formation Modeling – The Parametric Urban
Model Case Study, ACADIA Conference Proceeding 2010s,
133-138. 2010.
Jacobs A, Appleyard D, (1987). "Toward an Urban Design
Manifesto", in Le Gates, R and Stout, Routledge. New York
pp. 165-175
C. Dee. Form and fabric in landscape architecture, UK, Spon
Press. 2001.
G. Cullen. The concise townscape. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Burlington. 1994.
J. Gehl. Life between the buildings. Copenhagen, The
Danish Architectural press. 1986.
R. Krier. Urban space, New York, Rizzoli. 1979.
H. Loidl, S. Bernard. Opening Spaces, Basle, Birkhäuser.
2003.
K. Lynch. The Image of the City, Cambridge, Mass., MIT
Press. 1960.
K. Lynch, G. Hack. Site Planning. Cambridge, Mass, MIT
Press. 1984.
J.O. Simonds, B. Starke. Landscape Architecture. New
York, McGraw-Hill Professional. 2006.
W.H. Whyte. The social life of small urban spaces. New
York, Project for Public Spaces. 1980.
J. Halatsch, A. Kunze, G. Schmitt. Using Shape Grammars
for Master Planning. In J.S. Gero (ed), Design Computing
and Cognition DCC’08, Springer, 655-673. 2008.
A. Kunze, J. Halatsch, C. Vanegas, M. Maldaner Jacobi, B.
Turkienicz,, G. Schmitt. A Conceptual Participatory Design

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

Framework for Urban Planning: The case study workshop
‘World Cup 2014 Urban Scenarios’, Porto Alegre, Brazil, In
Respecting Fragile Places, 29th eCAADe 2011 Conference,
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 895-903. 2011.
P. Schirmer, N. Kawagishi. Using shape grammars as a rule
based approach in urban planning – a report on practice. In
Respecting Fragile Places, 29th eCAADe 2011 Conference,
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 116-124. 2011.
U. Wissen Hayek, N. Neuenschwander, J. Halatsch, A. GrêtRegamey. Procedural modeling of urban green space pattern
designs taking into account ecological parameters. In Peerreviewed Proceedings of FUTURE CITIES 28th eCAADe
Conference, ETH Zurich (Switzerland), 339-347. 2010.
C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, M. Silverstein. A Pattern
Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. New York,
Oxford University Press. 1977.
P. Müller, P. Wonka, S. Haegler, A. Ulmer, L. Van Gool.
Modelling of Buildings. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGGRAPH 2006/ ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
ACM Press, 25(3), 614-623. 2006.
EsriCityEngine,2012url:
http://www.esri.com/software/cityengine/
Grasshopper
for
Rhinoceros,
2012,
url:
http://www.grasshopper3d.com/
CATS, Center for Applied Transect Studies. SmartCode
Version
9.2.
The
Town
Paper
url:
http://transect.org/codes.html
H.I. Erhan. Interactive support for modeling and generating
building de-sign requirements. Doctoral Thesis. School of
Architecture, Carnegie Mellon University. Pittsburgh, PA.
2003.
H.H. Achten, Experimental Design Methods - A Review. In
International Journal of Architectural Computing, vol. 7, no.
4, 505-534. 2009.
J. Kieferle, U. Wössner, M. Becker. Interactive Simulation
in Virtual Environments - A Design Tool for Planners and
Architects. In International Journal of Architectural
Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, 116-126. 2007.
B. Turkienicz, B.B. Goncalves, P. Grazziotin. CityZoom: A
Visualization Tool for the Assessment of Planning
Regulations. In International Journal of Architectural
Computing, vol. 6, no. 1, 79-95. 2008.
J. Beirão, J. Duarte, R. Stouffs. Structuring a Generative
Model for Urban Design: Linking GIS to Shape Grammars.

[33]

[34]
[35]
[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]

409

In Architecture in Computro, 26th eCAADe Conference
Proceedings, Antwerpen, Belgium, 929-938. 2008.
A. Kunze, G. Schmitt. A Conceptual Framework for the
Formulation of Stakeholder Requirements. Future Cities, In
28th eCAADe Conference Proceedings, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, 697-705. 2010.
Z. Toker. Recent trends in community design: the eminence
of participation, In Design Studies, vol. 28, no. 3,
Participatory Design, 309-323. 2007.
P. Waddell. Modeling urban development for land use,
transportation, and environmental planning, In Journal of the
American Planning Association, vol. 68, 297-314. 2002.
A. Borning, P. Waddell, R. Forster. UrbanSim: Using
Simulation to Inform Public Deliberation and DecisionMaking. In Chen, H., Brandt, L., Dawes, S., Gregg, V.,
Hovy, E., Macintosh, A., Traunmuller, R., Larson, C.A.
(eds.), Digital Government: Advanced Research and Case
Studies, Springer, 439-463. 2008.
C. A. Vanegas, D.G. Aliaga, B. Benes, P. Waddell.
Interactive Design of Urban Spaces using Geometrical and
Behavioral Modeling. In ACM Trans-actions on Graphics,
also In Proceedings SIGGRAPH Asia, vol. 28, no. 5. 2009.
A. Koltsova, G. Schmitt, P. Schumacher, T. Sudo, S.
Narang, L. Chen. A Case Study of Script-Based Techniques
in Urban Planning. In J. S. Gero (Ed.), Design Computing
and Cognition ’10, Springer Netherlands, 681–700. 2011.
F. Tibbalds, Colbourne, Karski, Williams, Monro. London's
Urban Environmental Quality. London, London Planning
Advisory Committee. 1993.
M. Carmona, S. Tiesdell, T. Heath, T. Oc. Public Places Urban Spaces. The Dimensions of Urban Design, Oxford,
Architectural Press. 2010.
A. V. Moudon. Public streets for public use. Van Nostrand
Reinhold. 1987.
R. Stiles. Urban Spaces – Enhancing the attractiveness and
quality of the urban environment. Working Paper, Vienna
University of Technology. 2009.
R. Diener, J. Herzog, M. Meili, and P. De Meuron,
Switzerland: An Urban Portrait. ETH Studio Basel. 2006.
M. Koch, M. Schumacher. The Belly of the Planner:
Discovering the urban potential of the Limmattal, In
Landscape Architecture in Mutation. Institute for Landscape
Architecture, ETHZ, gta Verlag, Zürich. 2005.

