2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Television News Graphical Layout Analysis Method Using Eye Tracking

Rui Rodrigues, Ana Veloso, Óscar Mealha
Dept. of Communication and Art
University of Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
ruirodrigues@ua.pt, aiv@ua.pt, oem@ua.pt

graphics used in TV News and there main function will be
presented. Third, a systematization of the most common
visualisation techniques used with eye tracking data. Fourth,
the analysis method developed and demonstrated in a
controlled study is reported. Fifth, conclusions are presented
and future work is considered.

Abstract—This paper presents an analysis method used to
evaluate the graphical layout of Television (TV) News. With
the data gathered from an eye tracker, it is possible to discern
viewers’ main focus of attention. However, in the case of video
media, the visualisation tools of eye tracking software are
insufficient for this discernment. This method uses eye
tracking log files and combines them with algorithms
developed using a spreadsheet application and visual data
representation techniques. As a result of this combination, it is
possible to identify the graphics which have greater visual
attention, and subsequently, these representations supported
the analysis of viewers’ main focus of attention (areas of
interest). A case study was also applied for the validation of
this method.

II.

During the last 30 years several authors have studied
TV news. Elements such as the attention as well as the news
story messages were analysed in this genre of TV program
[4-11]. However, with the progress of new technologies, as
well as the development of digital scenography in TV news,
the inclusion of eye tracking can be relevant in order to
assess the experience and interaction of a user with a
specific study object.
Still, few studies have been developed with the use of
eye tracking in TV News. One of these studies was
conducted in 2006 by Josephson & Holmes [12], with the
aim of measuring the attention spent by participants in
different areas of TV news (crawler, headline, title, globe
and main area). This study presented three versions of TV
news with: i) video and audio redundancy without textual
content; ii) video and audio redundancy and unrelated
textual content (crawler) and iii) video and audio
redundancy with related and unrelated textual content
(crawler and headline).
Matsukawa, Miyata and Ueda [13] conducted a study
using eye tracking technology, which was aimed to
understand the use of graphics in TV news and information
redundancy. The study was divided into two moments: i) the
first moment intended for viewers to watch a TV news
broadcast with eye tracking technology; ii) the second
moment consisted in understanding the degree to which
viewers understood the content present in the TV news
broadcast. This study was important to understand the
relationship between graphics and reception of contents.
Another study developed in this area was the research
project “Portuguese TV news scenography: from simplicity
to profusion of news rooms studios” [14]. During this
project, a preliminary experience was also developed with an
eye tracker, which focused on the study of selective attention
on TV News’ program of the Portuguese public television
channel – RTP. The results obtained presented several
indicators and evidence of the unexplored field of TV

Keywords – Analysis Method, Television News, Eye
Tracking, Graphical Layout, Visual Attention

I.

INTRODUCTION

TV News programs have seen significant changes over
the last few years. One of the most important changes can be
found in the graphical layout, with the introduction of onscreen graphic elements (over the shoulders, tickers, lower
thirds) during news broadcasts, creating new ways of
transmitting information. This information reception context
has increased in complexity such that visual stimuli are
presented diversely in the visual space and in most situations,
also simultaneous in time. These graphics are visual stimuli
with content and have the intention to provide extra
information or additional messages to complement the
anchor and news video.
The research in this area is far from having convergent
results and therefore, further investigation on TV News is
necessary, specifically because graphics are a reality that will
endure [1]. In this area, and according to Josephson &
Holmes [2], the use of eye tracking can assume a very
important role for the study of TV News, more specifically
in the study of visual composition. The eye tracking
technology allows the detection and registration of viewers’
eye movements [3], and in this context, eye tracking
becomes a crucial technology to clarify the influence of
visual composition. The visual composition considered in
this study includes several elements such as ticker, over the
shoulders, bugs, lower thirds and the anchor.
This paper is divided into five main sections. First, a
theoretical framework that supports this study is presented,
namely focusing eye tracking in TV News. Second the main

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.66

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

357

Finally, the “Ticker”, sometimes referred to as a crawler
(Fig. 1D), usually appears at the bottom of the screen and has
the intention of displaying less important news. The "Ticker"
is increasingly used to show other types of textual content,
such as the short messages sent by viewers as well as
advertising information [16]. This graphic is also a motion
textual image.
Lastly, there are other graphics that are part of TV news
broadcast, but their occurrence is less frequent. There are the
cases of notice boards that occupy the entire screen, as well
as the generic and the end credits.

information reception. Another study was conducted by
Marques [15]. This author developed a study where the
primary goal was to evaluate the impact of scenography as
well as the visual and auditory attention of viewers when
viewing news in a TV context.
III.

GRAPHICAL LAYOUT IN TV NEWS

There are different graphics for different purposes.
However, all these graphics have the common intention of
endowing TV news broadcasts with a distinctive and unique
identity, establishing a better connection with the viewer.
Fig. 1 highlights the main graphics present in TV News:
Bugs (A), Over the Shoulders (B), Lower Thirds (C) and
Ticker (D).

IV.

EYE TRACKING VISUALIZATION TECHNIQUES

Visual representation of data and information is of
utmost importance since it helps with the interpretation and
comprehension of abstract data that is non-understandable
[17]. In the context of eye tracking data visualisation,
techniques have been developed. Fig. 2 represents some of
the visualisation techniques developed for eye tracking
context.

Figure 1. Graphical Layout (RTP)i

Regarding Bugs (Fig. 1A), this still graphic appears
normally in the left superior corner of the screen, and is
typically used to place the TV Station's logo. The term
“Bugs” is applied to this graphic because during the news
emission, the position of this graphic is always the same
[16]. Usually, the clock is associated with "Bugs", but
sometimes the clock can be associated to "lower thirds" or
the "ticker", as is shown in Fig. 1.
The graphic element "Over the Shoulders" (Fig. 1B),
normally appears in the news that has higher impact,
therefore revealing the relevance of the news story. The term
"Over the Shoulders" is applied because it generally appears
in the superior part of the shoulder of the anchor [16]. In
some countries it appears on the right side of the anchor
(Portugal, Spain, France), and in another countries it appears
on the left side of the anchor (Germany, Switzerland,
Austria). The "Over the Shoulders" is usually accompanied
with an image or icon, with the intention of establishing a
link with the news story being presented.
Concerning the "Lower Thirds" graphic (Fig. 1C), this
appears normally in the lower area of the screen, as the name
suggests. The "Lower thirds" have a major importance in TV
news broadcasts since they have the intention of highlighting
the news story being presented. This news story can be
detached by key words of short sentences with great impact.
The "Lower Thirds" can be divided into three types,
depending of the informative textual lines that are present: i)
One-tier lower third; ii) Two-tier lower third; iii) Three-tier
lower third [16]. This graphic is a motion image.

Figure 2. Representation of common Visualisation Techniques used with
Eye Trackingii

The main visualisation techniques that are represented in
Fig. 2 are:
• Gaze Plot (A) – This visualisation technique
consists in showing the sequence (and their order)
of the eye movements of a subject. This data
representation technique uses variation in circle size
to indicate different fixation times. In other words,
the larger the circle, the longer the fixation. The
lines that connect the circles represent saccadic
movements (rapid eye movements that occur
between fixations). In this visualisation technique, it
is also possible to see the path and the order of eye
movements with a timeline. However it is only
possible to visualize a single subject at a time.
• Heat Maps (B) – This visualisation technique
consists in mapping with colour levels the main
visualisation zones of a specific visual field. A heat
map will also display elements of greater interest by
colouring “hot” (red and orange colours) and “cold”
(green colours) spots/areas. The "hotter" the

358

A. Method Description
The analysis method that was developed
d
is divided into
three main phases: i) Collection of eye tracking data (Fig. 3,
Phase 1); ii) Extraction of log file data from an eye tracker
into a spreadsheet application (Fig.
(
3, Phase 2); iii)
Application of algorithm (Fig. 3, Phase 3).

colours, the more visualised the areea was. Finally, in
this visualisation technique it is alsso possible to use
two types of metrics: i) number oof visualisations;
and ii) fixation time.
• Bee Swarm (C) – This visualisation technique
consists in showing in the form off points, the spot
where a user focuses. It can alsoo simultaneously
present the attention points of different users.
Different colours are used to distinnguish the points
of each subject.
• Clusters (D) – Finally, clusters coonsist in defining
areas of interest for posterioor analysis of
concentration of fixation points. T
This visualisation
technique can be applied either foor a subject or a
group of subjects in non-temporal m
media.
Although eye tracking technology sooftware includes
some effective visualisation techniques, inn some contexts
these techniques have limitations. It is aalso important to
mention that these limitations are related to tthe software used
in this study (Tobii Studio). With this sooftware, it is not
possible to use the main visualisation techhniques for video
analysis, because this software can only pprocess the time
variable that appears in video media with tthe “bee swarm”
visualisation technique. Taking into accounnt some of those
limitations, several authors developed technniques in order to
provide other solutions. One of those casees was developed
by Raiha et al. [18]. These authors proposedd a new technique
where temporal information played a key role in eye tracking
data representation and visualisation. Theyy designated this
technique as "time plot of the gaze data" [188]. Authors in the
analysis of web search results listings used this technique.
Another example that attempts to explore eyye tracking as an
important tool of information visualisation w
was developed by
Flag et al. [19]. These authors developedd an information
visualisation system that adjusts to the speciific necessities of
a subject.
V.

Figure 3. Analysis Meth
hod Phases

The first phase consists in cap
pturing the viewers’ eye
movements. This registration is do
one using an eye tracker.
The second phase deals with the co
ollection of data from the
eye tracker’s log files. The relev
vant data that has to be
extracted for analysis are: x-coordin
nate, y-coordinate and the
duration of each fixation. This dataa is then converted into a
format compatible with the analyssis data in a spreadsheet
application which is dependent of the characteristics of the
temporal media being studied. The third
t
phase is divided into
two moments: i) the application off the algorithms (3a); and
ii) visual representation of the data obtained with these
algorithms (3b). The first momeent (3a) consists in the
application of two algorithms to
o the collected data: i)
“fixation points algorithm”(FPa); and ii) “fixation time
algorithm” (FTa). Fig. 4 represen
nts a bounding box of a
predetermined analysis area, characcterized by its dimension
with the coordinates of its origin in
i the bottom left corner
(B0,0), the coordinates of the bottom
m right corner (BB,R) and
the coordinates of the top left cornerr (BT,L).

METHOD

The method reported in this paper appplies to temporal
media, e.g. audio-visual content, and has the following main
goal: Identify the graphic elements, preseent in TV News,
which have greater visual attention. With thhis, it is possible
to differentiate viewer’s main focus off attention. The
relevance of this method is related to some evidence
presented in the theoretical framework as weell as some of the
limitations in the analysis of graphical layoouts evidenced in
several studies with eye tracking and TV N
News [12, 13, 15].
Moreover, the visualisation tools of the eye ttracking software
are insufficient for the discernment of viiewer’s focus of
attention in graphical layout and therefore, it was necessary
to develop an analysis method for represennting this data in
temporal media. Summarily, this representaation is based on
an algorithm that correlates eye tracker loog file data with
analysis data described in a spreadsheet appplicationiii. This
method aims to represent the visual behavviour of a set of
viewers when they watch TV news that uses a superimposed
dynamical graphical layout.

Figure 4. Bounding Area Ch
haracterization

359

FPa algorithm

B. Study Context
The analysis method described above was applied in an
empirical study. The study consisted in participants
watching approximately 10 minutes of a sample of TV
News on a Tobii T120 eye tracker monitor. A convenience
and non-probabilistic sample of 80 Portuguese university
students took part in the study. The participants’ age ranged
from 18 to 30 years old (mean = 22.5), with 40 female and
40 male participants. A pre-session and post-session survey
was used as an instrument for data collection. Results
acquired from these surveys are discussed in [20].
A controlled study object was used throughout the
study. The reason behind the production of this news sample
was to prepare a set of news stories with unfamiliar content
to all the participants in the study, in order to avoid possible
bias from previous knowledge about the topic and graphical
layout. Four (4) sets of sample news were used and each
participant only visualized one of the sets, selected in a
random order. All sets were composed of 6 news stories,
with the same global length. Each one of the sets had nine
minutes and fifty-two seconds (09:52) length. The topics
were: Society, Sciences and Technology, Actuality (2 news
stories), Culture and Sport. These topics were chosen
because they are the most common thematics in Portuguese
TV News’ and trigger a greater interest in viewers. The
sample news used were assembled from stories developed at
the University of Aveiro’s “3810” television program.
This experience presented two versions of TV News: i) a
version without any graphics (clean feed version); and ii) a
version with graphics overlay. In this second version, in
addition to the anchor (AOI2), a set of four areas of interest
(AOI) with graphic elements are used: Bugs (AOI1), over the
shoulders (AOI3), lower thirds (AOI4), and ticker (AOI5), as
can be seen in Fig. 5.

L = Total number of log file entries.
ri(x,y) = log file data sample (x and y coordinate, and fixation time).
cFP = Fixation Point count (number of points). Initial condition of cFP is 0
point counts.

¦

L

i =1

if ( B0, 0 < x( ri ( x, y ) ) < BB ,R AND B0, 0 < y (ri ( x , y ) )
< BT , L )cFP = cFP + 1;

The first algorithm (FPa) calculates the total number of
fixation points within a predetermined bounded area of
analysis. Defining a bounding area is important because
there may be fixation points outside the intended area of
analysis (Fig. 4). After defining the bounding area, all log
file entries (L) are imported into a spreadsheet application.
Each log file entry (ri(x,y)) is tested; if the “x AND y”
coordinates of the data sample (ri(x,y)) are within the defined
bounding area, the counting variable is increment once [cFP
= cFP+1]. The final count number held by cFP corresponds to
the total number of fixation points for the predetermined
bounding area, previously determined for analysis according
to temporal media study areas and temporal intervals.
FTa algorithm
L = Total number of log file entries.
ri(x,y) = log file data sample (x and y coordinate, and fixation time).
cFT = Fixation time count (ms). Initial condition of cFT is 0 millionth of a
second (ms).

¦

L
i =1

if ( B0, 0 < x (ri ( x , y ) ) < BB , R AND B0, 0 < y ( ri ( x , y ) )
< BT , L )cFT = t (ri ( x , y ) ) + cFT ;

The second algorithm (FTa) consists in obtaining the
total fixation time of a predetermined bounding area of
analysis. Similarly to the first algorithm (FPa), a bounded
area must be defined and all log files entries (L) must be
imported. For each log file entry (ri(x,y)), if the “x AND y”
coordinates (ri(x,y)) are within the defined bounding area, then
sum the respective time (t) of ri(x,y) [cFT = t(ri(x,y)) + cFT]. The
sum value held by cFT indicates the total fixation time for the
defined bounding area analysed. The second moment (3b)
consists in visually representing the data obtained from these
algorithms in a “bubble chart”. Here, the maximum and
minimum values of the x and y coordinates are defined (i.e.
the intended bounding area). The position of each bubble in
the chart is defined by a x and y coordinate, and the size of
the bubble by the respective fixation time: the larger the
bubble, the longer the fixation. This visual representation of
data can be considered a combination between "Gaze Plot"
and "Bee Swarm", because it represents in terms of size the
time spent in each fixation point (gaze plot), as well as the
number of fixation points of one or more viewers (bee
swarm). However, this visual representation of data does not
represent the saccades or the visual path of the viewer over
time (another characteristic of the "Gaze Plot"). Finally, the
desired Areas of Interest on the TV screen layout can be
adapted to these algorithms.

Figure 5. Graphical Layout (ex. Anchorwoman)

Finally, it is important to explain the procedure followed
in this experience. Each participant´s session started in a
room that was prepared to receive him/her in a comfortable
and controlled environment, to whom was explained the
purpose of the study. The first task of the study consisted in
answering a pre-session survey. After answering the survey,
participants were taken to an area where the eye tracker was

360

placed to watch one of the four sets of sample news. After
watching the sample news, participants were asked to answer
a post-session survey. The length of each session was
approximately 15 to 20 minutes.

The referred coordinates are represented by red dots in
Fig. 6 and the visual data representation in this figure is only
applied to a single participant. As a note, the number of
fixations detected by each participant in the range of 10
minutes (the total duration of the sample news) is about 400600 fixations. Therefore, if all participants’ fixations were
processed, approximately 32.000-48.000 fixation points
would have to be rendered and represented.
The main purpose of using this analysis method is to
understand the main focus of attention during the reception
of TV News as well as to analyse the differences between
different graphics. Therefore, there was the intention of
understanding which graphics were viewed the most in
terms of number of fixations as well as fixation time. In this
sense, from the results obtained with the application of this
analysis method to each AOI and considering the total
amount of fixation points of the screen, it is possible to have
relative knowledge of the most visualized graphic elements.
As can be observed in Fig. 7, the anchor is the viewers’
most focused element in terms of mean fixation time
(41,0%). Concerning the graphic elements; the viewer’s
attention was dispersed throughout the entire graphical
layout. The ticker is the graphic with the highest mean
fixation time (15,3%), while the remaining graphics present
a very low percentage, especially the bugs (1,4%). In terms
of fixation points, the percentages regarding the anchor were
30,1%, 1.9% for Bugs and 28.6% for the ticker. Concluding,
in terms of visual behaviour, viewers spend more visual
attention on the graphical elements that move (ticker and
anchor) then the graphical elements without movement
(bugs, lower thirds and over the shoulders).

C. Results and Discussion
The analysis method described in section 2.1 was
applied to this specific context (TV News), resulting in a
visual representation, as can be seen in Fig. 6.

Figure 6. Areas of Interest (ex. Anchorman)

Fig. 6 represents a two-dimensional illustration of the
viewers' main focus of attention during the reception of TV
News. This representation consisted in associating to each
viewer's visualisation an x and y position, as well as the
fixation time for each point. To obtain these results, the
algorithms described in section 2.1 were used and applied to
the Areas of Interest (AOI) intended to analyse: AOI1, AOI2,
AOI3, AOI4 and AOI5.
Specifically, the first step consisted in applying the
analysis method to the entire screen, correlating the data
gathered from the eye tracker (x and y position and fixation
time) with the pre-determined analysis specifications
created in a spreadsheet application iv . The x and y
coordinates were defined in order to perform a visual
representation of the points observed and bounded within
the delimitations of the screen. In this case, the defined x
and y values were: B0,0 = (0,0), BB,R = (756,0), BT,L =
(0,520), as can be seen in Fig. 6.The process was repeated
for the previously defined AOIs. The x and y values used
for each AOI were:
• AOI1: B0,0 = (0,450); BB,R = (0,180), BT,L = (0,510);
• AOI2: B0,0 = (180,90); BB,R = (470,90), BT,L =
(180,505);
• AOI3: B0,0 = (520,180); BB,R = (180,720), BT,L =
(520,465);
• AOI4: B0,0 = (55,80); BB,R = (450,80), BT,L =
(55,122);
• AOI5: B0,0 = (0,0); BB,R = (756, 0), BT,L = (0,60).

Figure 7. Most Focused Elements in terms of Fixation Time (ex.
Anchorwoman)

The use of this analysis method can help in
understanding how viewers process the various graphical
elements presented in TV News and with that understand the
viewers’ visual behaviour. Differences can be found between
this analysis method and the main eye tracking visualisation
techniques. With this analysis method it is possible to
represent the data in temporal media, and applied on the TV
screen layout, as well as in the AOI defined by the
researcher.

361

VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The use of eye tracking technology has brought
innovative aspects to this study, since it enabled the
collection of specific data concerning visual information
based on subjects’ eye behaviour. However, the complexity
of specific study objects in multiple contexts requires
visualisation techniques that nowadays eye tracking
software alone cannot always interpret. This implies that
occasionally, visualisation techniques have to be developed
in order to better understand data acquired with eye
tracking. The main purpose of this paper was to understand
the graphic elements of TV news which have greater visual
attention. In this context, the analysis method explored in
this paper facilitated the understanding of the relation
between visual stimuli arrangement and information
processing in TV news, allowing the representation and
differentiation of viewers’ visual behaviour.
Finally, with the use of this analysis method, it will be
possible to understand in a better way the main AOI
visualized by viewers. With this knowledge it is possible
comprehend some of display patterns and thereby, help TV
stations with the improvement of their graphical layout,
adapting it to viewers’ needs or characteristics. As future
work this analysis method can be applied in other
experimental versions of TV News, for example, study a
graphical layout with only still graphics and another layout
with only motion graphics and thereby explain if animated
graphics affect the visual behaviour of viewers.

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Labs.SAPOv at the University of
Aveiro for lending their eye tracker equipment. To the
Portuguese institution “Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia” (FCT) for funding the PhD grant
SFRH/BD/69836/2010.

[15]

[16]

REFERENCES
[1] S. McClellan and K. Kerschbaumer. (2001) Tickers and bugs:
Has TV gotten way too graphic? Broadcasting & Cable.
[2] S. Josephson and M. Holmes, "Visual Attention to Repeated
Internet Images: Testing the Scanpath Theory on the World
Wide Web," presented at the ETRA '02 Proceedings of the
2002 symposium on Eye tracking research & applications,
New York, 2002.
[3] A. Duchowski, Eye Tracking: Theory and Practice, Second
ed., 2007.
[4] L. Bergen, T. Grimes, and D. Potter, "How Attention
Partitions Itself During Simultaneous Message Presentations,"
Human Communication Research, vol. 31, pp. 311-336, 2005.
[5] H.-B. Brosius, W. Donsbach, and M. Birk, "How do textpicture relations affect the informational effectiveness of

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

iii

television newscasts?," Jornal of Broadcasting & Electronic
Media, vol. 40, pp. 180-195, 1996.
D. Drew and T. Grimes, "Audio-Visual Redundancy and TV
News Recall," Communication Research, vol. 14, pp. 452461, 1987.
J. Fox, "A Signal Detection Analysis of Audio/Video
Redundancy Effects in Television News Video,"
Communication Research, vol. 31, p. 524, 2004.
J. Fox, A. Lang, Y. Chung, S. Lee, N. Schwartz, and D.
Potter, "Picture This: Effects of Graphics on the Processing of
Television News," Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic
Media, vol. 48, pp. 646-674, 2004.
L. Frings, I. Mader, and M. Hull, "Watching TV news as a
memory task – brain activation and age effects," BMC
Neuroscience, vol. 11, p. 7, 2010.
D. Graber, "Seeing is remembering: How visuals contribute to
learning from television news," Journal of Communication,
vol. 40, pp. 134-156, 1990.
T. Grimes, "Mild Auditory-Visual Dissonance in Television
News May Exceed Viewer Attentional Capacity," Human
Communication Research, vol. 18, pp. 268-298, 1991.
S. Josephson and M. Holmes, "Clutter or content? How onscreen enhancements affect how TV viewers scan and what
they learn.," ETRA 2006 Proceedings, pp. 155-162, 2006.
R. Matsukawa, Y. Miyata, and S. Ueda, "Information
Redundancy Effect on Watching TV News: Analysis of Eye
Tracking Data and Examination of the Contents," Library and
Information Science, vol. 62, pp. 193-205, 2009.
J. Azevedo, L. Fernandes, and M. Saraiva, "O Telejornal sob
o olhar da cenografia: Da experimentação à imagem de
marca," Comunicação e Sociedade, vol. 15, p. 245, 2009.
R. Marques, "Avaliação da Recepção da Informação
Noticiosa em Televisão," Departamento de Comunicação e
Arte da Universidade de Aveiro, Aveiro2009.
C. Silva, "Gerador de Caracteres e Grafismos Multimédia
para Emissões TV," Curso de Mestrado em Comunicação e
Multimédia, Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro,
Vila Real, 2009.
B. Fry, "Computational Information Design," Media Arts and
Sciences, School of Architecture and Planning, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2004.
K.-J. Räihä, A. Aula, P. Majaranta, H. Rantala, and K.
Koivunen, "Static Visualization of Temporal Eye-Tracking
Data," in Human-Computer Interaction-INTERACT, ed. New
York, 2005, pp. 946-949.
A. Flag, M. Haraty, G. Carenini, and C. Conati, "The Role of
Eye Tracking in Adaptive Information Visualization,"
presented at the International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces, Palo Alto, California, USA, 2011.
R. Rodrigues, "A cenografia das notícias televisivas em
Portugal Um Estudo de Eye Tracking," Departamento de
Comunicação e Arte, Universidade de Aveiro, 2010.

A spreadsheet is a computer application (based on rows and columns)
that makes calculations and data presentations.
iv
The spreadsheet used in this study was the Microsoft Excel.
v
Accessed 2012/2/26: http://labs.SAPO.pt/ua/.

i

Screenshot taken from “RTP News” (http://rtp.pt/play/) on 22/2/2012.
A - http://tinyurl.com/6udygam; B - http://tinyurl.com/6v2q4tw; C http://tinyurl.com/6nnypjy; D - http://tinyurl.com/72ln8u7. All Images
accessed on 20/2/2012.
ii

362

