2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Reducing Contract Complexity through Visualization
A Multi-level Challenge

Helena Haapio

Stefania Passera

Lexpert Ltd
Helsinki, Finland
helena.haapio@lexpert.com

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Aalto University School of Science
Espoo, Finland
stefania.passera@aalto.fi

their relation with the surrounding text from a semiotic point
of view. Understanding the implications of contracts as
multimodal documents is a first step towards more complex
research questions, such as the impact of contract
visualization in terms of reduced cognitive overload,
enhanced knowledge transfer, or ease of doing business.

Abstract— In today’s networked economy, contracts are
everywhere. Most contracts are complex, as is the business
they describe. Contracts are not easy to read, and their
misinterpretation can cause expensive disputes between the
parties. Recent research suggests an alternative to contracts
written in legalese, by harnessing the benefits brought by plain
language and plain design. Clarity and user-friendliness
present a challenge on multiple levels: the contract as artefact,
the cognitive capabilities of the readers, and the different
contexts in which the contract may be used. This paper focuses
on the artefact level. Using recent examples of contract
visualization, we investigate ways in which text and images can
work together to address the needs of different readers and help
them use contracts to secure successful business outcomes.

II.

For a young lawyer just out of law school, the goal of
contract design may be a contract as close to “perfect” as
possible: one that is legally binding, enforceable,
unambiguous, and provides solutions for all imaginable
contingencies [1, p. 82–84]. In contrast, the business
community in the “real world” requires a different approach.
For businesses, the contract itself is not the goal; successful
implementation is. Signing a contract is just the beginning of
the process of creating value [2, p. 62].
Contracts do not make things happen – people do. If we
consider commercial contracts or public procurement, key
people on both sides need to be able to capture, elaborate,
structure, communicate, access and use information and
knowledge, in order to agree on the desired outcomes and the
activities needed to achieve them. The same needs exist
externally and internally, inside the contracting
organizations, among different functions and departments.
Contracts pose at least two challenges in organizational
settings, one at the individual level and the other at the social
level. The first challenge is that contracts are seldom easy for
their users in the field, mostly non-lawyers, to understand
and to implement. Their language and complexity may
overload readers’ cognitive abilities [3; 4]. If this happens
and contract implementation fails, it would be wrong to
assert that those contracts are “perfect” or fit for their
purpose. According to the cognitive load theory [5], there are
three types of cognitive load (intrinsic, extraneous, germane),
and traditionally dense, text-only contracts do not help in
reducing this load: the task of reading long, difficult
documents is time-taking and needs concentration (intrinsic
load), the language and terminology used to represent the
information might not be self-evident to the reader
(extraneous load), and the efforts to understand and learn the
information are often far from being intuitive and
unconscious (germane load).

Keywords-contract visualization; information design; textimage semiotic relations; cognitive overload; knowledge transfer.

I.
INTRODUCTION
As companies collaborate, network, and outsource, they
become more and more dependent on each other’s success –
and on contracts. The ability to understand and use contracts
is increasingly important.
The users of commercial contracts can be divided into
two major groups: the legal community and the business
community. So far, the focus of contract drafters and scholars
has been predominantly on the needs of the former: legal
practitioners and researchers, law teachers, judges, and
arbitrators. Most of the discussion about using contracts has
been about applying them in court, after a dispute has arisen.
While some contracts may need to work as evidence in a
legal dispute, most contracts do not. Our research-in-progress
seeks to soften the current legal dominance in how contracts
are communicated, perceived, and used. We see the main aim
of contracts in securing successful business relationships and
performance. However, this is a difficult goal to reach, if
contracts do not truly support understanding and knowledge
transfer among the involved parties.
This paper is based on ongoing research where we apply
knowledge visualization to commercial contracts, in order to
make them more understandable and user-friendly. Contract
visualization is a multidisciplinary and young field of
research, and different perspectives can be used in
investigating and quantifying its possible benefits. This paper
presents examples of visualizations in contracts and analyzes
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.68

THE CHALLENGES OF CONTRACT COMPLEXITY: COGNITIVE
OVERLOAD AND DIFFICULT KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER

370

transfer. By learning from the extensive knowledge of
information design (e.g. Tufte’s works [12;13;14;15]) and
the younger field of knowledge visualization [16;17],
contract design can adopt visual strategies where text alone
is not enough to communicate complex contents in complex
networks.

One natural solution would seem to be to move from
legalese to plain language. Several studies confirm the
benefits of this approach and its preference among different
groups of readers – clients [6], judges [7], and the public [8].
However, conventional (especially Anglo-American)
contract drafters still consider legalese superior. They talk
about the benefits of language that has been “tested”:
legalese is seen as having a clearly established, “settled”
meaning. This refers to language that has been litigated. But
why rely on language that resulted in litigation in the first
place? While such language may help to win in court, it does
not help to reach successful business outcomes.
Additionally, there is little scientific evidence supporting
legalese. Usual arguments identify the difficulties of plain
language adoption [9], rather than explaining why legalese is
superior from either a cognitive, communicational or even
“practical” (efficiency/effectiveness) perspective. Legalese
appears to be a professional convention grounded in tradition
and sustained by the difficulty of change, rather than a
substantiated choice.
The second challenge is that while individual
understanding of a contract is crucial, it is not enough.
Different individuals need to synchronize, communicate and
collaborate in order to produce and deliver what was agreed.
The interactions are carried out in a social context, where
different actors negotiate and share meanings. These
processes can be seen through the lens of knowledge
management, an approach that stresses the importance of
knowledge creation, capture and transfer in order to keep the
organization innovative, competitive and effective [10].
Knowledge is embedded in culture, systems, artefacts, and
individuals. It can be managed through four processes [11]:
the creation; storage and retrieval; transfer; and application
of knowledge. These stages can be used to describe
contracting, where knowledge regarding the goals and terms
of the collaboration is first captured and created through
negotiations, then recorded, “stored” in a contract. The most
important step, contract implementation, is about retrieving
and applying the knowledge. All involved teams need to
become aware of what is required of them, so knowledge
transfer has to take place effectively.
According to Burkhard [10], in order to transfer and then
apply knowledge, individuals not only need to convey the
relevant knowledge but also convey it in the right context.
Such context is extremely heterogeneous. In different
departments or different organizations, there is a risk that
while the parties think they are discussing the same thing,
they are actually not: different practices, cultures, and
business needs influence our ways of thinking. It is very hard
to be all the time aware of this invisible, complex and tacit
factor. Burkhard [10] suggests that knowledge transfer can
rely on the powerful, innate human ability to effectively
process visual representations. Visualizations can make the
invisible visible, and can help, for instance, to illustrate
relations and patterns, get the attention of the readers and
support remembrance, coordinate individuals, and illustrate
different courses of action.
As much as plain language, plain design offers a practical
solution to tackle both cognitive overload and knowledge

III. CONTRACT VISUALIZATION AS A RESPONSE TO THE
MULTI-LEVEL CHALLENGE: EXPLORING THE ARTEFACT LEVEL
The quest for contract clarity and user-friendliness seems
to take place on at least three levels: the contract as artefact,
the cognitive capabilities of individual contract readers, and
the social inter- and intra-firm interactions related to or
mediated by the contract. In case of failure, a fourth level
enters the picture: the contract as a weapon of defense or
offense in court (which is currently the prevailing approach).
The challenge is highly multidisciplinary, spanning over
visual design, linguistics, cognitive psychology, knowledge
management, organizational studies, and law. In this paper
we focus on the artefact level, by presenting different types
of visualizations that can be used in contracts. Since
visualized contracts fall into the category of multimodal
documents, texts that mix at least two semiotic systems [18],
a first necessary step is to clarify how the presence of
visualizations affects the text, and how this can allow
communicating meanings in ways that traditional
monomodal documents cannot [19; 20].
Working at the artefact level, we adopt a semiotic
perspective, applying a model that helps investigate the bond
between words and images and goes deeper than the simple
Barthesian concepts of anchorage (where text constrains the
possible readings of an image) and relay (where images and
text are complementary, and the text says what the image
does not tell) [21]. Kong [19] proposes a categorization of
the relationships between images and text (Fig. 1), extending
a previous framework by Halliday [22]. The text-image
relationship is described through several categories that can
be roughly summarized as:
A. Logico-semantic
• Expansion, in which one unit (text or image)
expands the other by either elaborating on its
meaning, or by creating new related information by
extending or enhancing the initial meaning
• Projection, in which one unit projects the other unit,
which can be an idea. For instance, drawing a
character (visual) can project speech or thought
(linguistic elements)
• Decoration, in which one unit (usually the visual
one) accompanies the other by adding a subjective,
emotion-laden layer, creating new but omissible
information.
B. Hierarchy
• Coordination: both units are introduced as “given”
information
• Subordination: one unit is introduced as “given”
information, while the second as “new”, yet related
information

371

Figure 1

Categorization of the different text-image relations. Adapted from Kong [19]

each of them, by comparing the results of each analysis it is
possible to draw some initial generalizations about the nature
of contract visualizations. These characteristics, presented in
Chapter V, suggest possibilities for linking contract
visualization to wider theoretical notions that affirm how
certain types of visualizations can help reduce cognitive
overload and enhance knowledge transfer.

C. Meta-functions
• Ideational: when the function of one unit is to
present, emphasize and clarify information
• Interpersonal: when the function of one unit is to
negotiate a stance with the audience
• Textual: when the function of one unit is to
reorganize the message and make it more coherent
(e.g., a summary)

IV.

ANALYSIS OF VISUALIATIONS IN CONTRACTS

A. Icons
The first example takes into consideration the use of icons in
the Creative Commons copyright licenses (Fig. 2). These
simple icons are recognizable and work as “shorthand” for
more complex license terms. By clicking on the icons on
webpages, it is possible to access a “human readable”
version of the license, and by clicking on the “human
readable licence”, it is possible to access the full version, the
“legal” (or “lawyer-readable”) text version of the license.
From a logico-semantic perspective, we can observe a
relationship of projection: the icons represent rights and
responsibilities as a sign. At the same time, the text is an
expansion of the image. Elaboration happens through
identification and explanation of the icons, while, as an
enhancement, the text specifies the implications of the icons
being present on the web content.
The spatial presentation of the content (information
value) is in this case “hyperspatial”. The presentation of the
information in progressive layers - from extremely synthetic
to extremely complex – hints at an interpersonal meta-

D. Information value
Depending on how information is spatially arranged, it is
possible to infer its importance. (E.g., central elements are
more important than peripheral ones)
E. Metaphorical nature
The relation between text/image can be described as a figure
of speech (metaphor, hyperbole, synecdoche,…)
F. Evaluative nature
One unit (usually text) can influence the reader’s attitude
towards the other unit, by providing a value or an
interpretation.
Using this framework, it is possible to analyze different
examples of visualizations in contracts and define which
communication strategy is enabled for each. Five different
typologies of contract visualization are presented in Chapter
IV. While the limited space of the paper does not allow us to
present more visualization typologies or more examples for

372

Figure 2 An example of Creative Commons License icons and their
corresponding meaning in plain language

Figure 3 Validity clause complemented with an explanatory timeline

Figure 4 Color-coding applied to a table of contents

function: the verbal-visual content layering addresses the
needs of different types of readers with different knowledge
needs. Additionally, also a textual meta-function can be
identified: the icons and texts are restatements of the same
content in legalese, in plain language, and in visual language.
Hierarchically, the relationship is neutral.

the users: the visual layer provides information otherwise
implicit and difficult to notice (expansion/enhancement). Its
meta-function is ideational: the visualization restates the
textual information by adding a new perspective. Text and
image are hierarchically coordinated: each highlights a
different aspect of the document structure. The text presents
the clause and page order, while the color-coding shows
thematic connections. The legend at the bottom of the page is
a satellite unit subordinated to the main nucleus constituted
by the index and the color-coding.

B. Timelines
In this example, we observe a timeline visualization, used
in a commercial contract of a company participating in our
research (Fig. 3). The visual timeline is a logico-semantic
expansion of the preceding text, which was perceived as “not
clear” by many readers. The visualization works as an
explanation, but also as an enhancement: it makes the causeeffect and temporal circumstances stated in the text visible.
The spatial organization of the elements suggests a
hierarchical subordination of the image to the text, which
appears first. The contract states that in case of conflict
between the text and the images, the text prevails. The metafunction of the image-text relation is ideational: the timeline
clarifies and emphasizes previously given information.

D. Photographs
Photographs can be adopted in contracts in cases where a
textual description cannot reach both clarity and synthesis at
the same time. In this case, a photograph was utilized to
illustrate how the supplier needs to mark and package the
material for delivery (Fig. 5). The photo is in this case the
nucleus of the message, and the text is subordinated to it.
The picture expands by exemplifying the almost caption-like
clause, which briefly identifies the packaging materials
shown in the picture. The text-image relationship is
ideational: it aims at effectively emphasizing the information
(how to package). The text has an evaluative function: it
defines the packaging in the picture as the expected standard.

C. Color-coding applied to a table of contents
The table of contents analyzed here is part of the same
contract introduced in the previous example. The issue was
that relevant topics (e.g., prices and steps of the delivery
process) were fragmented and presented in different clauses
of the contract and its appendices. The users had to scramble
through the clauses many times in order to find all the
relevant knowledge about one topic. Color-coding was
utilized to show at a glance in what clauses and what
documents to find the topics (Fig. 4). This solution makes the
structure of the information visible and communicates it to

E. Flowcharts
The flowchart presented here was developed by one of
the Authors as part of a visual guide to the Finnish General
Terms of Public Procurement in service contracts [23; 24].
The goal of the flowcharts was to visualize the causal
relationship between different clauses, reorganizing them in
a sequential order that better matches the real life situations

373

V.

Figure 5

DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

The examples presented in Chapter V represent instances of
plain design. The images are not used as decorations, and they
lack metaphorical nature. In a few cases, an evaluative nature
emerges in the related text, but such evaluations cannot be
marked as personal judgments of the authors: they express the
appropriateness of one alternative (e.g., a course of action)
compared to others.
The most recurrent logico-semantic relation of images and text
in our examples are expansion and enhancement, aimed at
further clarifying and emphasizing the meaning of the message.
This indicates how the meta-functions of the visualizations are
prevailingly ideational and textual: they explain, exemplify and
specify the text or restate/summarize it in alternative ways that
can convey meanings otherwise invisible (for instance, the causal
relationships between different elements or the latent logic of
certain processes). These effects seem to prefigure the expected
benefits of visualization against cognitive overload proposed by
Keller and Grimm [25], because:

A photograph used to illustrate how to package the goods

of the users. For instance, the flowchart in Figure 6 describes
how the customer can negotiate price changes. In flowcharts
text and image are strongly integrated and the hierarchical
relationship is neutral: the two units stand together in a
discursive sequence. Each block extends the meaning of the
previous by adding new information. The flowchart as a
whole stands instead as an enhancement in relation to the
original text-only contract terms, by explicitly linking causes
and effects and justifying certain courses of action.
Flowcharts have multiple meta-functions: they reorganize the
message of the contract (textual), they clarify its logic and
requirements (ideational), but also give motivations to react
in specific ways to specific situations (interpersonal).
Additionally the flowchart can assume an evaluative
character, for instance by suggesting which course of action
is desirable for the parties and which is not (e.g., termination
of the contract).

•

Contract visualization explicitly represents abstract
relationships, such as data and process structures,
“hidden” in the text (as, for instance, in the case of
the flowcharts and the color-coded table of contents).
This is seen as helping reduce extraneous cognitive
load, because users do not need to autonomously
develop mental structures to make sense of the
information. Visualizations can serve as a basis for
externalized cognition [26] and enhance the
processing ability of the readers.

Figure 6 A flowchart explaining price change mechanisms according to the Finnish General Terms of Public Procurement – JYSE 2009 Services

374

•

Visualization and text can express the same content,
but, by being different modes of communication,
manage to distribute the cognitive load on different
information processing systems
• As a result, since cognitive overload is additive [27],
visualization seems to free cognitive resources that
can be used for learning and understanding.
Following these preliminary considerations, it is reasonable to
expect that the presence of visualizations in contracts can
facilitate knowledge transfer. If learning and understanding are
enhanced, there are better chances for the reader to
contextualize the information and apply it as knowledge (e.g.,
key tasks and expected actions to manage shortcomings and
risks). As we observed in the analysis, the visualizations
clarify, enhance and explain the text, adding new levels of
detail and/or overview to the given nucleus of meaning. We
could argue, with the help of some of the previous examples,
that text expresses facts, or know-what, while the
visualizations add an extra know-how perspective to it. For
instance, a traditional table of contents would just indicate to a
first-time contract reader the order of the clauses and on what
page to find them. A color-coded table of contents, however,
expresses also thematic relationships among the clauses,
externalizing the sort of tacit knowledge that only someone
who already read the contract thoroughly could have.
Further research will be needed in order to investigate the
effects of contract visualization in terms of enhanced
cognition and knowledge transfer and, ultimately, to verify
the impact of such factors on business performance.
Avoiding costly errors and litigation is important, but there is
much more to be gained. Most of the work of companies
today takes place in collaboration with other companies, and
the value provided to the end customer depends on a
complex network of actors. If user-friendly contracts could
make a difference in terms of ease of doing business, they
might become a new source of competitive advantage.

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[20]

Support for this research was provided by the FIMECC research
programme User Experience & Usability in Complex Systems
(UXUS), financed by Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency for
Technology and Innovation, and participating companies.

[21]
[22]
[23]

REFERENCES
Pohjonen S. & Visuri K. (2008) Proactive Approach in Project
Management and Contracting. In Haapio, H. (Ed.), A Proactive
Approach to Contracting and Law. International Association for
Contract and Commercial Management & Turku University of
Applied Sciences, p. 75–95.
[2] Ertel, D. (2004) Getting Past Yes: Negotiating as if
Implementation Mattered. Harvard Business Review,
November, p. 60–68.
[3] Hagedorn J. & Hesen G. G. (2008, April 13) Contractual
Complexity and the Cognitive Load of R&D Alliance Contracts.
3rd Annual Conference on Empirical Legal Studies Papers,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1119802.
[4] Posner E. A. (2010) ProCD v. Zeidenberg and Cognitive Overload
in Contractual Bargaining. University of Chicago Law Review, vol.
77, no. 4, p. 1181–1194, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1499414.
[1]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

375

Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J.J.G., Paas, F.W.C. (1998). Cognitive
architecture and instructional design. Educational Psychology Review,
10, 251-296.
Adler, M. (1991) Bamboozling the Public. New Law Journal, 26th
July 1991, http://www.clarity-international.net/downloads/Bam.pdf
Kimble, J. (2006) Lifting the Fog of Legalese. Durham, NC:
Carolina Academic Press.
Plain Language Institute of British Columbia (1993) Critical
Opinions: The Public’s View of Lawyers' Documents. Vancouver:
Plain Language Institute.
Tiersma, P M (2006) Some Myths About legal Language, Law,
Culture and the Humanities, 2(1), 29-50
Burkhard, R A (2005).Towards a Framework and a Model for
Knowledge Visualization: Synergies Between Information and
Knowledge Visualization. In Tergan S-O, Keller T (Eds.),
Knowledge and InformationVisualization: Searching for Synergies,
Springer
Alavi, M., & Leidner, D. (2001). Knowledge Management and
Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual Foundations and
Research Issues. MIS Quarterly, 25(1), 107-136.
Tufte, E. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.
Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press.
Tufte, E. (1990). Envisioning Information. Cheshire, Connecticut:
Graphics Press.
Tufte, E. (1997). Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press.
Tufte, E. (2006). Beautiful Evidence. Cheshire, Connecticut:
Graphics Press.
Tergan S-O, Keller T, Eds. (2005), Knowledge and
InformationVisualization: Searching for Synergies, Springer
Eppler M, Burkhard R A (2004). Knowledge Visualization.
Towards a New Discipline and its Fields of Application, ICA
Working Paper #2/2004, University of Lugano. Available at
http://www.bul.unisi.ch/cerca/bul/pubblicazioni/com/pdf/wpca0402
.pdf
Anstey, M, Bull, G (2010). Helping teachers to explore
multimodal texts. Curriculum Leadership. 8 (16).
Kong, K (2006). A taxonomy of the discourse relations
between words and visuals, Information Design Journal,
14(3), 207-230
Kaltenbacher, M. (2004). Perspectives on multimodality:
From the early beginnings to the state of art. Information
Design + Document Design, 12(3), 190–207.
Barthes, R (1977). Image-Music-Text. London: Fontana
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An Introduction to Functional
Grammar. London: Arnold.
Pohjonen, S, Koskelainen, K (2012). Visualization in trialogic
public procurement contracting, In Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Information Visualisation,
Montpellier, 11-13.07.2012
General Terms of Public Procurement in service contracts –
JYSE 2009 Services, Ministry of Finance. Available at:
http://www.vm.fi/vm/en/04_publications_and_documents/01_p
ublications/08_other_publications/20100217Genera/JYSE_200
9_services.pdf
Keller, T, Grimm, M (2005). The Impact of Dimensionality
and Color Coding of Information Visualizations, In Tergan SO, Keller T (Eds.), Knowledge and InformationVisualization:
Searching for Synergies, Springer
Scaife, M., & Rogers, Y. (1996). External cognition: how do
graphical representations work? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 45, 185-213.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1994). Why some material is
difficult to learn. Cognition and Instruction, 12 (3), 185-233

