2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Solving combined geospatial tasks using 2D and 3D bar charts

∗ Department

Stefan Seipel∗† and Leonor Carvalho‡
of Industrial Development, IT and Land Management
University of G¨avle, Sweden
Email: ssl@hig.se
† Centre of Image Analysis
Uppsala University, Sweden
‡ University of Turku, Finland
Email: leofer@utu.ﬁ

different from other applications of photo-realistic visualizations such as games or simulator based training.
In geospatial data-analysis on the other hand abstract
information, often numbers, is presented and evaluated in
its geographical context, whereby cartographic maps provide
geographic reference frames [6]. Insight is thereby gained
from seeing relations between quantities and patterns as
they become evident in their geographic neighborhood. The
well-known visualization of the Cholera epidemic in London
in 1854 [7] is one illustrative example which incidentally
demonstrates a very efﬁcient 2D graphical design. The use
of 3D maps for visualization of abstract i.e. non-spatial information has been popularized in geovisualizations already
in the 1970s with the introduction of the 3D space-time
cube by H¨agerstrand [8]. The concept of the space-time cube
has recently been evaluated for spatio-temporal analysis in
various applications [9], [10], [11].

Abstract—This paper presents a user study that investigates
2D and 3D visualizations of bar charts in geographic maps.
The task to be solved by the participants in this study
required estimation of the ratio of two different spatial distance
measures and relative ranking among potential candidates. The
results of this experiment show that subjects were equally fast
and accurate when using both the 2D and 3D visualizations.
Visual discomfort was reported by almost half of the test
population, but performance was not affected. Our study also
showed that frequent game players did not beneﬁt more from
a 3D visualization than inexperienced game-players.
Keywords-3D visualization; geovisualization; evaluation;

I. I NTRODUCTION
In many situations advanced 3D visualization and interaction techniques have been shown to support users in
performing complex spatial tasks more efﬁciently. Also
in geographical information systems (GIS) the use of 3D
visualization appears as a natural way to present information
in spatial context [1]. Advanced device technology needed to
accomplish 3D visualizations, as e.g. stereoscopic displays
and 3D head tracking, is meanwhile readily available at
consumer level costs. In consequence, when building geographical information systems, the graphical design is likely
to be inﬂuenced by intuition and technical ﬁnesse. Instead,
it should be guided by an understanding of the kind of tasks
that beneﬁt from the possibilities offered by 3D visualization
[2], [3].
The objective of the study presented in this paper is to
compare the relative value of 2D and 3D visualizations
of quantitative information in geographic context and to
analyze potential effects based on other factors in the studied
population.

A. 2D and 3D visualizations
In the visualization literature various notions exist for
different types of 3D visualizations. According to computer
graphics textbooks a projection of a model represented
in 3D onto a 2D projection plane is to be considered a
3D rendering as long as it provides some of the so-called
monoscopic depth-cues (linear perspective being one of
them). According to this concept, even a planar (i.e.
2D) map deﬁned as a ﬂat planar surface in 3D can be
considered a 3D visualization if it is projected back on
the 2D computer screen at some angle and with some
perspective distortion. This notion has been assumed by
among others Lind et al. [12] who investigated traditional
2D user interfaces for industrial control that were virtually
slanted in 3D. These 3D visualizations are based on
monoscopic depth-cues only and they fail to exploit other
highly efﬁcient 3D cues such as motion parallax (e.g.
due to dynamic observer position) as well as stereoscopic
parallax [13]. Following the terminology in [14] we use in
our study the following deﬁnitions for our visualizations:

II. R ELATED WORK
3D visualizations in geographical context are quite selfevident in situations where the content to be visualized
has naturally 3D spatial properties. For instance, in urban
planning [4] or in landscape planning [5] the content to be
visualized are realistic structures which are to be presented
in an authentic way. In this context geovisualization is not
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.36

157

(a)
Figure 1.

•

•

(b)

Illustration of the conceptual design of (a) a 2D visualization and (b) a strong 3D visualization of maps.

A 2D visualization is conceptually deﬁned as a twodimensional geometry which is positioned in and
aligned with the 2D plane of the display. Even for a
stereoscopic rendering using some viewpoint dependent
perspective projection, the 2D visualization will not
create any depth cues (neither linear perspective nor
parallax). See Figure 1(a).
A strong 3D visualization is conceptually deﬁned by
geometry in 3D space which is rendered using both
monoscopic and stereoscopic depth cues. Dynamic 3D
cues (motion parallax) are provided even for static objects since dynamic projections for a moving observer
are maintained using head tracking [15]. Compare also
Figure 1(b).

In context of visualizations of maps and scalar information
related to map positions few formal evaluations of 3D and
2D visualizations exist. In a recent study Bleisch et al. [18]
compared users’ discrimination of bars that were presented
in a 2D map and in a 3D terrain map. No differences in time
and correctness were found. Similarly, no signiﬁcant effects
were found in a study comparing 2D and 3D visualizations
of spatio-temporal information[11]. A very recent study [19]
on the estimation of distances in planar maps visualized in
2D and 3D found also no signiﬁcant effects for visualization.
III. E XPERIMENT
From previous research we conclude that motion parallax
is an important factor for exploiting three-dimensional visualizations. Motion parallax and dynamic occlusion require
the visualized content to be three-dimensional geometries
with sufﬁcient spatial complexity, such as investigated in
[15], [16], [17]. In visualization of maps or other tilted
planar structures as studied in [12], [18], [19] the content
is largely two-dimensional which might explain, why the
use of 3D visualization did not gain signiﬁcant effects.
In the experiment presented here which directly emanates
from the experiments in [18] and [19], our objective is to
investigate if more complex geospatial tasks can beneﬁt from
a 3D representation. We also analyze if user performance is
related to other factors than visualization.

B. On the effects of 3D visualizations
Previous research has shown that 3D visualizations of
non-realistic structures not generally lead to measurable
beneﬁts when solving visual tasks. Also, various different
3D cues contribute to varying degree to users’ performance when solving visual tasks. The importance of motion
parallax cues (due to object motion or dynamic observer
position) has been demonstrated by Ware et al. [13], [15]
who compared visualizations of graphs in 2D and strong
3D. In their experiments equal user performance (in terms
of speed and accuracy) in 2D and 3D was still achieved
for graphs with a complexity of one order of magnitude
bigger in 3D. Similarly, studies on visualizations of vascular
structures by van Schooten et al. [16] showed that strong
3D cues are important and stereoscopic cues did not have
any additional enhancing effects in the presence of motion
cues. These results suggest that dynamic visual cues in 3D
visualizations might be more important than stereoscopic
cues. This assumption is further supported by [17] who
in a study with path tracing tasks found that stereoscopic
cues only, added to a weak 3D visualizations, did not
have any effect, whereas the addition of motion cues did.

A. Task and stimuli
For our experiment we chose a task that required a
combinatorial assessment of two quantities - the height of
bars and their distance in 2D map space. The objective
was to judge relative height differences among a number of
bars located in geographic positions and to evaluate them in
relation to the distances between the bars. Out of a number
of simultaneously visible bars participants had to decide
for the pair of bars with the largest difference in height
relative to their distance in map space. In a 2D visualization

158

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. A stimulus containing 10 bars as used in the experiment. Stimuli were represented and visualized in 2D (a) or visualized as a 3D slanted
map with 3D bars in strong 3D (b). Imaginary lines between bar ends in sub-ﬁgure (b) are here indicated only for illustration purposes and they were not
visible in the actual experiment.

this task can be considered as the evaluation of the lengths
of imaginary 2D line segments and mentally judging their
proportions. The same is true for a 3D presentation of bars;
however, in 3D there exists an alternate approach that implies immediate assessment of the slopes of imaginary lines
connecting the bar ends. In 3D visualizations there exist,
quite obviously, some ambiguities as to the true slope angles
of perceived lines, which in our strong 3D visualization
to some extend can be resolved by interactively examining
the 3D bar diagram from different viewing angles. Visual
conditions tested in our experiment were 2D and strong 3D
(according to the deﬁnition in subsection II-A). In 3D the
maps were virtually slanted out off the plane of the display
(55 degrees slant angle) and rendered using stereoscopic
off-axis projections based on current observer positions as
acquired with a camera-based tracking system. This allowed
the map to be perceived correctly according to the head
movement of the participants, as well as allowing for the
visualization of maps with different perspectives. A visual
stimulus consisted of 10 bars with varying positions within
the map from which the subjects had to search and identify
the pair with the largest height difference in relation to
their distance in the map. Figure 2 shows one stimulus
conﬁguration visualized in 2D or in 3D. Upon deciding for a
candidate pair of bars, participants registered their responses
by clicking with the mouse on the bottom of the two bars
that they identiﬁed as the best candidates (i.e. biggest height
difference in relation to distance). In order to avoid incorrect
parallax in the 3D visualization, the 2D mouse cursor was
replaced with a 3D cross-hair moving within the slanted
map.

between repeated trials, the order of visualization conditions
(2D-3D or 3D-2D) was determined by random and balanced
so that 50% of the test population started with either of
the two conditions. Each trial comprised 25 stimuli; hence
subjects viewed 25 stimuli in the 2D condition and viewed
the same 25 stimuli in the 3D condition, and vice versa.
Hereby the same stimuli conﬁgurations were used for both
visualization conditions.
In order to evaluate potential learning effects within each
trial (and visualization condition) stimuli for each trial were
in the subsequent statistical analysis grouped into two blocks
with block 1 comprising the ﬁrst 13 stimuli and block 2
containing the last 12 stimuli. Since the 25 different stimuli
had varying degrees of difﬁculty, their order of appearance
within each trial was randomly assigned to counterbalance
for potential differences in difﬁculty between both blocks.
This implies that subjects did see the stimuli not in the same
order.
C. Apparatus and procedure
The experimental apparatus consisted of a stereoscopic
LCD display (Zalman ZM-M215WGDT M ), with alternating
polarization on even and odd lines. The screen size was
47.8 cm horizontally and 26.8 cm vertically with a display
resolution of 1920 x 1080. In 3D mode the vertical resolution
of each stereo-frame corresponds to half of the physical
display resolution. An IR LED was attached to the center
of the passive stereo glasses in order to facilitate camera
based head position tracking. The tracking device (WorldViz
PPT4T M ) was composed of 4 cameras and it was calibrated
every day during the experimental phase. Thereby, the local
coordinate system of the display was co-registered with the
coordinate system of the tracking device.
The test group in our experiment, both teachers and
students from the University of G¨avle, comprised 18 subjects
(12 males and six females) and their age ranged between 18

B. Experimental design
The experiment followed a within-subject design, that
is all participants solved the task in both visualization
conditions (2D and strong 3D). To avoid carry-over effects

159

and 3D we obtained no signiﬁcant differences (n=18, W
=501, p-value = 0.0992).

and 65 years. The data initially collected were task response
times in seconds and correctness of the response per stimulus. Accuracy was then calculated as the percentage correct
answers for per subject and block of stimuli. The performed
visual task was a combinational task that involved evaluation
of the differences of bar heights and the assessment of their
distances in the map. The task was performed in both 2D
(mono) and 3D (stereoscopic) with head-tracking.

B. Learning effects
Regarding potential effects of learning between successive
trials, we performed a two-way ANOVA on the accuracy
observations with visualization and presentation order as
factors. This analysis did not reveal any signiﬁcant effect
for either factor nor any interaction effect. As the ANOVA
is not applicable for the observed times, we compared times
from the groups that started 2D or 3D, respectively, using a
Wilcoxon rank sum test. Also this comparison revealed no
difference between trials.
Signiﬁcant learning effects could in part be observed
within both visualization conditions in a block-wise
comparison of the observations for block pre (stimuli 1-13)
and block post (stimuli 14-25). Although the boxplots
for accuracies in Figure 3(c) suggest better accuracy in
the second block of stimuli in both visualizations, those
differences were not signiﬁcant for the 2D condition nor
in the 3D condition. However, in regard to response times
clear improvements in the post blocks can be seen in both
visualization conditions (see Figure 3(d)). The apparent
reductions of times between blocks were signiﬁcant both in
2D (n1 =13, n2 =12 , W=238, p-value=0.01557) and in 3D
(n1 =13, n2 =12 , W=281, p-value<0.001).

D. Questionnaire
In addition to the primary data (time and accuracy) other
factors that might inﬂuence the visual task were gathered
with a questionnaire given to the participants at the end of
the test. This questionnaire intended to collect information
regarding familiarity with 3D displays (yes/no), perceived
visual discomfort (yes/no), strongest conﬁdence in answers
(2D/3D), and if the subject was a frequent player of 3D
video-games (yes/no). Participants were also asked to make
a self-assessment of their 3D vision capabilities (high/low).
IV. R ESULTS
The primary data consisted of 18 (subjects) x 25
(stimuli per trial) x 2 (visualization conditions) time
and error (correct/incorrect) responses. Individual stimuli
responses were aggregated by averaging the ﬁrst block of
13 observations and the second block of 12 observations
for each trial. Those resulting 18 (subjects) x 2 (blocks) x
2 (visualizations) averaged time and accuracy observations
were subsequently analyzed using the statistical package R
[20]. Accuracy is hereby the proportion of correct responses
to the total responses per subject and block.

C. Personal abilities and skills
According to test answers from the questionnaires, we
compared responses for different subject groups. From 18
subjects n1 =12 rated that their spatial vision capabilities
as low, whereas n2 =6 rated them as high. Figure 4 shows
boxplots for accuracy (a) and times (b) in both groups. The
group stating high conﬁdence in their 3D vision capabilities
achieved clearly better accuracy both in the 2D visualization
and in the 3D visualization (Figure 4(a)). This difference
in accuracy was signiﬁcant in 2D (t=2.172, df=31.049, pvalue=0.03761), as well as in 3D (t=2.4045, df=33.27, pvalue=0.02192). The same holds true for times, where the
conﬁdent group showed shorter response times (Figure 4(b)).
This difference in time was, however, only signiﬁcant in
the 2D visualization condition (n1 =12, n2 =6, W=77, pvalue=0.0241).
Visual discomfort, that is eye strain and possibly associated dizziness or headache, is another factor frequently
reported in studies investigating 3D visualizations. In our
experiment as many as n1 =8 subjects, or 44%, reported
visual discomfort. N2 =10 subjects did not. A comparison of
achieved accuracy and times in the 3D visualization condition is provided in Figure 5(a) and (b). Although there were
no statistically signiﬁcant differences between both groups it
is notable that the group that experienced visual discomfort

A. Times and accuracy for visualizations
Inspection of the histograms of accuracies in 2D and 3D
suggested that data were normally distributed in both cases.
This was also veriﬁed with a Shapiro-Wilk test. Figure 3
shows boxplots for accuracy (a) and times (b) in the two
visualization conditions 2D and 3D. Mean accuracy in 2D
(x = 0.527) was similar to, but slightly lower than in 3D
(x = 0.551). A Welch two-sample t-test with a hypothesis of
equal means in the different visualization conditions showed
that this difference was not signiﬁcant (n=18, t =-0.4951, df
= 69.937, p-value=0.6221).
In regard to times subjects responded faster when
working with the 2D visualization (˜
x = 9.74 sec.) than
in 3D (˜
x = 11.21 sec.). Again, the hypothesis of equal
means of times in the different visualization conditions was
tested. Time observations in these kinds of psycho-physical
experiments are known to be not normally distributed.
Instead of applying a transformation on times on uncertain
premises, we chose in all subsequent analyses of response
times to employ a Wilcoxon rank sum test on the nontransformed time observations. For the comparison of 2D

160

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3. Box plots for accuracy (a) and times (b) for 2D and 3D. Sub-ﬁgures (c) and (d) show boxplots of the accuracies and times for blocks (pre and
post) in 2D and 3D.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. Results for groups rating their 3D/spatial capability as low and high. Accuracies (a) and times (b) are presented separately for both visualization
conditions.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5. Results in the 3D visualization for groups experiencing visual or not in 3D (a) and (b). Sub-ﬁgures (c) and (d) show results for the groups of
frequent game players and non-players.

161

performed better. The means of accuracy for the group with
visual discomfort (xDiscomf ort =0.602) and without visual
discomfort (xN o−Discomf ort =0.510) differ by 18%. The
median of times differs even by 38% (˜
xDiscomf ort =9.02 and
x
˜N o−Discomf ort =12.54).
A ﬁnal ﬁnding concerns frequent game playing which
was reported by n1 =6 subjects, or 33%. The boxplots in
Figure 5 show, that somehow unexpected, there were no
differences in accuracy (c) or times (d) between both groups
in the 3D visualization condition.

players did apparently not achieve any different performance
in the 3D task compared with non-players.
On a ﬁnal note we conclude that the results of this
study are in line with those of a number of previous
works in the ﬁeld of geospatial visualization which do
not point out strong advantages of 3D visualizations
for the type of spatial tasks investigated. On the other
hand there is ample evidence in the literature that threedimensional visualizations are effective for other types of
tasks (interpretation of tree-like graphs) and that dynamic
spatial cues in 3D visualization play a signiﬁcant role. Our
continued research in geospatial visualization will therefore
be geared towards further exploring other, more efﬁcient
visual mappings of geospatial data that better exploit those
cues.

V. C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Our experimental study investigated potential beneﬁts of
a 3D map representation with 3D bars for the relative
assessment of quantitative data in context of geographic
distance. The main results of this experiment indicate neither
improved accuracy nor shorter task solution times for the
3D visualization condition. Although previous investigations
of similar, albeit simpler, geospatial tasks preﬁgure such
results [18], [19], we expected yet to observe some clear
differences in this study. Contrary to the work presented in
[18], [19] we employed a more complex spatial assessment
task that required estimation of two different metrics and
their relative ratios. In a 2D visualization of bars, this task
must be performed as a two-stage sequence requiring short
term memory. The 3D visualization of bars provided an
alternative, immediate, cue to directly assess these ratios; the
slope of imaginary lines connecting bar ends in relation to
ground. In our study we did no follow-up if subjects actually
followed this strategy. Therefore it cannot be ruled out that
participants in our study used the same strategy to solve the
task as in 2D. Yet on the other hand, in our questionnaire
we asked test participants which of the two visualizations
they felt most conﬁdent with in regard to their performance.
Only three (17%) voted for 2D, whereas the remaining 15
subjects (83%) felt more conﬁdent with the 3D visualization.
Considering, again, that almost half of the population felt
visual discomfort in 3D, these results conﬁrm what appears
to be a prevalent overestimation of the real beneﬁts of threedimensional visualizations.
Still it must be assumed that the assessment of the slope
of an imaginary 3D line over a ground plane is ambiguous
in a projective display. In providing strong 3D cues (mainly
stereoscopy and motion-parallax) in our 3D visualization we
hoped to alleviate this problem, but we have no evidence as
to how much participants in our study exploited these cues.
Self-assessments of individual 3D capabilities were reliable. Subjects who rated their spatial skills high performed
indeed better on the tasks, not only in the 3D part but
also in 2D. Contrary to other research that speaks about
increased 3D and spatial skills of people who are frequent
game players, we found the opposite. In our study frequent

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank the participants for their
willingness to participate in this study.
R EFERENCES
[1] Johnson, A.; Leigh, J.; Morin, P. & Van Keken, P. (2006), ’GeoWall: Stereoscopic Visualization for Geoscience Research
and Education’, Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE
26(6), 10-16.
[2] Slocum, T. A.; Blok, C.; Jiang, B.; Koussoulakou, A.; Montello, D. R.; Fuhrmann, S. & Hedley, N. R. (2001), ’Cognitive
and Usability Issues in Geovisualization’, Cartography and
Geographic Information Science 28:1, 61-75.
[3] Kirschenbauer, S.Dykes, J.; MacEachren, A. & Kraak, M.J., ed., (2005), Exploring Geovisualization, Elsevier, chapter
Applying ”True 3D” Techniques to Geovisualization: An
Empirical Study, pp. 363-387.
[4] Kr¨oninger, A. & Bartel, S. (1998), ’3d-Gis for Urban Purposes’, Geoinformatica 2(1), 79–103.
[5] Paar, P. (2005), ’Landscape visualizations: Applications and
requirements of 3D visualization software for environmental
planning’, Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 30, 815–
839.
[6] Shepherd, I. D. H.Dodge, M. & Turner, M., ed., (2007), GeoVisualization, Wiley, chapter Travails in the third dimension:
a critical evaluation of 3D geographical evaluation, pp. 199222.
[7] Tufte, E. R. (1997), Visual Explanations - Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative, Graphics Press.
[8] H¨agerstrand, T., ’What about people in regional science?’,
Regional Science Association Papers 24, 7–21.
[9] Andrienko, N. V.; Andrienko, G. L. & Gatalsky, P. (2003),
’Exploratory spatio-temporal visualization: an analytical review’, Journal of Visual Languages and Computing 14, 503–
541.

162

[10] Pettersson, L. W.; Mats, M.; Spak, U. & Seipel, S. (2005),
Visualizations of Symbols in a Horizontal Multiple Viewer
3D Display Environment, in ’Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation’, IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 357–362.
[11] Kjellin, A.; Pettersson, L. W.; Seipel, S. & Lind, M. (2008),
’Evaluating 2D and 3D visualizations of spatiotemporal information’, ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 7(3), 19:1–19:23.
[12] Lind, M.; Seipel, S. & Mattiason, C. (2001), ’Displaying
meta-information in context’, Behaviour and Information
Technology 20(6), 427-432.
[13] Ware, C. & Mitchell, P. (2005), Reevaluating stereo and
motion cues for visualizing graphs in three dimensions, in
’Proceedings of the 2nd symposium on Applied perception
in graphics and visualization’, ACM, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 51–58.
[14] Kjellin, A.; Pettersson, L. W.; Seipel, S. & MatsLind (2009),
’Different levels of 3D: An evaluation of visualized discrete
spatiotemporal data in space-time cubes’, Inf Visualization
9(2), 152-164.
[15] Ware, C. & Mitchell, P. (2008), ’Visualizing graphs in three
dimensions’, ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 5(1), 2:1–2:15.
[16] van Schooten, B. W.; van Dijk, E. M. A. G.; ZudilovaSeinstra, E.; Suinesiaputra, A. & Reiber, J. H. C. (2010), The
effect of stereoscopy and motion cues on 3D interpretation
task performance, in ’Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces’, ACM, New York,
NY, USA, pp. 167–170.
[17] van Beurden, M.; Kuijsters, A. & IJsselsteijn, W. (2010),
’Performance of a path tracing task using stereoscopic and
motion based depth cues’ ’Second International Workshop
on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX)’, 176-181.
[18] Bleisch, S.; Dykes, J. & Nebiker, S. (2008), ’Evaluating the
Effectiveness of Representing Numeric Information Through
Abstract Graphics in 3D Desktop Virtual Environments’,
Cartographic Journal 45(3), 216-226.
[19] Seipel, S. (2012), ’Evaluating 2D and 3D Geovisualizations
for Basic Spatial Assessment’, Behaviour and Information
Technology,(in press)
[20] Ihaka R. & Gentleman R. (1996), ’R: A Language for
Data Analysis and Graphics’, Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics 5(3), 299–314.

163

