2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

PRISMA Mobile: An Information Visualization Tool for Tablets
¹Jairo de Jesus Nascimento da Silva Junior, ¹Bianchi Serique Meiguins, ²Nikolas S. Carneiro,
³Aruanda Simões Gonçalves Meiguins, ¹Roberto Yuri da Silva Franco, ¹Anderson Gregório Marques
Soares
¹Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciência da Computação – Universidade Federal do Pará
²Faculdade de Computação – Universidade Federal do Pará
³Área de Ciência de Tecnologia – Centro Universitário do Pará - CESUPA
{junior.jairo1@gmail.com, bianchi.serique@terra.com.br, nikolas.carneiro@gmail.com,
aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br, roberto.yuri.franco@gmail.com, andmarques2006@gmail.com}
we can use the mobile devices not only to make
decisions on-the-fly, but to improve the human
perception.
This work aims to develop an information
visualization tool for mobile devices, which have main
characteristics of a good information visualization tool,
such as overview, zoom, filters and details-on-demand.
The application has a client-server architecture where the
tablet is a thin client and the remote server will perform
all the data processing and transformation, avoiding the
waste of the mobile device resources.
This article is arranged in the following order: in
Section 2, brief description of information visualization;
in Section 3, some related works are presented; in
Section 4, the prototype is presented in details, as
well as its architecture and employed technologies; in
Section 5, preliminaries usability tests were performed;
finally, there are the concluding remarks and future
works

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to present PRISMA Mobile,
an information visualization tool for android-based
tablets. The application is based on a client-server model
where the client uses as few resources as possible in
order to preserve memory, battery and other device
resources. To get better profit from the device, the tool
uses the treemap technique coupled to other IV
resources, as zoom, filters and details-on-demand, to
improve user cognitive capabilities when analyzing data.
Keywords--- Information Visualization, Treemap,
Tablets, Client-Server Model.

1. Introduction
Mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets
have become common part of everyday life and business.
They are being used as tools to support a lot of different
tasks in different fields of knowledge.
Although these devices have some characteristics of
mobile computing, like mobility, connectivity and they
are even able to replace entry-level computers, they still
have limited resources, such as small display sizes, short
battery life, low processing power and low storage
capacity.
Even that these devices have been raising their
computational power; we still need to save their
resources. That is the first challenge to develop
applications for such devices, the second is the design of
the user interface for touchscreen.
Information Visualization is the communication of
abstract data through the use of interactive visual
interfaces [1], taking advantage of human cognitive
capacity to extract information from data using visual
representations [2]. Both the physical and social
environments are involved in the data-gathering loop.
The physical environment is a source of data, while the
social environment determines in subtle and complex
ways what is collected and how it is interpreted [3]. Thus

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.40

2. Information Visualization
Information visualization promises to help us speed
our understanding and action in a world of increasing
information volumes. [4]
Information Visualization tools are computer-based
tools that support interaction and data presentation
mechanisms. Allowing the user to view, analyze and
manipulate
complex
information,
such
as
multidimensional, hierarchical and spatial data. [5][6]
The characteristics of a good information
visualization tool are: overview, zoom, filters and
details-on-demand. [7]
These characteristics can be defined according to the
following user tasks [8]:
• Overview: Gain an overview of the entire
dataset.
• Zoom: Zoom in items of interest.
• Filters: Filter out uninteresting items.
• Details-on-demand: Get details of an item
or group when it needed.

182

EE for the server side. The client is built for Android 2.1
or above which runs on ~97% of android devices.
The use of some web standards like HTTP and XML
to trade data between the two tiers of the application
makes it extremely portable to other platforms such iOS
and Windows Phone.

3. Related Works
Among the related works, two must be remarked:
• Pinheiro [9] developed a prototype of a
tourism information visualization analysis
tool for mobile devices; this tool used three
coordinated
information
visualization
techniques, scatterplot, and treemap and
georeferenced maps. The tool supports
dynamic filters, discrete and continuous,
multiple coordinated views and different
datasets (Figure 1).
• Engdahl [10] implemented the Treemap
technique of Information Visualization in
mobile devices for the analysis of
discussion forums’ databases. This study
also demonstrates that the Treemap
technique’s advantages
in
desktop
environments are also present in mobile
devices environments with low screen
resolutions (Figure 2).

Figure 3: The prototype running in a 7’
(1024x600) Samsung Galaxy Tab

4.1 Architecture
This application uses PRISMA, an information
visualization tool based on multiple coordinated views to
explore multidimensional datasets using the following
techniques: treemap, scatterplot and parallel coordinates
[13], as a service, to perform all the tasks described in
the visualization pipeline (from data analysis of raw data
to rendering of image data) [14], while the tablet works
as a thin client that is able to talk with this service.
The application is divided into two tiers, the
presentation tier and the application tier (Figure 4).
The Presentation Tier (client-side) is responsible for
message control (send HTTP requests and process XML
and image responses), a control layer that handle user’s
interactions, and the presentation layer that dynamically
draws the user interface.
The Application Tier (server-side) is responsible for
handling HTTP requests (Servlets Layer), filters, detailson-demand (Service Layer), and data processing and
transformation (PRISMA Core).

Figure 1: Multiple coordinate views information
visualization tool running in a PDA.

Figure 2: Treemap technique on a small screen
device.

4. The Prototype
The prototype was developed using Android SDK
(Software Development Kit) for the client side and Java

183

Figure 4 Client and Server architecture.

4.2. Treemap
Treemaps are a rectangular, space-filling approach
for visualizing hierarchical data. They use 2D
visualization of trees where the tree nodes are
encapsulated into the area of their parent node. The size
of the single nodes is determined proportionally in
relation to all other nodes of the hierarchy by an attribute
of the node [11].
Due to tablets low screen resolutions, treemaps are a
good alternative since it uses 100% of the designated
display space.

Figure 6: Simple user and password access.

4.3. User Interface
The user interface is composed by the visualization
space and control/configuration space that can be
switched among Hierarchy Control, Filters and
Treemap’s Configuration, using the hidden menu.

Figure 5: Hidden menu on the bottom of screen.
Figure 7: List of available preconfigured
visualizations.

4.4. Access Control

4.5. Zoom

The application has a simple access control that
allows the user to authenticate in the server and load a
list of available preconfigured visualizations. The figure
6 shows the login screen while the figure 7 shows the
post-login step.

The prototype allows you to zoom in the
visualization using the pinch gesture, till the limit of 16x
factor, this feature is important to favor item selection
when we have many rectangles in the visualization and
they are too small to select with your finger.

184

4.8. Hierarchy Control
Attributes can be added to or removed from the
hierarchy using the hierarchy control.

Figure 8: Treemap with 8x zoom.

4.6. Filters
The prototype uses dynamic queries [12] to filter
data from the visualization. An expandable list of
attributes is generated with checkboxes for each distinct
value of that attribute, allowing the user to quickly
remove unwanted items from the display.

Figure 11 Hierarchy control on the right side of
the screen.

4.9 Configurations
The configurations controls allows the user to
change the size of rectangles based on an attribute, set an
attribute as a label or change which attribute will define
the rectangle color (Figure 12).

Figure 9: Unchecking a value to remove it from
the displayed set of data.

4.7. Details-on-demand
When an item is selected for a short time, a dialog
box shows up with information about that item. This
feature is best used with zoom.

Figure 12 Rectangle size, label and color
configuration

5. Usability Essays
Preliminary tests were performed with five users
with previous knowledge in information visualization in
order to measure user performance and satisfaction when
using a mobile-based information visualization tool. The
tests are following the taxonomy of user tasks for the
visualization of multidimensional information defined by
Pillat [15].
The dataset used in the test contains 5507 items, 12
categorical attributes and 22 continuous attributes. It
contains data about the human development index (HDI)
and other social and economic indicators of Brazilian
cities. The tests were performed in a 7-inch Samsung

Figure 10 Dialog Box to show details-ondemand.

185

Galaxy Tab with Android 2.2 connected to a wireless
network.
Each test was supervised by an observer who took
note of each interaction obstacle faced by user in the
question solving.
The users should answer to the following questions
about the dataset:
• Which region has the biggest mortality
rate?
• Which regions have the best literacy rate?
• What is the greatest HDI among the
capitals?
• What are the names of the cities with the
highest Municipal HDI?

Figure 14: Evaluation of user satisfaction
The user's answers have showed a regular
satisfaction with the application, but many times, user
frustration was evident, particularly when they took too
long to find an answer, perform an accidental tap,
resulting in an unwanted action, or when they wanted to
undo several actions.
There is also a big bottleneck in the database
understanding, all the users related the undesirable
challenge of gain an overview the database due to the
number of items and attributes and the difficulty to
represent them in a small screen, even with some filters.

Final Remarks

Figure 13: Time spent by users to answer the
questions.

The motivation for the development of this
application was to contribute to the scenario of
mobile-based information visualization tools, this
application is a mobile edition of PRISMA, a general
purpose information visualization tool.
The biggest challenges that guided the development
of this project were:
• Keep the client as thin as possible, avoiding
waste of important resources such as
bandwidth, battery and storage (keeping all
user data in the cloud).
• Turn PRISMA into a service that could
communicate with different platforms.

Most of the users reach the right answer using a
different set of features; however we noticed a delay in
problem resolution due to the difficulty to perform some
tasks using a touchscreen device.
In order to evaluate the user satisfaction, five
additional questions were made after the initial test:
• Database understanding (0 to 10).
• How the user felt using a tablet (0 to 10).
• In which frequency you configured filter,
hierarchy and treemap together to solve a
question (0 to 10)?
• Rate the hierarchy control task (0 to 10).
• Rate the filter task (0 to 10).
• Rate the treemap configuration task (0 to
10).

PRISMA Mobile accomplishes all the minimum
requirements of a good information visualization tool
and Software as a Service (SaaS) model proved a viable
alternative for information visualization tools, since it
can reach a wider range of users.
Preliminary tests were conducted with five users
from the computer field. All the tool’s features were
used, but was noted the difficulty of using zoom with
details-on-demand; moreover, accidental taps were
frequent, resulting in unwanted actions. The lack of a
proper continuous filter mechanism was also a huge
obstacle to solve certain questions.
Although this test yield some important results,
more elaborated tests should be performed in order to;
evaluate the influence of both physical and social
environment, perform tests with different screen size
186

devices to establish a desirable information density, and
compare the results of the same tasks in different
platforms (desktop, web and mobile).

[12]

Future Remarks
[13]

We highlight the following potential future
developments:
• Addition of new information visualization
techniques, such as scatterplot and parallel
coordinates.
• Improvement of the filter mechanism,
adding a new component to better work
with continuous data, such as a seekbar.
• Measure the data traffic over the network to
evaluate the scalability.
• Study and implementation of multiple
coordinate views.
• Extended
architecture
to
support
collaborative environments through the
network.

[14]

[15]

References
[1] Keim, D.A. and Mansmann, F. and Schneidewind, J. and
Ziegler, H. Challenges in Visual Data Analysis. In
Proceedings of Information Visualization (IV 2006) (
2006), 9-16.
[2] Spence, R. Information Visualization - Design for
interaction. Addison Wesley - ACM Press, 2001.
[3] Ware, Colin. Information Visualization: Perception for
Design. Elsevier, San Francisco, 2004.
[4] Card, Stuart, Jacko, J.A., and Sears, A. The HumanComputer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving
Technologies, and Emerging Applications. Lawrence
Erlbaum Assoc Inc, 2007.
[5] Oliveira, M. C. F and Levkowitz, H. From Visual Data
Exploration to Visual Data Mining: A Survey. In IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (
2003), 378-393.
[6] Keim, Daniel A. Information Visualization and Visual
Data Mining. IEEE Transactions in Visualization and
Computer Graphics (January-March 2002), 102-107.
[7] Carr, D. A. Guidelines for Designing Information
Visualization Applications. In Proceedings of ECUE'99
(Stockholm December 1999).
[8] Shneiderman, Ben. Designing the User Interface:
Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction.
Addison Wesley Longman, Inc, 1998.
[9] Pinheiro, Sérgio Clayton Viana. A Tourism Information
Analysis Tool for Mobile Devices. In 12th International
Conference Information Visualisation (London 2008),
265-269.
[10] Engdahl, Bjorn, Koksal, Malin, and Marsden, Gary. Using
treemaps to visualize threaded discussion forums on
PDAs. In ACM CHI 2005 Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems 2005 v.2 (New York 2005), 13551358.
[11] Johnson, B and Shneiderman, B. Treemaps: A SpaceFilling Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical

187

Information Structures. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Information Visualization ( 1991), IEEE, 275-282.
Shneiderman, Ben. Dynamic Queries for Visual
Information Seeking. IEEE Software, 11, 6 (November
1994).
Godinho, Paulo Igor A., Meiguins, Bianchi Serique,
Meiguins, Aruanda Simões Gonçalves, Casseb do Carmo,
Ricardo M, Garcia, Marcelo de Brito, Almeida, Leandro
Hernandez, and Lourenço, Rodrigo Augusto de Moraes.
PRISMA – A Multidimensional Information Visualization
Tool Using Multiple Coordinated Views. In Proceedings
of
11th
International
Conference
Information
Visualization (IV '07) (Zurich 2007), 23-32.
Dos Santos, Selan Rodrigues and Brodlie, Ken. Gaining
understanding of multivariate and multidimensional data
through visualization. In Computer & Graphics (2004),
311-325.
PILLAT, R. M., Valiati, E. R. and Freitas, C. M. D.
Experimental Study on Evaluation of Multidimensional
Information Visualization Techniques. In: CLIHC'05,
Cuernavaca, 2005 - Mexico. p. 20 - 30.

