2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Challenges of Exploratory Visualization of Gene-Environment Interaction in
Alzheimer’s Disease
Ekaterina I Galkina, Georges G Grinstein
Institute for Visualization and Perception Research, Department of Computer Science, University of
Massachusetts Lowell
{ekaterina_galkina@student.uml.edu, grinstein@cs.uml.edu}
we aimed to mine a clinical dataset of AD patient
information for interesting patterns.
Geographical differences between urban and
rural areas continue to concern researchers because of
the putative effects of exposure to harmful environmental
components and the difference in dementia occurrence in
each [4, 5]. Atmospheric pollution and ozone depletion
are becoming critical issues as population growth and
consumption increase. Furthermore, in a recent study an
association between long-term air pollution exposure and
serious medical conditions such as neuroinflammation,
altered immune response, and central nervous system
(CNS) disease has been discovered in children and
young adults [6].
Air pollution is comprised of a mixture of
particulate matter (PM), organic compounds, metals and
gases such as ozone, carbon monoxide, sulfur oxides and
nitrous oxides. PM is especially pertinent to CNS effects;
it varies in size from ultrafine particles (UFPM) that are
less than 0.1 µm to particles 10 µm in diameter (PM10).
PM less than 2.5 µm in diameter (PM2.5) is the most
effective size for lung deposition, penetration and
movement towards the brain [7]. The presence of PM in
olfactory bulb neurons and its clear passage through the
blood brain barrier as indicated by brain autopsy reports
[6] implicates exposure to air pollution as a convincing
risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease.
Although interesting trends have been
uncovered through exploratory visualization in Weave,
the nature of the clinical dataset, which is comprised of
patients from 29 different Alzheimer Disease Centers,
lends itself to various biases, which we examine in detail.

Abstract
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the 6th leading cause of
death in the United States. Although several genetic and
environmental factors have been implicated in AD risks,
no single factor is found solely responsible for disease
manifestation in all Alzheimer’s cases. In cases when no
single gene can explain causality, the scenario of a
combination of factors with modest effect sizes has been
suggested. Through means of visual analysis in Weave
we uncovered and further strengthened growing
evidence for the link between genetics, air pollution and
an earlier onset of Alzheimer’s disease as exemplified in
US cities with the highest reported levels of toxicity.
Major sources of bias impacting our dataset are
examined to caution the reader about the value of
correlation findings in this less than ideal study sample.
Keywords-- Exploratory visualization,
Alzheimer’s disease

1. Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common
cause of dementia, accounting for 60-80% of all
dementia cases [1]. AD progressively destroys neuronal
connections in the brain, causing loss of cognitive
function, and ultimately death [2]. Much research has
gone into which clinical, environmental and genetic
factors influence the risk of developing AD. It is clear
that Alzheimer’s is a very complex disorder having
pathophysiology dependant on many factors and
combinations of factors as opposed to the effect of a
single gene. Genes whose mutations can directly cause
AD, which are amyloid precursor protein gene and
presenilin 1 and 2, account for only a subset of familial
early-onset cases [3]. A fourth gene, apolipoprotein E
(APOE) is not causal, but rather conferring
susceptibility; its four variants are widely studied for
both protective and increased risk effects [4]. It is thus
crucial to identify additional factors and their mechanism
of action on disease manifestation in order to provide
answers to the millions of people and their families
affected by this disease. Through means of exploratory
visualization and analysis using the Weave framework
1550-6037 2012
U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.112

2. Data analysis
Clinical, demographical, and genetic AD data
were obtained from the National Alzheimer’s
Coordinating Center (NACC) [8], which comprises 29
centers funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA).
After filtering out records with missing values, the
dataset included a total of 5,670 subjects with possible or
probable AD diagnosis. It is common for case-control
studies to be subject to various sampling biases that may
result in subjects being unrepresentative of the
population of interest [9], and the NACC dataset is no
567

exception [NACC’s Dr. Walter Kukull, personal
communication, May 3, 2012]. Approximately 5.4
million Americans suffer from AD today [10], but the
NACC dataset captures just over 0.1% – a sample that is
neither randomized nor stratified.
Our initial inquiry into the selection biases of
the NACC dataset concerned the geographical
distribution of the enrolled subjects. Weave (WEb-based
Analysis and Visualization Environment) framework
[11] was used for plot generation and interactive visual
analysis. Geographical distribution of the data was
evaluated using Weave’s MapTool feature, which
allowed for the overlaying of subject enrollments on a
map of the United States. As a result, Figure 1 shows a
patient distribution plot where larger, redder circles are
proportional to a higher conglomeration of participants
enrolled by the AD Centers (ADCs) program for NIAsupported studies.
The patient selection bias is responsible for
irregular coverage of geographical areas across the US;
observed differences in patient count must not be
interpreted as nationwide AD prevalence. The variability
in enrollment can be attributed to grant budget
dependencies specific to each ADC and the need to
support proposed studies (NACC’s Lilah Besser,
personal communication, March 28, 2012). Thus, the rest
of this discussion concerns cross-ADC comparisons in
which datasets collected at the centers are treated as a
separate class. The ADCs with the highest sample sizes
map to 8 high-density regions that are clearly identified
on the map in Figure 1 as having more than 100 subjects.
Due to the de-identification policy at the NACC region
boundaries are defined by the first three digits of the

patient residential zipcode (the remaining two digits were
not available). Aided by Weave’s street-view map
feature, we associated the eight high-density regions of
interest with the closest cities encompassed by the
region. Out of the eight regions, four mapped to the three
top-10 most populated US cities per Census 2010 data:
New York City, NY (#1), Philadelphia, PA (#5), and San
Diego, CA (#8, appearing with two distinct zipcodes).
The remaining regions mapped to four somewhat less
populated top-100 cities: St. Louis, MO (#58), Pittsburg,
PA (#59), Lexington, KY (#63), and Birmingham, AL
(#97). All eight regions are in proximity to an ADC.
Notably, all but one of the cities of interest fall into the
list of 25 most polluted regions in the US identified by
the American Lung Association [12]. Pittsburg ranks #7
for highest year-round particle pollution, followed by
Birmingham - #8, St. Louis - #17, New York City - #21
and Philadelphia - #24. San Diego ranks #15 for highest
short-term particle pollution.
To avoid influence of variability in patient
enrollment on our findings, we directed further analysis
at demographic study of the age of disease onset and
progression. Both characteristics reflect severity of AD
symptoms while affected little by the size of patient base
selected for clinical studies. We used the age of cognitive
decline (DECAGE) values provided by the NACC
dataset [13] to describe the onset of AD. To seek
statistical dependences we compared probability
histograms of DECAGE for the patients from the 7 highdensity cities to the baseline histogram for all patients.
Additionally, we included Rochester, MN that is
considered one of the cleanest US cities for ozone
pollution (American Lung Association). Figure 2

Figure 1: Map of the Distribution of Alzheimer’s Disease Patients Participating in ADC Programs

568

correlation between DECAGE and APOE allele variant.
Unfortunately, not all cities had the same level of genetic
testing fulfillment, with 80% of New York City’s
participants having unknown APOE genotypes compared
to San Diego’s 4.4% (Table 1). Nonetheless, Figure 3
presents a combined histogram plot of all AD subjects
sorted by the APOE variant into 6 types of allele
combinations: (ε3, ε2), (ε2, ε 2), (ε3, ε3), (ε4, ε2), (ε3,
ε4), and (ε4, ε4). For each of the 6 types, a percent
histogram was calculated for a range of DECAGE values
from 30 to 105 years. A deeper color indicates a higher
percent of subjects in that age group. All histograms are
unimodal and negatively skewed except for (ε2, ε2)
whose low subject count (17 patients) is responsible for
artifacts of distribution evaluation.

presents the baseline DECAGE distribution for all
patients with known zipcode as the only selection
criterion colored by age.

Figure 2: Histogram of all AD patients by age of
cognitive decline (DECAGE).

Analysis of the all-patient histogram in Figure 2
reveals that DECAGE distribution is far from normal,
with skewness of -0.44 falling well beyond the tolerance
of the standard error of skew, -0.048. Thus, the disease
onset shows a distinct signature of the early-onset patient
population; a higher skewness value is indicative of local
factors influencing such earlier onset. With DECAGE
distributions far from normal median values are a more
robust representation of the typical age of cognitive
decline than averages. Table 1 summarizes comparison
of histograms calculated for the selected 8 cities to the
baseline.
Differences of only a few percent in the median
age of cognitive decline were observed among the cities
of interest in Table 1, except for Lexington, KY where
local conditions must be favoring a later onset of AD.
Skewness of the distribution was found similar to the
baseline for 6 of the selected cities, while the distribution
was normal in Lexington and St. Louis, suggesting lower
contributions of the early-onset cases in these two cities.
Further insight into the heterogeneity of the age
of cognitive decline was obtained by studying the

Figure 3: DECAGE histograms for various categories
of APOE allele variant.

The DECAGE median values calculated for the
various APOE allele dosages shown in Figure 3 are
consistent with genetic risk factors influencing AD onset
described in the literature [14, 15]. To further illustrate
this agreement, Table 2 correlates DECAGE medians to
the degree of risk ranging from “least at risk” (*) to
“most at risk” (****) such that homozygosity for ε4
confers most risk for earlier onset of AD, while the
protective effect of ε2 postpones the onset. The observed
consistency to the literature supports validity of median
DECAGE calculations in our analysis.

Table 1: Comparison of AD dataset attributes of eight cities to the baseline of all patients

City
Lexington, KY
New York City, NY
St. Louis, MO
Rochester, MN
San Diego, CA
Birmingham, AL
Pittsburg, PA
Philadelphia, PA
All patients

# patients

Census 2010
population

227
632
246
69
384
144
280
331
10565

295,803
8,175,133
319,294
106,769
1,307,402
212,237
305,704
1,526,006
-

DECAGE
median [yrs]

DECAGE
skewness

PM2.5
[ug/m3 LC]

78
75
75
75
73
73
73
71
72

-0.28
-0.49
-0.09
-0.62
-0.59
-0.83
-0.51
-0.43
-0.44

10.8
10.7
11.7
10.4
11.1
12.0
13.6
11.3
-

569

% missing
APOE
31.4
80.4
9.2
13.0
4.4
15.2
11.4
10.3
41.4

Table 2: AD risk estimate and age of cognitive
decline for different APOE allele variants

APOE

#
patients

(ε3, ε2)
(ε2, ε2)
(ε3, ε3)
(ε4, ε2)
(ε3, ε4)
(ε4, ε4)

420
17
2416
188
2486
665

DECAGE
median [yrs]

Risk
estimate

75
73
74
72
71
67

*
*
**
**
***
****

progressed from mild (CDR=1) to moderate (CDR=2)
dementia. Out of the available 10,566 patient records,
only ~1,300 could be used to detect the transition of
CDR from 1 to 2 and obtain the “age of worsening”
(AOW). Thus, the median AOW was determined to be
79 years of age. Further investigation into intercity AOW
variability could not be warranted due to an
insufficiently large sample size.

3. Challenges of Analysis: Bias
The examination of intercity gene-environment
interaction, though a promising analysis, would have
been ideal to perform using a different, more
comprehensive dataset. Due to selection bias the current
results only propose a trend restricted to ADCs and one
that may not extrapolate well to city population as a
whole. As seen in the ADC enrollments map, whole
areas remain unrepresented and the regions that are
represented do not reflect national Alzheimer’s disease
prevalence, but rather reflect esoteric study selection
criteria of ADC protocols. The fact that only 29 ADC
centers sample subjects from all 50 states with uneven
representation is indicative of some recruitment bias
based on proximity to the centers and exemplifies
convenience sampling. However, convenience sampling
works to our advantage as we prefer for the majority of
subjects to reside in areas proximal to a large city with an
ADC in order to make better inferences about the quality
of air they breathe.
Because ADCs enroll the type and number of
subjects they need to support proposed studies, the
possibility of certain DECAGE and APOE genotype
cases being purposely enrolled was considered.
However, when the distributions of each were visualized
no such selection could be seen: onset ages from 30 to
107 and all six APOE genotypes are represented without
weight on any particular variant [histograms not shown
due to similarity].
Migration patterns of subjects to and from areas
of high pollution could not be studied due to the short
time-span of the available dataset. Migration bias has
been known to distort assessment of toxic exposure in
ecology-driven epidemiology studies [17], but is rather
difficult to avoid given the logistic difficulty of
following subjects from birth.
Contrasting population metrics from the seven
metropolitan cities to rural areas where pollution is low
and migration is less frequent could minimize bias and
would be an interesting follow-up for this study.
However, access to only the first three digits of a
residential patient zipcode would make any urban versus
rural resident analysis tedious and unreliable.
As with any dataset, interpretation of an
observational study should be made carefully.
Alzheimer’s disease is a complex disorder characterized
by several stages of abnormal cognition that are
sometimes transiently interrupted by short periods of
lucidity. Information given by the patient has been

Although the dosage effects of the APOE allele
variant reveal a distinct pattern for estimating disease
onset, clearly protection of the ε2 variant is not fully
penetrant as seen in the few ε2-homozygous cases. The
complexity of Alzheimer’s lies in the interaction of
several yet-to-be-determined genetic and environmental
risk factors. Observing here that genetic factors are not
solely responsible for the variability in onset age, the
hypothesis that environmental determinants such as air
pollution are at least partially causal was tested. Fueled
by the earlier effectiveness of the median DECAGE
values, we ran their comparison against environmental
pollution as defined by daily mean concentrations of
particulate matter PM2.5 (obtained from epa.gov [16])
across the 8 cities of interest. Figure 5 displays a bubble
chart of the dependency of the median age of cognitive
decline on PM2.5, using patient enrollment count at each
city as the bubble size.

PA

AL
MO
PA
CA

KY
NY
MN

Figure 5: Dependence of the median age of cognitive
decline on environmental pollution in select cities

Even with only 8 data points a small correlation
of air pollution levels with median DECAGE is seen,
trending towards an earlier disease onset in more
polluted cities independent of patient count. As we
discussed previously, patient selection process at ADCs
prevents direct association of the negative factors with
city-wide AD incidence rates.
Next, progression of AD was examined by
querying the subject database for the age at which a
patient’s Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score

570

of air pollution such as lead, carbon monoxide, and
sulfide oxide could not be studied at this time due to
missing EPA data for some of the counties. Despite the
limitations, we will continue exploring trends while
teasing out reliable data.
We acknowledge the fact that as with any
descriptive study there are biases to be addressed. The
people who volunteer to participate in studies typically
differ from the main population in that they may be more
health-focused and motivated (volunteer/referral bias).
Because the various selection criteria on which the
ADCs focused was not disclosed to us a better study
would have been to monitor the decline of patients
already enrolled through the duration of their study
participation. However, the rate of withdrawal from the
studies makes it difficult to maintain a sufficient sample
size (only four subjects remained by the last recorded
visit), consequently leading to withdrawal bias [9].
We believe our sample of thousands of
individuals makes for a fair-sized pilot exposure study
the results of which warrant further investigation into
this association. Despite the obstacles we faced we hope
this research is informative and will contribute to current
literature regarding the relationship between pollution
and central nervous system diseases. Interactive
visualization using a framework such as Weave could
provide a means for pinpointing and even resolving some
of the confounding factors. Having better diagnostic
tools would contribute to more reliable data, a more
accurate analysis and better progress towards a treatment
and cure for this fatal neurodegenerative disorder.

known to reflect discrepancies in accordance with
difficulty remembering details such as how many years
the subject has smoked or the number of affected siblings
(memory bias). While informants do step in to confirm
the details, a different informant can provide different
information during a subsequent visit. Other confounding
factors include: imprecision associated with estimating
age of dementia onset to the nearest 5-year period when
the precise age is unknown, subjectivity of clinicians in
making a diagnosis, and different clinicians assessing the
patient throughout the duration of the study.

Conclusion
This brief, but informative survey set out to
examine intercity gene-environment interaction in
several well-dispersed regions of the United States
containing some of the highest concentrations of subject
enrollment for Alzheimer’s disease research studies
coordinated by ADCs. The seven identified regions of
interest map to metropolitan areas with a densely
populated urban core. Because these highly
industrialized mega cities are home to the nation’s
leading research centers, it is plausible to imagine the
detrimental effects elevated levels of ambient air
pollution may have at these locations. This hypothesis
ignited further investigation into the possible brain
damage of long-term exposure to environmental
pollution.
We settled on a method of plotting histograms
of age of cognitive decline as an investigative tool. All
histograms were found highly skewed to warrant use of
medians to describe onset of dementia. Such analysis of
the entire dataset was successful in strengthening known
knowledge about the dosage-dependent protective and
risk-increasing roles of APOE e2 and e4 alleles,
respectively. Specifically, the ‘e2, e3’ genotype was
associated with the latest age of onset (a.k.a. median age
of decline), while ‘e4, e4’ was associated with the
earliest decline.
Further investigation showed that the
distribution of APOE allele variants was not significantly
different in the seven cities compared to the entire
dataset viewed as whole. The exclusion of genetics as a
factor differentiating those cities from the whole
prompted the continuation of exploratory visualization
into detrimental environmental factors. Of all the air
pollution components, PM and ground-level ozone are
the largest health threats and are heavily implicated in
disease [7]. With this in mind, PM2.5 daily mean
concentrations were plotted against the median age of
cognitive decline for each “polluted” city and one
additional “clean” city through a bubble chart. A small
negative correlation hinted at higher air pollution
accelerating the onset of dementia in AD.
Lacking in the NACC dataset is incidence of
asthma or any pulmonary diseases, which could be
examined for evidence strengthening the hypothesis of
air pollution as a disease onset accelerator. Other types

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank UMass Lowell’s
Andrew Dufilie for Weave consultation; James Giddings
and Aicha Charfi for data retrieval support. Collection of
the data used in this study is supported by the National
Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center of the National
Institute on Aging (NIA) Grant U01 AG016976. We
would also like to thank Dr. Walter Kukull and Lilah
Besser for providing insight into dataset specifics.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

571

K. Blennow, M.J. de Leon and H. Zetterberg,
"Alzheimer's disease," Lancet, vol. 368, pp. 387-403, Jul
29. 2006.
J. Ye, T. Wu, and J. Li, “Machine Learning Approaches
for the Neuroimaging Study of Alzheimer's Disease”
IEEE Computer Magazine, 2011
T.D. Bird, “Alzheimer Disease Overview,” Gene
Reviews, 2007
L.J. Whalley, "Early-onset Alzheimer's disease in
Scotland: environmental and familial factors,"
Br.J.Psychiatry Suppl., vol. 40, pp. s53-9, Apr. 2001.
M. Prince, M. Cullen and A. Mann, "Risk factors for
Alzheimer's disease and dementia: a case-control study

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

based on the MRC elderly hypertension trial,"
Neurology, vol. 44, pp. 97-104, Jan. 1994.
L. Calderon-Garciduenas, A.C. Solt, C. HenriquezRoldan, R. Torres-Jardon, B. Nuse, L. Herritt, R.
Villarreal-Calderon, N. Osnaya, I. Stone, R. Garcia,
D.M. Brooks, A. Gonzalez-Maciel, R. Reynoso-Robles,
R. Delgado-Chavez and W. Reed, "Long-term air
pollution exposure is associated with neuroinflammation,
an altered innate immune response, disruption of the
blood-brain barrier, ultrafine particulate deposition, and
accumulation of amyloid beta-42 and alpha-synuclein in
children and young adults," Toxicol.Pathol., vol. 36, pp.
289-310, Feb. 2008
M.L. Block and L. Calderon-Garciduenas, "Air
pollution: mechanisms of neuroinflammation and CNS
disease," Trends Neurosci., vol. 32, pp. 506-516, Sep.
2009.
J.C. Morris, S. Weintraub, H.C. Chui, J. Cummings, C.
Decarli, S. Ferris, N.L. Foster, D. Galasko, N. GraffRadford, E.R. Peskind, D. Beekly, E.M. Ramos and
W.A. Kukull, "The Uniform Data Set (UDS): clinical
and cognitive variables and descriptive data from
Alzheimer
Disease
Centers,"
Alzheimer
Dis.Assoc.Disord., vol. 20, pp. 210-216, Oct-Dec. 2006
J.M. Hartman, J.W. Forsen Jr, M.S. Wallace and J.G.
Neely, "Tutorials in clinical research: part IV:
recognizing and controlling bias," Laryngoscope, vol.
112, pp. 23-31, Jan. 2002.
Alzheimer’s association: Alzheimer's Facts and Figures
url: alz.org/alzheimers_disease_facts_and_figures.asp
A. Baumann, A.S. Dufilie, S. Kolman, S. Kota, G.
Grinstein, and W Mass, “Exploratory to Presentation
Visualization, and Everything In-between: Providing
Flexibility in Aesthetics, Interactions and Visual
Layering,” Information Visualisation (IV), 2011 15th
International Conference on Information Visualisation,
vol., no., pp.200-204, 13-15 July 2011
American Lung Association’s State of the Air Report
url: www.stateoftheair.org
National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center, “NACC
Uniform Data Set (UDS) Coding Guidebook for Initial
Visit Packet”, version 2.0, February 2008.
E.H. Corder, A.M. Saunders, N.J. Risch, W.J.
Strittmatter, D.E. Schmechel, P.C. Gaskell Jr, J.B.
Rimmler, P.A. Locke, P.M. Conneally and K.E.
Schmader, "Protective effect of apolipoprotein E type 2
allele for late onset Alzheimer disease," Nat.Genet., vol.
7, pp. 180-184, Jun. 1994.
E.H. Corder, A.M. Saunders, W.J. Strittmatter, D.E.
Schmechel, P.C. Gaskell, G.W. Small, A.D. Roses, J.L.
Haines and M.A. Pericak-Vance, "Gene dose of
apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer's
disease in late onset families," Science, vol. 261, pp.
921-923, Aug 13. 1993.
United States Environmental Protection Agency
url: www.epa.gov/airdata/ad_data_daily.html
S. Tong, "Migration bias in ecologic studies,"
Eur.J.Epidemiol., vol. 16, pp. 365-369, Apr. 2000.

572

