2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Exploring User-Generated Data Visualization in the Accommodation
Sector
Elizabeth Simão Carvalho, Marcirio Silveira Chaves
Business and Information Technology Research Center (BITREC),
Universidade Atlântica, Fábrica da Pólvora de Barcarena, Barcarena, Portugal
{ecarvalho|marcirioc}@uatlantica.pt
sector. We used online reviews collected from guests of
small and medium hotels (SMH). We cross-reference
this data to find patterns that could give a better insight
and support an effective decision making. To classify
and analyze the data, we developed a methodology based
on concepts of a domain-specific ontology —
Hontology, described in detail in Chaves and Trojahn
[23].
At this stage of our work, we want to elicit formal
requirements for visual design of the data. To achieve
this, we produced some graphs to work as our test bed.
The result from this stage will help us to redesign and
define the visual output to be delivered by a tool that is
under development in the scope of the framework
proposed in Chaves, Trojahn and Pedron [26].
We want to know better the following aspects:
• What is the visual model of the potential end-user?
• How should we properly map and render:
o the most valued accommodation features?
o the perception of the quality offered by the hotel?
o the correlation between the guest’s profile and the
mostly relevant features?
o the intensity of the positivity or negativity of the
features?
• Does the use of advanced visual techniques (such as
tree-oriented) to map the results will help the
accommodation managers to have a better insight of
the data?
This paper is organized in five sections. Section 2
gives a brief background on the use of visualization
techniques to map blog data and opinion surveys, and
references related work. Section 3 presents the
methodology applied to collect and treat the data. Section
4 introduces significant aspects of the visual design of
data and describes how it was done. Section 5 concludes
this study also giving an outlook on important future
work.

Abstract
An important part of our information-gathering
behavior has always been to find out what other people
think. People now actively use information technologies
to seek out and understand the opinions of others. This is
due to the availability and popularity of opinion-rich
resources such as online review sites and blogs. The
accommodation sector is one of those where the guest
opinion dictates its future. This sector needs to adapt and
update the services they offer to their guests in order to
stay competitive.
In this paper we outline the potential use of treeoriented visual techniques to map 1500 online reviews
collected from 50 small and medium hotels (SMH). Our
goal is to deliver visually the results of these reviews as
straightforward and intuitively as possible to the
accommodation managers, enabling them use it to
support their decision making.
Keywords--- Online Reviews, Small and Medium
Hotels,
Accommodation
Sector,
Information
Visualization.

1. Introduction
“What other people think” has always been an
important piece of information during a decision-making
process. The Web has made possible to find out about
the opinions and experiences of those in the vast pool of
people that are neither our personal acquaintances nor
well-known professional critics — that is, people we
have never heard of. They are making their opinions
available to strangers via the Internet through online
reviews, blogs and social networks.
This information is highly valuable to “tune”
services and even “tailor” new ones that are offered to
the public. In the tourism and hospitality industries,
accommodation managers have a special role, since they
are the responsible for the closest contact to the voyager.
To have an efficient management of their services means
to be proactive and know as soon as possible what is the
prospects’ or guests’ feeling towards the services offered
by the accommodation.
This work demonstrates the application of
information visualization techniques to user-generated
content (UGC), specifically to the accommodation
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.42

2. Related Work
Recently, much effort has gone into automatic
opinion mining, making it possible to obtain customer
opinions from a large amount of free review text. The
effective visualization of it has also been a primary goal.
Wu et al. [1] presented OpinionSeer, an interactive
visualization system that could visually analyze a large
198

collection of online hotel customer reviews. The system
is built on a new visualization-centric opinion mining
technique that considers uncertainty for faithfully
modeling and analyzing customer opinions. A new visual
representation was developed to convey customer
opinions by augmenting well-established scatterplots and
radial visualization.
Weaver et al. [2] implemented an interactive visual
tool for exploring the visitation patterns of guests at two
hotels in central Pennsylvania from 1894 to 1900. They
implemented it as a coordinated multiple view
visualization in Improvise. Numerous discoveries have
driven additional data collection from archival
newspaper and census sources, as well as plans to
enhance analysis of spatial patterns using historic
weather records and railroad schedules. Distributed
online evaluations of usability and usefulness have
resulted in feature and design recommendations that
were incorporated into the tool.
Sung et al. [3] adopted a proposed heuristic n-phrase
rule to identify the polarity customer’s opinions and
provide position maps to visualize the pros and cons of
respective hotels. They concluded that some inherent
limitations such as the weakness in blogs itself such as
free format of text and the difficulty to generalize
findings due to the small size of bloggers, majority are
young people. They illustrated the whole opinion mining
of hotel customer generated contents in Chineselanguage weblogs and proposed technique for the
automatic feature-opinion extraction as well as for the
visualization of the detected opinions polarity on the
different features in the accommodation sector.
Gregory et al. [4] described a technical approach for
analyzing the content of blog data using a visual analytic
tool, IN-SPIRE, developed by Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory. They presented a methodology for
blog analysis using a mature document visualization tool.
With this tool, users can harvest blogs (datasets can be
static or dynamic, updating with real time information),
view them by thematic content, isolate key words of
interest, run queries, visualize changes in content over
time, or isolate bloggers of interest.
Bross, Schilf and Meinel [5] implemented
POSTCONNECT ⎯ an Adobe-Flex application with the
aid of Flare (http://flare.prefuse.org). They wanted to
provide a contemporary and innovative tool for the
improved exploration of blog archive. POSTCONNECT
is an interactive and well-arranged visualization tool to
powerfully explore and browse standard blog systems
archives that is the synthesis and application of existing
visualization and interaction techniques to the new
domain of weblogs. Figure 1 shows the development
phases of the visualization that they proposed to the
POSTCONNECT. They started with a very similar
technique to the “Eigenfactor citation patterns” (A) and
ended with the design presented in (C).

Figure 1 Development phases of visualization
[5]

3. Data and Methodology
Our data was obtained from an exploratory study
conducted by Chaves, Gomes and Pedron [22], according
to this methodology:
First phase: They gathered the names of all hotels in
the Lisbon region registered in the National Registry of
Tourism (http://bit.ly/vZy8rc) up to March 31, 2011
according to the following criteria: i) the hotel must be
independent (i.e. not belong to a chain of hotels); ii) it
must have fewer than 120 rooms; iii) it must have at least
30 reviews available for 2010 on Booking.com and
Tripadvisor online pages, with text, in Portuguese,
English or Spanish (for hotels that did not have enough
comments for 2010, they supplemented them with
reviews from the beginning of 2011). In cases where
there were more than 30 reviews, we selected the
comments with more description (i.e. the 30 longest
comments). Due to fact that the number of hotels present
in the National Register of Tourism that met all
requirements fell short of the desired number (50
Hotels), they also used the list of housing program
DiscoverPortugal (http://bit.ly/vrxgU3). This list comes
from the site of Tourism of Portugal from April 15,
2011. They selected the first seven hotels in the city of
Lisbon that met the criteria described above.
Phase two: They loaded 1500 reviews to a
spreadsheet, and subsequently analysed them using the
following parameters:
• Polarity: Identified taking into account six categories:
positive, negative, mixed, neutral, irrelevant, or
uncertain, as proposed by Godes and Mayzlin [24];
• Relevance of Concept of the Ontology (CO): They
chose the segments of the reviews containing relevant
CO (maximum three per review);
• CO: They identified the CO present in each segment
selected;
• Strength of the Polarity (for each CO, polarity was
identified in the following categories: very negative,
negative, neutral, positive, or very positive. The
strengths of the polarity were classified according to
the approach of Turney [25]. In this approach, the
classification is chosen by the association of
adjectives, adverbs of positive or negative
connotation for the chosen parameter (e.g. clean,
dirty, nice, nasty, comfortable and uncomfortable).
For the classification of the strength very positive and
very negative, the criterion used was the presence of
adjectives or expressions of extreme tilt (e.g.

199

information is significant and interesting to be analyzed,
we selected only some fields to build the first group of
visualizations. These are going to be used as the first
rough sketch of the visual encodings to be tested against
potential end-users. According the input that we will
receive from them, our visualization design is going to
evolve to more customized and enhanced versions.
To start the visualization design process we
identified what relations in the data should be visually
encoded and what were their goals. Table 1 summarizes
the main conclusions.

stainless, dirty, good, bad, very, and could not have
done more to);
• Qualifier of each CO, i.e. the term attributable to a
positive or negative use of the CO.
In addition to classifying the reviews on the basis of
the ontology, they identified what type of guest made the
review. In this case, they used the categories provided by
Booking.com and TripAdvisor sites. Other attributes
evaluated were the number of stars of the hotel and the
rating given by each user to the hotel.
Third phase: They analyzed the sample data through
Excel pivot table function, by means of the intersection
of several variables. The purpose of this stage of the
study was to identify possible patterns of market
preference, which could support the decision making of
the SMH managers.
In this paper, we extend this methodology through
the application of visualization methods according to
specific goals of an accommodation manager.

Relation

Data
Concept of the
Ontology
Polarity

CO-P-R

Rating

4. Visualization Design
Creating visualization requires a number of nuanced
judgments. One must determine which questions to ask,
identify the appropriate data, and select effective visual
encodings to map data values to graphical features such
as position, size, shape, and color [6]. The challenge is
that for any given data set the number of visual
encodings—and thus the space of possible visualization
designs—is extremely large.
There are a number of taxonomical studies on
interaction in visualization, e.g. [7, 8, 9], and taxonomy
proposals for specific classes of techniques and
applications, e.g. [10, 11]. Brodlie proposed a notation
for symbolic labeling visualization methods [12]. Card
and Makinlay proposed a descriptive structure for
visualization [13]. Duke et al. presented an argument to
bring taxonomy and ontology together [14]. Other
important examples are given by Bertin [15, 16],
Cleveland [17] and Wilkinson [18].
The fundamental substrate of visualizations is the
spatial position. Marks such as points, lines, or areacovering elements can be placed on this substrate. These
marks can carry additional information independent of
their spatial position, such as size, greyscale luminance
(brightness) value, surface texture density, color hue,
color saturation, curvature, angle, and shape. The
literature contains many different names for these kinds
of visual encodings: retinal variables, retinal attribute,
elementary graphical perception tasks, perceptual tasks,
perceptual dimensions, perceptual channels, display
channels, display dimensions, and so on. Section 4.1
describes the steps and what aspects were considered
relevant to design the data visualization.

CO-P-PS

CO
Polarity
Polarity Strength

G-CO-P

Guest
CO
Polarity

CO-Q-PS

CO
Qualifier
Polarity Strength

Goal
To properly provide a
visual representation of
what are the features in
the hotels that are
mostly observed and
relevant to the guests.
To infer what is the
guest’s perception of the
quality offered by the
hotels.
To spot the correlation
between the guests’s
profile and the mostly
relevant features.
To identify the intensity
of the positive or
negative use of a CO.

Table 1 Data and goals of the visualization
Data
CO
Count of CO
Polarity

Category
dimension
measure
dimension

Count of polarity
Polarity strength

measure
dimension

Count of
strength
Rating

measure

polarity

dimension

Count of rating
Average of rating
Guest
Count of guests
Qualifier

measure
measure
dimension
measure
dimension

Count of guests

measure

Type
Nominal
Quantitative
Nominal and
ordinal
Quantitative
Nominal and
ordinal
Nominal
Quantitative
and ordinal
Quantitative
Quantitative
Nominal
Quantitative
Nominal and
ordinal
Quantitative

Table 2 Data classification

4.1. Design phases

The next step was to classify the data, in order to
identify more straightforward what visual techniques
would fit better to the data. Because the gathered data are
discrete variables describing it (defines a domain), it was

The data collected is in tabular format. It contains
fields like the hotel name, the number of stars and the
total number of rooms. Although all the collected

200

Finally, Figure 3 shows the visual mapping of the
relation CO-P-R. Because we wanted to include a more
standard graph representation, we produced these plots.
The thickness of the polyline, the size of the symbols, the
position and the color are used to depict how the rating
and the polarity impact on the CO.

counted and averaged in order to derive its main
measures. Table 2 presents the results of this step.
Finally, taking into account the guidelines given by
the visual encoding taxonomies, we used the color, size
and position as the main visual encodings. Additionally,
we used text, legends, symbols and zooming to improve
readability. Because the data describes a hierarchic
relationship, we focused on the usage of tree oriented
visualizations to map this – bubble, radial, treemap and
force-direct, although we also produced plot graphs for
comparison. To develop these rough sketches, we used
off-the-shelf visualization tools: Tableau [19], Tulip [20]
and Treemap [21]. Tableau Desktop is based on
technology from Stanford University that lets drag and
drop to analyze data. Tulip is an information
visualization framework dedicated to the analysis and
visualization of relational data. Treemap enables users to
compare nodes and sub-trees even at varying depth in the
tree, and help them spot patterns and exceptions. These
tools offer interesting visual mapping solutions that
allow a fast and flexible rendering of the data. Figures 1,
2 and 3 illustrate some of the visual results that were
achieved.
Figure 1 presents two bubble tree graphs to depict
the relation CO-P-PS. The color was used to map the
polarity and the polarity strength values on the CO. The
size was used to map the frequency that the CO is
mentioned in the reviews. Moreover, symbols were
applied in each node to map zones of influence of the
rating or the polarity when the user zoom the image.
Labels were also used to identify the CO on each bubble.
Figure 2 illustrates the mapping of the relation GCO-P. We used a squarified treemap using the color, the
size and the hierarchical ordering of the data to give
different views on this relation. We also applied a slice
and dice visual arrangement but the distribution of the
data caused some parts of the tree to become a very thin
slice, thus not giving a clear cue.

4.2. Visualization Evaluation
Although the Information Visualization field is not
new, it still suffers from a lack of methodologies to
evaluate the results that it produces.
Pleasant [27] presents the challenges of the
evaluation of the visualization and suggests three
possible first steps to improve information visualization
evaluation and facilitate adoption: the development of
repositories of data and tasks, the gathering of case
studies and success stories, and the strengthening of the
role of toolkits.
Chen and Czerwinski [28] provide a timely and
unifying forum for researchers and practitioners to tackle
some of the fundamental and practical issues concerning
empirical evaluation of information visualizations.
Most recently, Lam et al. [29] proposed seven
guiding scenarios to evaluate information visualization.
These scenarios were derived through an extensive
literature review of over 800 visualization publications
and are described through their goals, the types of
questions they embody and illustrated through example
studies.
Because the goal of information visualization
evaluations in our research is to work towards
understanding the work, analysis, or information
processing practices by a group of hotel managers with
or without software in use, we will adopt the first
scenario proposed by Lam et al. The evaluations in the
EWP - Evaluating Environments and Work Practices
group elicit formal requirements for design, which fits
perfectly our goal at this stage.

Figure1 Result of the application of Bubble Tree visualization of the relation among concepts of the
ontology, polarity (left) and polarity strength (right).

201

Figure 2 Results using Treemap visualization of the relation among guests, concepts of the ontology
and polarity (due to the visibility, the snapshots are truncated).

Figure 3 Results using Plot visualization of the relation among concepts of the ontology, polarity and
rating.

202

5. Conclusions and Future Works
The graphs produced for representing visually the
collected data from online reviews from SMHs will help
us to elicit better the visual requirements of our endusers. They will help us to know better some of the main
aspects that may impact on the visualization design and
to identify its formal requirements. In special, they will
allow us to evaluate if a tree-oriented visual
representation of the data promotes an effective insight
to accommodation managers. However, there is much
room for extending the visualization design of the data,
improving its analysis and introducing new visual cues.
As future work, we intend to perform user
evaluations (visual response), to redesign these
preliminary proposals according to the manager’s needs
and to proceed with the implementation of the visual
layer of our tool.

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

Acknowledgements

[17]

We thank Rodrigo Gomes by the data provided.

References

[18]

[1]

[19]

Y. Wu, F. Wei, S. Liu, N. Au, W. Cui, H. Zhou, and H.
Qu. OpinionSeer: Interactive Visualization of Hotel
Customer Feedback. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 6, 1109-1118. Nov-Dec 2010.
[2] C. Weaver, D. Fyfe, A. Robinson, D. W. Holdsworth, D.
J. Peuquet and A. M. MacEachren. Visual Exploration
and Analysis of Historic Hotel Visits. Information
Visualization, 6:1, 89-103, February 2007.
[3] Rueijiau Sung, Chaochang Chiu, Peiyu Hsieh, Huiling
Chou. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Financial Management and Economics 2011. Hong
Kong. Vol. 11, 150-154. ISBN 978-981-08-9084-1.
[4] Michelle L. Gregory, Deborah Payne, David McColgin,
Nick Cramer, Douglas Love. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media ICWSM 2007. Colorado, USA.
[5] Bross, J.; Schilf, P.; Meinel, C. Visualizing Blog
Archives to Explore Content- and Context-Related
Interdependencies. In Proc. of the Web Intelligence and
Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT) IEEE/WIC/ACM
International Conference on. Toronto, Canada. 647-652,
ISBN 978-1-4244-8482-9. September 2010.
[6] Heer, J; Bostock, M.; Ogievestsky, V. A Tour through
the Visualization Zoo. Magazine Communications of the
ACM, 53(6), New York, USA, 1-22, June 2010.
[7] L. Tweedie. Characterizing interactive externalizations.
In Proceedings ACM CHI, p. 375–382, 1997.
[8] M. O.Ward and J. Yang. Interaction spaces in data and
information visualization.In Proc. Eurographics/IEEE
TCVG Symposium on Visualization, p. 137–145, 2004.
[9] J. S. Yi, Y. ah Kang, J. T. Stasko, and J. A. Jacko.
Toward a deeper understanding of the role of interaction
in information visualization. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1224–1231,
2007.
[10] G. Ellis and A. Dix. A taxonomy of clutter reduction for
information visualisation. IEEE Transactions on

[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

203

Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1216–1223,
2007.
N. Elmqvist and P. Tsigas. A taxonomy of 3D occlusion
management for visualization. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(5):1095–1109,
2008.
K. Brodlie. A classification scheme for scientific
visualization. In R. A. Earnshaw and D.Watson, editors,
Animation and Scientific Visualization, p. 125–140.
Academic Press, 1993.
S. Card and J. Mackinlay. The structure of the
information visualization design space. In Proc. IEEE
Information Visualization. Phoenix, USA, pages 92–99,
1997.
D. J. Duke, K. W. Brodlie, D. A. Duce, and I. Herman.
Do you see what I mean? IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 25(3):6–9, 2005.
J. Bertin. Graphics and Graphic Information Processing.
Walter de Gruyter, 1981.
J. Bertin. The Semiology of Graphics. University of
Wisconsin Press, 1983.
W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill. Graphical Perception:
Theory, Experimentation, and Application to the
Development of Graphical Methods. J. of the American
Statistical Association, 79(387):531-554, Sep. 1984.
L. Wilkinson. The Grammar of Graphics. SpringerVerlag, 1999.
Tableau.http://www.tableausoftware.com/products/deskt
op (visited on 25-12-2011).
Tulip. http://tulip.labri.fr/TulipDrupal/ (on 25-12-11).
Treemap. http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/treemap/ (visited
on 25-12-2011).
Chaves, M. S.; Gomes, R. and Pedron, C. Analysing
reviews in the Web 2.0: Small and Medium Hotels in
Portugal. Tourism Management, 33(5) 1286 – 1287,
Elsevier Science, 2012.
Chaves, M. S. and Trojahn, C. Towards a Multilingual
Ontology for Ontology-driven Content Mining in Social
Web Sites. In Proc. of the ISWC 2010 Workshops. Vol. I,
1st International Workshop on Cross-Cultural and CrossLingual Aspects of the Semantic Web. Shanghai, China,
Nov 7th, 2010.
Godes, D. and Mayzlin, D. Using Online Conversations
to
Study
Word
of
Mouth
Communication. Market. Science, 23(4), 545-560, 2004.
Turney, P. D. Thumbs up or thumbs down? semantic
orientation applied to unsupervised classi¿cation of
reviews. In Proc. of ACL. p. 417–424, 2002.
Chaves, M. S.; Trojahn, C. and Pedron, C. A Framework
for Customer Knowledge Management based on Social
Semantic Web: A Hotel Sector Approach. In: CRM and
the Social and Semantic Web: Enabling Cliens Conexus.
Colomo-Palacios, R.; Varajão, J. and Soto-Acosta, P.
(Eds.). p. 141-157, Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2012.
C. Plaisant. The challenge of information visualization
evaluation. In Proc. of the Conference on Advanced
visual interfaces. AVI ’04, 2004. ISBN:1-58113-867-9.
Chen, C. and Czerwinski, M. In Journal International of
Human-Computer Studies - Empirical evaluation of
information visualization. Academic Press, MN, USA,
53(5), Nov. 2000.
Lam, H., Bertini, E., Isenberg, P., Plaisant, C. and
Carpendale, S. Seven Guiding Scenarios for Information
Visualization Evaluation. TR 2011-992-04, Department
of Computer Science, University of Calgary, 2011.

