2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Brandmap: an Information Visualization Platform for Brand Association in
Blogosphere

Amadeu Sa de Campos Filho, Fred Freitas, Alex
Sandro Gomes

Jairson Vitorino
IT Department
Elife Company
Mannheim, Germany
e-mail: jairson@elife.com.br

Informatic Center
Federal University of Permanbuco, UFPE
Recife, Brasil
e-mail: ascf2@cin.ufpe.br, fred@cin.ufpe.br,
asg@cin.ufpe.br
•

Abstract - Word-of-mouth in the Internet is rapidly
increasing, but the dissemination of this information is
sometime difficult to interpret. This paper presents a
visualisation platform (BrandMap). It was used to structure
data of brand association distribution in the blogosphere as
a case study that analyses the word-of-mouth of two
smartphone brands in Brazil. BrandMap is a prototype that
was developed based on extensive research about word-ofmouth in the blogosphere and how to visualize brands
monitoring. BrandMap uses a novel approach for
information visualization of complex data. The result was
the evaluation of BrandMap analyses that compared the
user’s perception about the advantages and disadvantages of
two brands in social networks.
Keywords--- Information Visualization,
Social Network, Semantic Web.

I.

Represented features: instances, concepts,
hierarchical relations, discover patterns, or detect
important links in information, particularly when
the data set is complex and uncertain, according
to the relevant users needs. [1]
There are two kinds of information visualization:
graphical visualization and textual visualization. Each one
use specific domain, but some applications may be
understood better using a graphical approach than a
textual one. For example, we can choice between the
possibilities of an alternative route or the existence of
historical buildings in the neighbourhood of the route.
The graphical approach, if well applied, might improve
the human learning process [2].
Furthermore the potential use of 3D graphics for
information visualisation is nowadays a significant
unexplored area. The use of 3D graphics not only
enhances the design of an information visualization
interface but it provides additional information to that of
2D. The challenge of visualizing abstract information in
3D consists in determining effective visual representation
and interaction schemes for human analysis and
exploration.
However, the most important task for successful
visualization is the retrieval of necessary data and the
availability of a suitable visualization through metaphors
that show the association of data representation to an
experience outside the object's environment. Metaphors
are very important when it shows real worlds and
establishes social interactions, especially in virtual reality
[3]. So, the choice of a metaphor is most of the time
essential to enhance the usability of a visualization
interface. One main problem with many graphical designs
is that they have no intuitive interpretation, and the user
must learn how to understand them. Metaphors found in
nature or in the real world avoid this problem by
providing a graphical design that the user already
understands.
This paper proposes a visualization platform for the
structured data on the web. In particular our focus is on a
specific knowledge domain, which we explain in the
technological background section of this article, namely
brand association distribution in the blogosphere. To
validate this proposal we conducted a case study to track
and measure the distribution of brands in the blogosphere
through visualization maps (BrandMap) for these brands

Blogosphere,

INTRODUCTION

Since the introduction of the World Wide Web in the
mid- 90's, the volume of unstructured data has increased
exponentially. Visualizing attributes semantically
structured from data collections like person names,
places, zip codes, dates among others, has become
progressively more difficult. The challenge is to provide
good clues to right questions, which is the key to actual
scientific discoveries in many areas. A variety of
visualization techniques exist to tackle this problem. The
development of techniques for supporting appropriate
visualization methods in browsing large amounts of data
is relevant in order to help end users to navigate through
the knowledge repositories created by processing raw
information networks.
Furthermore information visualization and the
construction of Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) is not a
trivial task particularly when there are large amounts of
dynamic data collections being represented. It involves
the following issues:
• The nature of the data: numerical, ordinal or
categorical
• Number of data dimensions: univariate,
bivariate, trivariate or multivariate
• Structure of the data :linear, temporal, spatial or
geographic, hierarchical or network
• Type of interaction: static, transformable or
manipulable

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.60

316

in terms of its dissemination throughout the Portuguese
blogosphere.
In the following sections, the paper presents a brief
description of the blogosphere brands monitoring, the
technological background and the main concepts of the
BrandMap platform following a case study. The paper
then concludes with a discussion of the main
contributions and future work.
II.

The aim of our work was the development of
innovative visualization techniques to convey information
found in the blogosphere about brands. After crawling a
collection of blogs for specific terms (i.e. nike, running
shoes, etc) we end up typically with a list of annotated
posts and comments. By annotations we mean a set of
attributes such as the publication and crawling dates, a
term frequency list, author name, location (when given),
number of incoming links pointing to that blog (extracted
via Google API) among others. From this listing one can
imagine how complex it can be to render it visually when
it is composed of hundreds or thousands of items.
In the next section, we explain a brief description of
the technological background of information visualization
platform for brand association in blogosphere.

BRAND MONITORING IN THE BLOGOSPHERE

Blogs appeared circa the beginning of the last decade
in 2000. It was quickly adopted by millions of people
everywhere first as a way to express themselves to friends
and family and then evolving to professional writing
projects, which actually start providing financial income
to the producers. Ten years later social media and social
networking is everywhere and although blogs are not hot
news anymore, it keeps its steady growth in the web.
Technorati [4] accounted for more than 133 millions
blogs in 2007.
Marketing managers promptly realized the potential of
such a huge resource of data. Many bloggers mentioned
their brands, products and services. They discussed
actively with their community a new game release, an
advertisement television spot or a global recall of
automobile parts. These discussions fuelled even more the
on-line buzz, sometimes creating huge successes or crisis
stories, depending on which types ideas got spread.
Suddenly a group of global influential bloggers could
make more than a dent on a product release.
Nielsen, a global company performed a study for over
25,000 Internet consumers world wide, ninety percent of
consumers surveyed said that they trust recommendations
from people they know, while 70 percent trusted
consumer opinions posted online [5]. See graph in the
figure below.

III.

TECHNOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

The general architecture of the new information
visualization platform for brand association in
blogosphere was based on a Framework Proposal for
Developing 3D Graphical User Interfaces on Telehealth
Systems. [6] (Figure 2)

Figure 2. Architecture of framework for information visualization in
semantics contents

According to figure 2 the architecture is composed by
3 layers:
• Data layer: In this layer, the data is stored from
the data provider. In this layer it is not important
to know where the data come from (Blogs, Sites,
Twitter, etc) and how is their structure (XML,
database, RDF, etc.)
• Business layer: In this layer all the information
in the data layer remains untouched, we have to
parse this data to right visualization standard that
is based on the metamodel proposed. This
metamodel must provide all variables to the
visualization. To build this transformation, the
user must participate, by selecting parameters to
be used for the XML Parser in order to construct
the nodes (entities).
• Graphical user Interface (GUI) layer: In the GUI
layer there will be a VisualModel that is the
graphical model of information visualization
platform. This VisualModel will be created based
only on the MetaModel in business layer no
matter what kind of data structure is coming from
data layer.
In the next section, we explain a particular useful
artefact for displaying the described listings in a way that
might lead to insights more quickly than simply browsing

Figure 1. Number of trusted consumer opinions posted online

Many start-ups and established companies have
started developing tools to handle this vast collection of
information in a way that companies can interpret all this
data within the minimal time possible. This proved to be a
complex task that involved many computer science subareas such as text mining, information extraction and web
crawling among others.

317

linearly through the data. We introduce the concept of
brand association maps.
IV.

physical characteristic
shapes) to represent
dimensions, including
elements, competitive
concepts and themes.

BRANDMAP: THE VISUALIZATION PLATFORM

BrandMap is a visualization platform for ConsumerGenerated Media analysis that delivers insights into how
consumers think and talk about a brand in the
Blogosphere through the similarity among terms more
frequency in the blog post. In the blogosphere there are
typically huge collections of terms that when they are
alone, they are only row data and have not meanings.
However, this row data when connects to others terms,
can deliver information but sometimes it is hard to
visualize theirs meanings.
The BrandMap architecture is an instance of
framework above and is depicted in Figure 3 In data
layer, the system will reuse information retrieval and
information extraction technology from XML files to
populate Brand Association model. After this, in the
business layer the populate Brand association model will
fill out the system model to be processed the cluster
algorithms in order to group the data with the same
similarity. Finally in the GUI layer, this data is then
rendered on a interface to represent the brand
dissemination.
BrandMap goal is to support the better visualization of
huge set of connected terms. It is based on Universe
metaphor where the main term, the brand term, is the
centre of system (Sun) and the others terms that are
correlated with the brand term are displayed around the
centre like planets (see Figure 4). Beyond the use of the
universe metaphor, the visualization platform used

of the object (color, size and
several kinds of key brand
product attributes, messaging
and category sets, and related

Figure 4. BrandMap Interface

According to the figure 4 we defined that the distance
between the centre and the term is inversely proportional
to its frequency of the variable that is studied. In the case
of brandmap the variable is the number the times that the
term is cited in the blog post.

d=

Figure 3. BrandMap Architecture

318

1
freq(var)

Figure 5. Technique to calculate the terms angle based on the Dendogram techniques

the central brang. Thus the BrandMap platform allows
one to develop insights into the opinions of Internet users
and their perception of the brands in social media by
quickly examining how categories, terms and brands
relate to each other on the map.
The BrandMap of smartphone Y is depicted in Figure
6 and proved to be very related to reception problems in
its new model, which interferred with if handled by the
body of the device. It was necessary the use of a case to
avoid the problem. The term "Reception" at the center of
the brandMap shows that this was the main point of
criticism of the new device on the blogs. The terms
"antenna", "failure", "problem" and "case" also deal with
the same problem with signal reception.

The angle between the terms around the centre is
calculated by a new technique created by [7] that is based
on hierarchy clustering technique that analyses theirs
similarities and dendrogram technique (see Figure 5).
Dendrogram is a diagram showing the relationships of
items arranged like the branches of a tree. It is common
interface to use it to show the process of a hierarchical
clustering method.
The selection of the terms that will be displayed in the
map is correlated to the frequency that theses terms
appear in relation of the central brand in blogs. The
selection technique is based on information retrieval
techniques. The terms are grouped in category according
to data model of the search engine system and they are
stored in an XML file.
A. A Case Study
In September 2010, electronics companies W
launched in Brazil a smartphone X to compete with a
smartphone Y of an competitor Z. Due to the similarity of
features of both devices, the company W made use of
various advertising campaigns attacking the weaknesses
of its competitor Z. To observe whether the word-ofmouth of the Internet against the advantages and
disadvantages of the devices reflected the market's
behavior in relation to smartphone X of the company W,
the BrandMap platform was used to compare the
perception of smartphone X and Y in social networks.
For producing the BrandMaps of brands, we use
BuzzMonitor search engine [8] to search for most
frequently terms mentioned in the blogs in the Portuguese
language related to smartphone X and smartphone Y,
from January to September 2010. In a top 50 list of terms,
step words of Portuguese language was excluded and
selected about 10 to 20 most interesting terms associated
with the brands mentioned.
After the terms are selected, they are categorized
according to the characteristics that they have, for
example, "Jailbreak" and "Operator" related to unlock the
smartphone Y, and "Bada" and "Android" related to the
comparison of Operating Systems from smartphone X.
The analysis of word-of-mouth on blogs is made in the
BrandMap by the proximity of terms associated with the
central term. The terms closer to the center are those that
appear most frequently in postings that have mention to

Figure 6. BrandMap platform of Smarthphone Y

According to figure 5, new features and characteristics
of devices such as screen "touchscreen" with better
resolution or Retinal Display technology or the "camera"
of 5mg with LED flash or the ability to store up to 32GB
or the new white color model are disseminated on social
networks. Mobile applications, especially the new Firefox
browser developed for the new model has also been much
reported.

319

•

The exclusive contracts with certain providers brings
several testimonies on how to unlock the devices, with
tips on how to make the "Jailbreak" in the smartphone Y
On the other hand in the BrandMap of smartphone X
(Figure 7), "Bluetooth" 3.0, which allows a high rate of
files transfer including multimedia files, was the
functionality most often mentioned. In addition to this
feature, the Android operating system, the camera for
"videos" in HD, the touchscreen, GPS and memory card
2GB were also mentioned. There were also comparisons
with others competing smartphones, especially the iPhone
(3G version), Nokia and Motorola. The launch of the iPad
tablet also generated high expectations. There are many
comparisons especially with the tablet of the American
company.

An original platform to visualize large spatiotemporal datasets representing Internet Brand
dissemination, including 3D visualization
techniques, metaphors and the incorporation of
virtual world features when applicable.
• The proposed platform may be used by other
researchers
interested
in
investigating
communicating word-of-mouth in several
disciplines (psychology,
sociology,
communication sciences, anthropology, etc).
For future work we will evaluate these visualization
platforms applying usability questionnaires in order to
improve the user interface techniques and to define,
which one is the best to apply for the Social Network
domain case. Furthermore we will include interaction
design methodologies to construct the new interfaces in
different contexts as in learning management systems
where data represent interaction and collaboration
between users.
Finally we will develop a new version of the system
including a variety of 3D information visualisation
techniques. We expect to provide users with better tools
for the visualization of systems that manipulate the so
called big data. The incorporation of 3D techniques will
contribute to the advance of the state of the art in the field
of 3D graphical user interfaces.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank CAPES/DAAD PROBRAL and the
Brazilian National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development (CNPq) for financial support.
REFERENCES

Figure 7. BrandMap platform of for Smarthphone X

[1]

By analysing the map the user find three fundamental
elements: terms, categories (discriminate by colors) and
their location on their plan. For example, by examining
the location of color green in figure 5, the user can for
example note that many terms of the category features are
aligned together and in particular somewhat separated
from other categories. The only exception is Firefox that
is very close to touchscreen (maybe people were relating
both terms together?). By looking those relations between
terms and categories on the 2D space, the user is led to
questions which in turn lead to insights. This is the main
goal of such a tool : support a market analyst in the search
of questions and correspondingly insights.
V.

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
[7]

This Paper showed an innovative software platform
for information visualization of brand dissemination over
the Internet. The results of this platform may provide the
means to monitor, analyze and advise clients regarding
the brand perception and services, behavior and consumer
habits, trends and relationship with the consumer 2.0,
among others, by communicating word-of-mouth and
public dialogues and spontaneous consumer online line.
The platform may also give to the users a deep
understanding how your brand is perceived, discussed and
understood among consumers online.
The contributions of this platform are:

[8]

320

M. Hearst. Information visualization: Principles, promise, and
pragmatics. Handouts of the tutorial at CHI 2003 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2003.
R. Ruddle, K. Brodlie, and V. Dimitrova. Communication,
visualisation and interaction. University of Leeds, School of
Computing. Handbook of the course. 2002.
B. Kot. Information Visualisation Utilising 3D Computer Game
Engines , FoS Scholarship Report, University of Auckland, February
2005.
url:
www.cs.auckland.ac.nz/~burkhard/Reports/SS2004_BlazejKot.do
Tecnorati. url:www.technorati.com
Nielsen Global Online Consumer Survey April. 2009. url:
http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/consumer/global-advertisingconsumers-trust-real-friends-and-virtual-strangers-the-most/
F.E.R. Rabelo, A.S. Campos Filho, M.A. Novaes. A Framework
Proposal for Developing 3D Graphical User Interfaces on Telehealth
Systems. In: AMIA 2011 Annual Symposium, 2011, Washington.
AMIA 2011 Annual Symposium Proceedings, 2011. p. 1760-1760.
E.M. Mislej. COCOVAS: Un sistema de visualización de
Información documental para sistemas de Recuperación de
Información de Internet, Departamento de Computación, Universidad
de Buenos Aires, Noviembre de 2006.
A. B. Lima, J. Vitorino, H. Mostaert. Buzzmonitor: A Tool For
Measuring Word Of Mouth Level In On-Line Communities. In:
IADIS International Conference IADIS e-Commerce, Porto, Portugal.
2005.

