2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Comparison of Methods for Visualizing Musical Genres

Jukka Holm

Harri Siirtola

Unit of Human-Centered Technology
Tampere University of Technology
Tampere, Finland
jukka.holm@tut.fi

School of Information Sciences
University of Tampere
Tampere, Finland
harri.siirtola@sis.uta.fi
“computer-supported, interactive, visual representation of
abstract data to amplify cognition” [4]. In the case of music
visualization, the musical metadata of user’s own music
collection, an online music store, or a music
recommendation service is mapped to selected visual
variables. By clicking on the desired part(s) of the
visualization, the user can quickly start exploring the music
collection and select what type of music to listen to. When
designed with care, such visualizations can minimize the
need to memorize things and the need for explicit user input,
increase the amount of useful information on the screen, and
improve the usability and efficiency of the system [5]. A
well-designed visualization can also make the exploration of
music collections a playful, entertaining, and intuitive
experience.
One common example of musical metadata is the musical
genre, which refers to “categorical labels created by humans
to characterize pieces of music” [6]. While building a
consistent genre hierarchy can be extremely difficult [7],
genre taxonomies are commonly used in physical and online
record stores, traditional music player applications (e.g.,
iTunes), and streaming music services (e.g., Spotify). Also,
in a study by Laplante [8] genre was shown to be the most
popular criterion of young adults to start a music search.
Using genres, one can rapidly obtain “a manageable set of
items” that can then be browsed based on some other criteria.
In this paper, four different methods (colors, icons, fonts
and avatars) for visualizing musical genres are presented and
compared against each other. The performance of the
methods was studied by conducting a series of online
questionnaires, and the findings were then utilized in
designing novel graphical user interfaces (GUIs) for the
latest version of Nokia Research Center’s SuperMusic music
recommendation system [9].

Abstract—A well-designed visualization can make the
exploration of music collections an intuitive and entertaining
experience. In this paper, four different methods (colors, icons,
fonts and avatars) for visualizing musical genres are presented
and compared against each other. The performance of the
different visualizations was studied in a series of online surveys
with mostly Finnish participants, and the findings were then
utilized in designing novel GUIs for an existing music
recommendation system. Based on the results, the best
performance can be achieved by combining different
visualization methods together; while colors alone were not a
good method for visualizing musical genres, the best
performing method (avatars) was partially based on the
findings of color and icon questionnaires. The easiest genre to
visualize was metal; it performed best in both online
questionnaires and practical prototype design.
Keywords-musical genre; visualization; color; font; icon;
avatar

I.

INTRODUCTION

After the introduction of Napster in 1999, the sales of
physical music recordings have decreased rapidly [1]. At the
same time, music consumption on the web has increased, and
the emphasis has gradually shifted from downloadable
content to streaming services. In the end of 2011, one of the
most successful streaming music services, Spotify
(www.spotify.com), had already approx. 20 million free and
paid users in Europe and the United States [2].
Record companies have already licensed 13 million
tracks to online music services, and there are over 400
licensed digital music services in the world [3]. As making
the content available to users is no longer an issue, the
emphasis is now moving more and more to inventing new
service concepts and improving the user experience of
existing products. To differentiate from the competitors,
music service developers should aim to design novel,
interesting, entertaining, and easy-to-use user interfaces
(UIs) and interaction methods for exploring the vast music
collections. Still, most companies are “playing it safe” and
relying on textual lists and pictures of album front covers.
The users may browse, navigate, and search the music
collection according to selected metadata attributes such as
artist and song names, musical genre, tempo, mood, and the
release year of the music.
An interesting alternative for representing digital music
collections is information visualization, which refers to using
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.107

II.

RELATED WORK

In commercial music player and music recommendation
applications, the most common way to visualize songs and
albums is to use album cover art. One good example of this
is the “Cover Flow” view of iTunes. To convey the
emotional message of the music, album covers may utilize
colors, fonts, and symbols that are typical for the musical
genre of the album.
Another common way to visualize music collections is to
use colors. In the Finnish Hitlantis service [10], the music
collection is visualized as a circular cloud of colored circles.

636

guides, radio stations, and related academic literature. The
most common genres were selected for further analysis,
some popular genres were combined together, and the
criteria for making the final decisions were specified. For
instance, as the target user group of our visualizations did not
include young children, the popular “Children” category was
left out. As we decided to concentrate on the North
American and West European markets instead of the whole
world, the genres were also selected from this perspective.
The final list included the following 17 genres: 1. alternative
& indie, 2. blues, 3. classical, 4. country, 5. electronica &
dance, 6. folk, 7. gospel, 8. hip-hop & rap, 9. jazz, 10. Latin,
11. metal, 12. New Age, 13. pop, 14. reggae, 15. rock, 16.
soul, RnB & funk, and 17. world music.
Next, a set of genre visualization methods (colors, icons,
fonts and avatars) was specified. The individual designs were
influenced by various factors such as findings from
commercial and academic prior art, album cover art,
magazines, the history of different musical genres, music
videos, TV shows, and movies.
To study the performance of each visualization method,
four online questionnaires with 55-104 participants were
arranged. Due to confidentiality issues, all participants had to
be recruited from the different business and research units of
Nokia. Most participants were from Finland, but some other
countries such China, India, and the United States were
represented as well. The majority of participants had
engineering background, and all were between 20 and 55
years old. Some employees participated in several surveys.
The questionnaires consisted mostly of questions such as
“Which musical genre comes to your mind when you are
looking at picture N?”, and the answers had to be selected
from the predefined list of genres.
In the second part of the research, findings from the
questionnaires were used to design novel GUIs for the latest
version of Nokia Research Center’s music recommendation
system [9]. Two such prototypes are presented later in
Section 5.
In the following, we present the four music visualization
methods and discuss the results of each online questionnaire
in more detail.

Musical genres are color-coded using 13 different colors
(e.g., rock = purple, electro = cyan, country = light green,
and blues = yellow), and frequently listened artists are
located close to the center of the visualization. Another
example of using colored circles is Van Gulik’s artist map
user interface [11], where the UI colors can be mapped to,
e.g., mood, genre, and tempo. In one of the given examples,
artists have been clustered according to genre and linked
with colors as follows: rock = red, pop = pink, Americana =
blue, dance/lounge = green, etc. Finally, with the Colour
Player [12], the users can assign music tracks to colors of
their choice. After this it is possible to select songs, filter
tracks, and create playlists by interacting with a color map.
In a user study with nine participants, the authors learned
that the users liked the interface and recalled the used colors
well.
In addition to their use in album cover art, icons and
fonts have not often been used to visualize music collections.
One exception to this is Apple’s iTunes application, where
the grid view of musical genres is based on icons. For
example, the reggae icon includes the Jamaican flag, the
blues icon includes the genre name on a blue and wooden
background, pop music is represented with stars, and world
music is represented with a globe filled with small symbols.
Furthermore, the genre names have been written with
representative fonts on top of the icons. For example, pop
music has been represented with a round font, country with a
Western font, and so forth. Interestingly, Apple’s icons and
fonts share many common elements with our designs.
Another example of using icons is the GenreGram [13],
which is “a dynamic real-time audio display for showing
automatic genre classification results.” GenreGram
represents genres with cylinders that are textured with a
representative image of each category. For example, classical
and country music have been visualized using pictures of an
old composer and a cowboy, respectively.
A more recent approach for accessing music collections
is to use representative avatars summarizing users’ musical
preferences. An avatar can be defined as the “representation
of the self in a given physical environment” [14]. In virtual
world applications, the user is typically represented with a
human-like avatar that she/he can move around the world
interacting with other characters and different objects. The
avatar can also be modified in a variety of different ways to
reflect the identity of the user. In [15], Haro et al. describe a
method for generating a musical avatar representing user’s
musical preferences. The authors first generate a user profile
by summarizing a set of “semantic descriptors” that have
been calculated for each track in the user’s music collection.
The descriptors also include six musical genres, which are
classical, jazz, metal, dance, rock, and electronic. The user
profile is further mapped to the various visual characteristics
of a musical avatar. For example, genre has an effect on the
head, hair, hat, and instrument of the avatar.
III.

A. Colors
In our first online questionnaire [16], we studied if colors
representing certain genres could be used in user interfaces
to replace textual genre lists. As stated in [17], colors are
“excellent for labeling and categorization”; thus they were
also a natural choice for visualizing musical genres. Based
on Ware’s rules for color coding [17], we selected the
following 12 colors for the study: red, blue, white, green,
cyan, orange, yellow, black, purple, pink, brown, and gray.
The questionnaire participants (N=104) were shown one
color at a time, and asked which one to three genres they
associated with that color.
Unfortunately, the results suggested that it is not possible
to design a globally accepted color-genre mapping. The
mapping is always a rough compromise, and it should be
targeted at a certain country or region. For example, it was
found out that 76% of the Western participants associated the

METHODS FOR VISUALIZING MUSICAL GENRES

To find a small but representative set of genres for our
music visualization studies, we first listed the categories used
in 14 online music stores, recommendation services, music

637

blue color with blues music, but for the Eastern participants
the corresponding number was only 39%. Based on the
results of the questionnaire, we proposed a compromise
color-genre mapping that could be utilized in Finland and its
neighboring countries. The gray color was mapped to
unclassified songs, i.e., songs that do not include any genre
metadata.
Table 1 shows the association percentages for this
compromise mapping. Only the votes of Finnish participants
(N=61, 82% male and 18% female) have been taken into
account. 33% of these participants were 25-30 years old,
62% were 31-40, and 5% were 41-50. Due to problems with
the used questionnaire tool, some answers had to be removed
from the questionnaire data before analysis; in practice, N
varied between 51 and 60.
TABLE I.

table, most icons were recognized accurately; thus the results
suggest that musical genres may be represented with icons.
In addition to the most voted icons, the table also
includes three additional designs: the devil horns sign
(metal), flames (rock), and a flower (folk). In the case of
metal, the difference between the skull and the devil horns
was so marginal that either design could be used. In the case
of rock, the association between a rock (an object) and rock
(musical genre) depends on user’s knowledge of the English
language; thus the flames may be a better choice. In the case
of folk, a major problem is the genre definition itself. While
many traditional Western music styles can be considered to
be folk music, people often equate it with the American
hippie era and folk artists such as Bob Dylan and Woody
Guthrie. Our icon, font, and avatar designs were based on
this assumption. In the case of the icon designs (Table 2)
approx. one fourth of the Finnish participants also shared this
view.
For the comparison in Section 4, we used the skull, the
flames, and the peace mark designs.

ASSOCIATION PERCENTAGES FOR GENRES AND COLORS
Genre

Color

%

Alternative & Indie

Red

16
75

Blues

Blue

Classical

White

39

TABLE II.

Country

Green

33

Genre

Electronica & Dance

Cyan

37

Folk

Green

27

Gospel

White

37

Hip-Hop & Rap

Orange

9
18

Jazz

Blue

Latin

Yellow

20

Metal

Black

89

New Age

Purple

17

Pop

Pink

53

Reggae

Yellow

36

Rock

Red

29

Soul, RnB & Funk

Orange

33

World Music

Brown

12

B. Icons
Next, we studied the feasibility of representing musical
genres with icons [18]. The main motivation for the work
was to find a suitable set of icons (32x32 pixels) for the next
version of SuperMusic [9], where the icons were placed next
to the names of recommended tracks. For this study, we
decided to neglect the traditional guidelines for
internationalization and cross-cultural design [19; 20]. The
design choice was intentional, and it was done at the risk of
not pleasing all the users. For example, some designs
included religious and political symbols, flags, and hand
signs. Whenever practical, the icons used the colors proposed
in [16].
In the questionnaire, the participants (N=100) were
shown 42 different icons one at a time, and they were asked
to map each one to one of the 17 genres. Table 2 shows the
association percentages of the most voted icons for the
Finnish participants (N=82, 76% male and 24% female).
37% of these participants were between 20-30 years old,
55% were 31-40, and 8% were 41-50. As seen from the

ASSOCIATION PERCENTAGES FOR GENRES AND ICONS
Icon

%

Genre

Icon

%

Alt. & Indie

56

Blues

34

Classical

96

Country

99

Electr. &
Dance

82

Folk

26, 22

Gospel

95

Hip-Hop &
Rap

74

Jazz

80

Latin

62

Metal

73, 72

New Age

45

Pop

35

Reggae

84

Rock

39, 35

Soul, RnB &
Funk

68

World Music

98

Unclassified
music

72

C. Fonts
Our third study [21] concentrated on fonts. The main
motivation for the work was to study the feasibility of using
fonts to increase the amount of useful musical information
on the screen. For instance, a certain font typeface could
represent a certain musical genre; hence the genre
information could be embedded in text strings for song,
artist, and album names.

638

TABLE III.
Genre

Font collection

ASSOCIATION PERCENTAGES FOR GENRES AND FONT COLLECTIONS

%

Genre

Alternative
& Indie

38

Country

Font collection

%

Genre

Font collection

%

Blues

5

Classical

93

90

Electronica &
Dance

90

Folk

33

Gospel

17

Hip-Hop & Rap

48

Jazz

38

Latin

10

Metal

90

New Age

7

Pop

21

Reggae

12

Rock

43

Soul, RnB &
Funk

29

World Music

62

D. Avatars
For the last study [22], we designed 17 stereotypical
avatars (Figure 1) to represent different musical genres. Each
avatar consisted of three parts (head, body and background),
which were studied separately in addition to the complete
avatars. Most of the avatars were based on the findings of
our previous studies; for example, the metal avatar had long
black hair and a black T-shirt with skull decorations. Again,
we decided to neglect the traditional design guidelines for
internationalization and cross-cultural design [19; 20] and
tried to make the avatars as stereotypical as possible from the
perspective of a North American or a West European
consumer.
To study how well the avatars were recognized, an online
questionnaire with 71 participants was arranged. The results
suggest that the basic idea of using avatars to represent
musical genres works well when a good representative avatar
has been found. All the designs were associated with those
genres that they were intended to represent, and in many
cases the association percentages were close to 100%. Table
4 shows the association percentages for the Finnish
participants (N=60, 77% male and 23% female). 22% of
these participants were between 20-30 years old, 63% were
31-40, and 15% were 41-45.

The questionnaire consisted of 17 figures, each of which
contained the text string “Band name – Album name” written
with three similar type of fonts. Instead of using popular
fonts such as Arial or Times, we selected 17 distinct font
collections that emphasized the characteristics of each genre
while preserving the legibility of text. Due to project
restrictions, only fonts that were free or free for noncommercial use could be used. Unfortunately, this also
meant that the selected fonts were not always optimal.
In the case of each font collection, the participants
(N=55) were asked which musical genre comes to their mind
when looking at the text strings. Based on the results, many
important genres can be presented by a font, and these fonts
can be recognized quite accurately. Successful font
collections included, e.g., classical (91% of the participants
associated the same font collection with classical music),
metal (87%), and country (86%). However, there are also
many genres (e.g., reggae and blues) for which it is very
difficult to find a representative font.
Table 3 shows a proposed compromise mapping for the
Finnish participants (N=42, 83% male and 17% female).
29% of these participants were between 25-30 years old,
53% were 31-40, and 18% were 41-55. The compromise
mapping differs from the “most voted” mapping in only two
respects. In the case of reggae music, the winning collection
was pop (14%) but it was already reserved for pop music
(21%). Similarly, the winning font collections to represent
blues music (jazz and soul font collections with 7% each)
had already been reserved for the corresponding genres.

639

TABLE IV.
SUMMARY OF ASSOCIATING AVATARS WITH GENRES.
NUMBERS IN THE “AVATAR” COLUMN REFER TO THE NUMBERS OF
AVATARS IN FIGURE 1.
Genre

Avatar

%

Genre

Avatar

%

Alternative &
Indie

1

50

Blues

2

52

Classical

3

98

Country

4

93

Electronica &
Dance

5

95

Folk

6

38

Gospel

7

97

Hip-Hop & Rap

8

97

Jazz

9

78

Latin

10

48

Metal

11

97

New Age

12

70

Pop

13

92

Reggae

14

97

Rock

15

73

Soul, RnB & Funk

16

55

World Music

17

77

IV.

SUMMARY OF ONLINE QUESTIONNAIRES

In the following, the results of the online questionnaires
are summarized using a balloon plot and boxplots. Using
these simple and intuitive visualizations, it is easier to see the
“bigger picture” than by looking at Tables 1-4 separately.
Only the Finnish participants have been included in the
comparisons. However, in the case of avatars, icons and
fonts, removing the answers of other nationalities than
Finnish had only marginal effect on the results.
In Figure 2, the association percentages have been
rounded down to the nearest multiple of 20% and
represented as circles of varying color and size. From the
balloon plot, one can quickly see which genres and methods
were successful and which should be improved. By looking
at the columns, one can notice that the most successful
method was using avatars to represent musical genres. Icons
followed second with a similar performance, fonts came
third, with the least successful method being colors. In the
case of colors, there were two clear positive exceptions
(metal and blues). By looking at the rows, one can see that
metal, classical, country, and electronica & dance genres
were the easiest to visualize, while the results for some
genres such as folk were relatively poor.
Figures 3 and 4 visualize the original, non-rounded data
from Tables 1-4 using boxplots. We found this type of
presentation to be useful in cases where the rounded
overview view was not detailed enough. For example, from
Figure 3 one can see that the selection of the hippie theme to
represent folk music was clearly a wrong one. The
distribution of the association percentages is very small, and
all the values lie between 26 and 38 percent. From Figure 4
one can also see how two color outlier values (metal-black
89% and blues-blue 75%) affect the skewness of the color
distribution. In practice, this means that while color in
general is not a good method for visualizing musical genres,
the black and blue colors are.
Figure 1. Avatars used in [22] (© Nokia Research Center, 2009, used with
permission).

640

Figure 2. Comparison of different visualization methods and genres using a balloon plot.

Figure 3. Comparison of different genres using a boxplot.

641

traditional music player applications, the prototype was
better suitable for complementing them.
The participants were also asked to rate how well the
looks of included “Metal”, “Electronica & Dance”, “Rock”,
“Soul & Disco”, and “Hippie” (the “folk” avatar of Figure 1
but mapped to music from the 60’s/70’s and newer artists
playing in the same style) avatars matched with the
recommended music on a seven-point Likert scale (1 = did
not match at all, 7 = perfect match). As shown in Figure 6,
most participants felt that there was a good match; without
the exception of the hippie/folk design (which performed
now better with 60’s/70’s music), the ratings were in the
same rank order as the association percentages of the avatar
questionnaire. All the median values were either 5.0 or 6.0,
and the metal avatar matched best with the given music
recommendations.
However, several users commented that the overall
concept could suit better for younger consumers than
themselves. The main reasons for this were the cartoon-like
characters, and that selecting the music sometimes felt more
like playing instead of doing serious music. To appeal to a
larger audience, the prototype should have used less naïve
characters.

Figure 4. Comparison of different visualization methods using a boxplot.

V.

EXAMPLES OF PROTOTYPE APPLICATIONS

Based on the results of the questionnaires and other
conducted research work, we developed several novel GUIs
for the latest version of the SuperMusic music
recommendation system [9]. Each prototype was evaluated
by the same set of Finnish participants (N=40, 77% male and
23% female) from various age groups (12-55 years) and
education levels. In the following, we have briefly discussed
the user study results of our “avatar” and “potentiometer”
prototypes.

Figure 5. Screenshot from the avatar prototype [23] (© ACM, 2010).

A. Avatars
In [23], we studied the idea of using avatars as an UI for
discovering new music. In the implemented prototype, the
user builds an avatar from three parts (head, body and
background) representing certain musical genres (Figure 5).
Based on the selected combination of parts, the application
generates a new playlist of music by seeding the SuperMusic
system with examples from the selected genres.
In the conducted user study, the prototype was
considered to be innovative, entertaining, and easy to use,
and the concept inspired the users to explore new artists and
songs. Using avatars was said to provide faster access to
cross-genre playlists than traditional music player
applications. However, the prototype was also considered to
be too simple for longer-term use; some important features
such textual search were missing. Instead of replacing

Figure 6. Ratings for the match between avatars and related music
recommendations [23].

642

B. Potentiometers
In [24], we studied the idea of using graphical
potentiometers for interacting with SuperMusic. In the
prototype, the user can select the musical genre (soul, pop,
rock, metal or electronica & dance) and adjust tempo and
energy level potentiometers to fine-tune the contents of the
recommended playlist. Genres are visualized using
representative icons and potentiometer skins (Figure 7).
The prototype was evaluated by the same set of
participants as the avatar prototype. Again, the concept was
considered to be promising but too simple for longer-term
use. As shown in Figure 8, the graphical designs matched
well with the related music recommendations (all median
values 5.0 or 6.0 with metal performing slightly better than
the other designs). The main reason for the poorer ratings of
pop and electronica & dance was that the selection of seed
songs for the music recommendation algorithm was not
optimal.

Figure 8. Ratings for the match between icons and skins and related
music recommendations [24].

VI.

DISCUSSION

As the success of the avatars and the icons shows, it
seems that the best results can be achieved by combining
different visualization methods. Both the avatars and the
icons were partially based on the results of our color study,
and the avatars were also partially based on the icons study.
Another way to look at the results is the dimensionality
of the visualization methods. Color is essentially a onedimensional visual variable, but the other methods can have
N visual dimensions depending on the design. While this was
acknowledged, we still wanted to perform the comparison to
see the “bigger picture” more easily.
As some of the results (especially the color-genre
mappings) are culture-dependent, the findings should not be
generalized to cover the whole world. All graphics used in
the studies were designed from the perspective of a Western
consumer, and the genres used in the studies were targeted to
North American and West European consumers. If
developing a commercial application for other markets, both
the genre set and the visualizations should be localized and
verified with new user studies. Also, based on our
experiences, the stereotypical avatars may create negative
reactions in some conservative countries.
In addition to the target culture, the choice of the optimal
visualization method depends on the application and device
type. For example, in the case of mobile devices, the size of
available screen estate limits which methods can be used
efficiently. While a single avatar may fill up almost the
entire screen, one can easily add small (32x32 pixels) icons
after list items. Depending on the application, this type of
smaller-scale visualizations may be helpful in adding extra
information to the screen.
Regardless of how entertaining or easy-to-use the music
visualization might be, it cannot meet all the needs of a
modern music consumer without support for textual
searches. Due to the lack of textual search and other
limitations, the evaluated prototypes were too simple for
longer-term use; they were suitable only for complementing
rather than replacing the traditional text-based music player
applications. Should a single “perfect” music player
application be used, it should support several types of music

Figure 7. Icons and skins used in [24]. From top to bottom, left to right:
soul, pop, rock, metal, and electronica & dance potentiometer skins.

643

discovery, including textual searches and (for example,
visual) exploration.
Based on the results, musical genre is a relatively safe
choice for product implementation. Despite the on-going
debate on the feasibility of using genres to categorize music,
genre metadata is used in practically in all music player
applications, and it is also commonly used in everyday
language. Our survey results for visualizing genre metadata
(especially in the case of avatars and icons) were promising,
and the average performance of the different methods is
likely to improve after redesigning the worst designs.
VII.

could maybe be mapped to “happy” genres such as pop and
rough surfaces to more “aggressive” genres such as metal or
rock. Another potential approach would be to use natural
materials such as metal and grass to visualize the different
genres. These ideas could be studied separately as the “fifth”
visualization method, or combined with, e.g., the avatar
backgrounds as an attempt to improve the recognition rates
further.
The results of this paper can be utilized in the design of
novel music player GUIs to complement the traditional textbased approaches. In addition to musical genres, the GUIs
could also utilize other music-related metadata such as
tempo, the release year of the music, mood, or context of the
user. In addition to collections of music, some of the
presented ideas can also be used to visualize the parameters
of individual audio files. Inspired by [27], one interesting
way to combine musical genre with tempo and the release
year would be to represent audio files as glyphs, which could
then be placed, e.g., next to the track names of new music
recommendations.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper, four different methods (colors, fonts, icons
and avatars) for visualizing musical genres were discussed
and compared against each other. Based on the results of
online questionnaires with mostly Finnish participants, the
most successful method was the musical avatar. Icons
followed second with a similar performance, fonts came
third, with the least successful method being colors. The best
results were achieved by combining different visualization
methods together; the winning visualization method (avatars)
relied partially on the findings of colors and icons
questionnaires.
To study the visualizations in practice, two prototypes
utilizing the results of the questionnaires were presented.
Based on the results of the conducted user study, the
graphical designs matched well with the related music
recommendations. The results showed that visual music
player UIs can be entertaining and intuitive, and inspire the
users to explore the music collections in interesting and
unconventional ways. However, such UIs can also be too
simple for longer-term use, especially without text-based
search functionality. Thus, rather than trying to entirely
replace traditional text-based music player UIs with novel
and visual UIs, a better approach may be to complement
them with selected visual features.
The easiest genre to visualize was metal. In the case of all
presented methods, it was associated correctly by ≥73% of
all questionnaire participants. In the case of the two
prototypes, it also matched best with the given music
recommendations. The most difficult genre to visualize was
folk mostly due to the unsuccessful decision to rely on a
hippie theme.
During the study, we received several ideas on how to
improve the designs. For example, the Latin avatar should be
replaced with a female samba dancer, and the dancers of the
soul, RnB & funk background should be removed to avoid
mixing the design with electronica & dance music. Some
recently published album cover art books such as [25] may
provide new ideas for the soul, RnB & funk genre and other
less successful designs. As we also believe that these
changes would make the avatars easier to recognize, the
avatar method would then perform even better in the
comparison.
From [26], we learned that people tend to give more
positive emotional responses (e.g., cheerful and elegant) to
smooth surfaces than to rough surfaces. From our research’s
point of view, this means that smooth surfaces or textures

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

644

D. Goldmann, “Music's Lost Decade: Sales Cut in Half,”
http://money.cnn.com/2010/02/02/news/
companies/napster_music_industry, 2010.
E. Van Buskirk, “10 Awesome Music Apps Powered by Spotify,”
http://evolver.fm/2011/10/07/10-awesome-music-apps-powered-byspotify, 2011.
IFPI Digital Music Report 2011,
http://www.ifpi.org/content/section_statistics/index.html, 2011.
S.K. Card, J.D. Mackinlay and B. Shneiderman, Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. San Francisco,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.
K. Hoashi, S. Hamawaki, H. Ishizaki, Y. Takishima and J. Katto,
“Usability Evaluation of Visualization Interfaces for Content-Based
Music Retrieval Systems,” Proc. International Society for Music
Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010), ISMIR, Aug. 2010,
pp. 207-212.
G. Tzanetakis and P. Cook, “Musical Genre Classification of Audio
Signals,” IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, vol.
10, Jul. 2002, pp. 293-302.
M. Sordo, O. Celma, M. Blech and E. Guaus, “The Quest for Musical
Genres: Do the Experts and the Wisdom of Crowds Agree?” Proc.
International Conference on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR
2008), ISMIR, Sep. 2008.
A. Laplante, “User’s Relevance Criteria in Music Retrieval in
Everyday Life: An Exploratory Study,” Proc. International Society
for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2010), ISMIR,
Aug. 2010, pp. 601-606.
A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating SuperMusic: Streaming Context-Aware
Mobile Music Service,” Proc. International Conference on Advances
in Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE’08), ACM Press, Dec.
2008, pp. 314-321.
Hitlantis, www.hitlantis.com, 2011.
R. Van Gulik and F. Vignoli, “Visual Playlist Generation on the
Artist Map,” Proc. International Conference on Music Information
Retrieval (ISMIR 2005), ISMIR, Sep. 2005, pp. 520-523.
M. Voong and R. Beale, “Music Organisation Using Colour
Synaesthesia,” Proc. Computer-Human Interaction Conference, ACM
Press, Apr. 2007, pp. 1869-1874.
G. Tzanetakis, G. Essl and P. Cook, “Automatic Music Genre
Classification of Audio Signals,” Proc. 2nd Annual International
Symposium on Music Information Retrieval, ISMIR, Oct. 2001.

[14] E.
Castranova,
“Theory
of
the
Avatar,”
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=385103, 2003.
[15] M. Haro, A. Xambo, F. Fuhrmann, D. Bogdanov, E. Gomez and P.
Herrera, “The Musical Avatar – A Visualization of Musical
Preferences by Means of Audio Content Description,” Proc. Audio
Mostly, ACM Press, Sep. 2010.
[16] J. Holm, A. Aaltonen and H. Siirtola, ”Associating Colors with
Musical Genres,” Journal of New Music Research, vol. 38, 2009, pp.
87-100.
[17] C. Ware, Information Visualization. San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 2004.
[18] J. Holm and H. Holm, “Associating Icons with Musical Genres,”
Proc. International Conference on Internet and Multimedia Systems
and Applications, ACTA Press, Aug. 2008.
[19] W. Horton, The Icon Book: Visual Symbols for Computer Systems
and Documentation. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
[20] N. Aykin, Usability and Internalization of Information Technology.
New Jersey, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2005.
[21] J. Holm, A. Aaltonen and J. Seppänen, ”Associating Fonts with
Musical Genres,” Proc. International Conference on Virtual Reality,

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]

645

Computer Graphics, Visualisation and Interaction in Africa
(AFRIGRAPH’09), ACM Press, Feb. 2009, pp. 33-36.
J. Holm, H. Siirtola and L. Laaksonen, ”Associating Avatars with
Musical Genres,” Proc. International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV 2010), IEEE, Jul. 2010, pp. 186-193.
J. Holm and A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating an Avatar-Based User
Interface for Discovering New Music,” Proc. International
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM’10), ACM
Press, Dec. 2010.
A. Lehtiniemi and J. Holm, “Evaluating a Potentiometer-Based
Graphical User Interface for Discovering New Music,” Proc.
International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV 2011),
IEEE, Jul. 2011.
J. Paulo, Funk & Soul Covers. Taschen GmbH, 2010.
H. Zuo, T. Hope, M. Jones and P. Castle, “Sensory Interaction with
Materials,” in Design and Emotion: The Experience of Everyday
Things, D. McDonagh, P. Hekkert, J. van Erp and D. Gyi, Eds. New
York: Taylor & Francis Inc, 2004, pp. 223-227.
P. Kolhoff, J. Preuss and J. Loviscach, “Music Icons: Procedural
Glyphs for Audio Files,” Proc. XIX Brazilian Symposium on
Computer Graphics and Image Processing, IEEE, Oct. 2006.

