2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

From the arcane to the lucid: a case study of improvements to a library database
using visual cues.
Theodor Wyeld
Flinders University, Australia.
{twyeld@gmail.com}
Abstract
As we move from analogue to digital new systems
are being developed for searching and finding physical
documents in archival stores. However, many digital
database systems do not provide the efficiencies
promised. Indeed, many make the original task harder.
This short paper discusses the migration of an existing,
analogue, paper-based catalogue to a digital database. It
highlights the shortcomings of the new text-only digital
database and outlines a series of incremental changes to
this database using visual cues with user studies between
each leading to a more efficient system. The findings of
this study are transferable to other contexts.
Keywords--- 3D, analogue to digital, archive,
library, interaction evaluation.
Chart 1. Comparison of search and retrieval
time (vertical axis) for each implementation of
the new interface (horizontal axis). The graph
shows a decrease in time taken: from a mean
average of 2:24 under the original paper-based
alpha-numeric system (0.0), to 5:12 under the
initial digital database system (1.0), to 0:24
seconds in the final, combined, 2D & 3D
thumbnail, visual interface system (6.0). Note
also the reduction in difference between outliers
(slowest and fastest).

Introduction
Since the advent of the relational database there has
been a steady migration of analogue catalogue systems to
their digital equivalents. These digital catalogues take
many forms. However, few studies investigate the end
usability of these systems. This paper reports on a case
study of the migration of a reports library catalogue to a
digital relational database. More specifically, it tracks the
migration and incremental testing and implementation of
a system that went from being easily understood by most
to almost incomprehensible to many, to a system that
better supports the users’ needs (see chart 1). This
project extends similar projects completed by the author
(see Wyeld, 2005; 2007; Wyeld and Colomb, 2006)

One part of this documentation process is a
collection of reports that are commissioned for individual
projects. Kept in a Reports Library (RL) of
approximately 2500 documents, many of these reports
are accessed daily by the POs (see figure 1). The reports
are usually A4 bound documents with colourful covers
and a range of thicknesses. Once organised in an
analogue alpha-numeric system, a MSAccess database
was developed to digitally catalogue and support the
expanding RL (see figure 2).
Project Officers with little training found the
original alpha-numeric system familiar and easy to use
when searching in the RL. They could find a document
based on the logically labelled documents alone. The
physical documents were organised in topic-related
groups n the shelves of the library. By comparison, the

Background
University property assets are vast and managed by
medium to large teams of Project Officers (POs). These
people often struggle to maintain clear records of their
documentation for legal purposes and for retrieval and
archiving. The burgeoning weight of new data types
(email, digital documents, images, short videos, CAD,
GIS, and so on) only adds weight to the argument for the
need for increased efficiencies.

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.35

151

newly implemented database system was very difficult to
use. It required users to search for specific documents by
name, author, date and so on, at a desktop computer and
record the document’s 3-part number before retrieving
the physical document from the RL. The physical
documents had been rearranged according to their
number sequences only – no longer in topic-related
groups. The abstraction of the document information to a
string of numbers shifted the search task from an open,
low-skilled user system to a closed, high-skilled user
system (Dix et al, 2004). Unlike the previous system,
where users could simply navigate the physical space of
the library to find what they were looking for and get a
‘feel’ for where the document they were searching for
might be due to similar documents in the same
area/group, they now needed specific knowledge on
searching for documents using textual metadata before
attempting to retrieve the physical document.

Figure 2. The digital database interface.
A new system was needed to better support the sorts
of vague queries the POs used to search documents in the
library. The database needed to better support the
previous search behaviour, which relied on the physical
qualities of the documents sought rather than on only an
abstract numbering system and textual metadata
associated with the document (Card et al, 1999).

The Case Studies
To identify how the database was being used and
could be made more efficient, six case studies were
conducted over a period of 13 months. A preliminary
survey was conducted with all participants to ascertain
how the previous analogue alpha-numeric system was
used (Furnas, 1987). Participants were asked to describe
how they retrieved documents under the previous system
and estimate how long this took: from identifying the
need, to actually completing the task (Havre, 2002).
The normal procedure was to simply go to the RL
and start searching through the shelves. This was an
efficient system, as most reports were housed in ¾
archive boxes with a label to the front. The label
included campus, building and date information (see
figure 1). Sections of the RL were organised similarly –
sections clustered by campus and sub-clusters by
building and date. On average, most participants took
between 3 and 5 minutes to find what they were looking
for.
Over the course of the 13 months, participants were
observed using the digital database and, based on these
observations and interviews, 5 subsequent iterative
improvements to the database were trialled:
1. adding report cover thumbnails to the database;
2. creation of a 2D array of all thumbnails;
3. creation of a 3D visual database of scanned
cover thumbnails organised about an RGB
colour space;
4. creation of a 2D visual database of scanned
spines organised in numerical order as they
appear on the shelves of the physical collection,
and;
5. a combination of the thumbnails, 3D visual
database and 2D spines database.

Figure 1. Reports Library.
This increased the real and perceived workload
levels for these personnel in adding to or retrieving
documents from the RL. The POs typically only have
vague, non-specific information about the document they
seek. They are so familiar with the reports they
frequently use that they retain few details about the
documents other than perhaps its contents and an
impression of its size and colour. The digital database
does not support such vague queries.

152

In each, participants were asked to search for a
particular document based on its database number alone,
supplemented by the various improvements. They were
then asked to retrieve the physical document from the
collection. In all cases, what they said and did was
recorded along with how long this process took. A
follow-up interview clarified meanings gleaned from the
activity transcripts (McNamara et al, 1992). The
documents used in each of the case studies were chosen
because they contained distinctive features yet were
representative of the similarity and diversity of types
contained in the collection.

x

x
Figure 3. Sample of thumbnails arranged
numerically and from dark to light showing local
magnifying and metadata tag.
The key points emerging from these case studies
were:
x As reported in Pinkerton (1994), most
participants used a hit-and-miss strategy to
search and find documents.
x As Shneiderman (1996; 2004) has reported,
participants seemed to rely more on their shortterm visual memory and ability to ‘locate by
deduction’ – the physical placement of
documents in the collection – than their use of
the incumbent numbering system or long-term
memory of specific documents or groups of
documents.
x They all agreed that having thumbnails as a
visual reference next to a returned list of
searched titles in the database was helpful.
x Most participants had little trouble finding what
they were looking for using the 2D thumbnail
array. There was, however, a lot of
disagreement about how well it supported their
needs: generally, most felt it could be improved
if it was more like the old system – that is: more
like walking into the Library and being able to
‘see’ what one needed. They asked if they could

x

x

x

x

153

see all the database at once. They thought this
might be more useful. However, when the entire
database was presented in 2D format, the
thumbnail images were too small. They were
not able to distinguish with enough detail which
thumbnail might be of value to them. And,
zooming simply meant they ‘forgot where they
were’, thus necessitating zooming out to get reoriented (see figure 3).
Participants asked if the thumbnails could be
searched by colour and as a collection. As such,
a method for displaying the thumbnails
arranged by colour was developed. However,
with only 2 dimensions of information available
in the vertical and horizontal axes, colour and
numerical order still did not provide the level of
searchability required. Some participants
suggested the images needed to be arranged
‘more like a library’. With this in mind,
Wexelblat’s (1992) semantic dimensions spatial
visualisation schema was employed. The
thumbnails could now be arranged along the
axes of an HSV cubic space – the semantic
dimensions being colour (RGB) and Hue
(darkest to lightest) (numerical order being
deemed less important than colour alone). Each
criteria had equal weighting. This spatial
representation also lent itself to other organising
schemas, or semantic dimensions such as
number
of
pages,
numerical
order:
alphabetically by author, title, date, and so on.
The 3D representation better satisfied the
request for a library metaphor than the 2D
representation. It started to take on the structure
of a collection of documents in a traditional
library of sorts (Cockburn and McKenzie,
2004).
Document covers with similar colour and hue
characteristics were arrayed locally. Users could
‘pull’ these out of the local array and investigate
their characteristics and associated metadata
within the context of other similar document
covers (see figure 4).
Overall, the 3D array of thumbnails facilitated
better navigation of the dataspace than the
previous 2D version, while still allowing the
user to view the entire database collection at
once and correlations by colour.
None of the participants had any difficulty in
navigating the 3D dataspace after some basic
tuition. They were all able to find the document
cover sought within a few minutes. They all
thought this would be useful in helping to
identify documents before heading to the
physical RL.
To further the existing library space analogy,
the document spines were also scanned and
organised as they appear in the physical library.
A system was developed to browse the
collection spines. The scanned spines were

each spine (see figure 5). None of the
participants had any trouble recognising how
the system worked (Chen, 1999).

arranged in numerical order as they appear in
the physical collection. Their associated
document numbers arranged vertically below

Figure 4. Final version of consolidated 3D visualisation of scanned covers with linked metadata.

Figure 5. Screen view of Spines and its physical corollary in the RL (above).
x

Finally, a combined system was employed
which significantly reduced the search and find
times (see figures 6 & 7).
The key points arising from the combined system
were that:

x

154

participants used the images in their short-term
memory to support their search in the RL.

x
x
x

the scanned spines helped them virtually ‘pluck’
the correct document from the collection, thus
supporting the more typical vague query;
the cover image helped confirm their final
choice;
many participants systematically went from the
gross view – searching the 3D screen by colour,
then refining it to a number which they then

x

used to search in the RL. The cover image was
used to confirm their find; and,
some printed all 3 screens and took them to the
RL, and this proved to be a prudent strategy.

Figure 6. Combined system.

Figure 7. Combined system and FI database connection

155

Conclusion

[11] Wexelblat, A., 1992 “Giving Meaning to Place: Semantic
Spaces”, in (ed.) Benedict, M., Cyberspace: First Steps,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[12] Wyeld, T. G., 2007, “A Non-Expert Organised Visual
Database: a Case Study in Using the Amazon Metric to
Search Images”, in proc. of the 11th European
Information Visualisation, IV07, Zurich, Switzerland,
July 03-07.
[13] Wyeld, T. G., and Colomb, R, 2006, “Using the Amazon
Metric to Construct an Image Database based on what
people do, not what they say”, in proc. of Information
Visualisation 2006, London, England Jul05 -07.
[14] Wyeld, T. G., 2005, “3D Information Visualisation: an
Historical Perspective”, in proceedings of Information
Visualisation 2005, London, 6-8 July, 2005.

The strongest outcome from this case study is that
when migrating a traditional alpha-numeric cataloguing
system to a fully digitised numerical database there is
clearly a need to support the hit-and-miss, non-skilled
workers’, typical work practices with a visual interface
that more closely matches the sorts of ‘vague idea’
search criteria they employ. There is a need to create a
system that supports multiple individual users that can be
customised to support the way they work. What the
visual system discussed here does is support vague
searches for which the user can browse the results.
Hence, it supports a broader skill range without changing
current work practices or the need for intensive training.

Acknowledgments
The visual system described in this paper has since
been developed further by the inventor/author and is
subject to a worldwide patent 2010900534 (see
thereitis.com).

References
[1]

Card, S. K., MacKinlay, J. D., Shneiderman, B., and
Card, M., Readings in Information Visualization: Using
Vision to Think, Morgan Kaufmann Series in Interactive
Technologies, Academic Press, 1999.
[2] Chen, C., 1999, Information Visualisaiton and Virtual
Environments, Springer, London, Berlin.
[3] Cockburn, A., and McKenzie, B., 2004, “Evaluating
Spatial Memory in Two and Three Dimensions”, in the
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies.
61(3): 359--373. Elsevier Science. 2004.
[4] Dix, A., Finlay, J. E., Abowd,G. D., Beale, R., 2004,
Human-computer interaction, Prentice-Hall, England,
New York.
[5] Furnas, G. Landauer, T. Gomez, L. Dumais, S., 1987,
The
Vocabulary
Problem
in
Human-Systems
Communication, Communications of the ACM, 30(11),
1987, 964-971.
[6] Havre, S., Hetzler, E., Whitney, P., Nowell, L., 2002,
ThemeRiver: Vizualising Thematic Changes in Large
Document Collections, in IEEE Transactions on
Visualisation and Computer Graphics, Vol. 8, No. 1,
Jan-March, 2002.
[7] McNamara, T. P., Halpin, J. A., and Hardy, J. K., 1992,
“The Representation and Integration in Memory of
Spatial and Nonspatial Information”, in Memory and
Cognition, 20 (5), pp529-532.
[8] Pinkerton, B, 1994, "Finding What People Want:
Experiences with the WebCrawler", In Proceedings of
the Second International World Wide Web Conference
'94, Chicago, Illinois, USA, July, 1994.
[9] Shneiderman, B, Designing the user interface : strategies
for effective human-computer-interaction, Addison
Wesley, Reading, Mass, 2004.
[10] Shneiderman, B., 1996, “The Eyes Have It: A Task by
Data Type Taxonomy for Information Visualizations”, in
proceedings of IEEE Symposium, Visual Languages,
1996, pp336-343.

156

