2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Enhancing Contract Usability and User Experience Through Visualization
An Experimental Evaluation

Stefania Passera
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management
Aalto University School of Science
Espoo, Finland
stefania.passera@aalto.fi

something went wrong and such goals were not achieved.
But why concentrate on eventual troubles, rather than
focusing on securing success? Why relying on language that
- although “tested” in court - resulted in litigation in first
place?
Contract interpretation remains the largest single source
of contract litigation between business firms [7]. Inter-firm
understanding seems to be a typical case in which knowledge
transfer is difficult and “sticky”[8] because the knowledge
exchanged is complex and causally ambiguous [9]. Eppler
[10] identifies chasms of knowledge between experts and
managers that call for knowledge communication: “the
deliberate activity of interactively conveying and coconstructing insights, assessments, experiences or skills
through verbal or non-verbal means”.

Abstract— Contracts are complex just like the business
relationships, processes and tasks they seek to describe. Despite
being necessary tools for collaboration, most contract users are
frustrated by traditional contracts, which are long, overly legal
and difficult to understand. Some approaches to managing
complexity and designing user-friendly contracts have been
suggested, based, for instance, on the principles of proactive
law, lean manufacturing/management and plain language.
Recent research has explored the possibility of using
information design and visualization to facilitate knowledge
transfer and collaboration in complex organizational settings.
This paper investigates visualization applied to contracts. A
contract prototype was created and tested with users, in order
to assess whether visualized contracts are more usable and
provide a better user experience than traditional text-only
contracts. The paper illustrates hypotheses regarding the
correlation of visualization, usability and user experience,
proposes a test procedure and presents the results obtained.

II. CONTRACT VISUALIZATION: RELATED WORKS
Before The approach adopted in this research focuses on
non-verbal means, exploring the role of visualizations and
information design principles applied to contracts.
Information design aims to sort and compare information in
the belief that complexity can be made understandable and
clarity can be reached through essential, rigorous abstraction
[11]. The benefits of visualization in supporting evidence
analysis, explanation and reasoning have been extensively
described in literature by Tufte [12; 13; 14; 15]. Other
authors have started investigating the possibilities of
applying visualization and collaborative, co-located
visualizing to managerial and organizational practices [e.g.
16; 17; 18; 42].
My approach to contract visualization follows this
direction and ideally belongs to the field of knowledge
visualization. Knowledge visualization can be defined as the
creation and transfer of knowledge by visualizations with
and without the help of a computer [19], with the aim of
“supporting cognitive processes in generating, representing,
structuring, retrieving, sharing and using knowledge” [20].
However, contract visualization research and practice are
still in a seminal phase, where most authors concentrate on
theoretical suggestions or on presenting examples. The field
still lacks empirical data on methods, tools and best practices
for implementing contract visualization, as well as data

Keywords- contract visualization; knowledge visualization;
information design; usability; user experience; collaboration

I.

INTRODUCTION

The ability to understand and use contracts in collaborative
relationships is increasingly important. Most of the work of
companies today is done in collaboration with other
companies, and the value provided to the end customer
depends on a complex network of actors. Contracts are
artifacts seeking to describe such complexity, and thus, even
if they try to be as clear as possible, they are complex in
nature [1]. Such complexity overloads the cognitive abilities
of the readers [2; 3] and reveals the “bad ergonomics” of
most contracts, which are not fit for their users [4].
The concept of a contract user, however, is a multifaceted
one: not only are they used by people in different
departments in different companies, but the goals, needs and
expectations of the users evolve at different stages of the
contract lifecycle [1]. In this research, which builds on a
proactive approach to contracting and law [e.g. 5; 6], the
business audience is seen as the primary intended user of the
contract, because the ultimate goals of a contract are
successful implementation and business performance.
Courts, lawyers and arbitrators come into the picture only if
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.69

376

supporting the effectiveness and the efficiency of the
approach. One of the first to envision visualization in the
legal field was Brunschwig [21], and in German-speaking
countries there is a field growing around the topics of legal
visualization
(Rechtsvisualisierung),
visual
legal
communication, visual law, and multisensory law.
Most of the specific work on contract visualization has
been presented by Haapio, in the context of proactive law
and contracting [22; 23; 24; 25;]. Other sources about
contract visualization concern the use of flowcharts [1;26],
visualization in service contracts [27] and icons in contracts
[28;29].
So far, not many have tested contract visualization in
order to clearly assess its benefits on cognition, attention and
memory retention. Kay and Terry [30;31] have been
experimenting with “textured agreements”, i.e. “visually
redesigned agreements that employ factoids, vignettes, and
iconic symbols”, with the aim of increasing the time users
spend reading end-user license agreements (EULAs) shown
during software installation. Their measures show that
visualization increases the interest and the attention span of
the reader.
Another experiment was conducted to assess the usability
of the Canadian Employment Insurance Act [32] (thus a
piece of legislation, and not a contract), after it was
redesigned following plain language and plain information
design principles. Also in this case, the visualized version of
the document performed better than the traditional textual
one. However, this experiment fails to clearly separate the
benefits due to plain language and those due to visualization,
since the variables were not measured separately.
This paper seeks to consolidate the research on contract
visualization by providing both quantitative and qualitative
data that support the benefits described in the theory. In
order to formulate measurable hypotheses, which are
relevant for both academia and practitioners, I decided to
verify the connection of contract visualization with usability
and user experience.

visual format. A prototype of a visualized contract was
created (Figure 1), and the company wished to test its
usability against their traditional textual contract. The design
intervention consisted in 1) improving the typography and
layout of the document, plus highlighting key terms and
sentences in bold typeface 2) utilizing color as an extra cue
for finding information 3) introducting charts, diagrams,
timelines and flowcharts to clarify selected parts of the text
4) redesigning the table of contents, utilizing color-coding to
map recurrent topics in different parts and appendices of the
document 5) redesigning tables in a clearer style.
A group of contract users from different departments
(sourcing, legal, sales, and supply chain management) was
gathered to work with the contract. They were asked to fill in
a self-administered questionnaire before, during and after
reading the visual contract, answering comprehension
questions regarding the content of the contract. After the
questionnaire, further qualitative feedback was collected
during a focus group session. Since the company focus was
interested in improving experiential elements such as
“mutual trust”, “supplier involvement” and “ease of doing
business”, measures for user experience were also taken into
consideration.
This paper summarizes the findings from both the selfadministered questionnaire and the focus group discussion. It
is critical to remember that results are based on a small-scale
research initiative within one partner company. Results
should be seen as indicative, as, reinforcing initial
hypotheses, they provide further direction to continue
experimenting with contract visualizations using a usercentric approach.
IV. HYPOTHESES
The experiment was designed to test whether a visualized
contract is more usable and provides a better user experience
than a traditional textual one. Usability has been defined as
“The extent to which a product can be used by specified
users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness,
efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context of use”
[33]. Preliminary interviews with the contract users revealed
that current contracts are long and difficult to read and, due
to their complexity, misunderstanding among different
readers is frequent. The goal of improved usability is thus
conceptualized as two testable hypotheses:
• H1: Visualized contracts support faster reading and
information finding
• H2: Visualized contracts support more accurate
understanding of information
User experience (UX) is a concept originating from usercentered design research [34]. UX can be generally defined
as “Every aspect of the user’s interaction with a product,
service, or company that make up the user’s perceptions of
the whole” [35]. In addition to the pragmatic needs mostly
addressed by usability, UX tries to satisfy the emotional,
hedonic and contextual needs of the users. Experience cannot
be designed, but it is possible to design for experience by
providing suitable tools, evidences [36] or scaffolds for the
users to build their experience [37]. In this sense, testing the
visualized contract against the traditional textual contract

III. DESIGN OF THE EXPERIMENT
During 2011 the author started cooperating with a Finnish
metal and engineering company, in order to develop and test
prototypes of visualized contracts. The case described in this
paper was initiated in the sourcing department, as the
company has a need to involve suppliers in delivering better
quality for the final customer. At the moment, suppliers
perceive the company’s terms and contract templates as
complicated and inflexible. This was seen as a hindrance to
collaboration, so the company decided to experiment with
contract visualization to promote mutual trust and
engagement. The contracts taken into consideration are plain
textual B-2-B contracts, designated for corporate customers
(they sell-side of the supplier). They barely have any
formatting apart from cramped tables and capitalized
headings.
Preliminary interviews and collaborative workshops
provided indicative insights, such as what the bottlenecks of
the delivery process are, what clauses are often
misinterpreted and what information could be presented in a

377

allows for a comparison between the experiences they offer.
Also, UX is not a uniform concept, but it can be expressed as
experience before usage (anticipated UX), during usage
(momentary UX), after usage (episodic UX) and over time
(cumulative UX) [38]. Since the experiment refers to a single
contract usage, and users are not verbalizing their experience
during usage, it is possible to measure and compare only the

anticipated UX and the episodic UX. The goal of improving
contracts’ UX is measured by testing the following
hypotheses:
• H3: Visualized contracts provide a more positive
user experience than text only contracts
• H4: Visualized contracts affect the expectations of
the users in a positive manner

Figure 1. Example visualizations used in the contract. Clockwise: color-coded table of contents, delivery terms diagram, liquidated damages bar-chart,
validity timeline. An extract of the contract is available at: http://dl.dropbox.com/u/480469/visualcontract_draft.pdf

378

V. TEST PROCEDURE
The procedure was a partial repetition, in its structure and
approach, of the test used to assess the usability of the
Canadian Employment Insurance Act [32]. The Act was
redrafted in plain language, while flowcharts, enhanced
typography and layout helped in further enhancing the clarity
and the readability of the information. This approach is
similar and was considered as a precedent for our case.
Additionally, with a few modifications and additions the
testing procedure proved suitable to test the hypotheses.
The test consisted of two means of data gathering: a selfadministered questionnaire in three parts (before, during, after
using the contract) and a subsequent focus group discussion.
The study took place between December 2011 and January
2012, and three different sessions were organized. In total, 22
respondents participated in the study and they can all be
considered informed users, since all were more or less
familiar with the original contract structure used in the
company (even if not with the specific contract being tested).
However, none of them was familiar with the visual version
of the contract, and all were shown it for the first time during
the test, in order to elicit genuine feedback. The respondents
were drawn in roughly equal numbers from different
departments: 5 from legal, 6 from sourcing, 6 from sales and 5
from supply chain management. Roughly half of the group was
allocated to work with the visual version of the contract, while
the others worked as the control group with the traditional
textual version. The participants were not told in advance to
which group they were allocated.
The questionnaire was divided into three sections: in the first,
general questions about age and years of experience in the field
were asked. Also, prior to looking at their version of the contract,
the participants were asked to indicate how difficult they thought
it would be to use a contract to find answers to comprehension
questions about what is agreed in such a contract. After
answering the question, the participants were asked to flip
through their version of the contract and then indicate how
difficult they thought it would be to use this specific contract.
In the second part of the questionnaire, the participants had
to answer 8 comprehension questions regarding the issues
agreed upon in the contract. The test not only measured the
correctness of their answers, but also how quickly the readers
could find and use the correct information.
In the third part, the participants were asked to indicate
how difficult it has been to find and understand information
during the second part of the test. Then they were given both
versions of the contract and asked to express a preference
regarding different aspects of the contracts. After the
questionnaire, the participants participated in a focus group.
The author facilitated the discussion, following a semistructured interview format and prompting the participants to
express freely their impressions, thoughts and feedback.
VI.

version took on average 146.26 seconds per question, while
the respondents working with the textual version took on
average 224.15 seconds per question (Table 1). Also, the
accuracy was higher for those using the visualized contract:
71.9% correct responses, against 60% in the control group
using the textual version, the participants were given the
chance of skipping questions in case they found it impossible
to provide an answer: there was only 1 skipped question in
total in the group using the visual contract, while in the
control group 4 questions were skipped.
The visualized version of the contract seems more usable,
since it better supports the users in achieving their goals
quickly and accurately. During the group discussion, the
participants (recurrently) suggested what visual elements
helped improving the usability: the heading style was clearer
(red headings on the side of the main text, and clauses
divided by thin lines); the key terms highlighted in bold and
sentences within the body text helped in finding relevant
information; a less dense layout and lines of text made the
contract more readable; the topic-sensitive color-coding in
the table of contents helped in identifying recurrent topics
and where to find them; and the visualizations gave hints
about the content of the surrounding text, and this made
localizing information faster and more memorable (“from
the first glance I already remembered […] so when the
question came I remembered straightaway where I saw it”).
A visual approach is seen as a useful complement that
supports understanding: some respondents said that “it’s
understandable from text also, but [visualization] helps you
to understand it faster or even clearer”, or “if it’s only text, I
think I need to read it a couple more times before I really
understand what is says”.
TABLE I.
ACCURACY, SPEED AND SKIPPED QUESTIONS.
COMPARING THE VISUAL AND THE TEXTUAL VERSIONS OF THE CONTRACT.
Correct answers

Time taken per
answer

Skipped questions
(no answer given)

Visual
version

Textual
version

Visual
version

Textual
version

Visual
version

Textual
version

71,9%

60%

146,26
seconds

224,15
seconds

1

4

B. Perceived difficulty before and after use
The results also suggest that a more visually friendly contract
inspires greater confidence in the users (Figure 2). The
participants anticipated an average difficulty of 3.68 (on a 17 scale, where 7 is “most difficult”), before seeing the
contract. After a quick scan of their versions, the respondents
with a visualized contract anticipated an average difficulty of
3.25 while the respondents who used a textual contract
declared an average difficulty of 4.20. The visualized
contract inspires an anticipated slightly less difficult
experience, while the textual version suggest an even more
difficult experience than previously expected.
After using the contract to answer the comprehension
questions, respondents who used the textual version assessed

RESULTS

A. Speed and accuracy
The results suggest that the visualized version of the contract
allows the users to work more quickly and provide more
accurate answers. The respondents working with the visual

379

EXTREMELY
DIFFICULT

an average difficulty in finding the information of 3.7, and in
understanding the information of 4.7. The respondents who
used a visual version of the contract assessed instead an
average difficulty in finding the information of 3.5 and in
understanding the information of 3.3. For both groups, the
real experience proved more difficult than expected, but the
group using the textual version reported an even higher
difficulty in both finding the information and understanding
the contract.
The results are even more striking considering that the
text of both versions was exactly the same, despite being
presented in different ways. Visualizations seem to
particularly enhance text comprehension, even if the text is
left unchanged.

7
6
5
4
3
2

NOT AT ALL
DIFFICULT

3,68

3,25

4,20

3,50

3,70

3,30

4,70

1
Anticipated
perceived
general
difficulty

Anticipated
perceived
general
difficulty
(visual)

BEFORE
SEEING
THE CONTRACT

Anticipated
perceived
general
difficulty
(textual)

Perceived
difficulty in
finding
information
(visual)

Perceived
difficulty in
finding
information
(textual)

AFTER
SEEING
THE CONTRACT

Perceived
difficulty in
understanding information (visual)

Perceived
difficulty in
understanding information (textual)

C. User experience: general preference
The users preferred the general appearance of the visualized
contract (81%) and appreciated the presence of visualizations
(90%). Also, different layout elements –such as headings,
table of contents, tables… – got individual preference
compared to the traditional, un-styled textual control version
(Table 2). 86% of the respondents found the visual version
“easier to read and skim through” and some specified the
reasons for their preference during the focus group: “Pictures
are always nice, whatever they are”, “[the contract] became
more interesting to see”, “it is more inviting”, “it is more
readable”, “easier to find [answers]”, “I also liked these
pictures, because I think that it is not so clear ‘what is what’
[in the text]”, “one picture tells more than thousand words”.

AFTER
USING
THE CONTRACT

Figure 2. Perceived difficulty before and after use: a comparison between
the visual and the textual versions

TABLE II.

RESPONDENTS PREFERENCES FOR VARIOUS DESIGN
ELEMENTS OF THE CONTRACT

Textual
version

Visual
version

Overall appearance of the document

19%

81%

Presence of visualizations

10%

90%

Style of the layout

19%

81%

Style of the table of contents

32%

68%

Style of the headings

37%

63%

Aspect

Style of the tables

37%

63%

Easier to read and skim through

14%

86%

TABLE III.

D. User experience: company image, trust and
collaboration
Visualized contracts seem to well support the company goal
of improving collaboration and trust with its suppliers. The
respondents mostly believe that a company utilizing
visualized contracts will suggest a more trustworthy,
innovative and quality-oriented image; other brand values
that can be communicated are collaboration, clarity and
honesty (Table 3).
In the focus group discussions more thoughts related to
these topics were clarified: a respondent said “I think it could
be more trust increasing for the business people of the other
party. So they know that we are trying to make the contract
in a way that everybody really understands what is in it”,
while others added that “[visualization offers] some support
to ensure that you are being clear about all the important
points, or gather all the opinions about certain [matters]” and
that “It’s much easier to start a discussion with new
persons”. Some respondents see visualization as a tool to
collaborate during the contracting process, since
“visualizations need to be done together with the other
contract party”. Another important value for the company is
transparency and respondents see visualization as beneficial,
because “making both sides understanding what we have
agreed is always good”.

PERCEIVED BRAND IMAGE. A COMPARISONE BETWEEN
TEXTUAL AND VISUAL VERSIONS.

What idea do you get about
the company that drafted
this contract?

Both
versions

None of
the
versions

100%

0%

0%

63%

23%

0%

0%

77%

23%

0%

0%

95%

5%

0%

5%

68%

17%

0%

Textual
version

Visual
version

Innovative, quality-oriented

0%

Trustworthy, reliable partner

14%

Truly open to collaboration
Truly makes an effort to
communicate with the reader
Values clarity in business
Respects its contractors

5%

59%

31%

5%

Aims at efficiency

14%

68%

18%

0%

Aims at effectiveness

9%

72%

19%

0%

380

Some also consider visualized contracts as “good
marketing tools”, because it “would be quite nice to be the
first one who are using visualizations, and showing that we
are at the top also in this” and the company could be seen as
“the only one to have different contracts”.
VII.

population sampling. Also, an accurate selection helps to
control extraneous data variation and to define the limits for
generalizing the findings [44].
The current research will be continued by creating new
comparable cases in collaboration with different companies,
and by prototyping and testing with a wider range of
documents and visual approaches.

CONCLUSIONS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

According to these initial test results, visualization enhances
the usability and the user experience of complex contractual
information. All four hypotheses found support, as according
to the test results:
•

This research is funded by the FIMECC UXUS project (User
Experience & Usability in Complex Systems) and Tekes –
the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation.

H1 is verified, as respondents working with the
visualized contract were consistently faster in
answering the comprehension questions. Many
respondents felt that visualizations made reading
more fluent, because they supported content
visibility, text comprehension and information
memorization.

•

H2 is verified, as respondents working with the
visualized contract also scored a higher number of
correct answers. Visualizations clarified and
highlighted parts of the content, mirroring the text.

•

H3 and H4 are verified, as visualized contracts
provide more positive anticipated and episodic user
experiences. The users feel more confident about
achieving their goals, as they think that content
presented in a visually clear and appealing way is
easier to read and understand. Other positive
experiential effects are the increased sense of trust,
collaborativeness, mutual respect and transparency.
Both the expectations about the contract itself and
about the business-partner-to-be are positively
influenced. The visualized contract seems to act as a
boundary object [39], allowing different parties,
departments and individuals to transfer, learn and
transform heterogeneous knowledge [40].

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

From a theoretical point of view, these results are a
preliminary, but encouraging addition to the field of
knowledge visualization, since they support the view that
visualization has positive effects in knowledge-intensive
organizational tasks [16; 41; 42]. From a pragmatic
perspective, the feedback provided by the users will help to
further develop prototypes of visualized contracts and
promote the visual approach internally to the company.
However, the results still need to be seen as indicative
rather than conclusive, because data was gathered from a
single case study. A larger research population is needed in
order to increase the validity and the reliability of the results.
The current case will be expanded by continuing the tests
with the partner company’s contractors: this satisfies both the
need of a larger research population, and the need to test and
design contextually for the real users. This follows Yin’s
recommendations for case study research [43] (p.15), where
significant analytical sampling is preferred over statistical

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

381

Passera S. & Haapio H. (2011) User-Centered Contract Design: New
Directions in the Quest for Simpler Contracting, Proceedings of the
2011 IACCM Academic Symposium for Contract and Commercial
Management (pp. 80–97).
Hagedorn J. & Hesen G. G. (2008, April 13) Contractual Complexity
and the Cognitive Load of R&D Alliance Contracts. 3rd Annual
Conference
on
Empirical
Legal
Studies
Papers.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1119802.
Posner E. A. (2010) ProCD v. Zeidenberg and Cognitive Overload in
Contractual Bargaining. University of Chicago Law Review, vol. 77,
no. 4, pp. 1181–1194, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1499414.
Passera, S. & Haapio, H. (2011). Facilitating Collaboration Through
Contract Visualization and Modularization, Proceedings of ECCE
2011, European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics, 24 – 26
August 2011, Rostock, Germany.
Haapio, H. (2008). Innovative Contracting, in Haapio, H. (Ed.), A
Proactive Approach to Contracting and Law. Turku: IACCM &
Turku University of Applied Sciences, pp. 105–152.
Pohjonen S. & Visuri K. (2008) Proactive Approach in Project
Management and Contracting. In H. Haapio (Ed.), A Proactive
Approach to Contracting and Law (pp. 75–95). Turku: International
Association for Contract and Commercial Management & Turku
University of Applied Sciences.)
Schwartz, A. & Scott, R.E. (2010), Contract Interpretation Redux.
Yale Law Journal, Vol. 119, Issue 5, March, pp. 926–965, available at
http://ssrn.com/abstract= 1504223, last accessed 14 June 2011.
Von Hippel, E. (1994). "Sticky Information" and the Locus of
Problem Solving: Implications for Innovation. Management Science,
40(4), pp 429-439
Szulanski, G. (2000). The process of knowledge transfer: A
diachronic analysis of stickiness, Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 82(1)
Eppler, M.J., (2004) Knowledge Communication Problems between
Experts and Managers. An Analysis of Knowledge Transfer in
Decision Processes, ICA Working Paper #1/2004, University of
Lugano, Lugano
Irwin, T. (2002). Information Design: What is it and Who does it?
Retrieved
on
4.4.2011
from
http://www.aiga.org/resources/content/1/8/9/3/documents/AIGA_Cle
ar_InformationDesign.pdf
Tufte, E. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.
Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press.
Tufte, E. (1990). Envisioning Information. Cheshire, Connecticut:
Graphics Press.
Tufte, E. (1997). Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press.

[31] Kay, M. (2010). Techniques and heuristics for improving the visual
design of software agreements, Master Thesis, University of
Waterloo
[32] GLPi and Schmolka,V (2000). Results of Usability Testing Research
on Plain Language Draft Sections of the Employment Insurance Act,
Justice Canada and Human resources development Canada, Retrieved
3.2.2012 from http://www.servicecanada.gc.ca/eng/ei/legislation/glpienglish.pdf
[33] ISO 9241-11 (1998) Ergonomic requirements for office work with
visual display terminals (VDTs) Part 11: Guidance on Usability.
[34] UPA (Usability Professionals’ Association) (2007) Usability Body of
Knowledge. Online glossary at http://www.usabilitybok.org/glossary
[35] Nuutinen M, Seppänen M, Mäkinen S J, Keinonen T (2011). User
Experience in Complex Systems: Crafting a Conceptual Framework,
Proceedings of the 1st Cambridge Academic Design Management
Conference, 7-8- September 2011, Cambridge, UK.
[36] Shostack G. L (1977), Breaking Free from Product Marketing,
Journal of Marketing 41:2, 73–80.
[37] Sanders. E B.N (2002). Scaffolds for Experiencing in the New Design
Space. In Information Design, Institute for Information Design Japan
(Eds.), IID.J, Graphic-Sha Publishing Co. Ltd. Retrieved 2.2.2012
from
http://www.maketools.com/articlespapers/ScaffoldsforExperiencing_
Sanders_03.pdf
[38] Roto, V., Law, E., Vermeeren, A., & Hoonhout, J. (2010). USER
EXPERIENCE WHITE PAPER: Bringing clarity to the concept of
user experience. (V. Roto, E. Law, A. Vermeeren, & J. Hoonhout,
Eds.). Dagsthul Seminar on Demarcating User Experience,
September
15-18,
2010.
Retrieved
2.2.2012
from
http://www.allaboutux.org/uxwhitepaper
[39] Star, S.L. & Griesemer, J.R. (1989). Institutional Ecology,
'Translations' and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in
Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39, Social Studies of
Science, 19 (3), pp. 387–420
[40] Carlile, P. R. (2002), A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries:
Boundary objects in new product development. Organization science;
Jul/Aug 2002 vol.13 no.4
[41] Bresciani, S.
Visualizing Knowledge for Organizational
Communication Within and Across Cultures. Ph.D. Thesis.
Università della Svizzera italiana, Lugano, Switzerland
[42] Platts, K., & Tan, K. H. (2004). Strategy visualisation: knowing,
understanding, and formulating, Management Decision, 42(5/6), 667676.
[43] Yin, R.K. (2009). Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Fourth
edition, SAGE Publications.
[44] Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989). Building Theories from Case Study
Research. Academy of Management Review, 14 (4): 532-550.

[15] Tufte, E. (2006). Beautiful Evidence. Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics
Press.
[16] Bresciani S., Eppler M., Tan, M., (2011) Communicating Strategy
Across Cultures with Visualization: An Experimental Evaluation.
Academy of Management annual meeting, 12-16 August 2011: San
Antonio, Texas.
[17] Roos, J, Bart, V., Statler M. (2004). Playing Seriously with Strategy
Long Range Planning, 37: 549- 568
[18] Eppler, M. J., Platts, K. [2009] Visual Strategizing: The Systematic
Use of Visualization in the Strategic Planning Process. Long Range
Planning, 42: 42-74
[19] Burkhard, R. A. (2005). Knowledge visualization: The use of
complementary visual representations for the transfer of knowledge.
A model, a framework, and four new approaches. PhD thesis,
Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule ETH Zurich
[20] Tergan, S. O., Keller, T., Burkard, R. A.(2006). Integrating
knowledge and information: digital concept maps as a bridging
technology. InformationVisualization, 5(3):167–174
[21] Brunschwig C. R. (2001) Visualisierung von Rechtsnormen – Legal
Design [Visualization of Legal Norms]. Doctoral Thesis. Zürcher
Studien zur Rechtsgeschichte, vol. 45. Rechtswissenschaftliche
Fakultät d. Universität Zürich. Zürich: Schulthess Juristische Medien
[22] Haapio, H (2010). Visualizing Contracts and Legal Rules for greater
Clarity, The Law Teacher, Vol. 44, N.3
[23] Haapio, H (2011). Contract Clarity through Visualization –
Preliminary Observations and Experiments. In: Banissi, Ebad et al.
(eds.), Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Information Visualisation, IV2011 (London 13–15 July 2011).
[24] Berger-Walliser, G, Bird, R. C., Haapio, H (2011). Promoting
Business Success Through Contract Visualization, The Journal of
Law, Business and Ethics, Vol.17, Winter 2011
[25] Rekola, K, Haapio, H (2009). Better Business Through Proactive
Productization and Visualization of Contracts, IACCM Contracting
Excellence Magazine, June/July 2009
[26] Jones, H.W. & Oswald, M. (2001). Doing deals with Flowcharts,
ACCA Docket, 19(9), 94–108Add reference
[27] Rekola, K. & Boucht, K. (2011). Visualizing Service Contracts – The
Case of an Equipment Manufacturer. In: Banissi, Ebad et al. (eds.),
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Information
Visualisation, IV2011 (London 13–15 July 2011).
[28] Mahler, T (2010). Legal Risk Management. Developing and
Evaluating Elements of a Method for Proactive Legal Analyses With
a Particular Focus on Contracts, PhD Thesis, University of Oslo
[29] Barton, T, Berger-Walliser, G, Haapio, H (2011) Visualization:
Seeing Contracts for What They Are, and What They Could Become.
Proceedings of the 2011 IACCM Academic Symposium for Contract
and Commercial Management (pp. 80–97).
[30] Kay, M., Terry, M. (2010). Textured Agreements: Re-envisioning
Electronic Consent, SOUPS '10 Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security, ACM New York, NY, USA

382

