2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Using an Interactive Dymaxion Map to Convey Research Information through
Visualization
Chen Zhong, Tao Wang, Stephen Cairns, Stefan M¨uller Arisona
Future Cities Laboratory, Department of Architecture, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
zhong@arch.ethz.ch, wang@arch.ethz.ch, cairns@arch.ethz.ch, arisona@arch.ethz.ch

in this paper. The prototype implementation represents one
solution, which is understandable, functional, and creative.
The remainder of paper presents the process developing
a possible solution solution, how this was implemented in
terms of an interactive prototype, and how the solution can
be further extended and applied to the other cooperative
design and visualization tasks.

Abstract—Visualization is a medium for communicating
information to and between people with different background
knowledge. The availability of digital tools and the progress of
visualization technologies enhance the potential of visual representation. But along with it, issues emerge as how to choose
appropriate forms of visualization to make results generally
understandable. This paper presents our approach to convey
information on research conducted at ETH Zurich’s Future
Cities Laboratory (FCL) to a broad target audience through
visualization. We ﬁrst carry out a requirements analysis for the
visualization task. The results of the analysis are elaborated and
implemented by means of a software prototype that employs an
interactive Dymaxion Map to visualize the information given
in our case.

II. A NALYSIS OF THE V ISUALIZATION TASK
Based on the basic requirements and questions described
above, in this section, we develop concrete objectives for
the visualization to be realized.
First, the visualization should enhance communication
by means of a story. As mentioned before, the FCL is a
transdisciplinary laboratory with researchers coming from
different domains. In order to foster collaboration between
researchers from different ﬁelds, an appropriate graphical
representation and story can help building bridges between
various ﬁelds and domain-speciﬁc languages. Since most
research conducted at the FCL refers to speciﬁc locations,
and in addition the distribution of the locations well reﬂects
the global framework of the FCL, mapping information
by locations becomes an appropriate choice. Thus a map
representation builds the basis of our story.
Second, the story should be enhanced with interactive
means that allows users to explore the visualization in a
playful way. The goal is to allow users to recognize the
obvious geographic distribution of work locations, but in
additional also to understand implicit information like the
connections between research locations.
According to these two main thinking, the resulting visualization in this paper is designed with following main
features:
• Creative - Through geo-location, it implicitly links
research locations to potential topics in the target area.
• Interactive – It employs gaming and human-computer
interaction (HCI) aspects to attract and involve users.
• Aesthetic - Instead of a traditional world map representation, we use Buckminster Fuller’s Dymaxion map,
which, as we shall see, has some particular properties
in the context of FCL’s research locations.
• Functional – As an interface, it employs a GIS database
backend as source for visual representation.

Keywords-information visualization; interactive visualization;
dymaxion map;

I. I NTRODUCTION
The visualization in this paper originates from the question how research conducted at the ETH Zurich’s Future
Cities Laboratory (FCL) [11] can be presented intuitively
to a broad audience, i.e., to experts as well as non-experts
in the ﬁeld. The FCL is a transdisciplinary research center focused on urban sustainability in a global frame. It
gathers researchers from different domains, including urban
designers, planners, geographers, environmental engineers,
civil engineers, and computer scientists. With the city as
the central theme, the research locations for concrete case
studies include about twenty cities across the globe, with
a particular focus in the South-East Asian Region. The
motivation of our work is to highlight the globally located
research foci as well as their unique features. Thus, in our
context, visualization is used as a means of conveying this
information to other researchers and, equally important, to
the public to provide a better understanding what the FCL
is.
More speciﬁcally, there are certain requirements and goals for the visualization. First and for most, it should be
easily understandable and attractive. At the same time, as
a medium, it should be able to answer deeper questions,
such as: “what is the motivation of the research carried out
at the FCL?”; “why are the research locations distribute
in this way?”; or “what are possible interactions between
those topics?” These requirements directly guide the work
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.114

422

way by analytical reasoning, and supported by an interactive
visual interface, this extra information lets users see, explore,
and understand large amounts of information.
III. I NTERACTIVE DYMAXION M AP P ROTOTYPE
The above considerations were implemented in terms of
an interactive prototype application for multi-touch surfaces.
This section provides details on the prototype implementation.
A. The Dymaxion Project as a Context
The Dymaxion map, created by Buckminster Fuller in
1943, is a projection of the world onto the surface of a
polyhedron, which can be unfolded and ﬂattened to two
dimensions [9]. With this special projection, instead of a
gnomonic map projection, each triangle edge of the Dymaxion map matches the scale of a partial great circle
on a corresponding globe, and other points within each
facet shrink toward its middle, rather than enlarging to the
peripheries [4]. In this paper, we use the 1954 version
published by Fuller, the Airocean World Map, which uses
a modiﬁed but mostly regular icosahedron as the base for
the projection. It keeps all continents uninterrupted and a
balance between local distortions of all geometric variances
while it has a disadvantage on representing angle changes
in large geographic range.
However, why should we use the Dymaxion map for representing FCL’s research locations? Besides of its suitability
for interactive reconﬁguration, the main answer comes from
observations revolving around FCL’s main research location:
FCL research is appropriately organized and geographically
placed at the heart of one of the currently most demanding and challenging locations, as well as connected to
Singapore’s aspirations in that context [11] as shown in
ﬁgure 2. The colored triangle accounts for around 80% of
FCL’s research. Most of this is concentrated in a triangle
that is centered on Singapore and spanning India, China
and Indonesia. This triangular zone shown in ﬁgure 2, the
colored one, is signiﬁcant in a number of aspects:
• It contains about one third of the world’s population,
i.e., about 2.5 billion people, and expected 3.4 billion
by 2025.
• It experiences the steepest rate of urbanization in the
world for coming 40 years.
• It shows the fastest growth of largest population in the
human development index (HDI).
• It potentially places greatest pressure on global environmental sustainability.

Figure 1. Overview of system with Dymaxion projection map as front-end
and with geo-spatial data base and GIS system as back-end.

A. Geographic Information Representation
In order to represent location information, using a map
is the straightforward consideration. It provides a georeferenced framework for representation of interesting phenomena. Under this framework, the geospatial characteristics, such as the distribution of the locations, are more easily
captured than that through introduction by textual representations [8]. In addition, this work employs the capacity of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to provide a generic
interface to access to the geo-spatial datasets as shown in
the ﬁgure 1.
On analog and digital maps, the symbols are decomposed
into detailed visual variables to represent phenomena [6].
In addition to this commonly accepted graphical code, we
make use of properties of a particular projection, i.e. the
Dymaxion projection, which in contrast to traditional maps
allows for reconﬁguration of the view, and thus change the
visual distance of the locations. This encourages people to
think and re-interpret the plan in alternative ways.
B. Interactive Information Visualization
Information visualization as a disciplinary ﬁeld has been
brought into many applications related to cities. A typical example was given by [2], where high-dimensional
visualization techniques were used to represent the multivariables in urban space. In terms of interaction, several
approaches were presented: The GeoTouch [10] employs
multi-touch technology to provide more convenient ways for
map interactions and engaging participation from users. The
MetroBuzz project [7] employs mobile devices to navigate
in large amounts of transportation simulation data.
Consequently, to the map representation outlined in the
previous section, we add additional elements from interactive information visualization, aiming to enhance the visual representations and interaction techniques. Based on
approaches of conveying abstract information in intuitive

B. Interacting with the Map
We implemented the prototype of the interactive Dymaxion map with three main functions:
The ﬁrst main function refers to interactive aspects with a
gaming component, inspired by the Faumaxion Slippy Map

423

[12]. The position of the triangles can be reshaped without
changing the neighboring relationship. In other words, the
globe can be unfolded into different arrangement of triangles
by implicitly given rules for neighboring triangles. This
allows to maintain geo-referenced locations while revealing different relationship patterns. To do this, we record
the index of twenty triangles and nodes, as well as the
neighboring relationship between them. In order to achieve
this design purpose, the adjacent information of twenty sides
of the icosahedron is stored in a topological data structure.
As demonstrated in ﬁgure 3, for each operation, a series
of queries will be triggered: if the mouse enters a triangle,
triangle is selected and shaded in yellow. In addition, three
adjacent triangles will be marked blue and possible valid
positions according to the three adjacent triangles will be
highlighted in green. Finally, if the mouse moves to one of
the possible locations, the selected triangle will move to the
new position and reconﬁgure the map.
The second function refers to the database server. The
interface links to a GIS database backend to update locationbased data in real-time. This allows for additional database
queries to be implemented e.g. referring to like population,
density by country, by triangle, or by research topics (shown
as a point on the map). The interactive system is also
designed to dynamically connect to a geospatial database
deployed on a data server. This function gives professional
users the possibility to acquire more information by performing various spatial queries. Thematic information returned
from the server, such as population density, urbanization
status, land use and land cover, can be mapped on the Fuller
base map.
The third function refers to the multi-touch implementation. Multi-touch functionality is added for enhanced user experience and to augment interactive operations in a
playful, intuitive way. Deployed on a multi-touch table
surface, it further allows for collaborative operation. The
implementation includes the typical multi-touch functions
such as zoom-in/out, pan and select, and future operations
can be added as required.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was established at the Singapore-ETH Centre
for Global Environmental Sustainability (SEC), co-funded
by the Singapore National Research Foundation (NRF) and
ETH Zurich.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. Ben-Joseph, The code of the city.

MIT Press, 2005.

[2] R. Chang, G. Wessel, R. Kosara, E. Sauda,, and W. Ribarsky,
Legible cities: Focus-dependent multi-resolution visualization
of urban relationships. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Transactions on, IEEE, 2007, 13, 1169-1175.
[3] M. Flaxman, Fundamentals of Geodesign.
Buhman, E.,
Pietsch, M. & E. Kretzler (Eds.), Peer Reviewed Proceedings
Digital Landscape Architecture, 2010.
[4] R. B. Fuller, Ideas and integrities.
graphical, 1963.

A Spontaneous Autobio-

[5] R. Park, E. Burgess, and R. McKenzie, The city.
of Chicago Press, 1984.

University

[6] T. A. Slocum, R. B. McMaster, F. C. Kessler, and H.
H. Howard, Thematic cartography and geovisualization.
Prentice Hall, 2008.
[7] W. Zeng, C. Zhong, S. M¨uller Arisona, and I. McLoughlin,
MetroBuzz: A 3D Representation of Transport Data. ICCIS
2012 : International Conference on Computer & Information
Sciences, 2012.
[8] C. Zhong, T. Wang, W. Zeng and S M¨uller Arisona, The code
of the city.
2012. Spatiotemporal Visualisation: A Survey
and Outlook. In: Mller Arisona, S., Wonka, P., Aschwanden,
G., and Halatsch, J. (eds.). Digital Urban Modeling and Simulation. Communications in Computer and Information Science
(CCIS), Volume 242, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[9] Dymaxion map by Buckminster Fuller on Wikipedia,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dymaxionmap/
[10] Earth Observatory of Singapore (EOS) GeoTouch Multi-touch
Project, URL: http://www.earthobservatory.sg/.
[11] Future Cities Laboratory (FCL) at the ETH-Singapore Centre,
URL: http://www.futurecities.ethz.ch/.

IV. C ONCLUSION
Visualization is an important tool for communication between people with different knowledge background. This paper took the visualization needs of the FCL’s work locations
as an example, analyzed the real needs and implemented
a prototype of an interactive Dymaxion map. The result
constitutes an alternative way to traditional text descriptions
and map representations. The content of the visualization
as well as the visualization itself both present the research
carried out at the FCL. As an information medium, the
visualization is to promote urban visualization techniques
towards a more interactive, meaningful, and user-friendly
way.

[12] Slippy faumaxion, URL: http://teczno.com/faumaxion-II/.
MIT Press, 2005.

424

Figure 2.

Dymaxion projection and map with the highlighted triangle containing large parts of south and southeast Asia.

Figure 3. Interactive Dymaxion map as implemented in our prototype. Left: Yellow indicates selected triangle; blue indicates adjacent triangles; and green
highlights indicate possible valid positions where the selected triangle may me moved to. Right: Some examples of the reshaped Dymaxion map.

425

