2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Time-based geographical mapping of communicable diseases
Manuel Cesario∗ , Matthew Jervis† , Saturnino Luz‡ , Masood Masoodian† , Bill Rogers†
∗ Graduate

Programme on Health Promotion,
University of Franca, Brazil
manuel.cesario@uol.com.br

† Department

of Computer Science,
The University of Waikato, New Zealand
{mjervis,masood,coms0108}@cs.waikato.ac.nz
‡ School

of Computer Science and Statistics,
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
luzs@cs.tcd.ie

Although geographical visualisations have been extensively studied in connection with their ability to support
retrospective analysis, hypothesis formation and prediction
once sufﬁcient data have been amassed [3], the use of such
visualisation techniques in support of the data collection
activity itself has received less attention. In recent years,
the proliferation of mobile devices with enhanced data
processing and graphics capabilities have made it possible to
extend the beneﬁts of information visualisation systems to
ﬁeld workers. These systems can help monitor the progress
of a collective data gathering activity, provide up-to-date
views of the data, and display aggregated spatial as well
as time-based information.
The work described in this paper seeks to exploit these
capabilities in assisting the work of epidemiologists and
health researchers working in the ﬁeld in the Amazon
region. The broader context of this work is the goal of
mapping the spread of infectious diseases in the region
and creating an early warning system to detect possible
outbreaks. The activities that can potentially be supported
by the information visualisation system include monitoring
of case incidence in the mapped region over time, detection
of relationships between patient place of residence and case
notiﬁcation, and overlaying of time-based data from different
sources in order to reveal possible relationships between
factors such as land use, population movements and climate
changes in the spread of diseases.
It is believed that socio-environmental changes in Southwestern Amazonia will cause the (re)emergence of infectious diseases. Changes in the epidemiology of vector-borne
diseases are already being observed, including two diseases
transmitted by sand ﬂies: Cutaneous Leishmaniasis and Bartonellosis [6]. In this paper, we place special emphasis on the
role time-based visualisation techniques can play in assisting
geographically dispersed groups of users in collecting data
and identifying potential risks.

Abstract—Information visualisation methods can potentially
be employed to assist the work of epidemiologists and other
health care professionals in mapping the spread of communicable diseases in remote areas, where the task of disease
surveillance encompasses temporal elements such as changes
in climate, land use and population movements. This paper
presents an investigation into the use of time-based visualisation
techniques coupled with geographical maps and support for
distributed mobile collection of patient data. This study has
focused on the development of an information visualisation
prototype designed for use by epidemiology researchers on
mobile platforms (tablets and smart phones). The prototyping
activity has involved the participation of prospective users
working in the Amazon region. Initial results are presented
and discussed.
Keywords-Visualisation of disease spread, disease surveillance, time-based visualisation, geospatial visual analytics,
interactive geographical maps, mobile devices, human factors.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The use of maps to explain and predict patterns of
disease spread and to support epidemiological reasoning
is well established in medical research [1]. Disease maps
date back at least to the late 18th century, and feature
among the prime examples of the usefulness of information
visualisation [2], [1]. More recently, computing power and
interactive techniques have allowed statistical modelling to
be integrated into more sophisticated maps that support
assessment of disease transmission risks [3]. Geographical
information systems (GIS) have also been built which depict temporal as well as spatial data, allowing for a more
principled integration of time-based data at different levels
of coverage [4]. Good support for integrated visualisation
of these dimensions is regarded as crucial for the successful
use of such systems in epidemiology research, specially in
the area of emerging infectious diseases [5].
Authors listed in alphabetical order

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.30

118

based disease incident data is often restricted, which limits
the use of GIS-based systems [15].
Even with this general lack of availability of space-time
disease case data at present, in recent years attempts have
been made to show the potential of tools that provide
geospatial visualisations for analysing disease outbreaks.
Chen et al., for instance [11], present a case study of SARS
epidemic in Beijing in 2003 using spatial-contact networks.
This work shows that spatial-contact networks could be
very helpful for detecting spatial transmission risks, and
understanding the inherent mechanisms for transmission of
infectious diseases [11]. The visualisation techniques used
in this work are similar to, though less advanced than, ﬂow
mapping and multivariate visualisation demonstrated by Guo
[16] for analysis of spacial interaction data (i.e. locationto-location movements) which can be used for decision
making in a wide range of research areas including, but
not limited to, epidemiology. Unlike other existing ﬂow
mapping approaches [16], Guo’s interactive mapping technique allows: discovery of natural regions (communities) in
spacial interactions, generalisation of ﬂow patterns to higher
abstraction levels, and application of multivariate clustering
for analysis of multivariate data of ﬂows at the regional level.
These types of interactive ﬂow mapping techniques are,
therefore, likely to have potential use in epidemiology, once
accurate patient time-space collection methods are developed
and adopted in practice by health care professionals.

II. D ISEASE SURVEILLANCE
The importance of information technology for disease
surveillance is well-understood [7], and various tools and
techniques have been proposed and adopted, with some
success, in public health. Most of these approaches can
be categorised as space-time surveillance techniques, which
utilise statistical and modelling techniques to analyse available data to report any disease outbreaks (for a summary
see [8]). The analysis can be retrospective (to determine if
an outbreak has occurred) or prospective (to determine if an
outbreak is currently occurring).
Despite their acceptance, these syndromic surveillance
systems [9], [10] still suffer from a major shortcoming in
that they often generate false alarms due to the difﬁculty
in distinguishing natural data variations from real outbreaks
[11]. In all such cases human interpretation by epidemiologists is required, which can of course be costly in terms
of time and human resources. Signiﬁcant reduction of these
false alarms is therefore needed before disease surveillance
systems are widely adopted [11].
Since such fully automated and reliable systems are yet
to be developed, syndromic surveillance systems need to
incorporate more advanced data visualisation techniques, as
well as better user interfaces, to assist epidemiologists with
the process of analysing large volumes of data in a more
timely and cost effective manner. Geospatial visualisations
incorporating maps, in particular, can assist epidemiologists
with identifying and tracking outbreaks [12].
Despite the long association of maps with epidemiology
[13], use of interactive maps as part of modern disease
surveillance systems has been rather limited. One possible
reason for this lack of widespread use may be due to the
limited availability of accurate location-based disease data.
At best, most disease maps are based on patient home
address (or some small geographical location) data and, as
such, report heightened risks associated with those locations
while ignoring the fact that movement of people and animals decouples location of diagnosis from disease risk [8].
Furthermore, disease latency periods can also contribute to
space-time lags in diagnosis [14], [8]. However, as the use of
GPS-enabled devices such as mobile phones becomes more
widespread, personal location data will also become more
accurately and readily available; thus making surveillance
techniques which rely on individual patient time-space histories valuable tools in public health surveillance [8].
Furthermore, here we argue that the use of GPS-enabled
mobile tools for collection of patient data by health professionals working in the ﬁeld, particularly in remote developing regions where access to mobile devices by the resident
population can be limited, will also have a greater impact on
collection of more accurate space-time patient histories. It
should, however, also be noted that due to privacy concerns,
for instance in North America, dissemination of location-

III. E XPLORING VISUALISATION METHODS
We have explored the possibilities for the use of information visualisation techniques for monitoring of Bartonellosis
and Leishmaniasis in South-western Amazonia primarily
through user-centred design involving potential user groups
(researchers, health care professionals and epidemiologists)
and supported by the development of prototypes. This approach was taken because, as with most applications of
technology, without the support and acceptance of health
care practitioners the use of this type of medical system as
part of their work ﬂow is likely to fail [17].
Our primary user group consists of epidemiologists and
medical doctors, who devise models for disease surveillance
and rely on access to information from a variety of sources
in order to assess risks as well as direct future data gathering
efforts. From this point of view, an important requirement is
the ability to aggregate data on climate, land use, the region’s
general geographic characteristics, vector and patient case
distribution as well as their evolution over space and time
(e.g. migration, climatic change etc). For more details on
other user groups and needs involved in the broader health
care context see [18].
While time and space are important factors in this kind of
work, current data analysis efforts are hampered by the fact
that information on place of infection is often inaccurate,
since it is collected at a place of notiﬁcation usually far

119

Figure 1. Visualisation of incidence of Leishmaniasis cases in the Brazilian state of Acre by municipality of notiﬁcation. Circle radii are proportional to
the number of cases matching the selection.

removed from the rural area where the patients live. Mobile
devices equipped with global positioning systems can be
valuable in collecting accurate geographical coordinates
which can be linked not only to patient data but also with
other pertinent information such as proximity to domestic
and peri-domestic animals, which are known Leishmaniasis
parasite hosts, presence and contact with the sand ﬂy vectors,
travel and other potentially relevant variables.

The prototype was tested on real epidemiological data
collected on cases of Leishmaniasis reported in the Southwestern Amazon region from 1999 to 2011. The dataset
contains patient information (age, sex), disease information
(whether cutaneous or mucous), geographical information
(place of notiﬁcation, place where the infection may have
occurred, urban or rural site, etc) and dates. The user can
visualise the place and incidence of cases on the map by
varying the range of selected values for these variables by
direct manipulation, using sliders (for nominal and numeric
variables) and check-boxes for Boolean variables. The selections are immediately displayed on the map as overlaid
circles with sizes proportional to the number of cases notiﬁed in the region. Figure 1 illustrates this process with a map
displaying the distribution of case of Leishmaniasis in the
state of Acre from September 1999 to March 2007 according
to municipality of notiﬁcation. It is also possible to switch
the visualisation to display cases according to probable place
of infection, represented on the map by circles of a different
colour.

A. Visualisation prototype
Our initial visualisation prototype is based on the above
described requirements and has been implemented primarily
for mobile platforms. The prototype runs on the AndroidTM
operating system and therefore can be easily deployed on a
range of smart phones and tablets. Since the prospective
users of the system expressed a preference for a larger
screen size, the prototype was deployed on a SamsungTM
Tab 10.1 device. The system uses maps of the region
generated for the OpenStreetMap framework [19], and the
open source OSMDROID library1 to display the maps. The
map framework allows for overlays to be displayed which
can encode several types of data, including land cover and
use, temperature ranges, presence of domestic animals etc.
These maps and overlays can be pre-compiled and stored on
the device for ofﬂine access.

The data in our sample show that in many cases the
municipality where infection occurred is different from the
municipality where the disease was notiﬁed. This, and other
information on travel by the patient may be useful information to an epidemiologist attempting to model patterns of
disease spread. In order to provide such a visual summary,
we envisage a combination of the two maps where one

1 http://code.google.com/p/osmdroid/

120

of variables and spatial clusters [24]. Supplementing maps
with visual material such as statistical charts and tables [12]
in combination with clustering and scan statistics algorithms
have been proposed [25], [20], [16], [21]. A recent study
found that users of disease maps had difﬁculties in interpreting such supplementary information [26]. However, novel
techniques such as micromaps [24] may help mitigate such
difﬁculties.
IV. U SER FEEDBACK
As Andrienko et Al. [22] point out, one of the major
challenges facing geospacial visual analytics is to understand
and provide adequate support for different user categories.
We regard this issue not only from the perspective of
understanding perceptual and cognitive processes, but also
from the perspective of understanding the socio-technical
context in which the system will be employed [18].
The above described prototype resulted from requirements
elicited from initial interviews with health professionals and
researchers engaged in the development of an early warning
system for neglected infectious diseases in the Amazon state
of Acre. As the ﬁrst prototype capable of demonstrating
the information visualisation functionality became ready, a
second round of user feedback gathering was organised.
The prototype was demonstrated and user opinions were
collected on a number of issues from a group of 10 prospective users, including 5 medical doctors, 3 epidemiology
researchers and two other health care professionals.
The visualisation feature was very positively evaluated,
with users expressing enthusiasm for the possibility of integrating patient records and data collection for purposes of
disease surveillance. However, there were concerns regarding costs, dependability and technical aspects of the tablet
device with respect to its use in the ﬁeld, such as durability,
battery life and availability of internet connections.
In terms of the visualisation functionality, speciﬁcally,
both the summary views and the historical data presentation
mode (animation) were considered useful by the users. One
user remarked that the system seemed complex to use, and
another thought it would be less useful for data collection
than for analysis. Epidemiology researchers remarked that
the data needed continuous updating (in line with our initial
assumptions) and that this may be difﬁcult in regions where
connectivity cannot be taken for granted. The limitations
of the data set displayed in the demo were also noted. It
was remarked that the system displayed place of notiﬁcation,
which does not take into account “imported patients” who
were infected elsewhere and those diagnosed while in transit.
It is possible that the distinction between municipality of
notiﬁcation and infection was not made sufﬁciently clear in
the user interface. This point will be addressed in future
prototyping iterations. In agreement with the literature on
spatio-temporal epidemiology [24], it was also pointed out
that because population bases vary within a geographical

Figure 2. Network superimposed to map showing migration patterns from
municipality of infection to municipality of notiﬁcation. Arrows indicate
direction of population ﬂow.

variable (say, municipality of infection) is represented, as
before, by circles of varying sizes denoting number of cases
while the other is represented as connecting lines of thickness proportional to the number of cases. This combination
forms a network that can be visualised as a ﬂow map, as
shown in Figure 2. Since the region for which the system is
intended is sparsely populated, the scalability problems that
normally affect ﬂow maps are unlikely to arise.
However, clustering and graph reduction techniques proposed in the literature [16], [20] can be implemented should
scalability problems arise. Alternatives to ﬂow networks for
visualisation of spatial dynamics such as OD maps [21]
and other methods of support to geospatial reasoning [22]
could also be investigated. Patient travel history prior to
infection as well as general migration ﬂows, including cross
border travel, are currently not available but are regarded as
important from the perspective of disease surveillance in the
Amazon region [6] and could be incorporated to the system
in a similar way.
Although time-based information can be visualised
through basic ﬁltering, as described above, the prototype also
enables the user to “animate” the patient case data to show
the geographical evolution of infections at different levels
of resolution (day, month, year) while still allowing ﬁltering
by the non-temporal attributes. This mode of operation is
shown in Figure 3. Temporal mosaic [23] summaries of these
variables will be integrated into the prototype in the next
design iteration.
It is recognised that quantitative information such as
population differences alone do not sufﬁce to provide early
warning of potential epidemics. Although we expect the fast
response to time range selections and the animation features
we have developed to improve analysis of population data,
risk differences among regions also need to be taken into
account. This often involves a complex process of analysing
possible causal connections between a potentially large set

121

Figure 3.

Visualisation in animation mode, displaying the distribution of cases by place of probable infection on a month by month resolution.

region of interest the system needs to allow the user to scale
the circles according to infection rates and estimated risk as
well as absolute numbers.
Determining statistical signiﬁcance for risk areas is a
complex problem often compounded by aggregation bias
[20] (i.e. the fact that, as in our current dataset, patient cases
are often grouped in national databases according to regions
of very different sizes and population bases). This highlights
another likely advantage of using a mobile device to record
cases. Use of a mobile device would enable researchers
to obtain precise geographical coordinates of the patient’s
location and thus allow for ﬁner-grained data display and
risk assessment.

The development, and subsequent evaluation, of our system and its various components, one of which has been
reported here, has been closely guided by our potential users,
including health care professionals, researchers and epidemiologist in Brazil. We believe that without the acceptance and
ultimate adoption of any future system by these users as part
of their established workﬂow, systems such as ours will be
of limited value.
In terms of the future work, we aim to reﬁne and extend the visualisation capabilities of our system iteratively
through initial ﬁeld trials which will allow us to collect more
accurate spaciotemporal patient case data needed for these
future developments of the system.

C ONCLUSION

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

In this paper we have described the development of a
mobile system for time-based geographical visualisation and
mapping of collected patient case data to assist epidemiologists with the task of monitoring the spread and possible outbreaks of communicable diseases. This visualisation
component is integrated into a larger set of mobile tools
which also assist with collection of more accurate locationbased patient data in remote geographical regions. It is
argued that without real-time (or near real-time) access
to such data by heath care professionals working in the
ﬁeld, the task of monitoring the spread of (re)emerging
diseases such as Cutaneous Leishmaniasis and Bartonellosis
is drastically hampered.

Saturnino Luz is supported by the Science Foundation
Ireland (Grant 07/CE/I1142) as part of the Centre for Next
Generation Localisation (www.cngl.ie) at Trinity College
Dublin.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. Koch, Disease Maps: Epidemics on the Ground. University of Chicago Press, Jun. 2011.
[2] E. R. Tufte, Envisioning information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[3] U. Kitron, “Risk maps: transmission and burden of vectorborne diseases,” Parasitology Today, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 324–
325, 2000.

122

[4] G. Christakos, P. Bogaert, and M. Serre, Temporal GIS:
Advanced functions for ﬁeld-based applications. Springer
Verlag, 2001, vol. 1.

[15] T. Koch and K. Denike, “Gis approaches to the problem
of disease clusters: a brief commentary,” Social Science &
Medicine, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1751 – 1754, 2001.

[5] K. Clarke, S. McLafferty, and B. Tempalski, “On epidemiology and geographic information systems: a review and
discussion of future directions.” Emerging infectious diseases,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 85–92, 1996.

[16] D. Guo, “Flow mapping and multivariate visualization of
large spatial interaction data,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 15, pp. 1041–1048,
2009.

[6] M. Cesario, R. Cesario, and M. Andrade-Morraye, “Environmental change and health impacts in amazonia,” Human
Health and Global Environmental Change, vol. 1, pp. 26–33,
2011.

[17] R. A. Miller, “Medical diagnostic decision support
systems – past, present, and future,” Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association (JAMIA),
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 8–27, 1994. [Online]. Available:
http://jamia.bmj.com/content/1/1/8.abstract

[7] T. Boyd, T. Savel, G. Kesarinath, B. Lee, and J. Stinn, “The
use of public health grid technology in the united states
centers for disease control and prevention h1n1 pandemic response,” Advanced Information Networking and Applications
Workshops, pp. 974–978, 2010.

[18] S. Luz, M. Masoodian, M. Cesario, and B. Rogers, “Supporting collaboration among healthcare professionals and disease
surveillance in remote areas,” in Procs. of the 25th International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems.
IEEE, 2012.

[8] C. Robertson, T. A. Nelson, Y. C. MacNab, and A. B. Lawson,
“Review of methods for space-time disease surveillance,”
Spatial and Spatio-temporal Epidemiology, vol. 1, no. 23, pp.
105–116, 2010.

[19] M. Haklay and P. Weber, “OpenStreetMap: User-Generated
street maps,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
12–18, Dec. 2008.

[9] F.-C. Tsui, J. U. Espino, V. M. Dato, P. H. Gesteland,
J. Hutman, and M. M. Wagner, “Technical description
of RODS: A real-time public health surveillance system,”
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 399–408, 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://jamia.bmj.com/content/10/5/399.abstract

[20] F. Boscoe, C. McLaughlin, M. Schymura, and C. Kielb, “Visualization of the spatial scan statistic using nested circles,”
Health & Place, vol. 9, no. 3, p. 273277, 2003.
[21] J. Wood, J. Dykes, and A. Slingsby, “Visualisation of origins,
destinations and ﬂows with OD maps,” The Cartographic
Journal, vol. 47, no. 2, p. 117129, 2010.

[10] P. H. Gesteland, R. M. Gardner, F.-C. Tsui, J. U.
Espino, R. T. Rolfs, B. C. James, W. W. Chapman,
A. W. Moore, and M. M. Wagner, “Automated
syndromic surveillance for the 2002 winter olympics,”
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 547–554, 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://jamia.bmj.com/content/10/6/547.abstract

[22] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, D. Keim, A. M. MacEachren,
and S. Wrobel, “Challenging problems of geospatial visual analytics,” Journal of Visual Languages & Computing,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 251–256, Aug. 2011.

[11] H. Chen, D. Zeng, D. L. Buckeridge, M. Izadi, A. Verma,
A. Okhmatovskaia, X. Hu, X. Shen, Z. Cao, F.-Y. Wang,
X. Zheng, and Q. Wang, “AI for global disease surveillance,”
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 24, pp. 66–82, 2009.

[23] S. Luz and M. Masoodian, “Visualisation of parallel data
streams with temporal mosaics,” in Procs. of the 11th International Conference on Information Visualisation. Zurich:
IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 196–202.

[12] K. Moore, G. Edge, and A. Kurc, “Visualization techniques
and graphical user interfaces in syndromic surveillance
systems,” BMC Proceedings, vol. 2, no. 3, p. S6, 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://www.biomedcentral.com/17536561/2/S3/S6

[24] L. W. Pickle and D. B. Carr, “Visualizing health data with micromaps,” Spatial and Spatio-temporal Epidemiology, vol. 1,
no. 23, pp. 143 – 150, 2010.
[25] M. Kulldorff and N. Nagarwalla, “Spatial disease clusters:
Detection and inference,” Statistics in Medicine, vol. 14, no. 8,
pp. 799–810, Apr. 1995.

[13] F. A and Barrett, “Finke’s 1792 map of human diseases:
the ﬁrst world disease map?” Social Science and Medicine,
vol. 50, no. 78, pp. 915–921, 2000.

[26] A. Koenig, E. Samarasundera, and T. Cheng, “Interactive
map communication: Pilot study of the visual perceptions and
preferences of public health practitioners,” Public Health, vol.
125, no. 8, pp. 554 – 560, 2011.

[14] A. Schærstr¨om, “Apparent and actual disease landscapes some reﬂections on the geographical deﬁnition of health and
disease,” Geograﬁska Annaler, Series B: Human Geography,
vol. 81, no. 4, pp. 235–242, 1999.

123

