2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Making Place: Designing and building an engaging, interactive and pedagogical
historical world.
Kit Devine
Australian National University
Abstract

2. Building Places not Spaces

Digital visualisation technologies have transformed
the field of heritage. The digital re-creation of a place
demands much more than architectural modeling.
Designers of virtual heritage places can learn from
commercial computer games which can be very
successful at creating a sense of place. The Virtual
Sydney Rocks is designed to undertake research into the
role that user preference for interaction strategy has on
engagement in a Virtual Heritage Environment. Users
can explore an experiential model of Sydney Cove
between 1788 and 2008 in three different ways; by selfdirected exploration, by playing a game or by taking a
tour. Users set the date and time to determine the
position of the sun, the weather, the sounds that are
heard and the buildings that are displayed. Users can
also alter the speed of time. Additional information is
accessed via the interlinked Virtual Sydney Rocks
Guidebook.

For Virtual Heritage the architecture of a city is
merely one aspect of its cultural heritage. Complex, and
often contradictory, layers of meaning are integral to an
understanding of a particular place[8-11]. In creating a
virtual heritage place one common approach is to
provide additional information in pop-up text panels[12].
Another is to have computer controlled human figures
that act as guides. In the Gates of Horus there is a priest
in each section of the temple who informs users about
the nature and meaning of some of the temple features.
Users are then asked about these and, if they can
correctly answer the questions, they proceed to the next
part of the temple. The Uruk project exists in Second
Life and is being used to investigate the use AI (artificial
intelligence) to control virtual people in heritage
worlds[13]. Place-Hampi consists of an immersive
stereoscopic environment that blends high resolution
photographic images of the World Heritage site of
Vijayanagara with interactive computer generated
avatars whose behaviours are driven in part by the
gestures of the (human) users[14]. Generally however
most virtual heritage cities to date have been silent and
uninhabited. There is a growing interest in the design of
cultural heritage environments[15, 16].

Keywords--- Virtual Heritage, Place, Presence,
Interactive.

1. Introduction

3. Engagement/Presence

First developed in the 1960’s, 3D computer
visualisation technologies are now routinely employed
for purposes as disparate as military training, Hollywood
spectacle and kitchen design. Virtual Heritage involves
the use of these technologies in the field of Heritage for
both academic research, such as exploring the alignments
between the rising and setting of the sun at different
times of the year at Stonehenge[1], and for public
education such as in the Gates of Horus, an interactive
game designed to teach users about the religious beliefs
and rituals of Ancient Egyptians[2]. There is a growing
body of literature concerned with the role of Virtual
Heritage in education [3-7]. However studies are small
and there is a need for further research.

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.90

Presence, most commonly described as ‘the feeling
of being there’ has been reported in a wide variety of
media including cinema, telephone, online and virtual
environments[17-20]. The phenomenon of presence is of
great interest to researchers and there is a growing body
of work on the topic.

3.1. Types of Presence
Researchers distinguish between different types of
presence. Telepresence, also known as remote presence,
is the feeling of ‘being there’ where ‘there’ is real,
though remote, location. Social presence, also known as
co-presence, is the feeling of ‘being there’ with someone
else[19, 21]. Social presence may be experienced during
528

a telephone conversation or in a virtual environment that
supports multiple users. Contextualized or cultural
presence is the feeling of being in a place rather than a
location[4, 17, 19, 22]. Other distinctions include
embodied presence[23], physical presence, spatial
presence and hyperpresence[24], tangible presence and
imaginary presence[25].

out[52, 54]. An exception is Howe and Sharkey’s work
on identifying suitable users for a Virtual Environment
[55] and Jurnet et al’s work investigating the effect of
individual differences on the sense of presence[52]. User
factors known to affect presence include spatial
intelligence, personality type and prior knowledge[37,
52]. The subjective nature of the experience of presence
underlines the importance of individual user
characteristics[25, 32, 55].

3.2. Presence Theories
Various theories of presence have been proposed[18,
22, 25-34]. Several researchers have equated presence
with sensory fidelity. Other researchers have argued that
presence is more than immersion and is a multidimensional construct arising from the interaction of the
mind with the environment[22, 29, 31, 32, 35]. There is
much ongoing debate as to the various contributions to
presence by the sensory environment, mental processes
and underlying brain mechanisms[32, 35-37]. The
importance of individual user factors is revealed by the
fact that ‘differences among individual users often
account for more variability in performance than system
design factors’[38]. The subjective nature of presence
has provoked much debate about how to measure it and
led to the development of several different presence
questionnaires and debate about their merits[31, 39-44].

4. Game Worlds
When it comes to designing virtual places that
encourage engagement it is perhaps useful to examine
some of the highly successful commercial computer
games that feature interactive virtual worlds. Such
games, on both console and pc, attract millions of players
who happily spend hours at a time immersed in the
virtual world of the game. The look, the sound, the
interaction and the game play are all recognized as
important parts that contribute to the final result. And in
multiplayer online virtual worlds like World of Warcraft
the social interaction between individual players can be a
major contributor to engagement[56].
The environments are richly modeled and
elaborately textured with colour, transparency,
reflectance and surface detail. Photorealism is not
however a major contributing factor to a game’s
popularity. Many game worlds feature stylised looks
designed to contribute to the atmosphere of the game
world. While Cysis aimed for a photo-real look for its
tropical jungle setting, the detective game LA Noire
features a look based directly on the film noir look of the
1950s and the desert landscape of Borderlands has a
harshly lit (car)toon-shaded look.
Sound design is recognised as an key part of game
world design but is unfortunately often overlooked by
Virtual Heritage developers. Different sound qualities
such as reverberation can be set for different regions with
the result that sounds of a character’s footstep will
change as they walk on different surfaces and through
different architectural spaces. Dynamic ambient sound
can be used to great effect to create environmental
sound, driven in part by the player.

3.3. Presence Factors
Research to date has identified a large number of
factors affecting presence but the breakdown of factors
has varied from researcher to researcher (For details see
[17, 31, 42, 43, 45-47]). These factors can be grouped
into the three main categories of realism, social
interaction and user factors.
Realism – The more realistically the virtual
environment looks, sounds and behaves the more
presence will be reported. A great deal of research has
been carried out and in most cases supports this
assertion. A bigger display is better than a smaller
one[48]. Directional sound is better than unidirectional
sound[49]. Sound and vision is better than just
vision[50]. And, the better the sound, the better the sense
of presence[49]. Researchers have also investigated the
interplay of factors to try to determine their relative
importance. Games designers will sacrifice image quality
for interactivity[51].
Social Interaction – The power of social interaction
alone to evoke presence is demonstrated by the fact that
presence is widely reported in the sensory poor media of
telephones and text-based on-line interactions[17-19].
User characteristics/factors – A faithful simulacra
of reality will not in and of itself evoke presence [29].
Two people in the same Virtual Environment can report
quite different levels of presence [52]. This should not be
surprising as reality itself is not sufficient to maintain
presence. If it was, we would never become ‘lost in
thought’. Researchers agree that presence appears to be
inextricably linked to attention[22, 33, 36, 42, 45, 53].
Not much research into user factors has been carried

"Sneaking through nature means you hear birds,
insects, animals, wind, water, materials. So everything -the close and the distant sounds of the ambiance. Firing
your gun means you hear birds flapping away, and
silence.
Silence of course means, here, wind, water,
materials, but also -- and this was the key I believe -distant sounds (distant animals and other noises). We left
the close mosquito sounds in as well, which fly in every
now and then -- because we thought they don't care
about gun shots.
So, after firing your gun, you do hear close noises
like soft wind through the leaves or some random
crumbling bark of some tree next to you (the close
environment), all rather close and crispy, but also the

529

distant layer of the ambiance, warm in the middle
frequencies, which may be distant wind, the ocean,
distant animals -- [it doesn't] matter what animals, just
distant enough to not know what they are -- plus other
distant sounds that could foreshadow upcoming events.”
Christian Schilling, Audio lead for the game
Crysis[57].

heritage learning taking place[7]. When creating a game
for a Virtual Heritage environment careful attention must
be paid to the design of the game[15].

6. Historical Background of “the Rocks”
In 1788 a fleet of 11 ships with 550 sailors and
marines and 750 convicts arrived in Australia from
England to set up a penal colony. Botany Bay proving
unsuitable Governor Philips relocated to Sydney Cove.
There is no evidence that shows Aboriginals/Native
Australians were actually living in Sydney Cove itself in
1788 at the time of the arrival of the First Fleet. This may
have been one of the reasons that Governor Phillips
chose Sydney Cove[62]. However there is no disputing
that Aboriginals inhabited Sydney Harbour more
generally; this was no Terrus Nullis!
In 1788 Sydney Cove was a sheltered cove 300
metres wide at the mouth and leading some 600 metres
southward along a rocky shoreline to a sandy beach. The
flat land of the cove was thickly wooded with tall trees.
To the west there was a steep ridge of sandstone that
climbed up in a series of rough terraces. To the east there
was a low sandstone ridge and to the south the land rose
slowly, leading into a gentle rolling landscape. A small
stream flowed almost due south into the western corner
of the Cove. Most of the convicts were disembarked on
the flat land on the western side of Sydney Cove. The
remainder along with Governor Philips and his marine
guard established their tents on the Eastern side of the
cove. The main body of the marines were encamped on
the western side of the stream, between it and the
convicts. There was no need for walls and chains to keep
the prisoners from escaping as there was nowhere for
them to escape to.
Convicts were expected to do a certain amount of
work each day and the rest of their time was their own.
Little huts and houses were soon being built on the
sandstone terraces of what soon become known as “the
Rocks” and by 1850 the area was densely urbanised.
Over 200 years it has seen great change, going from bush
to scattered cottages, to smart houses and terraces, to
slums and back to highly desirable again. Despite a slum
clearance program in the early 1900s, many of the
buildings in the area currently date back to the mid1800s. Recognition of the area’s heritage is currently
high but it was not always so. In the 1970s the Rocks
was saved from demolition by a Green Banned imposed
by the militant Building Labourers Federation.

Most commercial interactive game worlds are
populated. In the game Assassin’s Creed users have to
explore the cities of Acre, Jerusalem and Damascus
during the time of the 3rd Crusade. The cities are
crowded with carts and people, with up to 60 non-player
characters such as errand boys, water women, guards,
thugs, merchants etc going about their everyday
business.
Why am I here? In a game world the answer is
simple, to ‘win’ the game which usually means to
correctly carry out a series of tasks. On an individual
level, spaces become places when we spend time in them
and build unique personal stories and associations with
those spaces[58, 59]. Games are designed to give the
player 15-25 hours of entertainment [60] so it is not
surprising that, in the mind of the player, the virtual
world is perceived a place.

5. User Interaction with Virtual Heritage
Places
‘The Past is a Foreign Country – they do things
differently there.’
The opening sentence of The GoBetween by LP
Hartley[61]
If the past is a foreign country then how do we
explore foreign countries? Prior to going we can learn a
bit of the history, culture and language. When physically
there we can take guided tours, wander with and without
a guidebook, stay in a hotel or with a local family. We
can keep to the beaten path or leave it.
My own research is into what effect user preference
for engagement strategy has on the engagement they
experience in a Virtual Heritage environment. In Virtual
Heritage there is currently little uniformity in interaction
design. Some examples offer a guided tour with a
pedagogical computer controlled agent, others feature
interactive games and still others support self-directed
exploration. It is thus difficult to compare like with like.
In order to conduct some meaningful research I needed a
Virtual Heritage environment that offered users different
ways to experience the same Virtual Heritage world. I
am in the process of building the Virtual Sydney Rocks,
an interactive, experiential and engaging virtual heritage
world that will offer users the choice of taking a Tour,
Exploring freely or playing a Game.
While there are obvious advantages to good visuals
and good audio in a Virtual Heritage world, the case for
good game-play is less strong. If the game has little
connection with the heritage goals of the environment,
the result, even if entertaining, will not result in any

7. The Big Dig
On the high ground in the south-western corner of
the Rocks, in an area of roughly 60 by 30 metres
bounded by Cumberland Street to the West and
Gloucester Street to the East, is the site of the ‘Big Dig’.
This was excavated in 1994 over a course of 20 weeks.
Evidence of Aboriginal activity in the form of shells was
found. Also found were the remains of 30 buildings. One
of the earliest was built in 1795 and lived in by George

530

The comings and goings of ships was of great
importance to the inhabitants of Sydney and all of the
early buildings had windows facing onto the
harbour[66]. To give a correct impression of the view
from inside the houses on the Big Dig site I have added
in over 200 additional buildings in the area surrounding
the Big Dig, extending as far East as the ridgeline
leading down to Bennelong Point (site of the Sydney
Opera House) as far West as the ridgeline leading down
to Dawes Point (site of the southern end of the Sydney
Harbour Bridge) and as far South as Bridge Street. These
have been roughly modeled with no textural detailing.
Many of these buildings date back to the 1860’s and are
on the New South Wales Heritage and Conservation
Register. Each building has an associated entry in the
Virtual Sydney Rocks Guidebook with links to additional
information. Unfortunately I do not currently have the
resources to populate the Virtual Sydney Rocks.

Legg, a convict from the First Fleet. Over ¾ million
artifacts were recovered and these, combined with a great
deal of archival evidence, have yielded some of the rich
personal histories that put human faces and stories to the
bricks and mortar of the architectural record.
The founding of Sydney is incredibly well
documented[62]. Public interest in the project in 1788
was very high and, prior to departure from England,
several people coming out on the First Fleet had been
engaged to write accounts of the settlement. There are
many maps of Sydney Cove and environs; between July
1788 and 1851 there are maps for April 1788, July 1788,
1792, 1802, 1807, 1822, 1836, 1843 and 1851. As well
as the maps and written accounts there are also numerous
drawings and paintings and, from the 1850s onwards, an
increasing number of photographs[63-65].

8. The Virtual Sydney Rocks
The Big Dig is a site with rich personal histories that
are woven into the greater history of the white settlement
of Australia. On a practical level it has a manageable
amount of data, with 30 buildings covering roughly 200
years. Architectural plans and photographs exist for over
half the buildings and there is a plethora of additional
historical information[66]. It was therefore ideal to use as
the basis for an immersive, interactive historical virtual
world.
The buildings and landscape are modeled and
textured using Autodesk Maya. The models are then
imported into 3DVIA Virtools, a development platform,
where the behaviours are programmed. Individual
models have a birth day and death day. This is used in
conjunction with the time and date of the master clock to
control their visibility. The master clock is used to
control what sounds are heard such as cicadas in summer
but not in winter, the sounds of dogs and domestic
animals after the arrival of the First Fleet and the
changing background city noises over 200 years, from
the sound of axes to pneumatic drills. The master clock
checks for leap years and also calculates the number of
days that have elapsed since settlement. The master clock
runs in real-time unless the user selects an alternative
speed. The other options are one second = one hour, one
second = one day, one second = one week and one
second = one year.
The buildings on the Big Dig site have been
modeled in high detail and texture mapped. Users can
enter the buildings and explore the rooms on all floors.
Doors and windows open when selected (or if already
open will close). Additional authoritative content in the
form of text and images are directly linked to these
buildings via the Virtual Sydney Rocks Guidebook and
displayed on a second screen. Selecting a building in the
Virtual Sydney Rocks will open the associated webpage
for that particular building. The webpage contains a
selection of links to the particular relevant pages of sites
that include the New South Wales Heritage and
Conservation Register, the Dictionary of Sydney and the
Australian Dictionary of Biography.

Conclusions/Further Work
The first round of testing of the Virtual Sydney
Rocks prototype is scheduled for April 2012. Visitors to
the Rocks Discovery Museum will be invited to use the
prototype and give feedback via a questionnaire
afterwards. Users will be able to choose between the
Explore and Tour options. The Game is currently in early
development and a second round of testing is planned for
late 2012. This will include the game option as well as
enhancements and revisions based on the feedback from
the first round of testing. Further testing is planned in the
immersive iCinema AVIE system[67].
Both the Rocks Discovery Museum and the Big Dig
Archaeological Centre have expressed interest in having
copies of the Virtual Sydney Rocks on permanent
display.

Acknowledgements
I have used Grace Karsken’s excellent book ‘Inside
the Rocks: The Archaeology of a Neighbourhood’ as my
main source of information on the Big Dig[66].
I have been in regular contact with the Sydney
Harbour Foreshore Authority. They, and their chief
archaeologist Dr Wayne Johnson, have been immensely
helpful.
The Rocks Discovery Museum has very kindly
allowed me to conduct user testing of my prototype at
the Museum.
I am a Phd researcher with the iCinema Centre for
Interactive Cinema Research and their support is greatly
appreciated. (http://www.icinema.unsw.edu.au/)

References
[1]
[2]

531

Pasztor, E., et al. Computer Simulation Of Stonehenge in
CAA98. 1998. Barcelona: Archaeopress.
Jacobson, J., Digital Dome Versus Desktop Display in an
Educational Game: Gates of Horus. International Journal
of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 2011.
3(1): p. 13-32.

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

Jacobson, J., Ancient Architecture in Virtual Reality:
Does Visual Immersion Really Aid Learning?, in School
of Information Sciences. 2008, University of Pittsburgh:
Pittsburgh.
Champion, E., Evaluating Cultural Learning in Virtual
Environments. 2006, University of Melbourne.
Clark, S. and M.L. Maher, Collaborative Learning in a
3D Virtual Environment. 2006.
Roussou, M., The Components of Engagement in Virtual
Heritage Environments in New Heritage: New Media
and Cultural Heritage, Y. Kalay, J. Affleck, and T. Kvan,
Editors. 2006, Routledge: London. p. 225-241.
Economou, A. and L. Pujol Tost, Educational tool or
expensive toy? Evaluating VR evaluation and its
relevance for virtual heritage, in New Heritage: New
Media and Cultural Heritage, Y. Kalay, T. Kvan, and J.
Affleck, Editors. 2008, Routledge: London. p. 242-260.
Kos, J.R., Experiencing the City Through a Historical
Digital System, in New Heritage: New Media and
Cultural Heritage, E. Kalay, T. Kvan, and J. Affleck,
Editors. 2008, Routledge: London. p. 132-152.
Paraizo, R. and J.R. Kós, Urban Heritage
Representations in Hyperdocuments, in Theorizing
Digital Cultural Heritage: A Critical Discourse, F.
Cameron and S. Kenderdine, Editors. 2007, The MIT
Press: Cambridge, MA. p. 417-436.
McCarthy, G., Finding A Future for Digital Cultural
Heritage Resources Using Contextual Information
Frameworks, in Theorizing Digital Cultural Heritage: A
Critical Discourse, F. Cameron and S. Kenderdine,
Editors. 2007, The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. p. 245260.
Champion, E. and B. Dave, Dialing Up the Past, in
Theorizing Digital Cultural Heritage: A Critical
Discourse, F. Cameron and S. Kenderdine, Editors. 2007,
The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Frischer, B. (2008) The Rome Reborn Project. How
Technology is helping us to study history, .
Bogdanovych, A. and A. Cohen. Uruk project. 2011
[cited 2012 15 February]; Available from: http://wwwstaff.it.uts.edu.au/~anton/Research/Uruk_Project/.
Kenderdine, S., et al., Place-Hampi: Co-Evolutionary
Narrative & Augmented Stereographic Panoramas,
Vijayanagara, India, in New Heritage: New Media And
Cultural Heritage, Y.E. Kalay, T. Kvan, and J. Affleck,
Editors. 2008, Routledge: London. p. 276-294.
Chen, X. and Y. Kalay, Making a Liveable 'Place':
Content Design in Virtual Environments, in New
Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage, E. Kalay, T.
Kvan, and J. Affleck, Editors. 2008, Routledge: London.
p. 207-222.
Champion, E., Explorative shadow realms of uncertain
histories, in New heritage: new media and cultural
heritage, E. Kalay, T. Kvan, and J. Affleck, Editors.
2008, Routledge: London. p. 185-206.
Lombard, M. and T. Ditton, At the Heart of It All: the
concept of presence 1997.
Schubert, T. and J. Crusius, Five theses on the book
problem: Presence in books, film and VR, in Presence
2002. 2002: Porto, Portugal.
Schroeder, R., Being There Together and the Future of
Connected Presence. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 2006. 15(4): p. 438-454.
IJsselsteijn, W.A., Presence in the Past: What Can We
Learn from Media History?, in Being There : Concepts,

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

532

Effects and Measurements of User Presence in Synthetic
Environments, G. Riva, F. Davide, and W.A. IJsselsteijn,
Editors. 2003, IOS Press: Amsterdam.
Schroeder, R. Copresence and interaction in virtual
environments: an overview of the range of issues. in
Fifth International Workshop on Presence. 2002. Porto,
Portugal.
Ellis, S.R., Presence of Mind: A Reaction to Thomas
Sheridan's "Further Musings on the Psychophysics of
Presence". Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 1996. 5(2): p. 247-259.
Schubert, T., F. Friedmann, and H. Regenbrecht,
Embodied presence in virtual environments, in Visual
representations and interpretations R. Paton and I.
Neilson, Editors. 1999, Springer-Verlag. : London. p.
268-278.
Biocca, F., The cyborg's dilemma: Progressive
embodiment in virtual environments Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication, 1997. 3(2).
Herrera, G., R. Jordan, and L. Vera, Agency and
Presence: A Common Dependence on Subjectivity? .
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 2006.
15(5): p. 539-552.
IJsselsteijn, W.A. and G. Riva, Being There: The
Experience of Presence in Mediated Environments, in
Being There : Concepts, Effects and Measurements of
User Presence in Synthetic Environments, G. Riva, F.
Davide, and W.A. IJsselsteijn, Editors. 2003, IOS Press:
Amsterdam.
Lee, K.M., Why Presence Occurs: Evolutionary
Psychology, Media Equation, and Presence. Presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 2004. 13(4): p.
494-505.
Nunez, D., A Constructionist Cognitive Model of
Presence, in 7th International Workshop on Presence.
2004.
Heeter, C., Being There: The Subjective Experience of
Presence.
Presence:
Teleoperators
&
Virtual
Environments, 1993. 1: p. 262-271.
Biocca, F., Inserting the Presence of Mind into a
Philosophy of Presence: A Response to Sheridan and
Mantovani and Riva. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 2001. 10(5): p. 546-556.
Schubert, T., F. Friedmann, and H. Regenbrecht, The
Experience of Presence: Factor Analytic Insights.
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 2001.
10(3): p. 266-282.
IJsselsteijn, W.A. Elements of a Multi-Level Theory of
Presence: Phenomenology, Mental Processing and
Neural Correlates in Presence 2002. 2002. Porto,
Portugal.
Bystrom, K.-E., W. Barfield, and C. Hendrix, A
Conceptual Model of the Sense of Presence in Virtual
Environments Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 1999. 8(2): p. 241-244.
Zahorik, P. and R.L. Jenison, Presence as being-in-theworld. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments,
1998. 7(1): p. 78-89.
Nunez, D. and E.H. Blake, Conceptual priming as a
determinant of presence in virtual environments, in
AFRIGRAPH 2003: 2nd International Conference on
Computer Graphics, Virtual Reality, Visualisation and
Interaction in Africa 2003.

[36] Nunez, D., Working memory and presence:
Reconsidering the role of attention in presence, in 7th
International Workshop on Presence. 2004.
[37] Nunez, D., Learning, Experience, and Cognitive Factors
in the Presence Experiences of Gamers: An Exploratory
Relational Study. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 2006. 15(4): p. 373-380.
[38] Kaber, D.B., J.V. Draper, and J.M. Usher, Influence of
Individual Differences on Virtual Reality Application
Design for Individual and Collaborative Immersive
Virtual Environments, in VE Handbook, K.M. Stanney,
Editor. 1999, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.:
University of Central Florida.
[39] Lessiter, J., et al., A cross-media presence questionnaire:
The ITC-Sense of Presence Inventory. . Presence, 2001.
10(3): p. 282-297.
[40] Lessiter, J., et al., Development of a new cross-media
presence questionnaire: The ITC-Sense of Presence
Inventory. Paper presented at in Presence 2000: 3rd
International Workshop on Presence. 2000: Delft, The
Netherlands. .
[41] Witmer, B.G. and M.J. Singer, Measuring Presence in
Virtual Environments: A Presence Questionnaire.
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 1998.
7(3): p. 225-240.
[42] Witmer, B.G., C.J. Jerome, and M.J. Singer, The Factor
Structure of the Presence Questionnaire. Presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 2005. 14(3): p.
298-312.
[43] Slater, M., Measuring presence: A Response to the
Witmer and Singer Presence Questionnaire. Presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 1999. 8(5): p.
560-565.
[44] Slater, M., How Colorful Was Your Day? Why
Questionnaires Cannot Assess Presence in Virtual
Environments Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 2004. 13(4): p. 484-493.
[45] IJsselsteijn, W.A., et al. Presence: concept, determinants,
and measurement. in SPIE 2000.
[46] Steuer, J.S., Defining virtual reality: Dimensions
determining telepresence. . Journal of Communication,
1992. 42(4): p. 73-93.
[47] Riva, G., F. Davide, and W.A. IJsselsteijn, eds. Being
There : Concepts, Effects and Measurements of User
Presence in Synthetic Environments. Emerging
Communication Studies in New Technologies and
Practices in Communication, ed. G. Riva and F. Davide.
Vol. 5. 2003, IOS Press: Amsterdam.
[48] Reeves, B., B. Detenber, and J.S. Steuer, New
televisions: The effects of big pictures and big sound on
viewer responses to the screen, in Annual conference of
the International Communication Association. 1993:
Washington, D.C.
[49] Doornbusch, P. and S. Kenderdine, Presence and Sound:
Identifying Sonic Means to "Be there", in Consciousness
Reframed 2004. 2004.
[50] Short, J., E. Williams, and B. Christie, The social
psychology of telecommunications. 1976, London:
Wiley.
[51] Heeter, C., et al., Telewindows: Case Studies in
Asymmetrical Social Presence, in Being There :
Concepts, Effects and Measurements of User Presence in
Synthetic Environments, G. Riva, F. Davide, and W.A.
IJsselsteijn, Editors. 2003, IOS Press: Amsterdam.

[52] Jurnet, I.A., C.C. Beciu, and J.G. Maldonado, Individual
Differences in the Sense of Presence in Presence 2005:
The 8th Annual International Workshop on Presence.
2005: London.
[53] Marsh, T., Staying There: an Activity-Based Approach to
Narrative Design and Evaluation as an Antidote to
Virtual Corpsing, in Being There : Concepts, Effects and
Measurements of User Presence in Synthetic
Environments, G. Riva, F. Davide, and W.A. IJsselsteijn,
Editors. 2003, IOS Press: Amsterdam.
[54] Stanney, K.M., R.R. Mournat, and R.S. Kennedy,
Human Factors Issues in Virtual Environments: A
Review of the Literature Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments, 1998. 7(4): p. 327-351.
[55] Howe, T. and P.M. Sharkey, Identifying Likely
Successful Users of Virtual Reality Systems. presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 1998. 7(3): p.
308-316.
[56] Bartle, R.A., Designing Virtual Worlds. 2003,
Indianapolis: New Riders.
[57] Kastbauer, D., The Next Big Steps In Game Sound
Design, in Gamasutra. 2010, UBM TechWeb: Online
Version of Game Developer Magazine.
[58] Casey, E.S., The Fate of Place: A Philosophical History.
2004, Berkeley: University of California Press.
[59] Tuan, Y.-F., Space and Place: The Perspective of
Experience. 1977, Minneapolis: Universtiy of Minnesota.
[60] Beraldo, J., Should MMOs be more like single-player
games?, in Gamasutra. 2011, UBM TechWeb: Online
Version of Game Developer Magazine.
[61] Hartley, L.P., The Go-Between. 2004, London: Penguin
Classics.
[62] Karskens, G., The Colony: A History of Early Sydney.
2009, Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
[63] Ashton, P., et al., Painting The Rocks: The Loss of Old
Sydney. 2010, Sydney: Historic Houses Trust of New
South Wales.
[64] Kelly, M., Anchored in a Small Cove: A History and
Archaeology of the Rocks, Sydney. 1997, Sydney:
Bloxham and Chambers.
[65] Hunt, S. and G. Davison, Sydney Views 1788-1888 from
the Beat Knoblauch collection. 2007, Sydney: Historic
Houses Trust of New South Wales.
[66] Karskens, G., Inside the Rocks: The Archaeology of a
Neighbourhood. 1999, Sydney: Hale & Iremonger.
[67] McGinity, M., et al., AVIE: A Versatile Multi-User
Stereo 360° Interactive VR Theatre 2007.

533

