2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visual Color Design
Mountaz Hascoët
LIRMM - CNRS, Univ. Montpellier II
UMR 5506 - CC 477
161, rue Ada
34095 Montpellier Cedex 5 France
{mountaz@lirmm.fr}

Many efforts from both artists and scientists on
color design have resulted in a variety of models and
rules devoted to coloring graphics. Based on these
results, a lot of interactive tools are now available to
help with color design based on various sorts of color
themes, templates, palettes, swatches, brushes, etc.
However, despite the numbers of tools and results
available, in many situations, color design is still tedious
and time consuming for both amateurs and
professionals. In this paper, we introduce visual color
design as a new approach to handling coloring problems
interactively. The coloring of web documents is used to
illustrate our approach with a real case study. The case
study takes as input (1) a given color image and (2) an
HTML/CSS document to be colored.

relevant color spaces. Visual color design is based on
wish templates and color schemes. Wish templates
express the coloring problem in terms of contrasts and
harmony that sets of elements are expected to meet.
Color schemes are meant to characterize color design
space. A color scheme is an organized set of colors.
Color schemes can be created from example by
analyzing input color images or they can be imported
from other tools used to create color palettes or theme.
In this paper, we start by a review of recent work
related to coloring and a clarification of the underlying
concepts. We discuss color contrast and color harmony
that are central to color design. We further introduce
wish templates and color schemes and show how they
can be used to automate simple color design. We finally
introduce Visual Color Design to handle more
challenging coloring problems.

Keywords--- Visual Color Design, Coding, Color
Matching.

Background and related work

Abstract

Colorization, re-coloring, adjusting and harmonizing
have recently been the focus of graphic research papers
leading to the useful clarification and refinement of
otherwise overused and confusing concepts.
Colorization [22] [25] is the computer-assisted
process of adding colors to a monochrome image or
movie. In this domain, Levin et al. [22] have recently
proposed a colorization model based on user input and a
heuristic. This approach contrasts with previous
approaches based on complex image segmentation and
region tracking used to produce a colored image.
Similarly to Levin et al., Irony et al. propose a method to
colorize one or more grayscale images based on userprovided reference.
Re-coloring [27] [26] is usually the reverse process
of generating grayscale images while preserving contrast
and luminance consistency with an input color-image.
The aim of re-coloring is to preserve saliency of the
input image or other information conveyed through
chrominance and saturation differences in the color
image.
Harmonizing is defined in [28] as the computerassisted process that, given an arbitrary image, possibly a
photograph, modifies the colors of the image to enhance

1. Introduction
Handling harmony and contrast is often considered
as one of the most important aspects of color design. It is
widely accepted that contrasts and harmony significantly
impact the usability and attractiveness of colored
graphics and contributes to the overall message of the
graphics. Even though a lot of progresses have been
made to provide new color design tools and techniques
[14,15,16,17,18,19], adjusting harmony and contrast is
still tedious and time consuming in many situations.
Most recent work has focused on studying the color
design space and has resulted in tools useful to explore,
use and adjust color spaces. For example, web sites such
as Kuler [14] exhibit very sophisticated color templates
to create color themes. Kuler and other similar initiatives
provide tools to create reduced and organized color
spaces. However, the challenging aspects of color design
is to find appropriate matches between color spaces and
information to be colored. Reducing color spaces
independently of the coloring problems is relevant only
for limited coloring situations. We define visual color
design as the process that integrates the analysis of the
coloring problem and the exploration and mapping to
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.21

62

the relationships among them and to increase their.
harmony. Harmonizing differs from re-coloring and
colorization by an important detail: the relationships
between colors are given from the input user image in
the cases of re-coloring and coloring. In harmonizing, on
the contrary, the creation and control over color
relationships and color groups constitute the main
challenge. In [28] , harmonizing is based on harmonic
schemes developed by Matsuda and presented in [29].
Wang et al. [30] goes one step further in the
automation of the coloring processes. The aim is similar
to harmonizing but the path is different. In [31], the
authors learn the rules of color adjustments from graphic
and designers examples. While harmonizing aims at
modifying colors of a given image based on a fixed set of
rules, the computer-aided process proposed in [31], aims
at learning rules for color adjustments from examples
before applying them.
While all these approaches are typical of imageprocessing field, another set of approaches to coloring
problems has emerged from the field of information
visualization with different perspectives. Brewer [10]
has proposed sets of harmonized colors to represent data
depending on the type of data: qualitative, quantitative,
ordinal. Healey [12] has investigated the numbers of
different colors that can be perceived pre-attentively.
Rogowitz and Treinish [13] have proposed to incorporate
perceptual rules in the design process of visualization
software and have proposed colormaps and rules for
selecting colormaps depending on the task and data.
Our approach to coloring builds from the previous
work merging image-processing colorization approaches
and visualization color coding approaches. Taking an
image as input to capture harmonious colors is similar to
approaches found in image-processing research.
However, both the color scheme extraction processes and
the coloring problem addressed in this paper are different
from these approaches. In particular, the coloring
problem is to build a mapping between a color space and
an information space so that a set of colors can convey a
given message. In that sense, our approach is closer to
the information visualization approach aiming at
building color schemes that best fit the characteristics of
some data.
The main contribution of this paper is in the
definition of color wishes and the introduction of visual
color design as a new approach to mapping color wishes
to colors schemes to solve coloring problems. This
contribution results in the design of a coloring tool that
stands with a foot in the problem space and a foot in the
design space. A direct benefit from visual color design is
a better coupling between the exploration of the coloring
problem space and the exploration of the coloring design
space.

though, the distinction between color harmony and
pleasing colors is worth making clear. Subjective
approaches that compare user preferences often lead to
contradictory confusing results. In that area, recent
attempts have brought some clarifications [5] but the
field cannot be left without considering the subjective
aspects of color perception.
A consistent definition of color harmony is hard to
capture as various definitions found in the literature can
be both useful and contradictory. Therefore, our
approach is to integrate various harmony definitions,
considering the harmony as a set of coordinated or
balanced colors.
Following widespread coloring rules [4] [11], we
define a color harmony of type 1 as a set of colors built
from one base color and a set of colors made of the same
hue + black (shade), the same hue + gray (tone), the
same hue + white (tint).
Following previous work definition of harmony [9]
[16] we define harmony of type 2 as the result of a color
combination of n colors such that all colors share the
same values for two of the three color characteristics
(hue, saturation, brightness) and vary for one of them.
Following Lyons and Moretti [22] Itten and Munsell
previous work on color strength and color harmony, we
can define harmony of type 3 as the result of a
combination of n compatible colors c1, c2, … cn, such
that
∀i,j ∈ [1,n] CS (ci) * surface (ci) = CS (ci) * surface (ci)

where
CS (ci) = saturation(ci) * lightness(ci)

with saturation(ci), lightness(ci) surface (ci)
representing normalized functions that respectively
characterize the saturation, brightness and surface
corresponding to a given color ci. Thus a small area of
color ci with high color strength will balance a large area
of color cj with low color strength. The colors are
considered compatible if the cumulating of their hues
covers the color spectrum. The objective interpretation of
harmony, is focused on characterizing color
combinations that together physiologically satisfy the
eyes of the viewer. In this paper, in order to limit the
scope of this work, we focus on these three types of
harmonies but the aim of our approach is to be general
enough to account for other types of harmonies.

Color Contrasts
While harmonies can be considered as sets of
balanced colors, contrasts can be considered as the
particular case of harmonies where only pairs of colors
are involved. In his seminal work on colors[3] , Johannes
Itten has exhibited seven different types of contrasts that
have inspired many subsequent work involving color
schemes [25] [29] . These contrasts include contrast of
light and dark, contrast of hue, contrast of temperature,
contrast of saturation, simultaneous contrast, contrast of
sizes and contrast of complementary. In this paper, we
focus on a subset of contrast types. In the next sections
contrasts of type 1, type 2, and type 3 will respectively

Color harmony
As noted by Donovan et al. [31] , it is generally
believed that certain color combinations are harmonious
and pleasing, while others are not. According to Itten [3]

63

refer to contrast of luminance, contrast of hue, and
contrast of temperature.
Contrast of light and dark defined by Itten is similar
to the widespread luminance contrast even though many
physiological aspects of human perception are not
accounted for in such contrasts.
Contrast of hue is the highest when three primary
colors - blue, yellow and red in Itten's view - are used in
combination. The strength of the contrast diminishes as
the colors move away from the primary colors. Attempts
to provide quantitative definition of hue contrast are
based on color differences. Color differences
computation have been the focus of an evolving process
involving different approaches. Even though CIE has
published uniform models such as CIE l*a*b, CIE
l*u*v*, and more recently CIEde2000, computing
accurate and uniform color differences is still an open
issue [33]. Eager to define standards for accessibility,
W3C has proposed WCAG1.0 [6].
In this work we have used two different widespread
color difference computations: the CIE l*u*v, for its
relative accuracy and uniformity useful for extracting
color schemes from images and the W3C color for its
simplicity useful in expressing color contrast wishes.
One of the W3C color contrast requirements, is that
two colors C1 and C2 defined in RGB color model
respectively by (r1,v1,b1) and (r2,v2,b2) have a
difference value d above 500, following the tentative
difference definition:
d = |r1-r2| +|v1-v2|+|b1-b2| [6]
Contrast of temperatures comes from a generally
agreed tendency to consider that some colors convey
cool sensations while others convey warm sensations. On
Itten’s color wheel, colors ranging from yellow to redpurple are considered as warm colors whereas colors on
the other side of the wheel ranging from green-yellow to
purple are considered as cool colors. Due to the impact
of other aspects of colors such as saturation and
luminosity on the perceived temperature, there is no
widely agreed objective function that can measure a
contrast of temperature between several colors.

(a) Input Image

(b) KMean result

Color Schemes
Color schemes are built from user input image. In
that respect our approach is similar to the approach of
[34]. However, we proceed differently: the automatic
extraction of target colors from the input color image
consists of a selection of a small subset of k colors colors useful to cover a wish template, amongst a
potentially large set of colors - color originating from an
input color image, possibly a photo. Our approach to this
selection problem is to process a k-mean based on the
CIE l*u*v* representations of the color pixels of the
input image. A k-mean process is one of the mostly used
clustering processes [35]. It applies to any set of points
of a Euclidean space to build and optimize a partition of
these points into k subsets.
As mentioned previously, the CIE l*u*v* color
model represents colors as points in a Euclidean space.

(c) Colored Web Page
Figure 1: Automating Color Design
The main purpose of using a k-mean on a l*u*v*
representation of image pixels is that the extracted set of
colors reflects the image colors as a whole and if the
image is harmonious, this harmony is likely to be
preserved in the resulting set of extracted colors.

64

Wish template

Color Matching

Wish templates are used to express requirements of
contrast and harmonies between information elements.
Colorists are defined as coordinators between
information elements. Colorists are created to embody
the various types of contrast and harmonies discussed in
previous section. A wish template can further be
represented as a graph made of nodes that can be either
elements or colorists. Figure 4 shows a typical wish
template where several contrast and harmony wishes
have been expressed.

Color matching is the process that computes
coloring from the input wish template and color scheme.
In the case study, the particularities of CSS and HTML
elements enable a simple heuristic to provide a simple
color matching - e.g. a matching in which only one type
of contrast is taken into account without minimizing the
number of color used.
A straightforward automatic matching is used to
match each color in the color scheme to each element in
the wish template after having sorted them. Figure 3
depicts the important steps of such a matching.
From the input image (a), a k-mean is computed to
provide n average colors from the image. The colors are
sorted by luminance and applied to the CSS elements
sorted from background elements to the foreground
elements. Such a matching ensures that the luminance
contrast between text and background is satisfying
considering the range of luminance values available in
the color scheme. Another direct benefit of such a
matching is to be computationally light. However, such a
simple matching only satisfies simple coloring wishes.
Processing more complex wish templates in the
general case is a open problem of a different complexity
that can is related to a graph coloring problem given a set
of wishes. Another concern with more complex wish
template matching is that very often interactive
approaches accounting for human choices in result in
better choices at lower cost than automatically processed
matching. These two aspects of the general case are two
key motivations for introducing Visual Color Design.

CSS + HTML document

Input Example Image

Wish Template

Color Scheme

Color Matching

Colored Web Page

Figure 2: Simple Matching for Automatic Coloring

Wish templates are best described through a
scenario related to our illustrative case study: a designer
wants to fully color a web page. He wishes a harmony of
type 2 between the backgrounds of his various areas
represented by div elements named s0, s1, s2, s3. He
further wants text elements to contrast with their
backgrounds respectively s0, s1, s2, s3. The contrasts he
wants in this case is a contrast of type 1. Now he wants
to harmonize the color of hyperlink elements. He
chooses a harmony of type 1 for this. Finally, he wants to
harmonize the title elements of each div element and at
the same time he wants to ensure that all elements
corresponding to "headings 1" in any of the various div
have the same color.
These color wishes can be expressed interactively by
creating new wish template. A wish template is further
represented by a graph. The graph corresponding to the
wish template of the scenario is displayed in the top
window of figure 3. The graph is made of two types of
nodes.
The first set of nodes corresponds to html elements
which, in this scenario, are html elements. These
elements to be colored are denoted by their
corresponding css selectors in figure 3.
The second type of nodes is depicted by circles in
figure 3 and corresponds to colorists denoted by code Ci
for colorist handling contrasts of type i and Hi for
colorists handling harmonies of type i. The top window
corresponds to the initial step in visual color design:
expressing the needs in terms of contrast and harmony
wishes.

Visual Color Design
We introduce Visual Color Design as a process that
(1) visually displays wish templates, color schemes and
intermediary results of underlying color matching and (2)
interactively accounts for human choices when solving a
color design problem.
As illustrated in Figure 2, Visual Color Design takes
as input elements a color wish template from a given
information space and a set of color schemes from a
given color space.
Information Space

Color Space

Wish Template

Color scheme

Visual Color Design

Colored Information

Figure 3: Visual Color Design

65

Figure 3: Visual Color Design – Creating Color Wishes (top) – Visual Coloring (bottom)

66

The bottom window of figure 4 shows visual color
design in action. The designer brings colors from the
color schemes to colorists, depicted by circles in the
display, by dragging and dropping colors from color
schemes to colorists.
When a color is dropped on a colorist, the colorist
performs coloring on the elements associated with it and
colored elements are surrounded by a rectangle of the
appropriate color. In this work, we favor an approach
where colorists color elements independently one from
another.
The result is that elements involved in concurrent
wishes are surrounded by more than one colored
rectangle corresponding to the various colors computed
from the various colorists.
Elements surrounded by multiple rectangles are
visually salient. Once spotted by designers, designers can
apply various strategies directly on the elements or on
the colorists to adjust the final color of the related
elements. Strategies available include choosing one color
amongst the different colors associated with the element,
choosing another color in the color schemes or applying
operators to compute color blending from the associated
colors.
Coordinating colorists through automated processes
would be an alternative approach to handling concurrent
wishes. However, handling concurrent wishes
automatically possibly lead to complex open problems.
Furthermore, handling concurrent wishes are the
interesting part where a human can make relevant
choices at relatively low cost, our future work is to
improve the interaction techniques related to visual color
design to facilitate designers choices and exploration.
With appropriate interaction techniques, solutions to
coloring problems can be derived from a better
exploration and analysis of both design and problem
spaces.

Graphics, American Statistical Association, Alexandria VA.
pp. 55-60.
[11]
Stone M., Choosing Colors for Data Visualization,
http://www.perceptualedge.com/articles/beye/choosing_colors.pdf, 2006.
[12] Christopher G. Healey. 1996. Choosing effective colours
for data visualization. In Proceedings of the 7th conference on
Visualization '96.
[13] B. Rogowitz and L. Treinish, How Not to Lie with
Visualization, Computers in Physics n.3, pp. 268-274,
May/June 1996
[14] http://kuler.adobe.com
[15] http://www.tigercolor.com/
[16] http://www.abitom.com/
[17] http://www.colourlovers.com/
[18] http://www.color-wheel-pro.com/
[19] http://www.w3.org/TR/AERT#color-contrast
[20] http://www.w3.org/TR/2010/NOTE-WCAG20-TECHS20101014/G18
[21] http://www.w3.org/Graphics/Color/sRGB.html
[22] Giovanni S. Moretti. A Calculation of Colours. Doctoral
dissertation, Massey University, New Zealand, 2010.
[23] A. Levin, D. Lischinski, and Y.Weiss. 2004. Colorization
using optimization. ACM Trans. Graph. 23, 3 689-694.
[24]
Daniel Cohen-Or, Olga Sorkine, Ran Gal, Tommer
Leyvand, and Ying-Qing Xu. 2006. Color harmonization. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2006, 624-630.
[25]
Ironi, R., Cohen-Or, D., and Lischinski, D. 2005.
Colorization by example. In Eurographics Symposium on
Rendering, 201--210.
[26] Rasche, K.; Geist, R. & Westall, J. Re-coloring Images
for Gamuts of Lower Dimension. Comput. Graph. Forum,
2005, 24, 423-432.
[27] Amy A. Gooch, Sven C. Olsen, Jack Tumblin, and Bruce
Gooch. 2005. Color2Gray: salience-preserving color removal.
ACM Trans. Graph. 24, 3 (July 2005), 634-639.
[28]
Daniel Cohen-Or, Olga Sorkine, Ran Gal, Tommer
Leyvand, and Ying-Qing Xu. 2006. Color harmonization. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers (SIGGRAPH '06). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 624-630.
[29] Tokumaru, M., Muranaka, N., and Imanishi, S. 2002.
Color design support system considering color harmony. Int.
Conference on Fuzzy Systems, IEEE Press, 378--383.
[30] Baoyuan Wang, Yizhou Yu, and Ying-Qing Xu. 2011.
Example-based image color and tone style enhancement. ACM
Trans. Graph. 30, 4, Article 64 (August 2011), 12 pages.
[31]
Peter O'Donovan, Aseem Agarwala, and Aaron
Hertzmann. 2011. Color compatibility from large datasets. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 201.
[32] Lyons, P., G. Moretti, and M. Wilson. Colour Group
Selection for Computer Interfaces. SPIE - The International
Society for Optical Engineering, 302--313.
[33] Pant, Dibakar Raj, Farup, Ivar, Geodesic calculation of
color difference formulas and comparison with the munsell
color order system, Color Research & Application, Wiley.
[34] B. Morse, D. Thornton, Q. Xia, and J. Uibel. Imagebased color schemes. In IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP), volume III, pages 497–500,
September 2007.
[35] A. K. Jain, Data Clustering: 50 Years Beyond K-Mean ,
Pattern Recognition Letters, Vol. 31, No. 8, pp. 651-666, 2010.

References
[1] CIE. Recommendations on uniform colour spaces, colour
difference equations and psychometric color terms, Graphics
Press. 1990.
[2] Rogowitz, Bernice and Lloyd Treinish, “How NOT to Lie
with Visualization”, Computers in Physics, 1996.
[3] Itten J. L'art de la couleur, édition abrégée.
[4] Stone Maureen, a Field Guide to Digital Color, 2003.
[5] Schloss, K. B. & Palmer, S. E. (2011). Aesthetic response
to color combinations: Preference, harmony, and similarity.
Attention, Perception and Psychophysics, 73, 551-571.
[6] http://www.w3.org/TR/AERT#color-contrast
[7] http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#visual-audio-contrast
[8] Mark A. Harrower and Cynthia A. Brewer, 2003,
ColorBrewer.org: An Online Tool for Selecting Color Schemes
for Maps, The Cartographic Journal 40(1): 27-37.
[9]
Ferenc Szabó, Peter Bodrogi, János Schanda,
Experimental modeling of colour harmony, Color Research &
Application Volume 35, Issue 1, pages 34–49, February 2010
[10] Brewer, C. A. 1999. Color Use Guidelines for Data
Representation, Proceedings of the Section on Statistical,

67

