2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Using Animated Mood Pictures in Music Recommendation

Arto Lehtiniemi

Jukka Holm

Nokia Research Center
Tampere, Finland
arto.lehtiniemi@nokia.com

Tampere University of Technology
Unit of Human-Centered Technology
Tampere, Finland
jukka.holm@tut.fi
To study the prototype in practice, a qualitative and
quantitative user study with 40 participants was arranged.
This paper describes the prototype implementation in more
detail, discusses the results of the user study, and suggests
several ideas for the further development of the concept.

Abstract—This paper studies the idea of using animated mood
pictures in the context of music recommendation. In the
implemented prototype, the user interacts with a collection of
pictures to receive new music recommendations from
associated genres. The prototype was evaluated by 40 Finnish
participants. After the first use of the prototype, the concept of
selecting music based on mood pictures was found to be very
good by 85% of the participants. In the longer-term use, the
prototype lacked some important features such as the ability to
personalize the picture and music associations. Despite this,
60% of the participants were interested in using the prototype
to complement their other music player applications. This
indicates that mood pictures are a promising way to access
music collections and to explore new music.

II.

Listening to music can have an effect on people’s mood
and physiological reactions [6]. Music is often used for
relaxation, mood enhancement, motivating certain tasks such
as sports, and moderating or boosting arousal levels. For
example, “people in a state of unpleasantly high arousal (e.g.
while driving in heavy traffic) generally prefer quiet,
relaxing music, while people who are in a state of pleasantly
high arousal (e.g. while working out) will prefer loud,
energizing music” [12].

Keywords-component; Mood; emotion; picture; musical
genre; playlist; music recommendation system; SuperMusic; user
interface; user experience; design

I.

RELATED RESEARCH

INTRODUCTION

Mobile music players have capabilities that enable the
creation of context-aware music recommendations, that is,
suggestions of music to match the current situation of the
listener. As context information typically includes location,
time, and activity [2], context-aware recommendations can
adapt to the location and time of music listening, in addition
to the user in question.
Another very important piece of context is the emotional
state of the listener. In practical systems, the emotions or
moods of the listener cannot be directly measured with
sensors, but they can be asked from the user. One way to do
this is to use emoticons, which can then be used to
recommend music from musical genres commonly related to
those emotions/moods [5]. Another potential approach is to
use so-called “mood pictures”, i.e., pictures that are typically
associated with a certain mood. For example, most people
may associate a picture of a fireplace with calmness and
relaxation.
To study the use of mood pictures in the context of music
recommendation services, a hi-fi prototype application for a
touch screen PC was developed. In the prototype, the user
interacts with a collection of animated mood pictures to
receive new music recommendations from the associated
genres. The playlist is generated based on a set of selected
seed songs, and the music is streamed from Nokia Research
Center’s SuperMusic service [11] .

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.34

Figure 1. Russell’s circumplex model of emotions [15].

One commonly used approach to categorize moods and
emotions is Russell’s circumplex model [15] (Figure 1),
which maps y-axis to activation level and x-axis to valence.
Emotions are located in such manner that the opposite
emotions (e.g. happy and sad) face each other. In the
optimal case, a mood-based music player would include
emotions/moods from every part of Russell’s model.
One example of such a system is Moody [13] , which is a
mood-based playlist generator for iTunes. The iTunes music
library is tagged along two axes, where y-axis represents
intensity and x-axis happiness. As a default, the axes are
color-coded in such way that red represents intensive but sad
music, yellow intense and happy music, blue calm and sad
143

New recommendations are visualized in the top right
corner of the screen using album cover art, and the user is
able to drag these songs to the playlist. The view also shows
the progress of the currently listened song and basic play
controls such as play, pause and skip to previous/next track.
Another click outside the play controls takes the user back to
the initial view showing only the mood picture.

music, and green happy but calm music. Once the library has
been tagged, the user is able to define new playlists based on
his/her current mood by clicking on the corresponding part
of the screen.
Another music player application roughly following
Russell’s model is Musicovery [14], where the user can
select music according to mood, decade, and genre. Mood is
selected by clicking on an x-y space, where y-axis has been
mapped to energetic/calm music and x-axis to dark/positive
music. The mapping has been done by the service provider,
and does not require any extra effort from the user.
In the All Music Guide service [1], the moods of
individual songs have been determined manually by a group
of music experts. Some other services such as Last.fm [10]
rely on the process of social tagging [9], which mean that the
moods of songs can also be tagged by the users themselves.
Other models of emotion classification and more
examples of mood-based music applications can be found
from e.g. [8].
III.

PROTOTYPE

Our prototype was implemented as a Flash application to
enable the use of different platforms including personal
computers and mobile devices such as Nokia N900. As
suitable mobile devices or Apple iPad were not available at
the time of the implementation, the main platform was a HP
Pavilion tx2500 touch screen laptop. One of the main design
drivers was that the prototype should be so easy to use that it
could be learned by using it for a short while. The number of
UI elements was kept to the minimum, and the elements
were designed in such a way that they could be operated with
fingers.
When the user starts the application, one of the seven
built-in mood pictures is displayed and music starts to play
(Figure 2).

Figure 3. Cascade view of different mood pictures.

The top right corner of each mood picture contains a
button which takes the user to cascade mode of the prototype
(Figure 3). The cascade mode displays all the mood pictures
simultaneously for easy mood selection. When the user taps
on a certain picture, that picture is selected and displayed in
the full screen mode.
In addition to tapping, another way to change the mood
(and thus also the music) is to swipe the screen to different
directions. For example, swiping to the left from the middle
picture in Figure 3 would bring the blue picture to the screen.
When the user changes the mood, a new playlist of music
recommendations is also generated and the playback of the
previous song is stopped.
A. Used Music Recommendation System
The mood pictures prototype relied on a new and
enhanced version of SuperMusic [11], which is a contentbased music recommendation system developed at Nokia
Research Center. The system utilizes both textual metadata
tags (describing genre and style) and audio signal processing,
and the similarity in terms of metadata tags is calculated at
the artist level. For more details on the used music
recommendation algorithms, see [4].
In the prototype, each musical genre was represented
with a set of prototypical seed songs, which were manually
selected to be well representative of the corresponding
genres. When creating a playlist for a combination of
musical genres, a seed song from each genre was first
selected randomly from the corresponding set. After this, a
playlist of recommendations for each song was fetched and
interleaved with the final playlist.

Figure 2. Main view of the prototype consisting of basic play controls and
a playlist of music recommendations.

The user is able to bring up a playlist of 20 tracks
associated with the mood picture by touching the picture.
The user can also change the order of tracks in the playlist,
delete tracks, and add additional songs to the playlist using
one of the songs as a seed song for further recommendations.

B. Built-in Mood Pictures and Seed Songs
The prototype featured seven different built-in mood
pictures with associated music, i.e., the seed songs. The
mood pictures were designed to cover three parts of

144

Russell’s circumplex model: top right, bottom right, and
bottom left with the emphasis being on the right side of the
model. The pictures were designed to match the potential
daily situations and activities of the target user group. Each
picture also included a custom-made animation layer to
enhance the mood compared to static pictures.

Figure 6. “Live concert” mood picture.

The third picture (Figure 6) illustrated an energetic
concert/party scenario with a big crowd. The picture also
contained a flashing and pumping bright light animation
effect. The seed songs for this mood were Guns N’ Roses –
Paradise City, Beastie Boys – Sabotage, Kiss – Lick It Up,
and Lauryn Hill – Doo Wop (That Think).

Figure 4. “Blue rainy Monday” mood picture .

The first mood picture, “Blue rainy Monday” (Figure 4),
featured a man sitting on a bench and looking at the sea. The
picture has a very blue color profile with rain animation. The
seed songs selected for this mood were Eric Clapton –
Change the World, Joy Division – She’s Lost Control,
Editors – Lights, and Kate Bush – Running up That Hill.

Figure 7. “Dinner & evening” mood picture.

The “Dinner & evening” mood picture (Figure 7)
illustrated a calm atmospheric evening setup with animated
fire in the fireplace. The room has dim lighting and it is
getting dark outside. The seed songs for this picture were
Stevie Wonder – You Are the of My Life, Marvin Gaye –
What’s Going On, John Legend – Let’s Get Lifted, and
Simon & Garfunkel – America.

Figure 5. “Driving on a highway” mood picture.

The second picture (Figure 5) illustrated a person driving
a car on a highway. The road was animated so that is seems
like the car is actually moving fast on the road. The seed
songs included N.E.R.D – She Wants to Move, Iron Maiden
– Run to the Hills, Daft Punk – Robot Rock, and Pantera –
Cowboys from Hell.

Figure 8. “After work” mood picture.

145

The “After work” mood picture (Figure 8) illustrated a
person who was relaxing / dreaming on the sofa and deeply
involved in the music. Different types of characters
illustrating thoughts were animated next to the listener’s
head. The seed songs included Joni Mitchell – California,
Bob Marley – No Woman No Cry, Feist – I Feel It, and
Eminem – Stan.

•

•
•
•
•

The research method was a combination of observation,
semi-structured interview, questionnaires, and evaluations
done at home or any other preferred listening context. Each
interview session lasted for about 30 minutes, and all
participants tested the software for the first time. The
participants were not informed about how the prototype
works or what they should do with it. Tutorials or help files
were not included.
Interview sessions were arranged in various locations
such as their own homes, authors’ homes, as well as the
premises of Nokia Research Center and Tampere University
of Technology. 37 of 40 interview sessions were arranged
using a HP Pavilion tx2500 touch-screen laptop and three
using a basic Dell Inspiron laptop. Evaluations at home were
performed using participants’ own computers.
In the beginning of the interview session, the participants
had to fill in a short background information questionnaire.
They were also shown the mood pictures one at a time and
asked what type of music they associated with that picture.
Next, the participants were able to use the software freely for
5-15 minutes while being observed, after which a short,
semi-structured interview studying both hedonic and
pragmatic aspects of the software was conducted. In the end,
the users had to rate a couple of quality aspects of the
prototype using a seven-point Likert scale.
After the interview session, the participants were able to
use an online version of the software at home or any other
preferred listening context for about three weeks. In the end,
they had to evaluate the prototype by filling a questionnaire
similar to the one used during the interview. The participants
were also asked to rate how well the mood pictures matched
with the recommended music on a seven-point scale.
The user study was arranged as a part of a study on six
novel music recommendation applications. As the users were
able to test all the applications at the same, the amount of
time to test one prototype was limited. On the average, the
participants tested the mood pictures prototype for 3-4 times
during the three weeks.
Each part of the user study was conducted in Finnish. In
the following, we have tried to translate all terms, questions,
and answers from Finnish to English as closely as possible.

Figure 9. “Sunday sauna” mood picture.

The very Scandinavian “Sunday sauna” mood picture
(Figure 9) presented a man relaxing in a sauna on Sunday
evening. There was also some animated steam on top of the
picture. The selected seed songs for this mood were Boards
of Canada – Chromakey Dreamcoat, Jose Gonzales –
Crosses, Air – Venus, and Zero 7 – Simple Things.

Figure 10. “Sports event” mood picture.

Finally, the “Sports event” mood picture (Figure 10)
illustrated an exciting basketball game with animated lights
flashing on top of the picture. The seed songs for this mood
were Michael Jackson – Thriller, Survivor – Eye of the
Tiger, Children Of Bodom – Living Dead Beat, and Queen –
We are the champions.
IV.

Are users interested in using mood pictures to access
music recommendation services and generate
playlists? Do they consider the concept fun and
entertaining?
Would the users be willing to replace their current
music player with this type of application? Or does it
only complement traditional applications?
How does the prototype work in general? Is it fast
enough and easy to use? How could it be developed
further?
How do the used mood pictures match with the
related music recommendations?
How does the user experience change after using the
prototype for a longer time?

RESEARCH METHOD

To study how well the prototype works in practice, we
arranged a user study as a part of a study on six novel music
recommendation applications. All the applications were
evaluated by 40 participants. The initial research questions of
the mood pictures study were formulated as:

146

A. Participants
The participants were selected using convenience
sampling from varying age groups and education levels. The
only requirement was that the participants had to listen to
music every now and then. However, most participants who
volunteered to the study were active music listeners.
All the participants were Finnish. 77% (31 participants)
were male and 23% (9) female. 8% (3) were 12-17 years old,
12% (5) 18-30 years old, 55% (22) 31-40 years old, and 25%
(10) 41-55 years old. The average age was 35, and all
participants from the 12-17 age group were male. 63% of the
participants were university graduates, and the rest were split
between all types of education.
8% were professional and 50% hobby musicians. 50%
considered listening to music as their hobby. During
listening, 20% of the participants did not usually do anything
else but concentrate on the music. All except two participants
listened to music at least once a day, and the average time
per day was 2.1 hours. The most popular genres included
pop (85% of participants liked it), rock (80%), metal (63%),
soul, rnb & funk (60%), alternative & indie (55%), blues
(55%), electronica & dance (50%), and jazz (50%). The least
popular genre was gospel (5%).
The most popular listening contexts were home (55%)
and car (45%), and other contexts included school, work,
sports, and the like. All major listening mediums were used,
the most popular ones being computer (most important for
35% of participants), traditional radio (23%), CD (18%) and
mp3 players excluding mobile phones (15%). Only 5% of
participants named mobile phone’s mp3 player as their main
listening medium.
43% of the participants searched actively for new music
to listen to. The most common sources included the Internet
(65%, of which 18% mentioned especially YouTube),
friends (63%), magazines (33%), radio (33%), and Spotify
(20%). 88% of the participants had used YouTube for
listening to music, 51% had used Spotify, 32% Last.fm, and
29% iTunes Genius.
V.

the picture: it is nice to imagine yourself in that situation and
reflect the music listening to that”.
The participants felt that mood plays an important role in
music selection. Swiping though the different mood
photographs and the well-implemented cascade view were
considered as fun ways to explore the moods. Pictures can
have great influence on people, and the participants felt that
it was easy to identify with persons in the pictures. The
animations on top of the pictures were said to be a very
positive addition.
The prototype was considered to be good for new music
exploration and especially for people that are not music
professionals. The participants also appreciated that they
were able to look for similar sounding songs. For example,
one participant stated that “Finding similar songs for playlist
items makes expanding of the playlist more intuitive and
fun”.
For 37% of the participants, the first impressions were
not that positive. These participants were either confused or
found the prototype to be too restricting due to the fixed set
of mood pictures and seed songs. A typical comment was: “I
can’t find suitable pictures for my use, how can I add some
of my own or associate my own music to these pictures?”
Some other restrictions of the prototype were also pointed
out. For example, there was not a possibility to listen to full
albums or do textual searches for specific tracks in the
database. Several users would also have appreciated to see
some usage related tips on the first time.
Despite the flaws, the idea of choosing music using the
mood pictures was found to be very good by 85% of the
participants. 81% also felt that the prototype looked good or
impressive. It was said that the application works very well
for people that like many types of music. However, some
participants expressed the concern that this type of music
player application might not be the optimal solution for those
users who always listen to some specific type of music.
B. Quality Aspects
In the end of the interview session, the users had to rate a
couple of quality aspects of the prototype using a seven-point
Likert scale (1=totally disagree, 7=totally agree). Both
hedonic and pragmatic aspects [3]were studied, and the same
aspects were also rated after using the application at home.
The statements were:
• The program looked impressive
• The program was fun to use
• The program presented music in a novel way
• I believe that the appeal of the program will last and
I will use it actively in the future
• The program had an extensive set of wellimplemented features
• The program was easy to use
• I was able to start the playback of desired music
quickly.

RESULTS

Based on the user study, we were able to answer our
initial research questions and received a broad range of ideas
for the future development of the concept. In this section, the
results of interviews and evaluations done at home are
analyzed and compared against each other.
A. First Impressions
After testing the software for a couple of minutes in the
interview, the participants were asked to describe their first
impressions on the prototype. These comments revealed
many interesting aspects of the software.
For 63% of the participants, the first impressions were
clearly positive. The positive comments described the
concept to be for example fun and novel. The concept also
was seen as a new way to explore music collections and to
cross traditional genre boundaries. One typical comment
from a user with a positive first impression was: “This is
very interesting concept to select music based on the mood of

In addition, the participants had to give a rating to “My
overall grade for the program” on a seven-point scale
(1=worst grade, 7=best grade).

147

median of looks decreased from 6.0 to 5.0, and the
participants also considered the application to be less fun.
Using Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test, the Z values for looks
and fun were -3.47 and -3.16 with p<0.01 (2-tailed), meaning
that the changes were also statistically significant.
In the longer-term use, the prototype was seen to be too
simple and to lack some important features (see Section 6 for
ideas for future development). For example, the lack of a text
based search function was a major shortcoming to 68% of
the participants (56% after the interview). This is well in line
with [7], where it was concluded that “Overall, while early
experiences seemed to relate mostly to hedonic aspects of
product use, prolonged experiences became increasingly
more tied to aspects reflecting how the product becomes
meaningful in one’s life.” Logically, participants who felt
that the prototype had an extensive set of well-implemented
features also believed that the appeal of the program will last
and that it was fun to use (Spearman’s rho=0.49 and
rho=0.77, significant at the p<0.01 level (2-tailed)).
The median value of lasting appeal decreased
dramatically from 5.0 to 3.0, and only 45% of participants
stated that they would like to use the prototype for a longer
time (73% after the interview). Using Wilcoxon’s signed
ranks test, the Z value for lasting appeal was -2.87 with
p<0.01 (2-tailed), meaning that the change was also
statistically significant. In addition to the lack of certain
important features such as the textual search, other reasons
for this included technical problems (e.g. program crashes
and wrong playlists) and the relatively small size of the
music collection (approx. half a million tracks most of which
were from unknown artists). 47% felt that the music
collection did not meet their needs, and 30% mentioned that
they did not want to use the prototype especially for this
reason. The lack of features had also effect on the grades for
“I was able to start the playback of desired music quickly”
(drop from median 5.0 to 4.5).
Only 50% of the participants felt that the prototype fits to
their current music consumption habits. While only 15% of
the participants thought that they could use the prototype as
their main music player application, as many as 60% said
that they could use it to complement other applications.

Figure 11 illustrates the ratings given by the participants
as pairs of boxplots. In the case of each pair, the left boxplot
represents ratings given after the interview, and the right
boxplot represents ratings given after longer-term use.
Numbers surrounding the outlier circles refer to certain users
in the SPSS data.
After the interview (Figure 11), the participants felt that
the prototype looked very good (median 6.0), was easy and
fun to use (medians 6.0 and 5.0, respectively), and that it
presented music in a novel way (median 5.5). The findings
are well in line with participants’ first impressions. These
results (or any other results of the study) did not correlate
with participants’ age or gender. We also experimented with
Chi-Square and t-tests, but the conditions for the test were
not met in any of the cases.

C. Mood Pictures
Before listening to any music in the interview, the
participants were shown each mood picture one at a time and
asked what type of music they associated with the pictures.
The “Live concert” picture was commonly associated
with rock (35%), electronic music (23%), and heavy metal
(18%). Words pop, club, jazz, live music, disco, and a couple
of Finnish bands such as Rinneradio and Von Hertzen
Brothers were also mentioned. In many cases, the answers
reflected the musical taste of the participant (i.e. the type of
concert they would attend to).
The “Blue rainy Monday” picture was associated with
terms such as sadness/melancholy/belonging (23% of the
participants), calm/relaxing music (20%), classical music
(20%), romantic/love songs (13%), and ocean (10%). Terms
electronic, ambient, new age, rock, jazz, pop, and country
were also mentioned.

Figure 11. Boxplots for the quality aspects of the prototype: Ratings given
at the end of the interview (boxplots on the left) and after longer-term use
(boxplots on the right).

The ratings for the other statements (see the left boxplots
on the lower picture of Figure 11) were also on the
“positive” side, i.e., the median values were greater than
four. In other words, the prototype looked quite promising
based on participants’ first experiences.
However, the situation changed for worse after the
participants had tested the prototype at home for a longer
time. While the idea was still considered to be novel, the

148

The “Dinner & evening” picture was most often
associated with classical music (23% of the participants),
romantic music (15%), and slow/relaxing/calm/moody music
(30%). Other terms that were mentioned included soulful
male vocals, Christmas, blues, jazz, pop, new age, and piano
music.
In the case of the ”After work” picture, common
associations included calm/relaxing/chill-out music (20%),
electronic music (15%), alternative & indie (15%), and
classical music (10%). Many participants felt that the person
was concentrating and serious about listening to music, and
he was also considered to be a nerd and/or a hi-fi
enthusiastic. Terms minimalistic, pop, progressive, jazz and
rock were also mentioned 2-4 times.
43% of the participants associated the picture of car
interior and road (“Driving on a highway”) with rock type of
music. 15% preferred country, 8% heavy metal, and another
8% electronic music. Other terms mentioned included jazz,
easy listening, blues, pop, and Motown. 18% of the
participants associated driving a car with fast music.
The ”Sunday sauna” picture was most commonly
associated with relaxing / chill-out /meditation music (30%
of the participants). Finnish rock music came second with
15%, and traditional Finnish ”iskelmä” music, reggae, pop,
rock, classical, and acoustic music were also mentioned.
Interestingly, two persons associated the picture with
pornography and homosexuality. 18% of the participants
commented that they associate sauna with silence, i.e. no
music should be played in that context.
Most participants (60%) associated the “Sports event”
picture with rock music. Other terms that were mentioned
included pop, hip-hop and rap music, positive, happy, party
music, music played in sports games, organ music, and live
music. Songs “We Are the Champions” and “Eye of the
Tiger” were mentioned several times.
After using the prototype at home, the users were also
asked to rate how well the mood pictures matched with the
recommended music on a seven-point scale (1=did not match
at all, 4= neutral, 7=perfect match).As shown in Figure 12,
the medians were close to neutral and there was quite a lot
of variation in the grades. While most mood pictures evoked
similar type of feelings in the participants, the participants
preferred to listen to different types of music in such moods
and contexts.

While one person may associate a picture of a concert
with rock music because he/she loves to go to rock concerts,
the other person may hate such music and thus will never
have such an association. Also, the preferences of the
participants did not always match with the preferences of the
authors (i.e. persons who selected the seed songs for the
prototype). Thus, it is extremely hard (or even impossible) to
find such mood picture / seed song pairs that please every
user.
VI.

IDEAS FOR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

During the study, we received a wide variety of ideas for
the future development of the concept including mood
pictures, music selection, playlists, and ideas going beyond
the basic mood pictures. In the following, these findings
have been explained in more detail.
Based on the user study, there was a clear need to let the
users customize the picture and music associations. As
shown in Section 5, the participants preferred to listen to
different types of music in a certain mood and/or contexts.
Some participants preferred to have pictures without any
people, whereas some felt that the best solution to represent
moods would be to use only pictures of people. As the builtin picture and music associations were not suitable for all
users, a better approach would be to allow the users to add
their own pictures to the system and map them to moods and
seed songs. Unless the number of personal pictures is
limited, there should also be a way to organize them in a
hierarchical manner. Another interesting addition to the
prototype would be the possibility to select multiple mood
pictures to listen to a mixed playlist.
In addition to adding their own pictures to represent
moods, the participants were also interested in changing the
seed songs for the built-in mood pictures. These mood
picture and music associations should be stored to the system
for later access. Many participants were also interested in
using pictures to categorize their own personal music
collection.
The lack of a text based search for finding specific tracks
was seen as a major shortcoming in the prototype. Several
participants would have wanted to listen to full albums from
selected artists, and browsing the whole music catalog was
also mentioned. Some participants wished to get album
recommendations from which one could then pick individual
songs to the playlist. The use of mood pictures to search for
music in a specific language was mentioned, and many
participants would also have wanted to see more information
regarding the individual tracks.
In addition to the basic mood pictures, the prototype
could also contain pictures of well-known artists which
would then be used to access their music. There are many
business opportunities to utilize this type of additional
content, and some of the content could even come
automatically from the record labels (e.g. “Michael Jackson
collection from the 90s”).
The idea of personalizing the existing mood pictures was
also brought up. There could be an additional object layer on
top of each picture, and this layer would then be changed
depending on the user. For example, in the case of the

Figure 12. Boxplots for how well the recommended music and the mood
pictures match.

149

“Driving on a highway” picture the user could add an object
to the dashboard or customize the car properties to look more
like a sports car. This would then have an effect on the seed
songs associated with the picture.
Several users were impressed by the animated elements
added to the static images and were hoping to see animated
actions in the future versions of the prototype as well. Using
animated actions would clearly point out the most important
message of the picture, and it could bring out the intended
mood more clearly.

application, the users themselves could add such layers on
top of the pictures.
This user study was conducted as a part of a user study
on six music player prototypes. After the other prototypes
have been analyzed in detail, the results should be compared
against each other and used to design a next-generation,
“ultimate” visual music player UI.
REFERENCES
[1]

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

[2]

In this paper, we studied the idea of using animated mood
pictures in the context of music recommendation. In the
implemented software prototype, the user interacted with a
collection of pictures to receive new music recommendations
from the associated genres. The prototype was evaluated by
40 participants.
In the initial interview, the idea of selecting music based
on mood pictures was found to be very good by 85% of the
participants. The participants also felt that the prototype
looked good, was easy and fun to use, and that it presented
music in a novel way.
In the longer-term use, the prototype lacked some
important features which had a clear effect on the longerterm ratings. Most importantly, majority of the participants
would have wanted to add their own pictures and music to
the system as well as change the picture and music
associations of the built-in pictures. One reason for this wish
was that it can be extremely hard to find such default mood
picture / seed song pairs that please every user.
Despite the flaws, 60% of the participants said that they
could use the prototype, as it is, to complement their other
music player applications. This indicates that the concept of
associating music to mood pictures is a promising way of
accessing music collections and exploring new music. The
concept could easily be scaled down to fit to the screen of
modern mobile devices, which include high-quality built-in
cameras, dedicated music player applications, and which
people carry around all the time.
The used pictures were designed to match the potential
daily situations and activities of the target user group. While
the variation in the grades of match between pictures and
music can be partially explained by differences in musical
taste, it may also indicate that the designed pictures were too
ambiguous. Thus, the next concrete step is to redefine the
mood pictures to clearly represent discrete moods, and select
a small set of songs that could be matched to these pictures
in a user study. This would help to clarify if there is a clear
link between the images and certain songs. Furthermore,
every user could have his/her personalized playlist of songs
for each picture, and the modifications could be shared with
other users.
Other interesting topics for future research include
investigating how generic certain music-picture associations
are within a specific culture, and studying how much the
animation layers can improve how people interpret the
intended feeling of the picture. In a practical mood player

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

150

All Music Guide url: http://www.allmusic.com (accessed August 9,
2011).
A. K. Dey and G. D. Abowd, “Towards a Better Understanding of
Context and Context-Awareness,” Tech. Report GIT-GVU-99-22,
Georgia Institute of Tech., Atlanta, GA, USA, 1999.
M. Hassenzahl, A. Platz, M. Burmester, K. Lehner, “Hedonic and
Ergonomic Quality Aspects Determine a Software’s Appeal,” Proc.
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, Apr. 2000, pp. 201208.
J. Holm, A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating an Avatar-Based User Interface
for Discovering New Music,” Proc. 9th Internatinal Conference on
Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, ACM, Dec. 2010, Article 9,
doi:10.1145/1899475.1899484.
J. Holm, H. Holm and J. Seppänen, “Associating Emoticons with
Musical Genres,” Proc. International Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression. NIME, June 2010, pp. 383-386.
P. N. Juslin and J. A. Sloboda, “Music and Emotion: Theory and
Research”, New York, Oxford University Press, 2001.
E. Karapanos, M. Hazzenzahl, J-B. Martens, “User Experience over
Time,” Proc. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
ACM, Apr. 2008, pp. 3561-3566, doi: 10.1145/1358628.1358891.
E. Y. Kim, E. M. Schmidt, R. Migneco, B. G. Morton, P. Richardson,
J. Scott, J. A. Speck and D. Turnbull, “Music Emotion Recognition:
A State of the Art Review,” Proc. International Conference on Music
Information Retrieval, ISMIR, Aug. 2010.
P. Lamere, “Social tagging and information retrieval,” Journal of
New Music Research, vol. 37, 2008, pp. 101 - 114.
Last.FM url: http://www.last.fm (accessed August 9, 2011).
A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating SuperMusic: Streaming Context-Aware
Mobile Music Service,” Proc. International Conference on Advances
in Computer Entertainment Technology, ACM, Dec. 2008, pp. 314321, doi: 10.1145/1501750.1501826.
D. J. Levitin, “Life Soundtracks: The Uses of Music in Everyday
Life,” unpublished, 2007.
Moody url: http://www.crayonroom.com/moody.php (accessed
August 9, 2011).
Musicovery url: http://musicovery.com (accessed August 9, 2011).
J. A. Russell. A Circumplex model of affect,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, vol. 39, 1980, pp. 1161-78.

