2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Simple Technique for Modeling Terrains Using Contour Maps
José Anibal Arias, Roberto Carlos Reyes, Antonio Razo
Universidad Tecnológica de la Mixteca, Universidad de las Américas - Puebla
{anibal@mixteco.utm.mx, robcar_67@hotmail.com, antrazo@gmail.com}
Abstract

2. Related work
In this paper we describe a simple modeling
technique used to create precise and complex digital
terrains models using contour maps. As a case study we
use the terrain of the “Monte Albán” archeological site,
located in the Mexican state of Oaxaca. We employ the
technique with a simple contour map to obtain a realistic
tridimensional terrain model that includes the four main
hills of the site.

In most applications, the procedure to digitally
generate a terrain is based in grayscale elevation maps.
In these maps lighter tones generally represent areas with
increased altitude. This type of procedure is
recommended for scale models including local
measurements. It produces a surface where we can place
different objects and apply textures to achieve realistic
terrain representations.
There are more complex and detailed models that
can even be georeferenced (i.e. associated with a spatial
reference system) to show the location of the model on
the earth’s surface at a given scale. These models are
based on field measurements, remote sensing or
restitution. The input formats can range from point
clouds, data generated by the LIDAR sensor, contours
generated by stereoscopic aerial orthophotos restitutions,
until GRID format with regular elevations in space.
Examples of these formats are GeoTIFF for raster
images and TIN (Triangulated Irregular Network) for
surface images.

Keywords--- 3D Modeling, GIS, Archaeological
reconstruction.

1. Introduction
There are several different approaches to represent a
3D digital terrain. These depend largely on the available
data and the level of detail desired. In the case of
archaeological sites, their location is clearly determined
by terrain features. These can clearly mark the settlement
and development of the ancient cities they post-date [1].
There are a number of requirements for such a
terrain model. Firstly, a terrain model should clearly
show the landforms and the effects of air and water
erosion over surfaces. It should also reflect a realistic
representation of terrain elevation and be functional at
different levels of detail. Such a model also needs to
display different types of erosion (water, wind, etc.), soil
composition and vegetation (amount and type). These
features can be illustrated using image textures.
Typically, climate and elevation are factors that
determine characteristics such as the color and density of
vegetation. Vegetation can be displayed as a texture or as
small 3D objects on the ground. A model also needs to
consider artificial elements that correspond to changes
made by man, such as roads, dikes, walls, terraces and
buildings in general.
Our proposal builds the terrain of an archaeological
site in an easy way using a minimum of information,
without need of specialized software.
The following section provides a description of
existing techniques for generating digital terrains,
available tools and formats commonly used to represent
them.
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.109

2.1. Tools for terrain generation
To generate a digital terrain we can make use of
different kind of applications. For example, there is 3D
modeling software that includes terrain edition
capabilities based in elevation maps and editing surfaces.
These provide tools for lifting, leveling or plunging
different parts of a surface and allow us to manually
approximate the desired models. There are also
specialized applications for Computer Aided Design
(CAD) and Geographic Information Systems (GISs) that
can generate terrain models and surfaces. To create these
models we need point clouds, elevation contours or
elevation grids. The input format is vector or raster; it is
processed to generate a Triangulated Irregular Network
(TIN), which is a triangulated surface based on vector
elevation data. The latter format is very detailed but their
generation and manipulation requires a great deal of
processing time.
As an alternative to the TIN format, a raster GRID
format can be generated at different levels of detail; this
format takes a regular sampling of the elevation and
generates a regular surface based on quadrants [2]. Any

658

influence and established alliances with other cultures.
The splendor of the city encouraged the development of
science and the arts. The city had its own astronomical
observatories, a writing system, a calendar, and a great
variety of ceramic and stonework. The city of Monte
Alban became the sacred space of the Mixtec world in
the eighth century, and concluded his ascension around
the year 850 when the construction of buildings came to
a halt and agriculture faltered.
Our project to reconstruct the archaeological site of
Monte Alban begins with the modeling of the terrain
where the civilization settled. Although the first phase of
the project proposes the modeling of buildings in the
main square of Monte Alban, we wanted to include the
mountains around these with a view to reconstructing the
housing settlements that were built in the hillsides, as
well as the Atzompa archaeological site.

of these TIN or GRID formats can be exported to
formats used in modeling tools, such as X3D or Collada,
to be integrated into other projects.

Figure 1. Terrain modeling of Popocatepetl
vulcano using GIS tools [3].

3.1. Terrain modeling
The use of digital terrain almost always involves a
great deal of processing. It does, however, allow us to
generate terrains at different levels of detail according to
project requirements. Models can also be shared online,
as the X3D format supported in HTML5 or KML for use
in Google Earth.
The videogame engine Unity [4] has a terrain editor
with various possibilities of manual terrain editing, and
offers the possibility to include textures in the terrains as
well as trees and vegetation models. The terrains
generated with this tool are realistic and designed for
real-time interaction, so they are modeled with simple
nets that can allow us to integrate collision detection
properties. Moreover, with the Terrain Toolkit for Unity
created in 2009 by Sándor Moldán we can model six
different types of erosion and many possibilities of
terrain smoothing and height normalization. With this
toolkit we can also apply textures of the land according
to their elevation. In addition, Unity can be installed in a
standard mid-range personal computer.

3.1.1. Step 1 Our terrain modeling work started with
the following image contour (Figure 2):

3. Case study: terrain of the Monte Alban
archaeological site
Figure 2. Contours of the Monte Alban zone [6].
The city of Monte Alban is a legacy of the Zapotec
culture which originates in the south of Mexico. In its
time the city was the economic, political and religious
hub of the civilization and the first urban complex of
Mesoamerica. The city grew to cover an area almost as
large as modern day Oaxaca city and lasted from its
formation in the year 500 BC., until its decline around
850 AC. [5].
The city is surrounded by several chains of
mountains which confluence at the great Valley of
Oaxaca. Three hills make up the archaeological site.
These are Monte Alban, El Gallo and Atzompa. Each of
these has monuments at its summit and terraced fields on
its flank. During the Classic Period (350-550 AC) the
city reached its peak. Based on a strong control over the
neighboring villages, Monte Alban extended its area of

This image served as a guide in the reproduction of
the contours. It was imported into Corel Draw© for
plotting the contours in vector format, and was scaled
according to the map scaling.
The vector path on the image was made using the
Bezier tool, which allows us to place control points
between line segments and adjust them to be linear or
curved as required.

659

Figure 3. Initial contour plotting with control
points.

Figure 5. Contours placed at their respective
height.

The contour is initially drawn using control points
(Figure 3). Next the nodes are converted to curved nodes
to approach as close as possible the contour we want to
capture. This procedure was performed for each of the
curves in the image (Figure 4).

Figure 6. Contours extruded into solids.
3.1.3. Step 3 The extruded solids were exported in
FBX format to the folder Project > Assets of a Unity©
project.
We import the 3D extruded solids into a Unity
project scaled to their corresponding size. Then we create
a flat terrain with the necessary dimensions and proceed
to modify it manually using the terrain editor of Unity,
specifically the Paint height tool (Figures 7 and 8); with
this tool we modified the height parameter of the flat
terrain using the data obtained from original contours (in
this case we started at height 225m with increasing
intervals of 50 meters).
We proceeded to modify manually the flat terrain of
Unity using the extruded solids as a guide: from the top
view screen and with the Paint height tool activated, we
choose a thick brush to elevate the terrain, changing the

Figure 4. Final contours.
3.1.2. Step 2 After obtaining the contour lines in
vector format, we used the Rhinoceros© 3D modeling
software (although we could have used any other
modeling program that generates export files in FBX
format) as support to convert these contours into
extruded solids. These were to serve as a reference in the
Unity software in order to model the terrain manually.
Before converting the contours into solids, we
placed each one in its respective height. Extrusion of the
lines was carried out to obtain the hill’s solid areas
(Figures 5 and 6).

660

created using a skybox with directional light emulating
the sun.

height parameter when necessary, following and
covering the contour, creating a level in the terrain in
(approximated) reference to the solids created with
Rhinoceros©. We performed this action with all other
contours to obtain an approximate result of the hill
(Figures 9-11).

Figure 9. Use of the Paint height tool from the
top view.
Figure 7. Extruded solids in Unity©.

Figure 8. Extruded solids and a flat terrain in
Unity©.

Figure 10. Visualization of the Paint height tool
in perspective view.

3.1.4. Step 4 Once we have an approximation of the
hills we used the Terrain toolkit of Unity to smooth the
terrain between levels, simulating erosion due to weather
conditions. For this project we used a small factor of
erosion due to wind, water and thermal conditions,
resulting in a field close to what we were looking for (the
parameters used to calculate erosions were largely
determined using a method of trial and error). Finally, we
applied some grass textures to the terrain, and the sky

4. Conclusions
In this paper we presented a simple technique for
terrain modeling which creates a realistic model of a 3D
terrain from a basic contour map using simple and
accessible computational tools. As an example, we
present the terrain modeling of the archaeological site of
Monte Alban, located in the state of Oaxaca, Mexico.
The benefits of the proposed method is that it allows the
661

generation of high quality terrain models using data that
is easily accessible to everyone without the use of
expensive specialized tools or high spec computer
equipment.

Figure 13. Terrain visualization in Unity©, at
execution time.

Acknowledgements
Figure 11. Approximated model of the hills.
This work has received financial support from the
SEP-PROMEP project UTMIX-PTC-018.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

Figure 12. Final terrain model.

662

Ch’ng, Eugene et all. From Sites to Landscapes: How
Computing Technology Is Shaping Archaeological
Practice. IEEE Computer. July 2011.
Ormsby T., Alul J. Extending ArcView GIS: with
Network Analyst, Spatial Analyst and 3D Analyst. ESRI
Press. 1999.
Razo Rodríguez, A. F. GISELA X3: Modelado estándar
de datos geográficos tridimensionales con XML y su
aplicación en un Sistema de Información Geográfica para
Protección Civil. Tesis de Maestría en Ciencias con
Especialidad en Ingeniería en Sistemas Computacionales.
Universidad de las Américas Puebla. 2001.
http://unity3d.com/.
Oliveros, Arturo. Monte Albán, Oaxaca. La ciudad de la
gente de las nubes. Arqueología Mexicana Núm. 55. p
80-87. May 2002.
Blanton, Richard E. Monte Albán: Settlement Patterns at
the Ancient Zapotec Capital. Percheron Press. 2004.

