2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Animation for Time-Oriented Data: An Overview of Empirical Research
Simone Kriglstein, Margit Pohl, and Claus Stachl
Vienna University of Technology, Institute for Design and Assessment of Technology
kriglstein@cvast.tuwien.ac.at, margit@igw.tuwien.ac.at, claus.stachl@orderedcomplexity.com
Abstract

ﬁnd. In many cases, authors of evaluation studies mention that a more detailed investigation of animation will be
a next step of their research. We could also observe that
scenarios / case studies were often chosen to highlight the
design and the usability of the animated visualization approaches (see e.g., [3, 14, 17]). A lot of research work has
been done in measuring of system performance (see e.g.,
[19]) or on user performance (e.g., task completion time,
error rates, accuracy rates).
Based on these observations we conducted a systematic
literature review of evaluation studies regarding animation
as an approach to make time-oriented data more comprehensible to users in information visualization systems. The
conducted literature review in this paper should help to get
current state of research in order to give researchers and
designers a more systematic overview of existing studies
to inform the design of information visualization and also
future research. Designers of animated information visualizations need recommendations for the development of
efﬁcient interfaces. The goal of this paper is to describe
such recommendations. They should be based on empirical studies with potential users. The literature review,
therefore, focuses on evaluation studies of animated information visualizations, especially for information visualizations presenting time-oriented data. The recommendations
should answer questions like, e.g., how animations should
be designed, in which contexts they should be used and
which features of animated systems are especially beneﬁcial.
This paper is structured as follows. The literature review used in this work is discussed in Section 2. In Section
3, we give an overview how the development of animation
in information visualization is inﬂuenced by research from
psychology. Evaluation studies concerning the usage of
animation for time-oriented visualizations is presented in
Section 4. In Section 5, we discuss different interesting
observations based on our literature review. Finally, we
give a short conclusion and an outlook on future work.

The usage of visualizations to aid the analysis of timeoriented data plays an important role in various ﬁelds of
applications. The need to visualize such data was decisive
for the development of different visualization techniques
over the last years. One of the frequently applied techniques is animation in order to illustrate the movements
in such a way to make changes in the data transparent.
However, evaluation studies of such animated interfaces
for time-oriented data with potential users are still difﬁcult to ﬁnd. In this paper, we present our observations
based on a systematic literature review with the motivation to support researchers and designers to identify future
directions for their research. The literature review is split
in two parts: (1) research on animation from the ﬁeld of
psychology, and (2) evaluation studies with the focus on
animation of time-oriented data.
Keywords— Animation, Time-Oriented Data, Psychological Aspects, Evaluation

1

Introduction

Animation is a technique that provides the illusion of
movement to make changes between objects transparent in
presentation tasks (see e.g., [13, 34]) and analysis tasks
(e.g., [26, 27]). It has become more and more popular
in the last years. The reason for this increased interest is
that human vision is very sensitive to movement. Therefore it is an effective way to communicate temporal information [10]. Animation techniques are used in different
ﬁelds of applications, such as simulating the real behavior of objects or for supporting users to understand complex structures (e.g., [6, 7, 16]), making changes over time
for users more comprehensible (see e.g., [23, 26, 27]), and
displaying transitions of one view or state to another (e.g.,
[2, 5, 29]).
Animation seems to be especially appropriate for timeoriented data. In the last years, a considerable amount of
research concerning development of animation as an approach to visualize time-oriented data was accumulated.
However, user studies with focus on the evaluation of animated interfaces with potential users are still difﬁcult to
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.16

2

Literature Review

Although in the last 10 years, a considerable amount
of research concerning the evaluation of animation as ap30

itive effects of animation could be found. She also indicates that interactivity might be a possibility to overcome
the problems with animations. When users are allowed to
control the animations actively, they might be able to form
more coherent mental models than when they can only
watch animations passively. Lowe addressed this problem
in a detailed study [18]. He found out that users did take
advantage of the user control, but this was not always done
effectively. He argues that additional design measurements
have to be applied to make user control beneﬁcial.
Mayer gives an overview of empirical research in [20]
concerning design principles for an effective design of animations for learning. He argues, for example, that cues
should be added to highlight relevant elements of the animation or that animations should be presented in learnerpaced segments rather than as continuous movie-like presentation. Animations apparently only work in some contexts and when designed properly. A study by Kehoe et
al. [15] also indicates this. The result of this study is that
animations are probably more advantageous in open, interactive learning situations and that they are more valuable
for the presentation of procedural aspects of the topic at
hand.

proach to visualize time-oriented data was published, it is
often difﬁcult to detect all or most of the relevant results
and to ﬁnd out what conclusions might be drawn from this
research. Therefore, a literature review is used to get an
overview which can support researchers to get a more systematic outlook on this research area. The literature review
consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part is a brief overview of
empirical and theoretical research on animation from the
ﬁeld of psychology. We also discuss how this research has
inﬂuenced the development of animation over the last few
years. The second part of the literature review is concerned
with animation of time-oriented data. For this part of
the literature review, we concentrate on evaluation studies
of information visualizations with empirical results which
were published in proceedings or journal databases (e.g.,
IEEE Computer Society, ACM Digital Library, ScienceDirect, and SpringerLink). The presented collection of literature includes several interesting evaluation studies about
visualization approaches which introduce animation as an
approach to make time-oriented data more understandable.

3

Psychological Studies

Investigations about animation in information visualization are inﬂuenced by research from psychology, especially
from educational psychology. There is a large amount of
research in educational psychology on whether animation
is beneﬁcial for learning or not, and, if yes, under what
conditions. This discussion has also been very important
for information visualization. The inﬂuence of Tversky’s
well-known paper ”Animation: Can It Facilitate?” [32] is
a good example for this. In this article, we can only give
a very brief overview of the most important investigations
in that area, in order to show that results from other disciplines are highly relevant for research in information visualization in that context.
There is a considerable amount of research in cognitive
psychology on the perception of movement and change.
Speciﬁcally, the phenomenon of change blindness has been
discussed in information visualization [25]. The identiﬁcation of changes in scenes is very difﬁcult because human
beings usually concentrate only on restricted areas in their
ﬁeld of vision. There are possibilities to design animated
information visualizations in a way that insights into the
data are supported by the characteristics of the visualization (e.g., by drawing users’ attention to speciﬁc changes).
Another line of research concerns the ability of humans to
track several moving targets. Pylyshyn argues in [24] that
humans can track around four similar targets (e.g., dots)
easily. This is, for example, relevant for animated scatter
plots.
Tversky’s overview article [32] on animation has already been mentioned. In this paper, she argues that, based
on the educational literature available at that time, no pos-

4

Animation of Time-Oriented Data

In this section we will present interesting ﬁndings from
the literature review regarding the evaluation of animation
approaches with time-oriented data in information visualization. There are more papers on information visualization systems representing time-oriented data, but evaluations of such approaches occasionally do not address animation speciﬁcally, but rather investigate more general
questions. We only found very few evaluations which had
the goal to investigate animation with time-oriented data.
The ﬁndings of the literature review showed us that animation was primarily used: (a) to improve the perception
and handling of changes in data (e.g., [4, 8, 12, 28]) and
(b) to support users in analyzing trends in data or data that
evolves over time (e.g., [1, 26, 27, 30]). We chose 15 papers for a detailed analysis of their evaluation studies and
the following interesting observations were made.

4.1

General Impressions

Although it was noted that animation was sometimes
confusing and not an appropriate technique for every user
[11, 33], the analysis of the results of the evaluation
studies showed that the animation was often described
as enjoyable, exciting and very helpful for understanding time-oriented data to see what was happening in the
data [11, 23, 27, 30]. For example, McGrath and Blythe
[21] found out that motion helped the participants to better
grasp changes of data.
Generally, we noticed that the size of the represented

31

which had non-cyclic character. It was also mentioned that
animation caused participants to get lost, especially if too
many data points are moving across the screen which possibly distracts the viewers’ attention [11, 23, 27]. In that
case, Farrugia and Quigley [11] suggested to use animation sparingly. Selective animating parts could be helpful
so that users will concentrate on a limited aspect of the visualization to support them in understanding the changes
[11, 23]. In the evaluation study by Nakakoji et al. [23], a
participant noticed that it would be helpful to annotate the
time for a better orientation in the animation (e.g., as memory aid which time-span was interesting). Furthermore, we
noticed that it also played a signiﬁcant role if the participants had the possibility to control the animation or not.
For example, Robertson et al. [27] pointed out that participants noted that they had to ﬁnd the data very rapidly which
they wanted to observe if they had no control over the animation. In comparison if the animation or small multiples
are more effective for analysis tasks, Robertson et al. [27]
found out that their animation approach to show trends in
data was valuable especially for presenting data. For tasks
of data analysis the usage of small multiples appeared more
effective.

data often played an important role how well an animated
visualization supports users in their tasks. For example,
Robertson et al. [27] pointed out that the participants were
more successful with small datasets. A reason was that animation and traces tended to become cluttered with larger
datasets and therefore static representations appeared to be
more effective.

4.2 Aim of Evaluation
We noticed that most of the evaluation studies (60% of
the papers) compared primarily their animation approach
with static representations, like small multiples. The goal
of the comparison studies was to ﬁnd out if the usage of animation is more effective than a static representation (see
e.g., [1, 11, 12, 23, 27]). McGrath and Blythe [21] conducted a user study to explore the effects of motion with
different graph layouts on viewers’ perception of changes
in graphs. In contrast, Midtbø et al. [22] compared different animation types to identify which animation type
users preferred depending on different time scales. Especially for comparison studies, the evaluation of user performance (e.g., task completion time, error rates, accuracy
rates) played an important role and is often combined with
user preferences. Furthermore, we found evaluation studies (27% of the papers) which only tested their visualization approach and how the user interacted with the animation (e.g., [4, 9, 26, 30]). Although the animation speed
was often named as challenge, the literature review showed
us that the animation speed often played no role in the evaluation studies. Often default animation speed was chosen
which the user could change during the test sessions. The
evaluation studies by Grifﬁn et al. [12] and Tekuˇsov´a et al.
[31] are examples which also considered the speed of the
animation in their evaluation.

4.4

Animation Speed

The results of the evaluation studies [12, 31] showed
that the speed has to be taken in account in order to how
well participants identiﬁed changes in the animation. For
example, they found out that the participants did not have
sufﬁcient time to realize changes if the speed of the animation was too fast. However if the speed was too slow, the
visual system had problems to maintain the Gestalt grouping. Grifﬁn et al. [12] concluded their ﬁndings that the interplay was an important role between (1) the distance that
the objects moved, (2) the duration of the stimulus (e.g.,
length of time of the displayed frame) and (3) the interstimulus interval (e.g., frame rate).

4.3 Results of Comparison Studies
In comparison with static representation, animation
seems to increase positive reactions to track changes, because the corresponding static graph was often perceived
as overloaded [8, 23]. Furthermore, it was noted that animation better reﬂected how the data changed over a period
of time [30]. Grifﬁn et al. [12] found out that the participants of their study identiﬁed patterns more correctly
and faster with the usage of animation than they did with
small multiples. However, how well the participants identiﬁed patterns or groups depended on how strong the moving clusters and patterns were. The results of the comparison study concerning the different animation types by
Midtbø et al. [22] pointed out that the participants had clear
preferences in combination with speciﬁc time spans. For
example, circular animation was preferred by most participants if the time was perceived as a repeating pattern (e.g.,
24-hour period) and a linear animation was more attractive for the participants for more common linear models

4.5

Interactivity

In 73.3% of the evaluation studies, the participants had
the possibility to interact with the animation like play,
pause, control the speed and jump back or forth between
keyframes. In addition to buttons for play, pause or stop,
the play controller often included a slider to play the animation back or forward in order to regulate the desired
speed. Although Archambault et al. [1] found out that
many of their participants did not use the slider (because
they felt pressed for time), it was noted that the usage was
useful to answer the questions of the tasks faster. The results of the evaluation studies showed us that the participants ﬁrst scanned the whole animation to get a comprehensive impression and for detailed analysis they used the
play controller to go to a position of the animation or to

32

inﬂuence the animation speed. It was observed that especially for the analysis of changes in data the participants
went back and forth in the time lines to compare the frames
and played the animation often extremely slowly (see e.g.,
[1, 4, 11, 23, 27]). This was also the reason why participants needed more time to analyze data with animation
than with a static representation [8, 11, 27]. Therefore, Archambault et al. [1] noted that animation is preferable if
accuracy is more important than response time. Tekuˇsov´a
and Kohlhammer [30] pointed out that features like a selection, ﬁlter, and search function can be useful for users
to highlight speciﬁc data which they would like to observe
during the animation. Furthermore, they noted that zoom
or detail on demand function would support users to get
more information about the observed data.

animation and ﬁnd it exciting. Under some conditions, animation can help users to understand patterns in the data better than from static displays (see
e.g., [12]), especially when users are supposed to
track changes. Static graphs were frequently described as overloaded. However, animation sometimes confuses the users when too many data points
move across the screen (e.g., see [11, 23, 27]) and
when the dataset becomes too large to see patterns at
a glance.
• Interactivity: In her paper [32], Tversky argued that
interactivity might be beneﬁcial for understanding
animations. Lowe made in [18] an extensive test of
this assumption . He argues that interactivity exerts a
positive inﬂuence on the subjects’ performance, but
this also depends on the design of the system and
other context variables. In information visualization,
interactivity helps users to get more accurate results
(see e.g., [1]), especially when they are enabled to
control the speed of the animation with sliders. For
the analysis of changes in the data, animation seems
to be very helpful (see e.g., [1, 4, 11, 23, 27])

4.6 Additional Features
It was often recommended that the animation should be
combined with additional indicators (e.g., traces, color or
sound) to lead users’ attention to the animation or to follow the changes in data over time more easily (see e.g.,
[4, 8, 21, 22, 26, 28, 30, 33]). For example, Schlienger et
al. [28] found out that the combination of animation with
sound would be an effective way to improve the perception of changes. Sound can be useful to lead the users’
attention to a change (especially for changes outside of the
user’s ﬁeld of view), whereas the animation would be helpful to track the changes in data. Often traces were used to
support users to analyze changes in data over a period of
time either during the animation or on static pictures. For
example, Robertson et al. [27] found out that the participants were faster to analyze trends with traces than with animations which showed no path information. However, it
was mentioned that the usage of traces was often described
as confusing for the participants, especially if too many
datasets were shown (see e.g., [26, 27, 30]).

5

• Speed: Speed of presentation is a difﬁcult issue. For
example, Lowe [18] describes that the subjects in
his study preferred a slow, stepwise presentation to
a movie-like, continuous presentation. This agrees
with research from information visualization which
also indicates that slower speeds are preferred to
form consistent mental models. It seems to be beneﬁcial when users can inﬂuence the animation speed
of the presentation (see e.g., [1, 4, 23, 27]).
• Context and Design: As stated above, the advantages of animation depend on the design of the system and the context of use. Mayer [20] formulated
principles for the design of animations. Tekuˇsov´a
and Kohlhammer [30] point out that additional features like selection and ﬁlter might help users to
understand animations. Additional indicators (e.g.,
traces, color or sound) can be used to attract the
users’ attention and help them focus on important
elements on the screen (see e.g., [4, 8, 21, 22, 26,
28, 30, 33]).

Discussion

In the previous sections we present different observations from evaluation studies with the focus on the usage
of animation for making time-oriented data more understandable. Based on this research we would like to outline
several important areas where tentative conclusions can be
drawn.

Conclusions

• General Impressions: It is still not easy to answer
the question whether animation is advantageous for
the visual representation of time-dependent data.
Some of the researchers in educational research are
still skeptical (see e.g., [32, 18]). Research results
in education are still contradictory. Evaluation in information visualization yields more positive results
(e.g., see [11, 21, 23, 27, 30]). Users usually enjoy

An overview of empirical research on animation indicates that animation might be beneﬁcial for the presentation of time-oriented data, especially when the users are
supposed to analyze changes in the data. It should be
mentioned, however, that information visualization systems should be designed appropriately and that there are
contexts in which animation might be confusing.

33

Future research should clarify in more detail when animation is useful for time-oriented data and when it is harmful. A more comprehensive overview should also include
studies from other sources (as e.g., HCI journals and conference proceedings). Such research results could be very
valuable to inform the design of efﬁcient and advantageous
animations for information visualization systems that have
to deal with time-oriented data.

[7] Nuttapong Chentanez, Bryan E. Feldman, Franc¸ois
Labelle, James F. O’Brien, and Jonathan R.
Shewchuk. Liquid simulation on lattice-based tetrahedral meshes. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation, pages 219–228. Eurographics Association,
2007.
[8] Fanny Chevalier, Pierre Dragicevic, Anastasia Bezerianos, and Jean-Daniel Fekete. Using text animated
transitions to support navigation in document histories. In Proceeding of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
683–692. ACM Press, 2010.

Acknowledgements
This work is conducted in the context of the CVAST
– Centre of Visual Analytics Science and Technology
project. It is funded by the Austrian Federal Ministry of
Economy, Family and Youth in the exceptional Laura Bassi
Centres of Excellence initiative.

[9] Paul Craig, Jessie Kennedy, and Andrew Cumming. Animated interval scatter-plot views for the
exploratory analysis of large-scale microarray timecourse data. Information Visualization, 4:149–163,
2005.

References
[1] Daniel Archambault, Helen Purchase, and Bruno Pinaud. Animation, small multiples, and the effect of
mental map preservation in dynamic graphs. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17:539–552, 2011.

[10] T. Todd Elvins. VisFiles: presentation techniques for
time-series data. SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics,
31:14–16, 1997.

[2] Patrick Baudisch, Desney Tan, Maxime Collomb,
Dan Robbins, Ken Hinckley, Maneesh Agrawala,
Shengdong Zhao, and Gonzalo Ramos. Phosphor:
explaining transitions in the user interface using afterglow effects. In Proceedings of the 19th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 169–178. ACM Press, 2006.

[11] Michael Farrugia and Aaron J. Quigley. Effective
temporal graph layout: a comparative study of animation versus static display methods. Information
Visualization, 10(1):47–64, 2011.

[3] Dirk Beyer and Ahmed E. Hassan. Animated visualization of software history using evolution storyboards. In Proceedings of the 13th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering, pages 199–210. IEEE
Computer Society, 2006.

[12] Amy L. Grifﬁn, Alan M. MacEachren, Frank
Hardisty, Erik Steiner, and Bonan Li. A comparison
of animated maps with static small-multiple maps for
visually identifying space-time clusters. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, 96(4):740–
753, 2006.

[4] Anastasia Bezerianos, Pierre Dragicevic, and Ravin
Balakrishnan. Mnemonic rendering: an image-based
approach for exposing hidden changes in dynamic
displays. In Proceeding of the 19th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 159–168. ACM Press, 2006.

[13] Tiffany Grace Holmes. Eco-visualization: combining
art and technology to reduce energy consumption. In
Proceeding of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on
Creativity & Cognition, pages 153–162. ACM Press,
2007.

[5] Thomas Bladh, David A. Carr, and Matjaz Kljun. The
effect of animated transitions on user navigation in
3D tree-maps. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Information Visualisation, pages 297–
305. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.

[14] Dong Hyun Jeong, Alireza Darvish, Kayvan Najarian, Jing Yang, and William Ribarsky. Interactive
visual analysis of time-series microarray data. The
Visual Computer: International Journal of Computer
Graphics, 24:1053–1066, 2008.

[6] Mats Brorsson. MipsIt: a simulation and development environment using animation for computer architecture education. In Proceedings of the 2002
Workshop on Computer Architecture Education held
in Conjunction with the 29th International Symposium on Computer Architecture. ACM Press, 2002.

[15] Colleen Kehoe, John Stasko, and Ashley Taylor. Rethinking the evaluation of algorithm animations as
learning aids: an observational study. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 54:265–284,
2001.

34

[16] Ari Korhonen and Lauri Malmi. Matrix: concept animation and algorithm simulation system. In Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces, pages 109–114. ACM Press, 2002.

multivariate trends in patient cohorts using animated
scatter plots. In Proceeding of the 2011th International Conference on Ergonomics and Health Aspects
of Work with Computers held as part of HCI International 2011, pages 139–148. Springer, 2011.

[17] Gautam Kumar and Michael Garland. Visual exploration of complex time-varying graphs. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12:805–812, 2006.

[27] George Robertson, Roland Fernandez, Danyel Fisher,
Bongshin Lee, and John Stasko. Effectiveness of animation in trend visualization. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14:1325–
1332, 2008.

[18] Richard Lowe. Learning from animation. Where to
look, when to look. In Richard Lowe and Schnotz
Wolfgang, editors, Learning with Animation - Research Implications for Design, pages 49–68. Cambridge University Press, 2008.

[28] C´eline Schlienger, St´ephane Conversy, St´ephane
Chatty, Magali Anquetil, and Christophe Mertz. Improving users’ comprehension of changes with animation and sound: an empirical assessment. In Proceeding of the 11th IFIP TC 13 International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pages 207–
220. Springer, 2007.

[19] Rainer Lutz and Stephan Diehl. ChartFlight: from
spreadsheets to computer-animated data ﬂights. In
Proceeding of the 15th International Conference on
Web 3D Technology, pages 127–136. ACM Press,
2010.

[29] Maruthappan Shanmugasundaram, Pourang Irani,
and Carl Gutwin. Can smooth view transitions facilitate perceptual constancy in node-link diagrams? In
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2007, pages 71–
78. ACM Press, 2007.

[20] Richard Mayer. Research-based principles for learning with animations. In Richard Lowe and Schnotz
Wolfgang, editors, Learning with Animation - Research Implications for Design, pages 30–48. Cambridge University Press, 2008.

[30] Tatiana Tekuˇsov´a and Jorn Kohlhammer. Applying
animation to the visual analysis of ﬁnancial timedependent data. In Proceeding of the 11th International Conference Information Visualization, pages
101–108. IEEE Computer Society, 2007.

[21] Cathleen McGrath and Jim Blythe. Do you see what
I want you to see? The effects of motion and spatial layout on viewers perceptions of graph structure.
Information Sciences, 5(2), 2004.

[31] Tatiana Tekuˇsov´a, J¨orn Kohlhammer, Slawomir J.
Skwarek, and Galina V. Paramei. Perception of direction changes in animated data visualization. In Proceeding of the 5th Symposium on Applied perception
in graphics and visualization, pages 205–205. ACM
Press, 2008.

[22] Terje Midtbø, Keith C. Clarke, and Sara I. Fabrikant.
Human interaction with animated maps: the portrayal
of the passage of time. Proceedings of the 11th Scandinavian Research Conference on Geographical Information Science, pages 45–60, 2007.
[23] Kumiyo Nakakoji, Akio Takashima, and Yasuhiro
Yamamoto. Cognitive effects of animated visualization in exploratory visual data analysis. In Proceeding of the 5th International Conference on Information Visualisation, pages 77–84. IEEE Computer Society, 2001.

[32] Barbara Tversky, Julie Bauer Morrison, and Mireille
Betrancourt. Animation: can it facilitate? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 57:247–
262, 2002.
[33] Loutfouz Zaman, Ashish Kalra, and Wolfgang Stuerzlinger. The effect of animation, dual view, difference
layers, and relative re-layout in hierarchical diagram
differencing. In Proceeding of Graphics Interface
2011, pages 183–190. Canadian Human-Computer
Communications Society, 2011.

[24] Zenon W. Pylyshyn. Things and Places: How the
Mind Connects with the World. The MIT Press, 2007.
[25] Ronald A. Rensink, J. Kevin O’Regan, and James J.
Clark. To see or not to see: the need for attention to
perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science,
8(5):368–373, 1997.

[34] Douglas E. Zongker and David H. Salesin. On creating animated presentations. In Proceedings of the
2003 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on
Computer Animation, pages 298–308. Eurographics
Association, 2003.

[26] Alexander Rind, Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch,
Sylvia Wiltner, Margit Pohl, Felix Drexler, Barbara
Neubauer, and Nikolaus Suchy. Visually exploring

35

