2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Collaborative Augmented Reality Application for Information Visualization
Support
Edson Koiti Kudo Yasojima¹, Bianchi Serique Meiguins¹, Aruanda Simões Gonçalves Meiguins²
¹Universidade Federal do Pará - UFPA, ²Centro Universitário do Pará – CESUPA
{koitiyasojima@gmail.com, bianchi.serique@terra.com.br, aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br}
will be able to interact with the IV technique and build
better patterns and views that can be easier to look and
understand. Secondary goals of the project aim to create
a fully expansive application that can easily accept other
modules of IV techniques and interactions like voice,
gestures and custom commands

Abstract
Nowadays, workflow in various scenarios requires
teamwork and collaboration. There is no doubt that
working in teams and cooperate together provides a way
to get better results in a short period of time compared to
a single person job. With the large output of data,
Information Visualization have become an important
area to organize and assist decision making in many
areas such as industry, medicine, education etc. In other
to improve the goal of collaboration and decision
making through alternative ways of interaction, this
paper presents an augmented reality application for
information visualization support.
Keywords--- This part is optional.

1.1. Augmented Reality
Unlike virtual reality, which transports the user to
the virtual environment, augmented reality keeps the user
in their physical ambient and transports the virtual
objects to the user space, allowing interaction with
virtual world with more reality. New interfaces
multimodal and are being developed to facilitate the
manipulation of virtual objects in user space, using their
hands or simple interaction devices. And to achieve its
objectives, the AR needs to integrate the graphical
information in the real environment. [1] [2]
AR provides new ways of user interaction, creating
a more realistic and interesting application in various
fields of knowledge, like education, marketing, industry,
medicine etc. [3]
With the evolution of hardware devices, more
applications with AR are being developed focusing on
the lay public [4] [5].

1. Introduction
Compared to a single user work, an organized and
cooperating group of people can achieve better results in
a shorter period of time. It is important to have in mind
that the teammate actions needs to be cohesive and well
planned accordingly to the expected result and all the
person involved needs to share the same objective,
otherwise, collaboration will fail and achievements will
become unreachable.
Information Visualization (IV) aims to organize and
manipulate datasets to build patterns that can be
interpreted by humans. During the process to build these
patterns, a many operations like view, organize, filter are
done by human actions, and each person will manipulate
the data according to their own interpretation. Some of
the IV problems come when the visualization will be
interpreted by others, a person that isn’t familiar with IV
application, may find a difficult time trying to understand
the results found.
Accordingly to [14], “...most visualization research
to date focuses on a single-user model, overlooking the
social nature of visual media. Visualizations are used not
only to explore and analyze, but to communicate
findings. People may disagree on how to interpret data
and contribute contextual knowledge that deepens
understanding.”
The main motivation of this work is, by using
Augmented Reality to provide new ways of interaction
and create an immersive environment to join Information
Visualization with collaboration concepts aiming to
provide a distributed application that one or more person

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.37

1.2. Collaborative Environments
With the evolution of Internet, multi-user
applications are more and more used by people. Software
provide real-time capabilities that enable manipulation of
data between multiple people within the same context
[6].
Collaborative environments using augmented reality
have been studied to evaluate and propose improvements
in the forms of interaction and communication. The use
of AR in a collaborative context has been a promising
business when it relates to collaboration. Several ideas
have been implemented in this context. It also reveals
concerns when it says about the interaction, new ways of
interacting emerge, opening new research to usability
testing and user acceptance for the application [7] [8].

1.3. Scatterplot Technique
Scatterplot is an IV technique that uses Cartesian
coordinates to plot objects in the view using axis. A
scatterplot cannot only show abstract data dimensions

164

very effectively, but also provide crude images by
drawing it using point coordinates.
The scatterplot was chosen to be implemented in the
application, because it is the technique ta best suits to 3D
environments, there are also studies of interactions of it
and it’s constantly used by IV applications [13].

3. Architecture
3.1. Techonology
3.1.1 JMonkey Engine
JMonkeyEngine is a game engine written in Java
and provides support for developing 3D games,
according to the official site [18], has the following
features:
• Free and Open Source within the BSD license.
• Compatibility with different versions of the
OpenGL graphics library, and supports various operating
systems.
• Uses a shader-based architecture for rendering
3D graphics objects.
• Has a graphical editor for various development
platforms, besides to have a self.
• Abstracts and automate different types of
routines and construction of objects as well as the use of
textures.
3.1.2 NyARToolkit

Figure 1 3D Scatterplot with Heatmap color
configuration

NyARToolkit [19] is an abstraction of ARToolkit
[20]; it was written for Java and provides functions for
integrating 3D objects with the real world using markers.

2. Related Works
Little research attention has been focused in
collaborative information visualization using augmented
reality. Many users still rely on using or implementing
IV tools with new features but not giving attention to the
environment of the user space. However, [15] have
developed an IV application using augmented reality to
single user interaction.

3.2 Implementation Aspects
The project aims to create an environment in
Augmented Reality, in which multiple users can interact
in a vision of data dispersion. Interacting through
configuration of color, shape and using filters, a context
can be construed and interpreted in real time enabling the
interpretation of several clients at the same time, unlike
single-user environments.
The architecture in a global aspect would include a
central server that would have as its main goal, and
synchronize customer data, and receive and forward
messages between clients when any modification is made
in a vision.

Figure 2 Collaborative IV applications
functionality comparison, the AR application[15]
present limited because it’s not possible to
configure the secondary view, its generated
accordingly to the database loaded
Figure 3 Client-Server with synchronized data,
server works only on synchronization of the
clients, graphic processing stays on the client
side

165

Server will work to provide synchronization
between clients. It will get the data from the users and
synchronize to the others that have the same view. If one
client changes the data, the others will be notified.
Also it’s possible to implement new views for the
application, each new IV technique and interactions can
be coded in JMonkey Graph Architecture and coupled to
the IV Technique and CommandListener class, Observer
will do the synchronization between clients.

spectator. Not all the teammates need to have a webcam
connected; it’s possible to run the application in a 3D
environment that can be controlled by the keyboard and
mouse actions.
In the main screen of the application, it is possible to
choose to configure color, shape, do filter and consult
details on demand.

Figure 5 Main Selection Interface, using the
pointer, user can select options from the menu,
left side is color, shape and filter operations. On
the upper middle part is the columns that can
be chosen
Figure 4 Client side Java class structure
• Observer: this class will be responsible for
observing for changes in some nodes responsible for
managing certain activities such as changing the color,
shape or performance of the filter. And communicate to
the server and other connected clients.
• MessageService: this class will be responsible
for receiving notifications of class Observer, package
them and send to the server; in addition, it will receive
and unpack messages.
• IV Technique: it will hold the organization of
data from the observer and mount the display to the user;
moreover, receive human interactions inputs through
Listeners (ComandListener) like movement, keyboard,
voice etc.
• Nodes: are responsible for managing settings
and application data, for example, setting the color and
shape, and perform data filtering and provide menus for
interaction.

Supposing that there are other two clients connected
to the server, when a change is made, they will be
notified and the scatterplot will change accordingly to
the configuration selected. As an example, a color
configuration was made.

4. Prototype
In the context of a collaborative environment, users
can work on a problem and more accurate results or at
least more closely meet the goal compared to a single
user environment. Moreover, collaboration can enhance
interaction in the aspect of communication and
discussion of the problem by manipulating shared objects
[21] [22].
It uses markers to display 3D objects on the screen
through these objects, users can manipulate data in
accordance with menus, pointer and voice. Using a 3D
pointer, a person can select the desired action and the
column that will be applied to.
All changes made and applied in the menu are
reflected to all users who share this view. Applications
and changes are optional and free to all users, a person is
not forced to interact with the tool, he or she can act as a

Figure 6 When a client make a change, all the
other users are affected by the change, they can
share the same view and make modifications,
changes are not limited to color, it’s also
possible to configure shape, details and filters
If a dataset have too many distinct number values,
it’s possible to change the behavior of the color
configuration to a gradient color. Also, users can
configure the shape of the objects and select them to see
the details of the item stored in the database.

166

they used the tool for about 15 minutes to familiarize
with the controls.
After the phase of familiarization with the
application, each user had to answer three questions
pertaining to the database used; one question is
considered easy level and the other two intermediate
level.
• 1st Question: The Japanese brand cars are cheaper
than American cars in general?
Answer: No
• 2nd Question: How many European cars have
higher value than the most expensive car in America, and
what is the value of the most expensive American car?
Answer: four European cars, and most expensive
American car is worth 33,900.
• 3rd Question: What are the main characteristics
of American cars of the value, power and years and
compared to the other?
Answer: It has low cost, and most are new power is
average.
Analyzing the tests, each pair had different
behaviors. Some have chosen to divide the tasks, each
person got one question to solve, and others have chosen
to resolve and discuss each question together.
The factor of collaboration has helped significantly
to resolving the issues, especially in the group where
there was a person who had no knowledge with IV tools,
the sharing of views and information exchange was
essential to the person that had difficulty on solving
problems, allowing gain of experience and cognition
from the results found. Moreover, it was noticed that the
execution time of tasks is relatively minor compared to
the use of one person only.

Figure 7 (a) Gradient color configuration; (b)
Shape configuration; (c) Details selection; All
these changes are also reflected to other users

5. Test Cases and Results
The prototype made, was presented in a
technological workshop open to public, two mainly
questions was made focusing on the augmented reality
environment and collaboration activities:
• “Difficulty level of application usage 1(low) –
5(high)”
• “Have found this type of interaction better or
worse than traditional human computer
interactions?”
After about few tries, we noticed that:
• People need some time to learn and adapt to the
application interaction.
• They found the way of interaction more
interesting
• Can achieve more accurate results thought
collaboration
• Use of a 3D pointer to select items are a
complex for some users
For more complex test cases, to validate the
usability and accuracy rate of the application, according
to the evaluation method proposed by [22], users of the
software will be submitted to a short training and soon
after will use the tool to make some assumptions that
involve pre-defined tasks of:
• Identification
• Determination
• View
• Comparison

5.2. Results Analysis
Accordingly to the tests conducted and participants
behavior analysis, we have appointed some
considerations about the usability of the tools. The
difference of interaction between a tridimensional
environment and an augmented reality was remarkable.
Users feel more “comfortable” with the 3D environment
because it was an approach that they are used to.
In augmented reality environment, the manipulation
of markers made it difficult to use the AR prototype,
especially by the use of the pointer. The existence of the
depth factor has left some users have difficulty selecting
three-dimensional elements, increasing the time
resolution of the problems considerably.

5.1. Tests Conducted
Using the results of the first test explained above,
adjustments was made on the application and them tested
again in another context.
We chose three pairs of users, who already have
familiarity with computer use, and the six people
selected, one did not have familiarity with the use of
information visualization tools.
The database was chosen for the prototype, is a car
database, which contains 11 attributes, six of type
character and 5 numeric types.
Each pair had a brief explanation of how the
application works and the main features of the prototype,

167

5.3.4 Selection mechanisms for augmented reality
environment
A mechanism is needed for selection in augmented
reality environments using the context of information
visualization. It was noted that the notion of depth in this
kind of environment makes it difficult to manipulate
objects in 3D.
One solution is to change only the X and Y
coordinates according to user manipulation of the pointer
within the environment, leaving the Z-axis static during
the course of translation with respect to the marker
manipulated.
This guideline came up with the analysis of
manipulation of the pointer on the prototype augmented
reality. Members felt it very difficult to move the pointer
to select items in menus and objects in the dispersion of
data, just by having to deal with the Z axis (depth) of the
objects.

Figure 8 Average time to resolve problems in
minutes (rounded) in 3D and AR

5.3. Guidelines Generated
Making an analysis of the tests, some
considerations have been suggested for 3D collaborative
environments and augmented reality. The guidelines
generated are suggestions that can improve the
functionality for future collaborative tools that emerge
using these environments.

5.3.5 Study of the context for a particular type of
environment
Another important factor is in what situation we
should use augmented reality. The mechanism of
interaction is different paradigm known by majority of
the people; it is possible that manipulation becomes a
difficult task even if the AR is attractive to the user.
The use of augmented reality aims to enrich the
user's environment with three-dimensional objects.

5.3.1 Modular Architecture
In the implementation level, with the use of a
modular architecture, it is possible to reuse modules in
various other applications; the modular architecture
presented useful avoiding code rewriting.
This guideline was generated analyzing the
implementation of two prototypes; there was an increase
in productivity and the implementation time as a result of
reuse of the generated modules.

Conclusions
This paper presented a Collaborative Augmented
Reality Application for Information Visualization
Support, by using an AR environment, teams can
collaborate together to find better and accurate results on
Information Visualization analysis.
An important point to be added is that the
application can load any type of dataset, making it
flexible and expansive to many other purposes.
We found that the use of new ways of interaction
attracts user attention and make applications more
interesting and easier to learn. The level of acceptance by
new users was quite satisfying.

5.3.2 Voice Communication
The use of real-time voice has become a much better
alternative in relation to text messaging. This is due to
the fact that the user is interacting with the more focused
on key features of the tool without the need to keep
typing in text boxes and changing windows or tabs.
Moreover, in augmented reality environments, the
voice becomes essential, since there are no effective
mechanisms for the exchange of text within these
environments, due to lack of keyboard.

Future Works
As future work, we can highlight the implementation
of new visualization techniques, in addition to improving
operations with existing interactions. As the new
activities we can focus on:
• Improve the accuracy of pointer and improve
the depth (Z axis) of the rendered items on the screen
• Case study of interactions in a augmented
reality environment
• Implement and allow the application to make
data mining operations

5.3.3 Availability of viewing the group's activities
The possibility of viewing the activities of people
within the group is a key factor for discuss about results.
While using the application, the emergence of doubts
about what value to choose, which build vision, etc. Can
be alleviated by viewing the activity of other users.
Views built on the cognition of others can help and serve
as a model for building other views.
The existence of a feature to view the vision of
others in the group, allowed the increase of learning and
sharing results during testing.
168

References
[1]

Regenbrecht, Holger T.; Wagner, Michael T. Interaction
in a collaborative augmented reality environment. CHI
'02 extended abstracts on Human factors in computer
systems - CHI '02 (2002)E.R. Tufte. Envisioning
Information. Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press. 1990.
[2] Kirner, C.; Tori, R. Fundamentos da Realidade
Aumentada, In Fundamentos e Tecnologia da Realidade
Virtual e Aumentada. VIII Symposium on Virtual
Reality (2006)
[3] Medicherla, Padmavathi S.; Chang, George; Morreale,
Patricia. Visualization for increased understanding and
learning using augmented reality. Proceedings of the
international conference on Multimedia information
retrieval - MIR '10 (2010)
[4] Hirose, Michitaka; Tanikawa, Tomohiro. Overview of
the digital museum Project. Proceedings of the 9th ACM
SIGGRAPH Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum
and its Applications in Industry (2010)
[5] Ren, T.; Wang, Y. A Japanese text based mobile
augmented reality application. ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA
2010 Posters (2010)
[6] Diehl, S. Distribued Virtual Worlds. Springer-Verlag
(2001)
[7] Billinghurst, M.; Kato, H. Collaborative augmented
reality. Communications of the ACM Volume 45 (2002)
[8] Billinghurst, M. Usability testing of augmented/mixed
reality systems. ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2008 courses
(2008)
[9] Spence, R. Information Visualization: Design for
Interaction. Barcelona: ACM Press. 2. ed. (2007)
[10] Ware, C. Information Visualization: Perception for
Design. Elsevier Inc. 2º Edition. (2004)

169

