2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualization in trialogic public procurement contracting

Soile Pohjonen

Katja Koskelainen

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management,
Aalto University, School of Science, SimLab
Espoo, Finland
soile.pohjonen@aalto.fi

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management,
Aalto University, School of Science, SimLab
Espoo, Finland
katja.koskelainen@aalto.fi

Abstract—Public Procurement is a heavily regulated process,
particularly its competitive tendering phase. Besides, public
procurers like states and municipalities are large and complex
organization environments guided by administrative
regulation. Thus, in public procurement contracting, even
more challenges in knowledge sharing are faced than in
“normal” contracting which is a demanding cross-professional
collaboration in itself. We have simulated municipal public
procurement processes which have revealed a need to balance
the prevailing legal attitude with design attitude. Using design
tools, such as visualization of organizational processes and
contracting documents, can facilitate efforts towards better
collaboration and procurement success by revealing challenges
in knowledge sharing and developing the legally oriented
documents into knowledge sharing tools.

perspectives should realize the shared goals. The real
interests of contracting parties in a contracting process are:
1) to co-create the common will and agree about its
realization and 2) to implement what was agreed upon. The
domain of law, i.e. solving legal disputes in court or
according to legal logic, is more or less absent from the
contracting practice in normal circumstances. Law has at the
moment colonized contracts and simultaneously decreased
their value for the contract owners. Parties, who should be
preparing for business collaboration, are focusing on their
opposing interests to be prepared for a potential legal dispute
i.e. spending much time and effort on secondary tasks from
the view point of successful procurement. This has led to
common comprehension that contracts are purely legal
documents which in a successful contract relationship can be
closed in a safe and be left there. The core of contracts –
what is to be performed and how – is often not understood as
‘contract’ at all.
Our viewpoint to the procurement contracting process is
based on Proactive Law and Proactive Contracting approach
[2]. Proactive Contracting approach aims at the development
of contracting competence. Traditionally contracting
competence is seen as a dominantly legal skill where the
emphasis is on preventing and allocating legal risks. In
Proactive Contracting, contracts are not seen as primarily
legal documents but rather as business plans which clarify
what has been agreed upon. The most important task of
proactively drafted contracts is not purely to prevent legal
risks but rather to enable the parties to reach their business
goals with success. This is a user-centered view for
contracting; developing contracting procedures and tools
which enable successful collaboration.

Keywords- public procurement, simulation, visualization,
proactive contracting, trialogic contracting, boundary object,
design thinking, legal thinking

I.

INTRODUCTION

The economic value of public procurement is huge.
Nevertheless, traditionally procurement competence has not
been widely appreciated. The focus in business is usually in
selling. The same lack of appreciation applies to contracting
competence. As for public procurement, it is often seen as
legally framed competitive tendering although this is only
one phase in the procurement process. Both public
procurement and contracting are often seen as legal
formalities. Substance-success of procurement as well as
procurement and contracting competence is not developed
when the attention is on legalese. When public procurement
is seen as a legal act, the attitude is often cautious as people’s
knowledge on the regulation is rather vague and they are
afraid of their decisions to be overruled in court. This leads
to formal and self-limiting behavior. Besides, knowledge
sharing is challenging between the units of the structurally
complex buyer organizations and between the buyer and
supplier.
Instead of the above described prevailing images
procurement contracting is here seen as agreeing about
common commitments and implementing them in
procurement environment.[1] Contracting is a collaboration
process where actors with different backgrounds and
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.70

II. CONTEXT OF KNOWLEDGE SHARING – CASE STUDIES
Our cases in the PRO2ACT research and development
project [3] consist of open procedure procurement processes
of municipalities in Finland. The research approach in our
study is a combination of case study and action research. We
conduct process simulation projects according to the SimLab
business process simulation method [4], which is illustrated
in Figure 1, focusing on developing networked public
procurement practices and related contractual processes.
Based on the interviews of actors in procurement processes a

383

process model was visualized to reveal what really happened
in the process in question. Figure 2 (texts in Finnish)
represents one example to give a general idea of the
complexity of a public procurement contracting process.
Different actor organizations can be found on their own
tracks and the shapes of the action boxes show the nature of
the action: decision, document and so forth.

We used qualitative data collection methods including 58
semi-structured theme interviews, observation of two group
discussions and workshop working, and analyzed
qualitatively transcribed interviews and group discussions.
[6] We interviewed procurement professionals, field
professionals
and
suppliers.
Secondary
written
documentation, such as contracts, invitations to tender,
tenders and internal procurement guidelines were analyzed.
Besides, we have studied the procurement function in
general based on literature and expert discussions. We have
among other things arranged expert network meetings where
particular themes concerning public procurement have been
discussed. In our data analysis, we applied the iterative
process of considering theory and empirical data following
the grounded theory approach presented by Strauss and
Corbin. [7]
Our first research question in data analysis was to find
out how the procurement process in itself had affected the
end results received by the process i.e. number and quality of
tenders. According to our findings strict and complicated
formalities and definitions in competitive tendering
decreased the number of tenders available. Some suppliers
did not tender at all, some tenders had to be rejected due to
non-compliance with the invitation to tender. Sometimes
only one tender remained to be chosen from. The quality of
the product bought is affected by the common interpretation
that successful suppliers have to tender exactly what was
demanded for in the invitation and not what they consider the
best option for the buyer.
Following the case analysis we will proceed developing
visualized working tools with partner organizations based on
the knowledge of their real needs for facilitation in the public
procurement contracting process.

Figure 1. SimLab process simulation method

During the simulation day when the model was discussed
the actors involved were able to see the whole picture and
their own role in it, reflecting together according to varying
facilitation methods what they could do to diminish
problems and enhance working methods. This follows - on a
case level - the logic of dialog: actors become aware of their
own suppositions and perceptions surrounding them, begin
to reflect their own operation and interaction with others and
hopefully take responsibility for amelioration.
In legal discussions, a somewhat comparable idea has
been called legal autopsy. [5] In general, though, the
idea of learning from what went wrong if the result is ending
up in court is not even today very common among the legal
profession. Lawyers do not always see the ending up in court
as a result which might reveal mistakes in preceding
operation.

Figure 2. Visualization of a public procurement process (cleaning service for schools)

384

potential tenderers refraining to tender, e.g. too strict damage
or liability clauses have led firms opting out of the
competitive procedure. Above all, the ability to procure the
most suitable products or services requires functional
dialogue with the market.
Public procurers need to develop new capabilities of
buying to be able to exploit markets and to create novel ones
to meet their demands. Besides, procurers tend to fear being
considered partial which makes them overcautious to engage
in market dialogue which could help in producing inviting
invitations to tender. Invitations often do not provide an
opportunity to sell the latest innovations in the field. The
proposed contracts may be too stiff, ambiguously
communicated and risky for suppliers, particularly for small
and medium sized enterprises, to engage in. Currently,
invitations to tender are often unattractive for companies as
they would demand too much effort and sense-making and
would not allow them to apply their innovation abilities.
Often, actors in these complex processes are not able or
motivated to find the information needed or have not even
realized the need. The information should be presented in a
form which attracts their interest. Public procurement
contracting documents like invitations to tender should
encourage a sufficient number of suitable tenderers. Building
collaboration is a dialogic process where knowledge sharing
needs to be supported. Many kinds of facilitation tools would
be required to enhance successful procurement processes but
in the following chapter we concentrate on visualized
contract documents.

III. KNOWLEDGE SHARING NEEDS REVEALED
Public procurement is a good example of a complex and
many-sided whole where most of the problems may be
referred to lack of clarity. It is a cross-professional and crossdisciplinary process which faces many comprehension
challenges due to varying professional viewpoints and
argots. With the aid of visualized process simulations in
facto problem spheres in knowledge sharing are revealed in
particular contexts i.e. procurement cases.
Knowledge sharing and co-creation are essential in all
contracting phases: in searching for partners, in planning the
service or the product to be procured, in defining the contract
documents and in implementation and follow-up. Knowledge
needs to be shared both inside organizations and between
them. Many contracting failures are due to lack of
information as people do not comprehend the process in its
entirety: the connection between different tasks, their own
role in the whole, what to do and how to do it, what they
need to inform and to whom, and so forth. A well-structured
contracting document is an approachable tool for different
users, for example including tailored versions for users in the
field.
Procurement expertise in public organizations is mainly
centralized. This results in a natural and unavoidable
separation between procurement expertise and substance
expertise in the organization. Procurement professionals’
expertise is largely legal skills regarding competitive
tendering and contracting. Substance expertise is often
dispersed in the organization. Procurement professional often
lacks the substance knowledge by which the core of the
procurement, the product or service to be procured and
related operations models, is defined. Therefore it is essential
that substance experts commit to the preparation of
procurement so that scope and quality can be defined to meet
the practical needs of the end users.
Since resources are often scarce and other professionals
do not see procurement as their duty, an easily
understandable process is required to motivate individuals to
participate in and contribute to the process. Professionals are
more willing to commit and participate in procurement work,
if procurement preparation and contracting are seen as an
efficient collaborative process, which benefits their own
work. On the other hand, the procurement coordinator needs
to know whom to contact to acquire necessary information.
The opening up of the procurement process and clearer
definition of roles and responsibilities help to arouse
motivation to participate and contribute to the process.
Some municipalities face difficulties in receiving a
sufficient number of suitable tenders. Suppliers often
experience the competitive tendering process excessively
formal and omit to tender or fail to do it in a proper manner.
Clear invitations to tender, which in practice are often
equivalent to the forthcoming contract, could literally invite
companies to tender successfully. In addition to defining the
scope of the contract, acquired knowledge may be utilized in
defining collaborative operations models. If the procurer is
sensitive to signals from the market, it may consider the use
of certain contractual arrangements that may result in

IV. DESIGN ATTITUDE AND TRIALOGIC CONTRACTING
Contracts should enable successful collaboration in
business relations. Design attitude could balance the legal
attitude by emphasizing dynamic flexibility, skills, embodied
emotions and the figuring of one’s way around constraints.
Design thinking is an emerging field combined to business
strategizing and management. Design thinking affords both
theoretical and practical tools for facing challenges in human
collaboration. To quote Jeanne Liedtka and Henry Mintzberg
in their article “Time for Design” (p. 17): “What is the lesson
for business here? The key, we believe, is to get the basics
right so that the specifics can easily be changed.”[8]
Visualization is a core element in design. Martin J. Eppler
and Ken W. Platts emphasize that visualization is a powerful
process enabler. In their article “Visual strategizing”, they
see a future research challenge lying in matching
visualization methods and strategic situations.[9] Contracting
represents situations where strategies are implemented.
Through the eyes of design thinking, contracts can be
seen as boundary objects [10], i.e. mediating artifacts or
instruments which facilitate the crossing of knowledge
boundaries in cross-professional collaboration. In the process
simulations performed by our research project need for
boundary objects has become evident. People involved have
very different backgrounds, more often than not they have
quite vague knowledge of the various operative rules and are
weakly motivated for procurement efforts, organizations
involved are large, their organizational structures are

385

complicated, and their division of tasks is often unclear, and
so forth.
Thinking of contracting in the framework described by
design thinking and trialogical approach to learning, gives
new perspectives to this process and its tools. In design
thinking contracting can be seen as an activity of social
prototyping, as an iterative, evolving and innovative process
that is grounded on the participating parties’ subjective
understanding, as opposed to control-oriented and technical
approaches, which strive for objective rationality. Sami
Paavola and Kai Hakkarainen [11] have distinguished an
approach to learning which they call “trialogical”. It
concentrates on interaction through boundary objects which
they call mediating artifacts or processes of activity.
Interaction is not, thus, seen as an action just between
people, or between people and environment but facilitated
with the help of a boundary object. On one hand, boundary
objects facilitate collaboration. On the other hand, they are
further developed in collaboration processes. Inspired by this
concept, the contracting process could be called trialogic
contracting to emphasize the additional need to also reflect
the functionality of its working tools and methods, so that
they would be user-friendly facilitators of knowledge cocreation, knowledge sharing and so forth.
V.

awoken to the possibility of using these in contract
documents as well. The frequency of a task commitment is
informed in the boxes above and arrows with corresponding
colors point to the tasks. On the side, the tools to be used are
illustrated.

Figure 3. Work instructions for cleaners

In contract and legal discussions in general, the first
attempt to clarify information has been to consider the use of
plain language. Use of plain language is understood to
include clarifying linguistic expressions and text layout. [15]
Our case municipalities have taken steps to improve both the
language and layout of their contract documents. Besides
instruction pictures, infographics i.e. information
representations in a graphic form could be compared with
plain language as clarifying information. The logic of laws
and contract clauses may be illustrated with flowcharts [e.g.
14, 16]. The dynamic usability may be increased for example
by warning signs emphasizing spots where action is
demanded or the interpretation of norms is unclear.
Our interview data revealed the need for clearer and
more understandable contracting documents. Therefore we
have initiated together with one of our case organizations
and a graphic designer the visualization of the Finnish
General Terms of Public Procurement in service contracts
(JYSE 2009) published by the Ministry of Finance. These
terms are widely included in procurement contracts but often
with vague understanding of their content and effect. Below
(Figure 4) is presented an excerpt of the visualized terms
presently under construction. The first run of usability testing
will take place in the fall 2012.
Electronic forms offer even more possibilities to visual
clarity for example by enabling the clicking of additional
information without blurring the overall clarity of the
picture. A good example is a Scottish Procurement Toolkit in
a form of a metro map.[17] Complicated information, like
legal or organizational frames as well as working
instructions, may be easily delivered with one or two
pictures.
While empirical evidence is needed to confirm, we
believe that besides facilitating understanding about existing
contracts, visualization can facilitate the creating of contracts
and ensure that parties really share a common understanding

CONTRACTS AS VISUALIZED BOUNDARY OBJECTS

In contracting processes, boundary objects need to be
developed to facilitate co-creation of the common will and
building contracts to plan the realization of this will as well
as implementing it. Rational and impersonal writing – typical
for contracts drafted for legal (textual) interpretation
purposes - is seldom the best method of reaching this aim. In
our scientific traditions, concepts have often been understood
as conscious, literal and disembodied. Like seeds, words and
thoughts have been seen as something which may be
transferred in containers, as more or less unchanged. Legal
language and its ideal of clarity are largely based on this
understanding. It has, though, been argued that human
thought processes are largely metaphorical and that our
conceptual system is mostly metaphorically structured.[12]
When metaphors are understood as our way of having a
reality, the question will not be what they mean but how they
work. A metaphor is not asked to validate a rule of logic, the
question is what logic and reality it constitutes and enables.
[13]
Visualizing contracts is arousing increasing interest. [14]
Visualization facilitates the sharing of knowledge as well as
of holistic and complex comprehension. Visualization
concretely makes the invisible visible. Visual meaning
making is often more effective than any textual
communication. People are drawn towards visual
representations and may comprehend their message with one
glance. Visual cleaning work instructions used by some
employers in the cleaning branch present good examples of
this and furthermore of overcoming language barriers with
non-native employees. The following illustration is an
excerpt of work instructions created by a Finnish
municipality (Figure 3). Even though these are used for
internal purposes at the moment, the case municipality has

386

about the meaning of the various provisions of the contract.
This is a much better way to protect the realization of the real
will of the parties than disputing in court afterwards. In
addition, visualization can help to make tempting invitations
to tender.
Contracts are supposed to guide behavior. For that
purpose their contents should be known. If people are
expected to familiarize themselves with information,
according to the principles of user-centered design, the
representation of this information should match the needs of
its prospective end-users.[18] User-centered information
should be easy to find, timely, match the context of use, be
catered in the amounts appropriate to the user and context, be

presented in a usable format, be written in language
comprehensible to the reader, be perceptually attractive, and
finally for the user to enable the elaboration and
development of the information through participation.
However, the way contract documents are presented is rather
forbidding than inviting. They are written to fit into
traditional legal interpretation logic and not to serve their
main purpose as collaboration and communication
instruments. Several of the interviewed supplier
representatives indicated the difficulty of understanding the
complex and formal tendering documents which decreased
their interest to tender.

Figure 4. Draft visualization of clauses dealing with defective services (General Terms of Public Procurement JYSE 2009 Services

387

VI. CONCLUSIONS
There is a need for better quality boundary objects in
public procurement contracting. When people do not know
enough they cannot fulfill their duties properly, their actions
are based on suppositions and they become overcautious or
negligent. The legally oriented nature of public procurement
and contracting i.e. focusing on avoiding legal risks furthers
a formal attitude instead of a dynamic effort towards
successful procurement. The SimLab business process
simulation and development method has enabled the
perception of the reality of public procurement cases and
revealed the actual challenges in knowledge sharing.
Knowledge is always shared in a particular context which
has to be taken into consideration in developing functioning
tools for knowledge sharing. Design thinking and especially
one of its core tools, visualization, could offer user-friendly
comprehension of organization structures and working logic,
requirements of the many-level-regulation, one’s own duties
and their relation to those of others and so forth. Various
visualized tools for different spheres of the process would
need to be created. We have collected information on tools
already made for public procurement or contracting purposes
and are finishing a visualized booklet on the widely used
General Terms of Public Procurement in collaboration with a
designer and substance experts. Finally, design mindset
could do the work of procurers more inspiring instead of
being overwhelmed by legal formalities. Designers are
trained to envision ways around hinders, towards success.

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This article has been written in the research project
PRO2ACT (Proactive contracting processes in public
procurement) at Aalto University, SimLab. The authors are
grateful for the fruitful collaboration in SimLab. PRO2ACT
is financed by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology
and Innovation (Tekes) and partner organizations.

[18]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

Pohjonen, Soile & Koskelainen, Katja, Empowering contracting
parties - Proactive and dialogic contracting in public procurement.
Forthcoming. Østergard, K. & Berger-Walliser, G. (ed.) DJOF
Publishing. Copenhagen (2012).
Siedel, George & Haapio, Helena, Using Proactive Law for
Competitive Advantage. American Business Law Journal, Vol. 47,
Issue 4, Winter, 641-686 (2010).
http://simlab.aalto.fi/en/research/pro2act (homepages of SimLab in
Aalto University). Complete case reports can be found only in
Finnish.
Smeds, Riitta Jaatinen, Miia, Hirvensalo, Antero and Kilpiö, Anna,
SimLab Process Simulation Method as a Boundary Object for InterOrganizational Innovation, 10th International Workshop on
Experimental Interactive Learning in Industrial Management,
Trondheim, Norway June 11-13 (2006).
Brown, Louis M., Legal Autopsy, Journal of the American Judicature
Society, Vol. 39, 2, 47-49 (1955).
Koskelainen, Katja, Pohjonen, Soile & Wernick, Alina, Proactive and
trialogic procurement contracting. Conference on Demand,
Innovation and Policy: Underpinning Policy Trends with Academic

388

Analysis
in
Manchester
on
22.-23.
March
(2012).
https://underpinn.portals.mbs.ac.uk/Conference/ProgrammePresentati
ons/tabid/2531/language/en-GB/Default.aspx
Strauss, Anselm L. and Corbin, Juliet R., Basics of Quality Research:
Techniques and Procedure for Developing Grounded Theory, Sage
Publications, Newbury Park, CA (1990).
Liedtka, Jeanne & Mintzberg, Henry, Time for Design, Design
Management Review, Spring, 10-18 (2006).
Eppler, Martin J. & Platts, Ken W., Visual Strategizing, The
Systematic Use of Visualization in the Strategic-Planning Process,
Long Range Planning 42, 42-74 (2009).
Carlile, Paul, A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries:
Boundary Objects in New Product Development, Organization
Science, Vol. 13, No.4, July-August, 442-455 (2002).
Paavola, Sami & Hakkarainen, Kai, The Knowledge Creation
Metaphor – An Emergent Epistemological Approach to Learning.
Science & Education, Vol. 14, 535-557 (2005).
Lakoff, George & Johnson, Mark, Metaphors we live by. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London (2003).
Winter, Steven L., A Clearing in the Forest, Law, Life, and Mind.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London (2001).
Passera, Stefania & Haapio, Helena, User-Centered Contract Design:
New Directions in the Quest for Simpler Contracting. In: Henschel,
René Franz (ed.), Bringing together academics and practitioners to
promote research and best practice in Contracts and Commercial
Management, Academic Forum for Innovative Research and Practice,
International Association for Contract and Commercial Management
(IACCM), Ridgefield, 80-97 (2011).
Assy, Rabeaa, Can the Law Speak Directly to its Subjects? The
Limitation of Plain Language 379, Journal of Law and Society, Vol.
38, September 3, 376-404 (2011).
Legal
flowcharts
by
MANZ’sche
Verlagsund
Universitätsbuchhandlung, Wien.
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Government/Procurement/buyerinformation/spdlowlevel/routetwotoolkit (pages of the government of
Scotland).
Beyer, Hugh & Holtzblatt, Karen, Contextual Design, Defining
Customer-Centered Systems. Morgan Kaufmann publishers, San
Francisco (1998).

