2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Paths to Success:
A Sketch-based Creativity Technique for Individuals and Teams
Martin J. Eppler, Roland A. Pfister
mcm institute, University of St.Gallen (HSG)
{martin.eppler@unisg.ch, roland.pfister@unisg.ch}
sufficiently related to the problem at hand. In addition,
group brainstorming suffers from the fact that
participants prematurely influence one another in the
sense that they ‘contaminate’ each other’s thinking by
providing thinking vectors that lead into one direction
only. Another widely acknowledged problem with group
brainstorming is ‘production blocking’ or the fact that
one cannot develop ideas while listening to others
presenting theirs [24]. Many more problems with
brainstorming are cited in these articles, ranging from
free riding (relying too much on others), to overly active
or dominating session participants.

Abstract
In this paper we propose a new graphic method for
idea generation and creative problem solving called
Paths to Success (P2S). P2S is a sketch-based creativity
technique that is based on 15 existing creativity
principles and the generative potential of images in
general and sketching in particular. The goal of the
method is to enable group-based and personal idea
generation productivity through systematic, proven and
varied creativity stimuli. The method, its background and
rationale are described in the paper, as are first pilottesting and evaluation results regarding its benefits and
improvement needs. We conclude the paper by outlining
future research opportunities to further test and develop
the method.

So what can managers, researchers, or engineers do
to move beyond brainstorming when having to develop
ideas (individually or in groups) under time pressure?
They can rely on more than sixty years of research into
creativity enablers and use these mechanisms in an
integrated manner in their daily practices. They can also
make use of the power of (software-supported and paperbased) knowledge visualization – a field that thus far has
not embraced creativity as an application area. In this
paper, we present a practical method that is based on
such mechanisms and combines them with the
naturalness, immediacy and stimulation of sketching (in
combination with on-screen joint idea mapping). In
doing so, we also hope to inspire and motivate
information and knowledge visualization researchers to
use their know-how and tools to support ideation in
organizations, a field in need of visual solutions.

Keywords: creativity, visualization, sketching,
creativity techniques, evaluation, business model
innovation.

1. Introduction: The Need for on-demand
Creativity Support beyond Brainstorming
There is a wide consensus in industry and academia
that creativity is a key requisite to master today’s societal
and business challenges. A recent CEO survey by IBM
showed that creativity is the number one requirement of
today’s managers for the next years to come (in the view
of the surveyed CEOs) [1]. To be creative under time
pressure, however, is not an easy task. Ideas are often the
result of per chance insights or come about through the
long incubation and development of dispersed findings
and insights. Yet in business contexts, idea generation
must work ad-hoc and on-demand and often in group
contexts, as diverse and distributed knowledge is needed
to solve complex problems creatively. To facilitate such
instant creative idea sessions, various creativity
techniques have been developed over the last decades.
These techniques should help professionals to be more
creative and generate novel and feasible ideas, either
individually or in teams. Still, numerous scientific
evaluations show that the most widely used method in
business today, brainstorming, is not an effective tool for
high-quality idea generation in groups [5, 17, 18, 24].
Participants may think too much out of the box so that
their ideas cannot really be put to use, as they are not

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.63

In this paper we first review existing creativity
methods and their three main underlying principles. We
then extend these three principles to a more
comprehensive list of fifteen creativity enablers. We use
these principles to design a new visual idea generation
method that can enable idea generation under time
pressure (i.e., lead to more than 70 high-quality ideas per
person in less than 45 minutes). We then describe the
Paths to Success (P2S) creativity technique, including its
visual framework and its individual steps. We also report
on the pilot-testing and evaluation results of the method
(in real-life creative strategizing and business model
innovation workshops with managers and with graduate
students). We conclude the paper by outlining the
practical and theoretical implications of our approach
and define future research needs to further validate the
proposed creativity method.
337

2. Autonomy

2. Background: A Review of Creativity
Mechanisms

Amabile
1997 [16]
Jones 1992
[2]

Let people generate ideas
individually.
Identify ways to worsen
the situation and move
away from the objective.

Gick,
Holyoak
1980
[4],
Poze 1986
[8]
Rawlinson
1981 [12],
Roy 1993 [7]

Identify ways to reach the
objective
from
other
domains.

6. Problem
evasion

Rawlinson
1981 [12]

Identify a solution that
would make one or more
barriers obsolete.

7. Constraints
(removal)

Clarke
&
George 2005
[5]
Savage
&
Miles 1998
[10]
Allen 1962
[6],
Verstijnen et
al. 1998 [9]
Zwicky 1969
[11]

Imagine a solution if time
or money didn’t matter.

Barron 1988
[13]
Lipshitz &
Waingortin
1995 [14]
Cross 1996,
[15]

Envision an
useful goal.

3. Problem
Reversal

In order to develop an effective creativity technique
for individuals and groups in organizations, we have
screened and analyzed the literature on creativity
methods and enablers. We have isolated a number of key
creativity mechanisms that have shown to be conducive
to the generation of novel and useful ideas. In total, we
have analyzed 30 existing creativity methods (primarily
the most widely discussed methods in books and articles
on the topic). These methods are based on three main
principles, namely analogies, combination, and various
ways of describing or representing the problem. Figure 1
(based on [19]) summarizes the analyzed methods and
relates them to their underlying creativity mechanisms.
These ‘main stream’ methods, however, do not use many
of the other existing creativity principles known from
creativity research, but rely mainly on the three
mentioned mechanisms. The new creativity technique
proposed in this paper also makes use of these three
important principles, but adds another twelve proven
principles to further stimulate creativity.

4. Analogies

5. (Visual)
problem
representation

8. Combination

9. Reframing

10. First Step

Figure 1 A classification of existing creativity
techniques and their underlying principles

Reference

Use in P2S

Mumford et
al. 1996 [20]

Stating
the
problem
explicitly as a difference
between the status-quo and
the desired objective.

Van Gundy
(1991) [21]

12. Presencing

Scharmer
2007 [3]
Roy 1993 [7]

13. Emphasis on
Quantity and
Variety of
ideas

The following additional creativity mechanisms
have been compiled from the literature and are used in
the Paths to Success Method as individual steps. They
have been identified by screening seminal (i.e., highly
cited) research articles and books on creativity. Below,
we state each principle’s main label, one or several key
citations for it, as well as how we have applied the
mechanism in the P2S method.
Creativity
Mechanism
1. Problem
Formulation

11. Indirect
approach

Directly
identify
and
address obstacles / barriers
to reach your objective.

Identify three elements or
previous ideas to combine
to reach the goal.

alternative

Generate a first step
towards the goal and then
create two subsequent
steps from there.
Generate proxy goals that
help to move closer to the
objective.
Experience the solution
The method generates over
10 different kinds of idea
types.

14. Sketching

Gross 1996
[22]
Verstijnen et
al. 1998 [9]

The method is used as a
sketching technique that
can be easily extended or
adapted.

15. Picture
Stimuli

Malaga,
2000 [23]

One path is drawn based
on the associations with a
picture that is shown.

Table 1 Creativity mechanisms and their use in
the P2S technique

338

be combined to make up a new solution to reach the
goal. Have each team member present their idea.
Alternatively have two to three people discuss and
draw out possible combinations of their prior ideas
together on a flip chart.
8. Proxy-Goal: Ask team members for indirect or midterm goals that could help to reach the objective and
let them share those after a few minutes.
9. Alternative Goals: Have them collectively discuss
alternative feasible goals to reach instead of the initial
goal that was fixed in step 0. Let them generate ideas
how to achieve that alternative goal.
10. First Steps: Now turn to the main goal again and ask
everyone what they could do to move towards that
goal in only 48 hours. Ask them for two follow-up
steps after that quick win.
11. Presencing: Ask them to describe how it would feel
if the problem were resolved. Capture their attributes
of the desired future state.
12. Picture Stimuli: The facilitator now shows 3-5 (rich,
expressive but totally unrelated) pictures to the
participants and asks them to relate them to the
defined goal and list corresponding ideas on an arrow
parallel to the status-quo and goal.
13. Method Extension: Ask the participants to draw one
new arrow into the diagram that could help them
identify new ideas. Let them list ideas on that arrow
(for example an arrow with an intermediate goal, an
arrow going beyond the goal or an arrow going in a
zigzag pattern).

The way in which these principles or mechanisms
operate in the P2S method is further described in the next
section, where we outline the main steps of the technique
and its resulting benefits.

3. Visualizing Ideation: the P2S Method
The basic premise of the creativity method presented
in this paper is that a visual, sketch-based approach to
group creativity that integrates existing insights into
creativity can yield higher value than current approaches.
The method combines proven creativity mechanisms
with the seamlessness, revisability and spontaneity of
hand-drawn sketching. It also combines individual and
collective idea generation moments by letting
participants first sketch ideas individually, that are then
mapped and combined jointly on a projected map.
Below, we present the main steps of the P2S
method. In a typical application scenario, a team goes
through these steps in 45 to 180 minutes under the
guidance of a facilitator. The method can be used in a colocated setting or via the Internet (with tools such as
www.cosketch.com or simple application sharing
programs). After each idea generation step, the facilitator
can ask the team members to highlight the best idea they
have just generated. Some of these ideas are then
combined in step 7 or used again in step 8 or they are
further analyzed with regard to their feasibility and
impact in a follow-up session. Each step can take
between 3 to 15 minutes.

The 13 steps described above are directly supported
by a corresponding sketching procedure that is
represented schematically (as a template) in Figure 2.
The pathways are drawn and labeled by the participants
as they go through the steps of the method. Additional
pathways (for example beyond the positioned goal) can
be added by the users towards the end of a creativity
session (in step 13). The visual framework is based on
the metaphor of solving a problem as finding multiple
pathways from the current position towards the final
goal. Different pathways are envisioned and act as
systematic and varied stimuli for individual and joint
idea generation. Depending on the team dynamics and
the available time, facilitators may choose to use only a
subset of all the possible pathways and they can modify
the sequence of steps according to the team’s
constellation and current status. We recommend,
however, that the reversal, analogies and barriers steps
are always completed first in a creativity session. They
have shown to be ideal ice-breakers and warm-up
exercises for joint idea generation.

0. Context: In the team, on a joint visual (brown paper
or via beamer), define the goal you want to reach and
the status-quo that differs from this future state.
Don’t be overly specific with the goal.
1. Reversal: Draw an arrow downwards from the
status-quo and let the participants (individually) come
up with ideas how to move away from the goal or
how to make the situation worse. Collect all ideas.
2. Analogies: Collect ideas where the objective has
been reached in other domains by discussing
analogies
(from
nature,
science,
sports,
entertainment, competitors etc). Also this step is first
done individually and then discussed.
3. Barriers: Identify three barriers that impede the team
from reaching the goal. This is also first done
individually and then chosen in the team.
4. Remedies: Have each team member think of ways to
reduce the barriers and share them in the group.
5. Avoiding: Ask participants to think about how to
make one or several of the barriers become irrelevant
(when would they no longer matter?).
6. Long Way: Ask the team members how they would
reach the goal if time (or money or any other
important constraint) didn’t matter. Collect these
ideas again and map them next to the corresponding
arrow.
7. Combination: Ask participants to think of three
elements (or the three best previously noted ideas) to

In Figure 3 we provide an example of the method’s
use for a team problem, namely how to improve one’s
working productivity creatively.

339

3.

4.

Figure 2 The paths to success (P2S
S) framework

5.

The (individual) idea collectionn below was
generated during a 45 minute sessionn based on the
starting question “how can I increease my work
productivity as a researcher.” The worrkshop involved
four people and the image below represennts the results of
one workshop participant. These resuults were then
discussed and shared in the team. We usse this example,
as the results of the business workshops are
a confidential.

versatile, but also morre sustained, as each novel
approach motivates thee participants to contribute
further ideas. Applyingg the method, a team can
continue to generate noovel ideas for more than an
hour, based on our initiaal testing with six teams.
Idea refinement. Thhrough the visualization,
participants can build on their own ideas and
recombine them in better ways as they continue to
draw.
Collaboration. The P2S method can be used
individually or in teaams. In teams the visual
framework enables grouups to move seamlessly from
individual idea generatioon to group deliberation and
back, thus avoiding mutual
m
mental contamination
that comes too early, buut fostering the constructive
combination and elaboraation of ideas in the team.
Follow-up: This creativvity technique has a built-in
documentation and priioritization mechanism and
thus fosters direct folllow-up activities after the
ideation session to start implementing
i
the best ideas.

The main benefits of
o the P2S method are
consequently its ability to syystematically foster creative
idea generation by expploring proven creativity
mechanisms – and this inn a simple, replicable and
enjoyable manner. In addittion, the sketching mode is
conducive to spontaneous, uninhibited idea elicitation
and ensures seamless ideaa documentation (especially
when used in combination with
w a visualization software
that allows ‘replaying’ a seession later on). In how far
these advantages can be conssistently achieved, is the key
question of the evaluation process that followed the
development of the method. These evaluation results are
discussed in the next section..

4. Application and Evaaluation Experiences
with the P2S Method
To test the practical useffulness, impact, and usability
of the P2S method, we havve applied it in five real-life
creative strategizing and business
b
model innovation
workshops with managemennt teams and in five student
creativity sessions. In the business workshops we have
worked with established maanagement teams consisting
of 4-8 participants. The fivee student creativity sessions
were held with experiencedd graduate business students
(MBA and master level) onn the topic of of improving
work productivity. In these classroom contexts we have
applied the method in grouups ranging from 10 to 40
people (using virtual skketching support such as
www.cosketch.com that alsoo allows for anonymous idea
contributions). As part of the first idea generation phase
in business model innovvation workshops, real-life
managers were asked to use the method to develop novel
business ideas and then shaare those with one another.
This has lead to a great quanntity of individual ideas that
were shared in the group witth the help of a visualization
software (www.lets-focus.coom, see Figure 4). After the
completion of each step, the main ideas of each
participant were captured on a projected template. In this
way, all participants were abble to see all generated ideas

Figure 3 Example of the method's use on “how
to improve one's working prod
ductivity”

Using the method in the way describbed above leads
to several advantages when compared too other methods,
such as traditional brainstorming. The keyy benefits of the
P2S method, as intended by the auuthors, are the
following:
1. Focus. The visual way of workinng ensures that
participants are kept engaged. This effect is
i the proposed
enhanced by the regular changes in
stimuli or prompting questions.
2. Versatile and sustained ideation: The method
enables individuals and teams to
t approach a
challenge from different perspeectives. These
changes in thinking make the ideatioon process more

340

use of analogies, and the picture priming. As a
complementary way to evaluate the method, five
creativity expert interviews have been conducted in order
to assess the method through expertise on creativity and
ideation tools. Four international (English, Austrian,
Swiss, and German) senior creativity and innovation
management experts (two consultants and two
researchers) were interviewed for one hour each about
their view of the method. For this purpose, the experts
were first talked through the method. Each step of the
method was explained to the corresponding expert and at
the end of each step the expert provided feedback or
clarification questions regarding the step of the method.
After the last step had been explained, the expert gave an
overall assessment of the method or asked further
clarification questions. To conclude the expert
interviews, the researcher asked the expert if there are
improvement opportunities or variations possible for the
method and regarding its application scope (i.e., fitting
and unfitting application contexts). The four experts,
interviewed separately assessed the method as “better
than existing methods”, “very useful”, “highly
applicable” and “versatile.” They also all indicated that
the method’s visual way of working was one of its key
benefits. In terms of improvement needs, they questioned
the method’s ability to work with large groups. They also
mentioned that further steps were necessary to evaluate
the generated ideas. Other improvement needs that we
have identified through the ten pilot workshops are the
following:
1. Improve the way in which individual and collective
idea elaboration is combined. For this purpose we have
adapted the combination step 7 and are now conducting
this step as a pair wise collaboration task instead of a
silent individual activity.
2. Improve the idea capturing: So far, we have
visualized all ideas on a single template (as depicted in
Figure 3). In the future, we would like to use other means
of capturing ideas, such as large poster sheets.
3. Optimize the time management: In our current usage
scenarios the P2S method required between 45 minutes
and 1.5 hours. In future sessions, we would like to
experiment with different time scope and analyze if and
how they impact idea generation productivity and idea
quality.
4. Optimize group constellation: From the pilot tests so
far we have realized that group size of 8 people is
already too big for the P2S method to work efficiently,
because of the resulting time needs for everyone to share
his or her ideas. Thus, we need to find ways to better
aggregate individual ideas in large team constellations.
We are currently trying to overcome these challenges.
We are also working an iPhone/iPad app that allows
participants to participate in a P2S session using their
mobile devices.

at all time during the workshop in order to build on one
another’s ideas (legibility of all ideas was ensured
through zoom-in).

Figure 4 The P2S software template to
capture and discuss all ideas
At the end of each business workshop, we have
issued a three page feedback questionnaire to all
participants and we have conducted a debriefing
discussion on the participants’ likes and dislikes with the
method. So far, we have gathered 24 completed surveys.
It is thus too early to generalize from the results in a
quantitative manner, but this number already allows for
good indications of how the method is perceived. The
questionnaire contained questions (based on pre-existing
scales) on the perception of the participants regarding the
following elements of the workshop:
• the team’s performance during the workshop
• the outcome of the workshop (i.e., the quality of
the generated ideas)
• the identification (commitment) of the
participant with the results
• the P2S method itself and its elements
• the use (and benefits) of visualization during the
workshop
We also asked the participants (in the survey) what they
liked most and least about the workshop. In terms of
satisfaction, the participants were very satisfied to
extremely satisfied with the process and with the results
(none of the 24 surveys included a value below “very
satisfied). The elements that the participants liked least
ranged from the workshop setting (i.e., sub-optimal room
size or temperature) to the timing (they would have liked
to have more time to evaluate the generated ideas) to the
team structure (they would have liked more ‘outsiders’
present). In terms of the things that participants liked
most they indicated the efficiency of the creativity
process, the balance between individual and collective
idea generation work, the out-of-the-box thinking, the
visualization of their ideas, the facilitation (the
workshops were facilitated by the inventor of the
method), the step-by-step approach, and the level of
engagement by all participants. The steps that were rated
as the most valuable ones were the problem reversal, the

5. Limitations and Outlook
The scope of the evaluation procedure employed
thus far is very limited and needs to be extended in future
341

studies. Using the method for different idea generation
contexts (such as strategizing, project work, or
innovation tasks) should also allow us to learn more
about the constraints imposed by the method and its
potential disadvantages and biases. It can also be
instrumental in determining whether the current
sequence of steps is optimal or not. This is a particularly
intriguing research question, as the right order of the
activities may foster a maximum of high-quality ideas.
To this end, we have now begun to not only have
participants assess the creativity process, but also rate the
quality (novelty, feasibility, etc.) of the generated ideas.
In future research, we would also like to further evaluate
the method regarding its application medium, for
example by using it online for remote teams working
with desktop-based shared sketching. This can be done
through IT tools such as www.cosketch.com, Skype or
Cisco’s WebEx. We are also experimenting with the use
of mobile devices to enable creativity on-the-go through
a subset of the P2S steps.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

6. Conclusion
[15]

In this paper, we have presented a new visual
creativity method for individuals and teams based on the
combination of fifteen existing creativity principles and
the seamlessness and spontaneity of sketching (in
combination with software-based mapping). We have
described the principles and how they have been
incorporated into the method. We have also described the
main steps of the method and its visual framework, based
on the metaphor reaching a destination or designing
pathways to a destination. We have reported on the first,
positive evaluation experiences and we have identified
future research needs, especially in varying application
contexts, for the method. In conclusion, we would like to
invite fellow information visualization researchers and
practitioners to try out the method and see how it can
accelerate and alleviate their own idea generation
processes. We invite information visualization
researchers to reflect on their expertise and tools and
how these could be put to use for idea generation
contexts in organizations (see also [25], p. 24 for this
point). We believe that visualizing information is an idea
whose time has also come for the context of innovation
and creativity in teams.

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[23]

IBM (2010) Global CEO Survey. New York: London.
Available online at: www.ibm.com
Jones J.C. (1092) Design Methods, Wiley (2nd edition).
Scharmer, O. (2007) Theory U: Learning from the Future
as it emerges. Boston: SOL.
Gick, M.L., Holyoak, K. (1980) Analogical Problem
Solving, in: Cognitive Psychology 12, 306-355.
Clarke, P, George, J. (2005) Big Box Thinking:
Overcoming Barriers to Creativity in Manufacturing, in:
Design Management Review, 16(2): 42-48.
Allen, M.S. (1962) Morphological creativity: the miracle
of your hidden brain power: a practical guide to the

[24]
[25]

342

utilization of your creative potential. Englewood:
Prentice Hall.
Roy, R. (1993) Case Studies of Creativity in Innovative
Product Development, Design Studies, 14, No. 4, 423–
443.
Poze, T. (1983) Analogical Connections—The Essence of
Creativity, Journal of Creative Behavior, Vol. 17, No. 4,
240–258.
Verstijnen, I. M., Van Leeuwen, C., Goldschmidt, G.,
Hamel, R., and Hennessey, J. M. (1998), Sketching and
Creative Discovery, Design Studies, 19, No. 4: 519–546.
Savage, J. C. D., and Miles, C. (1998) The Interaction of
Time and Cost Constraints on the Design Process, Design
Studies, 19, No. 2, 217–233.
Zwicky, P. (1969) Discovery, Invention, Research
through Morphological Analysis, McMillan, New York.
Rawlinson, J. G., (1981) Creative Thinking and Problem
Solving, Gower, Farnborough, UK.
Barron, F. (1988) Putting Creativity to Work, in R. J.
Sternberg, ed., The Nature of Creativity: 76–98.
Lipshitz, R., and Waingortin, M. (1995) Getting Out of
Ruts—A Laboratory Study of a Cognitive Model of
Reframing, Journal of Creative Behavior, 2(29): 151–
172.
Cross, N. (1996) Creativity in Design: Not Leaping but
Bridging, in L. Candy and E. A. Edmonds, eds.,
Proceedings of the 2nd International Sympo-sium
Creativity and Cognition, 1996, Loughborough: 27–35.
Amabile, B. (1997) Motivating Creativity in
Organizations. California Management Review 1(40): 3958.
H. Barki, and A. Pinsonneault (2001) Small group
brainstorming and idea quality: Is electronic
brainstorming the most effective approach?, Small Group
Research, 32, 2, 158-205.
Connolly, T, Routhieaux, R. and SSchneider (1993). On
the effectiveness of group brain storming - Test of an
underlying cognitive mechanism. Small Group Research,
24(4): 490 – 503
Ward, T. B. (2004). Cognition, creativity, and
entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(2),
173-188.
Mumford, M. D., Baughman, W. A., Supinski, E. P., &
Maher, M. A. (1996) Process-based measures of creative
problem-solving skills: II. Information encoding.
Creativity Research Journal, 9, 77–88.
VanGundy, A. (1981). Techniques of structured problem
solving. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company Inc.
Gross, M. D. (1996) The Electronic Cocktail Napkin - A
Computational Environment for Working with Design
Diagrams, Design Studies, 17, No. 1, 53–69.
Malaga, R.A. (2000) The effect of stimulus modes and
associative distance in individual creativity support
systems. Decision Support Systems. Volume 29, Issue 2,
August 2000, 125–141.
Paulus, P.B., Nijstad, B. (2003) Group creativity. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Shneiderman, B. (2007) Creativity Support Tools:
Accelerating Discovery and Innovation, Communications
of the ACM, Vol. 50, No. 12, 20-32.

