2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Voronoi Diagram Based Dimensional Anchor
Assessment for Radial Visualizations
Adam Russell, Karen Daniels, Georges Grinstein
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Lowell
{arussell, kdaniels, grinstein}@cs.uml.edu
where Fj = kx for k some spring constant and x is the
stretched distance. The stretched distance is the distance from
the dimensional anchor to a point in the two-dimensional
image space. We substitute for k the data record’s value for the
j-th dimension vj . For x we substitute the distance between
the dimensional anchor Sj on the unit circle and the data
record’s image x and then solve for x.

Abstract—Selecting the most expressed dimensions from high
dimensional data sets has motivated the design and application
of a variety of statistical and machine learning techniques. Here,
in our current work, we introduce a metric for assessing the
effectiveness of these methods. Our formulation is based on the
broad concepts of: (a) devising a formal method of partitioning a
visualization’s image space; (b) identifying regions that indicate
the relative strength of the dimension selection based on how
well they are populated by data images; and (c) similarily
identifying those regions indicating a poor selection of dimensions. In particular, we explore assessing the quality of radial
visualizations. Dimension selection in this class of visualizations
strongly effects visualization quality and the sensitivity of cluster
formation. We demonstrate the usefulness of Voronoi partitioning
the RadViz image space; quantifying radial visualization quality
is a direct measure of dimension selection. This work continues
to develop and reﬁne the formal theory behind the general class
of Normalized Radial Visualizations, including RadViz.
Index Terms—Visualization; Cluster Analysis; Normalized Radial Visualization; Voronoi Diagram;

x=

In two-dimensional RadViz we then have:
x1 =

An introduction and overview of Normalized Radial Visualizations (NRVs) from a formal theoretical perspective is given
in [1]. An NRV is a mapping of high dimensional records
into lower dimensional space where data records’ images are
convex combinations of the “dimensional anchors”: labels
arranged on a circle (in two dimensions) or on the surface
of a hypersphere (in higher dimensions). RadViz [2] can be
shown to be the particular instance of an NRV for which
the image space is of two dimensions. We use RadViz as
our reference NRV framework throughout the course of this
paper, however, we take care to note the applicability of these
techniques to higher dimension NRVs. The RadViz mapping
is best introduced using the analogy of spring forces using
Hooke’s Law. Informally we may intuitively picture each data
image in RadViz as being tethered to multiple springs, one
for each dimension, each of these springs attached to one of
the dimensional anchors. These springs then can be thought
to “pull” the data image towards the circumference of the
circle. In RadViz the spring constants vary according to the
data records and thus create a characteristic “pull” towards
certain dimensions. To rigorously formulate the mapping, as
in [1], we start with the stretching forces (F ) of d springs
under Hooke’s law. At equilibrium we have:
d−1

Fj = 0 =
j=0

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.46

d−1
j=0

cos(θj )vj
d−1
j=0 vj

x2 =

d−1
j=0 sin(θj )vj
d−1
j=0 vj

In the above expressions Sj is decomposed into its components for the x1 and x2 position of the dimensional anchor
(respectively, in polar coordinates, cos(θj ) and sin(θj )). These
expressions are generalizable using hyperspherical coordinates
and so extend to higher dimensional NRVs.
RadViz has found many uses in a variety of applied ﬁelds
as a data exploration tool for high dimension data sets. Draper
et al. [3] survey radial visualizations and give many example
usages. While it is possible to use thousands of dimensions
with good practical results many applications are well served
by reducing the dimensionality of the data being explored.
To determine clusters of interest in the data set we are
often required to manipulate the placement of the dimensional
anchors in addition to making a selection of dimensions to
visualize. Unfortunately, optimal placement of dimensional
anchors has been shown to be NP-hard [4]. Heuristics do exist
and are a continuing source of current research. To simplify
our work assessing dimension selection we introduce and use
a straightforward dimensional anchor placement algorithm we
call the “Alternating Anchor Metric” (AAM) method.
The task of reducing dimensionality of data may be done
using any of a large number of statistical and machine learning
methods. Our current work uses the mean ratio technique
introduced by Zhou et al. in [5]. The mean ratio was introduced by way of example using the Khan’s Small Round
Blue Cell Tumors (SRBCT) gene data [6]. Zhou et al. use the
mean ratio to select the dimensions (genes) which are most
likely to be expressed in the data. These dimensions are then
used for the dimensional anchors in the associated RadViz
visualization [2] of the data set. These earlier mean ratio

I. I NTRODUCTION

d−1

d−1
j=0 Sj vj
d−1
j=0 vj

vj (Sj − x)
j=0

229

43733

357031
7703
94

61
3774
866702

results provide an excellent test-bed for our new post-RadViz
method for assessing dimensional anchor selection using the
Voronoi diagram of the RadViz image space. Our method of
assessing dimensional anchor selection is based on a formal
partitioning of the image space. We later describe this method
in detail and give several examples on real data sets.
Since dimensional anchor selection and NRV visualization
quality are so closely linked we note the recent work of others
in the relatively new area of visualization quality metrics. Peng
et al. have examined clutter reduction in the visualization
of high dimensional data. In [7] Peng et al. examine the
nature of clutter in a variety of visualizations such as parallel coordinates, star glyphs, and scatterplot matrices. These
authors do not include the more recently developed general
class of NRVs. By examining the individual properties of each
visualization an individually tailored metric is developed to
assess clutter. We take a similar approach in that our methods
are based, initially, on qualitative notions of what speciﬁcally
constitutes an informative NRV. Their work on reducing clutter
via dimension reordering explores an important idea that
we ﬁnd useful for our future work on dimensional anchor
placement in NRVs. Bertini and Sanducci have done extensive
work in the area of visualization quality and clutter reduction.
Their work is based principally on sampling digital images.
In [8] they use several clutter related metrics to validate the
resizing and reordering of axes in parallel coordinates. While
working exclusively in two dimensions these authors claim
that their principles work more generally with any visualization such as RadViz that allow visual elements to overlap each
other. The work presented in [8] provides many possibilities
for work in visualization quality. Indeed, we ﬁnd ourselves
motivated to examine Voronoi partitioning to deﬁne regions of
the image space and then proceed to do the perceptual nonuniform sampling. Our work diverges from that of Bertini and
Sanducci in that we do not concern ourselves with the detailed
pixel level aspects of visualizations. For example, a Voronoi
partitioning of the image space at once divides the image
space into rigorously deﬁned regions. These regions have
well studied theoretical properties which we introduce later
and provide direction for future work. We prefer generating
these regions over the authors’ method of dividing the image
space into an 8×8 pixel grid. Also, NRVs may be of arbitrary
dimension and we restrict ourselves to pursue methods which
scale beyond two dimensions.
In Section II we introduce the method of dimension selection we will use for testing the visualization quality metric
we describe in Section IV. Our metric will work with any
method of dimension selection. We chose one method to use
here in order to focus on the visualization quality metric
itself. Section III contains an introduction and summary of
the Voronoi diagram on which our method is based. Section
V contains examples of applying our Voronoi based quality
metric to several real data sets. Section VI is both a summary
of our current work and an outline of directions for the future
work we have motivated. The Voronoi partitioning and the
new metric comprise the main contributions of this paper.

81
21
05
1356
88

DA Color by Class:
BL
EWS
NB
RMS

37
1833
80109

44563

241412
740604
7671
83

82
3251
96
98
62

461425

24
7842
298062

244618
2453
30

Fig. 1. Khan SRBCT data [6] with dimensional anchors (top ﬁve per class)
selected by mean ratio method [5]. Dimensional anchors are placed using the
AAM method.

II. S ELECTING D IMENSIONS WITH THE M EAN R ATIO
Zhou et al.’s efforts in [5] were to illustrate the value in
using the mean ratio as a metric for dimensional reduction. In
that application the dimensions are human genes. The intended
utility of these techniques is to provide researchers with data
exploration tools to determine which genes may be most
closely linked to any of a variety of cancers. The Khan SRBCT
data set used in [5] is broken up into four classes corresponding to four childhood tumor categories: Neuroblastoma (NB),
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), Burkitt Lymphomas (BL), and
Ewing Family Sarcoma (EWS). We make one deviation from
Zhou et al.’s methods: we use an algorithmic technique for
placing dimensional anchors whereas the dimensional anchors
in [5] are placed arbitrarily. In the description of this algorithm
note that “above” and “below” are made in the context in
which the labels are placed for reading by English language
readers about the RadViz circle. Our “Alternating Anchor
Metric” (AAM) method is used throughout this paper to: (a)
sort the dimensional anchors by the selection metric used
(e.g. mean ratio); (b) uniformly divide the RadViz circle into
sectors for each class (c) place the highest ranked anchor in
the middle of the sector for that class; (d) the next highest
is placed immediately above it; (e) the next (third highest)
is placed immediately below it; (f) the process continues
in this way with each successively ranked dimension placed
alternatingly above and below. The top ﬁve dimensions for any
class would thus be arranged to be read in the order 4-2-1-3-5.
This is our ﬁrst attempt at introducing systematic positioning
of the dimensional anchors. This method is a minimal and
straightforward way to position dimensional anchors in a nonrandom, hence easily reproducible, way. In future work we
shall explore further methods of placing dimensional anchors
for both non-classed data and multi-classed data sets.
For a data set of d dimensions which may be divided into C
classes (i.e. the data may be partitioned into C disjoint subsets
V = {V1 , . . . , VC }) we deﬁne, as in [5], the mean ratio ri for

230

(C − 1) ∗ Mik

. If C = 1 then ri = 1

where i = 1, . . . , d; Mij is the mean value of subset Vj on
dimension i; and Mik = max{Mi1 , . . . , MiC }. k is referred
to as the discriminative class label for dimension i.
In order to measure the effects of varying dimensional
anchor selection and/or dimensional anchor placement we
must ﬁrst rigorously quantify cluster sensitivity and overall
visualization quality. We consider ourselves, then, to be equipping ourselves with a tool to score our future results. While
cluster validation indices [9] provide a good measure of cluster
quality they do not necessarily lend themselves to quantifying
the quality of a RadViz image in its entirety. For example,
suppose we were to have a single cluster of data images
clustered tightly around the image space origin. This would
be rated by any measure as a high quality cluster, however,
we know that this is not necessarily the case. Due to the
cancellation of opposing “spring forces” we know that features
of the data set may remain hidden. Our method, introduced in
the next section, utilizes the well known Voronoi diagram [10]
of the image space. Voronoi diagrams have been an abundant
source of research into their theoretical aspects and their
application to problems in biology, chemistry, epidemiology,
and many other ﬁelds. A comprehensive survey of Voronoi
diagrams is presented in [11]. By deﬁning a formal method
of partitioning the image space we develop, in Section IV, a
quality metric for any visualization that relies on dimensional
anchors. Here we focus solely on visualizations which fall into
the general class of NRVs.

43733

Mij

357031
7703
94

ri = 1 −

C
j=1,j=k

61
3774
866702

any dimension i as

81
21
05
1356
88

DA Color by Class:
BL
EWS
NB
RMS

37
1833
80109

44563

241412
740604
7671
83

82
3251
96
98
62

461425

24
7842
298062

244618
2453
30

Fig. 2.

Voronoi diagram of Figure 1.

Consequently, our methods have applications beyond just twodimensional RadViz. Indeed, this inherent extensibility beyond
two dimensions is one of our main incentives for using the
Voronoi diagram. Also, the many properties of the Voronoi
diagram are intriguing and the implications to NRVs they
could yield would further our theoretical understanding of this
class of visualizations.
For dimensional anchors arranged equidistantly from the
image space origin we will see that only the portion of the
Voronoi diagram which intersects with the convex hull of the
dimensional anchors is a valid region in which data images
may be located. The result that data images must lie within
the convex hull of the dimensional anchors is proven in [1].
Dimensional anchors on the border of the convex hull of
the dimensional anchors result in unbounded Voronoi regions.
Figure 2 provides an example of this.
Consider only the case in which all dimensional anchors
(i.e. Voronoi sites) are located on the border of the convex
hull of all dimensional anchors. Points occurring at or near
the circumcenter may be due to any two or more dimensional
anchors whose inﬂuence opposes each other. This may also be
due to a low expression of values. The amount of space about
the barycenter in which dimensional anchor force nulliﬁcation
occurs is a source of future study. In particular, by locating a
reference site at exactly the barycenter of dimensional anchors
we create a Voronoi region in which the presence of points is
undesirable since the expression of one or more dimensional
anchors may be hidden.

III. VORONOI PARTITIONING OF N ORMALIZED R ADIAL
V ISUALIZATIONS
As seen in the last section, when one looks at a RadViz
image we have an intuitive sense for inter- and intra- cluster distance. Cluster validation indices such as the DaviesBouldin and Dunn indices [9] use Euclidean distance this
way and the method we introduce in this section also assumes implicitly that Euclidean distance is meaningful. To
formally describe a Voronoi diagram: consider a set of n
points P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pn } in R2 . We refer to these points
as sites. The Voronoi region V (pi ) for point pi consists of
all the points at least as close to pi as to any other site:
V (pi ) = {x : |pi − x| ≤ |pj − x|∀j = i}. For n points
in R2 , the Voronoi diagram can be constructed in O(n log n)
time [11]. Equivalently we may also express V (pi ) as the
intersection of half-planes H(pi , pj ), where H(pi , pj ) is the
half-plane which contains all the points closer to pi than to
pj . V (pi ) = ∩i=j H(pi , pj ) [10]. Less formally we may state
that a Voronoi diagram is a partitioning of a plane with n
point sites into convex regions such that each region contains
exactly one point site and any point in that region is closest
to that point site than any other in the plane. This partitioning
of the plane extends upwards to arbitrarily high dimensions.

IV. Q UANTIFYING NRV QUALITY USING VORONOI
PARTITIONING OF THE IMAGE SPACE

Given that points located around the barycenter are undesirable we can form a ratio U where
#data images in barycenter region
U=
.
total data images
The smaller this ratio the better. Further, we can consider
regions sited by dimensional anchors to be desirable in that
data images in these regions are clearly under the majority

231

Data set
Cars [12]
Htong [12]
Khan SRBCT [6]
Spam [13]
Transfusion [14]

Dimensions
7
4
2308
57
5

Dimensions Selected
maximum 5 per class
4
maximum 5 per class
maximum 7 per class
maximum 3 per class

Classes
3
N/A
4
2
2

Q score
-0.577
0.145
0.619
0.380
0.789

Remarks
No classes. All dimensions used.

TABLE I
T HE Q SCORES OF SEVERAL PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATA SETS .

available data sets: Spam [13], Cars [12], Htong [12], and
Transfusion [14]. These results are summarized in Table I. As
with the Khan SRBCT data we selected the top dimensions
per class using the mean ratio and calculated the Q using
the Voronoi partition of the RadViz image. In the case of
data sets with a low number of classes we increased the
maximum possible number of dimensions selected. The Cars
data set (Figure 3) has a Q score of -0.577. This is quite
low on our scale, however, this is a 33% improvement over
the best RadViz image in which all dimensions are used and
placed uniformly on the circle. We see that Figure 4 has a
Q of -0.862. Thus, selecting dimensions and arranging these
dimensions by class has led to a sizeable improvement. A
Q of -0.577 is the highest score of any RadViz image of
this data set we have seen to this date. These results for
this data set match those of Bertini and Sanducci in [8].
Using parallel coordinates in their example they note the
“correlation that exists between number of cylinders/weight
and weight/horsepower.” We obtained similar results. We see
a cluster of data images being pulled into the Voronoi regions
corresponding to horsepower, cylinders, and weight. The mean
ratio further informs us, by its inherent class distinction, that
this relationship is strongest for cars manufactured in the USA.
That observation is repeatedly conﬁrmed by many others who
have examined this popular data set. We also observe that
while the mean ratio also tracks common observations about
which dimensions are most associated with European and
Japanese cars the dirth of points being pulled into the Voronoi
regions associated with these classes conﬁrms other comments
about this data set; the clusters associated with European and
Japanese cars are difﬁcult to distinguish. We will retain use
of this data set as a challenge to methods developed in future
work. The Spam data set [13] is a more contemporary data
set. The 57 dimensions here are various word and character
frequencies. Each record corresponds to an email message.
This data is used as a basis for classifying the message as
“Spam” or “Not Spam.” As labels we chose, for clarity of
example, the dimension index. The Spam example (Figure 5)
is less ambiguous in demonstrating the strength of the pull of
the dimensions selected as most signiﬁcant to each of the two
classes.

Ac

at
ler
ce

ion

DA Color by Class:
Europe
Japan
USA

Year

MPG

pow
er

rs

de

Hors
e

ht

Cy
lin

eig

W

Fig. 3. Voronoi diagram of the Cars data set [12] with dimensions selected
with mean ratio and arranged in a class discrimination layout [5]. Q score is
-0.577.

inﬂuence of the dimensional anchors in which they are closest.
For each of these regions we can similarly form a ratio of
membership in any particular region to the total number of
data images. By summing the ratios from the desirable regions
and subtracting the ratio from the barycenter
d

Q=
i=1

#data images in regioni
total data images

− U = 1 − 2U

we obtain a value Q such that −1 ≤ Q ≤ 1. We consider a
Q = 1 to be a “very informative” NRV and a Q = −1 to be an
“uninformative” NRV. That is, when Q = 1 all the data images
lay in regions closest to the dimensional anchors and the user
is able to see the expressed strength of certain dimensions. For
a Q = −1 we consider the NRV to be uninformative since all
the data would be located around the barycenter. Of course,
it may simply be the case that the data set lacks signiﬁcant
expression by any particular dimension(s). Another possibility
is that the pull of a very large number of dimensions is muting
the effects of a small number of dimensions. Such ambiguity
leads to our choosing the description of “uninformative.” We
consider a Q = 0 to be an “informative” NRV. In this case
there may still be features of the data set which remain hidden.

VI. C ONCLUSION

V. E XAMPLES

The study of visualization quality is a rich source for
much new work. Here we have introduced a new technique,
using the Voronoi diagram, for assessing quality in radial

As an example of the Q score, the Khan data set of Figure 2
has a Q score of 0.619. Beyond the Khan SRBCT data
we further evaluated these methods using several publicly

232

D2

such “site consolidation.”
The placement of dimensional anchors is another important
problem. In [1] it is shown that dimensional anchors need not
stay on the unit circle (or hypersphere); data images must
always remain within the convex hull of the dimensional
anchors. We have simpliﬁed our work here by working with
the AAM placement method described in Section II. Future
work will be to combine our dimensional anchor selection
results with other products of our ongoing work in the area of
dimensional anchor placement.

D1

D3
D6

R EFERENCES

D5

D4

[1] K. Daniels, G. Grinstein, A. Russell, and M. Glidden, “Properties of
normalized radial visualizations,” University of Massachusetts Lowell,
Tech. Rep., 2012, Journal of Information Visualization, in press.
[Online]. Available: http://www.teaching.cs.uml.edu/∼ heines/techrpts/
Papers/2012-02-13 Daniels etal TR NRV.pdf
[2] P. Hoffman, G. Grinstein, K. Marx, I. Grosse, and E. Stanley, “DNA
visual and analytic data mining,” in Visualization ’97., Proceedings,
October 1997, pp. 437–441.
[3] G. M. Draper, Y. Livnat, and R. F. Riesenfeld, “A survey of radial methods for information visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 15, pp. 759–776, September 2009.
[4] M. Ankerst, S. Berchtold, and D. A. Keim, “Similarity Clustering of
Dimensions for an Enhanced Visualization of Multidimensional Data,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization,
G. Wills and J. Dill, Eds. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1998, pp.
52–60.
[5] J. Zhou, G. Grinstein, and M. Kenneth, “A heuristic for gene selection
and visual prediction of sample type,” International Journal of Data
Mining and Bioinformatics, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 428–448, 2011.
[6] J. Khan, J. S. Wei, M. Ringner, L. H. Saal, M. Ladanyi, F. Westermann,
F. Berthold, M. Schwab, C. R. Antonescu, C. Peterson, and P. S.
Meltzer, “Classiﬁcation and diagnostic prediction of cancers using gene
expression proﬁling and artiﬁcial neural networks,” Nature Medicine,
vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 673–679, Jun. 2001.
[7] W. Peng, M. Ward, and E. Rundensteiner, “Clutter Reduction in MultiDimensional Data Visualization Using Dimension Reordering,” in IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization. IEEE, 2004, pp. 89–96.
[8] E. Bertini and G. Santucci, “Improving visual analytics environments
through a methodological framework for automatic clutter reduction,”
Journal of Visual Languages & Computing, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 194–212,
Jun. 2011.
[9] U. Maulik and S. Bandyopadhyay, “Performance Evaluation of Some
Clustering Algorithms and Validity Indices,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1650–
1654, 2002.
[10] J. O’Rourke, Computational Geometry in C, 2nd ed.
Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
[11] F. Aurenhammer, “Voronoi diagrams - a survey of a fundamental
geometric data structure,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 23, pp. 345–
405, September 1991.
[12] Worcester Polytechnic Institute, “XmdvTool home page,” July 2005,
http://davis.wpi.edu/xmdv/.
[13] A. Frank and A. Asuncion, “UCI machine learning repository,” 2010,
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml.
[14] I.-C. Yeh, K.-J. Yang, and T.-M. Ting, “Knowledge discovery on rfm
model using bernoulli sequence,” Expert Systems with Applications,
vol. 36, pp. 5866–5871, April 2009, dataset available at http://archive.
ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Blood+Transfusion+Service+Center.

Fig. 4. Voronoi diagram of the Cars data set [12] with uniformly spaced
dimensional anchors. Q score is -0.862.

42

DA Color by Class:
Not Spam
Spam
25

41

29

27

32

4

7

20

15

24

53

Fig. 5.

23

31

visualizations. The nature of the construction of this class of
visualizations inherently links visualization quality with the
selection and arrangement of dimensions. While we presented
several examples of this method with real data sets we also
introduced more theoretical concepts underlying our method.
These theoretical concepts form the foundation of the direction
of our future work. A comprehensive study of the properties
of the Voronoi diagram in this context may lead to further
techniques which enhance cluster analysis and the quality of
visualizations. For example, we consider a very large number
of dimensions to present a degeneracy. Since each dimension
is used as a dimensional anchor and so is represented as a
Voronoi site we can see that in some cases we could have
many sites. A large number of regions, especially when they
are small, creates an effect that we could call noisy or dense
in that the effects of any particular region are difﬁcult to
determine. In these cases we may wish to begin selectively
reducing the number of sites. Using the properties of Voronoi
diagrams to select dimensions for consolidation is an issue
for our future research, as are the details of implementing

Voronoi diagram of the Spam data set [13]. Q score is 0.380.

233

