2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Clutter Reduction in Multi-Dimensional Visualization of Incomplete Data Using
Sugiyama Algorithm
1

Liang Fu Lu , Mao Lin Huang 1,* , Yi Wen Chen 2 , Jie Liang 1 and Quang Vinh Nguyen 3
1
Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia;
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, P. R. China;
3
School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, University of Western Sydney, Australia
{*Corresponding Author E-mail: Mao.Huang@uts.edu.au}
due to a variety of reasons, such as the missing of data
values during the data collection stage. Thus the
incompleteness of data would be undesirable for the
analysts. Though visualization techniques help greatly
the viewers find the patterns and structures which are
hidden in the large scale datasets, most visualization
techniques fail to present the incomplete datasets.
Uncertainty visualization is a new field of research
dealing with the representation of uncertainties in
datasets that attracted many researchers in the last few
years[1-8]. In AVI’08 conference, senior Microsoft
research scientist George Robertson and his team
classified the uncertainty into five different levels[4].
These include 1) Measurement Precision; 2)
Completeness; 3) Inference; 4) Disagreement and 5)
Credibility levels. In the second level (completeness
level), the main concern is how to recover and represent
the missing data (or missing information), which truly
exist, but the specific values of them are not known by
people. The uncertainties in completeness level are quite
often occurred in high dimension datasets.
Visual clutter is one of the most significant problems
in visualization, especially in large scale data
visualization that seriously damages the quality of
visualization
in
terms
of
readability
and
understandability. Most of visualization techniques need
to adopt strategies for dealing with this problem, which
include problems of overcrowded displays, and too much
data to be fitted into small display space. Many methods
[9-19] have been proposed to deal with the visual clutter
in complete data visualization. In multi-dimensional data
visualization, especially in the parallel-coordinates
visualization, the current research of visual clutter
reduction is divided into three directions: 1) dimension
reduction[9, 12] ; 2) data clustering[10, 13, 16]; and 3)
minimization of edge crossings[11, 17-19]. The first
approach is to find and filter some less important data
attributes for simplifying the decision making or problem
solving processes. Of course, the visual clutter and visual
complexity will be reduced accordingly in the
corresponding visual representation of the data. Data
clustering is one of the data mining approaches which try
to group data items based on a variety of rules, such as
data similarity. After the clustering, we may display

Abstract
Visualization of uncertainty in datasets is a new field
of research, which aims to represent incomplete data for
analysis in real scenarios. In many cases, datasets,
especially multi-dimensional datasets, often contain
either errors or uncertain values. To address this
challenge, we may treat these uncertainties as scalar
values like probability. For visual representation in
parallel coordinates, we draw a small “circle” to
temporarily define a dummy vertex for an uncertain
value of a data item, at the crossing point between
polylines and the axis of certain dimension.
Furthermore, these temporary positions of uncertainty
could be permuted to achieve visual effectiveness. This
feature provides a great opportunity by optimizing the
order of uncertain values to tackle another important
challenge in information visualization: clutter reduction.
Visual clutter always obscures the visualizing structure
even in small datasets. In this paper, we apply
Sugiyama’s layered directed graph drawing algorithm
into parallel coordinates visualization to minimize the
number of edge crossing among polylines, which has
significantly improved the readability of visual structure.
Experiments in case studies have shown the effectiveness
of our new methods for clutter reduction in parallel
coordinates visualization. These experiments also imply
that besides visual clutter, the number of uncertain
values and the type of multi-dimensional data are
important attributes that affect visualization performance
in this field.
Keywords--- uncertainty visualization, incomplete
data visualization, clutter reduction, multidimensional visualization, parallel coordinates.

1. Introduction
Today high dimensional data analysis is becoming
more and more important as the number of applications
increases, such as the analysis of bio-informatics data,
networking data, social network data and so on.
However, the real-world datasets are often incomplete
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.26

93

some abstract clusters, rather than detailed data items in
the visualization. Therefore, the visual complexity and
clutter may also be reduced accordingly. The
minimization of edge crossings is the problem of graph
drawing. Through the optimization of geometric
positions of nodes and edges to reduce the edge crossings
among edges is the main method of visual clutter
reduction. Our research is focusing on the reduction of
edge crossings in parallel-coordinates visualization.
Visual clutter often occurs in parallel-coordinates
visualization of multidimensional data (see Fig. 1) along
with the growing of dimensionality and the number of
data items as well. When the dimensions or number of
data items grows high, it is inevitable for displays to
exhibit some clutter, no matter what visualization
method is used[9].

2. Visual clutter reduction in parallelcoordinate representation
In parallel coordinates visualization, we use m vertical
axes to represent a m − dimensional space. The ordering
of these axes in the visualization is a random set.
However, as the axes ordering changes, the drawing of
polylines is also changed accordingly. Different orders of
axes always reveal various visual structures of the multidimensional datasets. Wei Peng etc. [12] defined the
visual clutter in parallel coordinates as the proportion of
outliers against the total number of data points and they
tried to use the exhaustive algorithm to find the optimal
axes order for minimizing the member of edge crossings
(or visual clutter). Different from Wei Peng’s re-ordering
approach, we propose a new method to permute the
ordering of polylines (the visual representation of data
items) to minimize the number of edge crossing. It is
possible to alter the positions of polylines because we are
dealing with the incomplete dataset, in which some
values in particular axes are missing. However, the
crossing points between those polylines with missing (or
uncertain) values and their corresponding axes are
changeable. Therefore, we could optimize the positions
of those crossing points to achieve the reduction of edge
crossing (or visual clutter).
Though there are many sources that can produce
uncertain (or missing) values, such as uncollected data,
data source confidentiality, redefined data categories,
mutually exclusive multivariate combinations and
uncertainty deemed excessive[1], most of them can be
classified into nonnumerical and numerical values. In
this section, we will discuss our new approaches to
handle these data. Here all the algorithms are considered
to be used for two-dimensional datasets. And these
methods can be easily extended to the multi-dimensional
datasets.
Supposed that the data values in the second axis of
parallel coordinates are non-numerical data, we can
permute the order of all the crossing points (vertices) in
this axis to minimize the number of edge crossings
between two neighboring axes, and then determine the
best positions of data values to reduce the visual clutter
and increase the readability effectively. In fact, if the
data values in the second axis are numerical data, not all
the data points can be reordered because of their unequal
relations and practical meanings, whereas the new
algorithms can be used to permute the order of missing
data. The following is the theoretical algorithm for the
optimal positioning of vertices for reducing the visual
clutter in parallel coordinates.

Figure 1: Examples of visual clutter in parallel
coordinates visualization. See regions bounded
by two ellipses that contain a large number of
edge crossings.
Sugiyama algorithm known as layered graph
drawing method is one of the most effective methods that
can be used to reduce edge crossings in visualization. It
forms all edges into polylines and places all vertices on a
number of horizontal layered for optimization. Sugiyama
algorithm can produce clear and intelligible layouts of
hierarchical digraphs theoretically and heuristically.
Vertices of each layer are reordered to reduce crossing
numbers while holding the vertex orderings on the other
layers. We select this method in our parallel-coordinates
visualization because we could naturally transplant the
polyline property from Sugiyama layout method into the
parallel-coordinates visualization. In this paper, we
propose a novel method for clutter reduction of
incomplete multi-dimensional data through the reduction
of edge (polyline) crossings.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2
deliberates the approach. Section 3 demonstrates the case
studies in random and real world dataset with uncertain
values. Further findings and insights are also discussed in
this section. Section 4 summarizes our work and
conclusions with future work.

Determination of positions of incomplete data
In our methods, we use a small “circle” to create a
e

dummy vertex for presenting an uncertain value v of
i, j
th

the i data item in the crossing point between polyline

L(i th ) and the j th axis. The position of the small “circle”
could be permuted. This feature provides a great
opportunity for us to optimize the positions of these

94

dummy vertices for the reduction of edge crossings (or
visual clutter).
Suppose that a n − dimensional parallel coordinates
system is given, where the points on the first axis are
fixed and some of the vertices are dummy vertices that
represent the missing or uncertain values with
changeable positions in the second axis. We assume that
all the values in the second axis are non-numerical in our
visualization. Given a value set of the
dimensional data item is

D

vinormal
= vi , j /
, j −1

D
i, j

i

) 2 + ¦ (v inormal
) 2 , i = 1, 2,", s j
,j
i

Here we assume that the datasets in parallel coordinates
are visualized after the values are normalized into the
normal

interval [0,1] . v
i , j −1
complete values in

normal

and v
i, j

denote the normalized

( j −1)th and jth

axes separately.

Step2: Suboptimum positions of dummy vertices

ith multi-

In general, the number of uncertain values is always
less than certain values in data sets. Therefore, we could
optimize the positions of dummy vertices (uncertain

Vi = (vi ,1 , vi ,2 ," , vi ,n ), i = 1, 2,3," , m ,

e

th

value v ) by altering their initial positions. We
i, j

where m is the total number of data items. The j axis
(or dimension) in parallel coordinates is defined to be
ξ j , j = 1, 2,3," , n while vi , j , j = 1, 2,3," , n is the

calculate the number of edge crossings through the
following formula and assign a suboptimum position for
the dummy vertex with minimum number of edge
crossings with other polylines:

th

value of the i data item in the crossing point between
polyline

¦ (v

L(i th ) and the j th axis. Suppose that

arg min σ (vie, j )

vie, j ∈ {vi , j , i = 1, 2,3,", m; j = 2,3,", n} behaves

0≤ e ≤ s j

where σ (⋅) is the function of edge crossing number. In
the above function, the independent variable is the
number of edge crossings with the straight line

that the value of vi , j is uncertain, see the example
visualization in Fig. 2.

L(vi , j −1 , vie, j ) and other straight lines between

( j −1)th and jth neighboring axes.
Step3: Reducing
optimization

the corresponding vertices are dummy. However, after
the implementation of step 2 all dummy positions
in ξ j +1 are sub-optimized. We consider the further
permutation of the order of straight lines linking each
pairs of vertices between axes ξ j and ξ j +1 .
Step 3.1 Get the map m and the matrix realization M of
the data items between the two coordinates, and calculate
the number of edge crossings;
Step 3.2 Calculate the penalty digraph D for ξ j +1 ;

D

two neighboring axes is 90 . This is exactly expected by
Huang, etc.[17]in their evaluation result that is, through
the maximization of crossing angles to increase the
readability of graphs. In our experiments, we also
examine the rationality and correctness of graphs.
Suppose that s j denotes the total number of

positions v

reach

ξ j +1 , where some of the values in ξ j +1 are uncertain and

We first equidistantly map vertices with certain
values of all data items to axis in the visualization.
For dummy vertices with uncertain values, we
initially position each of them at the crossing point of its
axis and a horizontal straight line connecting the vertex
of its left hand side neighboring axis.
If we draw the straight line between these two points,
we will find that the angle between this straight line and

e
i, j

to

values (or positions) in two neighboring axes ξ j and

Step1: Initial positions of dummy vertices

jth dimension ξ j . The

crossings

In this step, we permute the order of vertices to
minimize the number of edge crossings between each
pair of the neighboring axes using Penalty Minimization
method (PM method ) proposed by Sugiyama in [20].
The method is summarized below:
Let P (ξ j , ξ j +1 ) denotes a set of possible pairs of

Figure 2: The example display of uncertain
values visualized in parallel coordinates. The
lines in red and green behave realistic and
uncertain data respectively. The dummy
vertices are shown by green circle.

uncertain values in the

edge

Step 3.3 Obtain all the strongly connected components in
penalty digraph D ;
Step 3.4 Eliminate all the cycles in the strongly
connected component, and get the minimum feedback
arc set;
Step 3.5 Get the optimal orders of the vertices in ξ j +1 by

initialized

D

= [vi , j ] of uncertain values can be

reversing the directions of straight lines;

calculated by the following nonlinear equation system:

95

Step 3.6 Form the new map m′ and matrix realization
M ′ for the solution, and calculate the reduced crossing
number.

3. Case study
In this section, the case studies in incomplete
random and real world datasets are explained below.
Experiments were implemented in java and run on a
standard Microsoft Windows 7 desktop PC with an
Intel(R) Core(TM) 2 Duo CPU @ 2.16 GHz, 2.0GB
memory. The comparable visualization results are
illustrated in Fig. 3, 4 and 5, and the measurements of
clutter reduction are summarized in Table 1 and 2. These
examples will demonstrate the effectiveness of our
clutter reduction approaches in multi-dimensional
visualization of uncertainty.
Taking data with two-dimension as the simplest
multidimensional examples, the experiments were
conducted in two cases. First we use a random dataset
(See Table 1) with five missing values in the second
dimension ξ 2 , in which all the values are non-numerical.

(b)

In step 1, the initial representation indicates four groups
of clustered polylines. Fig.3(a) shows the initial positions
of complete data in polylines colored pink, red, yellow
and blue and incomplete data colored green, which were
mapped from corresponding values in each dimension.
Fig. 3(b) illustrates the suboptimum result of incomplete
data after step 2 of the new method, where the number of
edge crossings reduces to 1256 from the original 1312.
Finally in step 3, by the use of permuting the vertices
order in the second axis (see in Fig. 3 (c)), the number of
edge crossings drops by 59.5% to 532. In the final
visualization result, the number of dummy vertices has
merged from 5 to 2. In the second example, we applied
new method into stock market analysis. The dataset used
is historical stock prices for AMEX stocks beginning
with the letter A (AMEXA dataset), with two dimensions
named “Stock_symbol” and “Volume”. Volume attribute
contains numerical values with ten unknown values. The
comparison of initial and final visualization results is
presented in Fig. 4 (a) and (b). The number of edge
crossing reduces from 519 to 464 and the number of
dummy vertices decreases from 10 to 3.

(c)
Figure 3: Case 1 - Random data in parallel
coordinates: (a) The initialization of incomplete
data items; (b)Visualization of suboptimum
positions of uncertain values; (c) The optimal
positions of vertices.

(a)
(a)
96

(ξ1, ξ2 ) (ξ2 ,ξ3 ) (ξ3 , ξ4 ) are also greater than (ξ4 ,ξ5 ) .
The reason is that nonnumerical values have more
opportunities to be re-ordered, whereas the order of
incomplete numerical data is relatively fixed. Thus, for
numerical attributes, step 3 of the method may not be
necessary in most cases.
2. Accordingly, the comparison results of clutter
reduction reveal that multi-dimensional data with nonnumerical values have more potential for clutter
reduction than the data with numerical values.
3. The number of missing values accordingly increases
from 5, to 10 and to 20, meanwhile, the clutter reduction
of

(ξ1, ξ2 ) (ξ2 ,ξ3 ) (ξ3 , ξ4 ) (ξ4 ,ξ5 )

is decreased

respectively. This may imply that the number of
uncertain values is an important attribute that can
significantly affect visualization quality as well.
(b)
Figure 4: Case 2 - An incomplete dataset AMEX
A visualized in parallel coordinate visualization:
(a)The initial drawing of the given data with ten
uncertain values; (b) The new drawing of the
same given data after the implementation of our
optimization method. The data source is
available at:
http://davis.wpi.edu/xmdv/datasets/amexa.html.
To be realized in more complicated scenario, the
third experiment has been extended in real data with
more dimensions. Fig. 5 shows a visual performance for
incomplete Forbes list in 1994(Forbes94 dataset), which
contains five dimensions. In this case, we assume that the
order of dimensions is fixed from company CEO to wide
industry, industry, city of birth and age of graduate. The
last dimensional attribute is numerical, while the rest are
non-numerical. There are 5, 10, and 20 uncertain values
in the last three dimensions ξ 3 , ξ 4 , ξ 5 respectively. As a

Conclusions
In this paper, we leverage a layered directed graph
drawing algorithm into parallel coordinates for
visualization of uncertainty. In the first stage, a nonlinear
equation system is deployed to obtain the initial positions
for all uncertain values. In the second stage, a multiobjective optimization algorithm is adapted to relocate
positions for the dummy vertices. In the final stage, the
penalty minimization method finalizes ordering of all
vertices.
The case studies have shown the clutter reduction
among polylines and hence demonstrated the
effectiveness of the method with better visual structure in
parallel coordinates visualization. These experiments
also imply that the number of edge crossings, uncertain
values and the attributes of multi-dimensional data may
play important roles in affecting visualization
performance.
In order to advance technology towards information
visualization of uncertainty, formal evaluation needs to
be conducted in the future. Based on the evaluation
results, we will not only work on visual quality but also
further modify the algorithm in order to reduce
complexity of computing time for larger datasets.

result, total 35 dummy vertices on axes have reduced to
7. The clutter reduction has been achieved by decreasing
the number of edge crossings from 7979 to 4176. The
individual reduction measurement of each pair of
dimensions (ξ j , ξ j +1 ), j = 1, 2,3, 4 has been detailed in
decomposition Table 2.
Reviewing all the final visualization results, we found
that
1. The approach merged dummy vertices into fewer
positions on every axis, linked by clustered polylines in
parallel coordinates, which significantly reduced the
noise of incomplete data items with missing values.
2. The number of edge crossing become fewer and the
visual quality has been improved, as edge crossing
numbers is an important attribute for visualization
aesthetics. Therefore, the clutter has been reduced for
both complete and incomplete data items in
visualization.
In addition, Table 1 and 2 provide following insights:
1. In the first case, the total reduction percentage is
almost 60% much higher than 10.6% in the second case.
In decomposition of the third case, the reductions of

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

97

Cyntrica Eaton, C.P., Terence Drizd, Visualizing missing
data: Classification and empirical study, in Proceedings
of INTERACT 2005. 2005, Springer. p. 861-872.
Popov, S., Nonlinear Visualization of Incomplete Data
Sets Computer Science – Theory and Applications, D.
Grigoriev, J. Harrison, and E. Hirsch, Editors. 2006,
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. p. 524-533.
Johnson, C.R. and A.R. Sanderson, A next step:
Visualizing errors and uncertainty. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 2003. 23(5): p. 6-10.
Skeels, M., et al., Revealing uncertainty for information
visualization. Information Visualization, 2010. 9(1): p.
70-81.
Feng, D., et al., Matching visual saliency to confidence in
plots of uncertain data. IEEE Transactions on

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2010. 16(6): p.
980-989.
Pang, A.T., C.M. Wittenbrink, and S.K. Lodha,
Approaches to uncertainty visualization. Visual
Computer, 1997. 13(8): p. 370-390.
Martin Theus, H.H., Bernd Siegl & Antony Unwin,
MANET: Extensions to Interactive Statistical Graphics
for Missing Values. New Techniques and Technologies
for Statistics II, 1997: p. 247-259.
Swayne, D.F. and A. Buja, Missing Data in Interactive
High-Dimensional Data Visualization. SSRN eLibrary,
1998. 13(1): p. 15–26.
J. Yang, M.O.W., E.A. Rundensteiner and S. Huang,
Visual Hierarchical Dimension Reduction for
Exploration of High Dimensional Datasets, in Joint
EUROGRAPHICS - IEEE TCVG Symposium on
Visualization (2003), S.H. G.-P. Bonneau, C. D. Hansen,
Editor. 2003. p. 19-28.
Hong Zhou, X.Y., Huamin Qu, Weiwei Cui, Baoquan
Chen, Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates.
Computer Graphics Forum, 2008. 27(3): p. 1047-1054.
Pascale, K., P. Bruno, and L. Rémi, Minimizing
crossings in hierarchical digraphs with a hybridized
genetic algorithm. Journal of Heuristics, 2006. 12(1-2): p.
23.
Peng, W., M.O. Ward, and E.A. Rundensteiner, Clutter
Reduction in Multi-Dimensional Data Visualization
Using Dimension Reordering, in Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization. 2004, IEEE
Computer Society. p. 89-96.
Ankerst, M., S. Berchtold, and D.A. Keim. Similarity
clustering of dimensions for an enhanced visualization of

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

multidimensional data. in Proceedings of IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization. 1998.
Ellis, G. and A. Dix, Enabling Automatic Clutter
Reduction in Parallel Coordinate Plots. Visualization
and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 2006.
12(5): p. 717-724.
Ellis, G. and A. Dix, A Taxonomy of Clutter Reduction
for Information Visualisation. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 2007. 13(6):
p. 1216-1223.
Peihong, G., et al. Interactive local clustering operations
for high dimensional data in parallel coordinates. in
Proceedings of the IEEE Pacific Visualization
Symposium (PacificVis), 2010. 2010.
Huang, W. and M. Huang, Exploring the relative
importance of number of edge crossings and sinze of
crossing angle:a quantitative perspective. To be appeared
in International Journal of Advanced Intelligence, 2011.
Laguna, M., R. Mart, and V. Valls, Arc crossing
minimization in hierarchical digraphs with tabu search.
Computers and Operations Research, 1997. 24(12): p.
1175-1186.
Wei-xiang, S. and H. Jing-wei, Edge Crossing
Minimization Algorithm for Hierarchical Graphs Based
on Genetic Algorithms. Wuhan University Journal of
Natural Sciences, 2001. 6(1-2): p. 555-559.
Sugiyama, K., S. Tagawa, and M. Toda, Methods for
Visual Understanding of Hierarchical System Structures
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
1981. 11(2): p. 109-125.

Table 1: Clutter reduction using optimal ordering algorithm for all cases.
Data properties

Uncertain vertex measurement

Edge crossing measurement

Case

Data type

Dimensionality

Uncertain
attribute

Uncertain
attribute
value

Final
dummy
vertex

Uncertain
vertex
reduction
%

Step1

Step2

Reduction
after step2

Reduction
%

Step3

Overall
reduction

Overall
%

Random

Nonnumerical

2

ξ2

5

2

60%

1312

1256

56

4.3%

532

780

59.5%

AMEX

Numerical

2

ξ2

10

3

70%

519

464

55

10.6%

464

55

10.6%

Forbes94

Combination

5

ξ3
ξ4
ξ5

5

3

80%

7979

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

3803

47.7%

10

2

20

2

Table 2: Clutter reduction in dimension decomposition for Case 3 Forbes94
Forbes94 Case study
Dimension decomposition

Each dimension clutter reduction measurement

Dimension

Data type

Uncertain
value

Edge
crossing
number

After
optimization

Crossing
Reduction

Reduction in
dimension
%

Overall
reduction

(ξ1, ξ2 )

Non-numerical

0

2329

814

1515

65.0%

19.0%

(ξ2 ,ξ3 )

Non-numerical

5

2087

636

1451

69.5%

18.2%

(ξ3 , ξ4 )

Non-numerical

10

2024

1257

767

37.9%

9.6%

(ξ4 ,ξ5 )

Combination

20

1539

1469

70

4.5%

0.9%

Total

Combination

35

7979

4176

3803

N/A

47.7%

98

(a)

(b)
Figure 5: Case 3 - Forbes 94, a dataset with 5 variables visualized in parallel coordinate visualization: (a)
Original plot; (b) after clutter reduction. Data from http://www-stat.wharton.upenn.edu/
waterman/fsw/datasets/txt/Forbes94.txt

99

