2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Visual Analysis Tool for Finding Embedded Relations in Chronicles
Mina AKAISHI
Faculty of Computer and information Sciences
Hosei university, Japan
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency
mina@hosei.ac.jp

Makoto SATO
Faculty of Computer and information Sciences
Hosei university, Japan
makoto.satoh.47@hosei.ac.jp

Koichi HORI
Faculty of Engineering
The University of Tokyo, Japan
hori@computer.org

Tetsuya ISHIKAWA
Historiographical Institute
The University of Tokyo, Japan
ishikawa@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

tool shows unknown relations or gives the inspiration of
new story concepts.
A novel, a story, a myth, or a tale spares us from the
complexity of the world. A simple story can communicate a
complex multi-dimensioned idea not by simply transmitting
information as a message but by actively involving the listeners in co-creating that idea [4]. To identify the topic of a
story, techniques for topic detection and tracking, text mining, and visualization are well explored [11, 13, 6]. There
are many studies for automatic story generation based on
artiﬁcial intelligence techniques [7, 8, 12, 3, 9]. Also, there
are studies for story generation support through interaction
between systems and the users [5, 10, 14]. The CAT provides functions to support creating new stories by ﬁnding
embedded relations in chronicles.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we introduce the notion of chronicle data and a
chronicle analysis framework. In Section 3, we present the
chronicle analysis tool and examples of its implementation.
In Section 4, we make some concluding remarks.

In this paper, a visual analysis method for ﬁnding a variety of human networks in chronicles on the basis of different
viewpoints is proposed.
A vast amount of human experience records is stored all
over the world. For understanding and using such chronicles effectively, it is necessary to ﬁnd several relations embedded in records. In this paper, we propose a chronicle
analysis tool (CAT), which provides several views of records
from different viewpoints. For such purpose, we introduce
the notion of chronicle data and a visual analysis framework for embedded relations in chronicles. On the basis
of these notions, we describe a chronicle analysis tool and
show a variety of historical human networks from different
viewpoints as examples of its implementation.

1

Introduction

Currently, a vast amount of information is being accumulated at an accelerating pace in many ﬁelds. As a result,
piles of records are stored. However, it is difﬁcult to understand all of their contents within the limit of time. Moreover, it is harder to create new ideas or to discover new
knowledge from the chaos of information.
Information visualization systems enable users to ﬁnd
patterns, relationships, and structures in data and help users
to conﬁrm knowledge or to verify hypotheses. Supporting
ﬁnding patterns in chronicles helps historians or novelists
to create new theories or novels. In this paper, we propose
a chronicle analysis tool (CAT), which represents various
patterns of chronicle data from different viewpoints. The
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.58

2

Chronicle Analysis

In this section, we describe the chronicle data model and
its example. Then, we explain a chronicle analysis framework.

2.1

Chronicle Data

In this study, we regard chronicle data as text with attributes, which includes date information. For example,
each record of the Dai-Nihon Shiryo database stores historical events with certain attributes, such as the date when the
302

Figure 1. An example of chronicle. The chronicle event is labeled by the historiographers with
attributes such as the date, names, ofﬁcial positions, places, and activities.

tribute values suggests candidate keywords for specifying
the viewpoint at the ﬁrst layer.

event happened, the place where the event occurred, and the
names and ofﬁcial positions of people who were involved in
the event.
Dai-Nihon Shiryo, which is the yet to- be completed,
will be the most comprehensive collection of pre-modern
Japanese historical materials. It consists of primary source
material from the period between 887 to 1867 and is organized chronologically by major historical events. A part
of Dai-Nihon Shiryo is provided as the Dai-Nihon Shiryo
database (See Figure 1.) The attributes of Dai-Nihon Shiryo
are given by historiographers. This means that sophisticated
sets of attribute values are formed by themselves.

2.2

If users can ﬁnd interesting patterns on the distribution
map in the second layer, the third layer represents transitions of relations among focal attribute values by using the
topic sequence technique [2]. The focal attribute is speciﬁed by a parameter focus. A topic sequence is regarded as
a graphical plot of a series of text chunks. Each chunk is
visualized by a word colony [1], which visualizes the dependency relationships among terms in a text as a graph.
A word colony is regarded as a visual abstract of a relation
among terms in a text. A topic sequence is formed by the
connections of word colonies. A topic sequence provides
overviews of the topical change of text chunk content over
time.

A framework for chronicle analysis

Figure 2 shows a framework for analyzing chronicle
data. It consists of three layers. The ﬁrst layer provides
a function for ﬁltering data by specifying conditions. A parameter scope consists of two kinds of queries: a period
and a viewpoint. A period is a query concerning the date
attribute, and a viewpoint is a query concerning the other
attributes.
The second layer visualizes the distribution of ﬁltered
data as a combination of matrix and bar chart graphs. The
horizontal axis represents time, and the bar chart at the top
shows the number of records included in each divided period. The vertical axis is one of the attributes speciﬁed by
the user on the basis of his or her interest. Attribute values are listed along the axis in the order of frequency in
the data, and the bar chart on the left side shows the numbers of records that have the attribute value. The list of at-

At the beginning, users see the patterns of distribution for
whole data. These patterns give an overview of a target data
set. If users can ﬁnd interesting patterns on the distribution
map by selecting an attribute for the vertical axis, then they
can narrow their interest down by ﬁltering data or they can
see more detailed information by visualizing a transition of
interesting attribute values. The distribution map or transitions of attribute values suggest users’ next keywords for
specifying another viewpoint. A reiteration of this process
corresponds to a story/hypothesis/interpretation generation
cycle. If users can ﬁnd interesting patterns of transitions of
attribute values, then these patterns are the fundamentals of
new stories.
303

Figure 2. A visual analysis framework for chronicle data.

3
3.1

Chronicle analysis tool

der of frequency, and the bar chart at left shows the number
of records that include the speciﬁed person’s name.
The distribution map represents personal activities concerning ”gift.” It is easy to see the co-occurrence of
Japanese emperors and men of power, e.g. Emperor Ogimachi – Nobunaga Oda, Emperor Goyozei – Ieyasu Tokugawa etc. This distribution suggests that the relationships
based on ”gift” indicate the relation of authorities and powers.

Data Filtering

By ﬁltering data, characteristic patterns will occure on a
distribution map. However, it is difﬁcult to specify a keyword that represents a user’s interest. Even if there is no
query, a distribution map representing an overview of whole
data will suggest candidate keywords to specify a user’s interest.
Let us assume that a user sees the distribution map of
whole data in the Dai-Nihon Shiryo database and ﬁnds an
interesting keyword, ”gift.” Then, records that include the
keyword ”gift” and that contain information on an event
that occurred between 1550 and 1650 are selected from the
database.

3.2

3.3

Transition of Attribute Values

A topic sequence represents the content of a document as
a graphical plot of a document. It supports users’ efforts to
guess the context (plot) of the document and to ﬁnd desired
parts of documents.
The records in the same cell of a distribution map are
grouped together into a document. Then, each document is
visualized by a word colony. The topic sequence is formed
by the connections of such word colonies.
The left side of ﬁgure 4 shows historical human relationships of Nobunaga and Ieyasu as topic sequences of docu-

Distribution Map

Figure 3 shows human relations as a distribution map.
The vertical axis represents the names of persons in the or304

ments in ﬁgure 3.
3.3.1

2. Dependent terms
If tdd (t, t ) > σ ≥ μ ≥ tdd (t , t), then term t depends
on term t . Term t emphasizes one aspect of term t
given the context.

Word Colony

To help users quickly access information, we provide a text
visualization function, transforming text into a word colony,
which visualizes the dependency relationships among terms
as a graph. Text has a rich structure in which sentences are
grouped and related to one another in a variety of ways.
Each sentence consists of terms. The word colony [1] visualizes the relationship among term dependency. It is regarded as a visual abstract of a document.
In this section, we introduce two basic notions, term dependency and term attractiveness, which are the basis of a
word colony.
In this paper, we treat a sentence as a set of terms. Sentences in a document are grouped and related to one another
in a variety of ways. Term dependency and term attractiveness are regarded as the cohesion between terms in a document. We deﬁne these two notions as follows.
The dependence of a term t on a term t in a document
d, denoted by dtd (t, t ), is given by conditional probability
as follows.
tdd (t, t ) =

sentencesd (t, t )
,
sentencesd (t)

3. Independent terms
If tdd (t, t ) and tdd (t , t) do not satisfy the previous
conditions, then terms t and t are independent terms.
Interdependent terms are very strongly related to each
other. It is easy to guess their relations. While dependent terms suggest associable relations between main terms
and subordinate terms, it can be said that the main terms
are the important words that are surrounded by subordinate terms, suggesting various subtle meanings of the topic
words. There are also independent terms.
Important topic terms, which are surrounded by dependent terms, provide an outline of document content, enabling visualization of such relationships.
The dependency relationship among terms forms a directed graph, called a ”word colony”. In a word colony, interdependent terms are embedded into the same node. The
strength of term dependence is mapped onto the distance
between nodes of terms, and the term attractiveness is regarded as the size of the nodes. To visualize this relationship, we use a spring model graph. This graph is a visual
overview of a document.

(1)

where sentencesd (t, t ) is the number of sentences that
includes the terms t and t in the document d, and
sentencesd (t) is the number of sentences that includes the
term t in the document d.
The attractiveness of term t is the sum of dependency of
any term t in a document on the term t. It is calculated as
follows.
attrd (t) =

tdd (t , t)

3.3.2

Topic Sequence

Figure 4 shows four topic sequences representing human
relations of two persons, Nobunaga Oda and Ieyasu Tokugawa, on the basis of ”gift” and ”battle.” The major persons
in Nobunaga’s human relation concerning ”gift” are authorities at that time, such as Ashikaga Shogun and Emperor
Ogimachi. In the case of Ieyasu’s human relation concerning ”gift,” the major persons are authorities only in the early
days, after which Ieyasu’s son took prominence for most of
the remaining days. Ieyasu is the ﬁrst shogun in the Tokugawa shogunate. He consolidated his son’s position as his
successor.
Topic sequences concerning ”battle” show that
Nobunaga is related with many daimyos (territorial
lords in pre-modern Japan), while Ieyasu is related with
a few daimyos. In light of knowledge about the territory
these daimyos had control over, the visualization gives rise
to the interpretation that Nobunaga fought various enemies
all over Japan, while Ieyasu fought a big enemy next to his
territory, which actually corresponds to history as we know
it. These patterns help users create new interpretations of
history by exploring chronological records.
Users can ﬁnd several relationships among people on the
basis of various viewpoints. This is helpful for considering

(2)

t ∈T

Term attractiveness is regarded as the popularity of the
term.
We focus on the characteristics of the dependence of
occurrence among terms, which can be divided into three
groups. The ﬁrst is the group of interdependent terms that
appear near each other in a document. The second group is
dependent terms. One term depends on another but not the
reverse. The last group is independent terms.
Let us assume that term t is given. On the basis of
tdd (t, t ), any other term t is grouped into the following
types.
1. Interdependent terms
If tdd (t, t ) ≥ δ and tdd (t , t) ≥ δ, then term t and
t are interdependent terms. These are closely relevant
terms in the context of the original document. Such
terms together vaguely suggest a notion.
305

Figure 3. Distribution map of people’s relations ﬁltered by the scope.

Acknowledgments

the stories or inspiration for new ideas on the basisis of historical event records. Not only each topic sequence but also
a combination of topic sequences enables users to compose
a more complicated story.

4

The authors would like to thank Mr. Toshiyuki Kikuchi
(NorthGrid Corporation, Japan) for his constructive comments and technical support.

References

Conclusion

[1] Akaishi, M. et al. An associative information retrieval
based on the dependency of term cooccurrence. Lecture
Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 3245, pp.295–
206, 2004.

In this paper, we proposed a framework for visual
chronological analysis to support ﬁnding interesting relations embedded in chronicles. On the basis of the proposed
framework, we implemented a tool called ”CAT”, which
provides a functionality for representing latent patterns in
chronicles on the basis of dynamics of scope, axis, and focus. It enables users to interpret new histories from various
viewpoints. We demonstrated that the tool can actually give
rise to various interpretations of chronicle records by applying the tool to comprehensive pre-modern Japanese historical material, Dai-Nihon Shiryo.

[2] Akaishi, M. et. al. Narrative based Topic Visualization
for Chronological Data, Proc. of International Conference on Information Visualization (IV2007), pp.139–
144, 2007.
[3] Bringsjord, S. and Ferrucci, D., Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Literary Creativity: Inside the Mind of Brutus,
a Storytelling Machine. L. Erlbaum Associates Inc.,
Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1999.

For future work, we would like to apply the framework to
other domain’s chronicle data and evaluate the effectiveness
of the system.

[4] Brown, J.S., Storytelling in organizations: Why storytelling is transforming 21st century organizations and
management. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2005.
306

Figure 4. Comparison of human relations of two persons based on "gift" and "battle."
[5] Cavazza, M., et al., 2002. Character-based interactive
storytelling. IEEE Intelligent Systems, Vol. 17, No. 4,
pp. 17–24.

[10] Riedl, M. and Young, R., From linear story generation to branching story graphs, Computer Graphics and
Applications, IEEE, Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 23–31, 2006.
[11] Russell Swan and James Allan, Automatic Generation
of Overview Timelines. SIGIR ’00 Proceedings of the
23rd annual international, 2000.

[6] Jon Kleinberg, Bursty and Hierarchical Structure in
Streams. DATA MINING AND KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 373–397, 2003.

[12] Turner, S., The creative process: A computer model of
storytelling and creativity. Lawrence Erlbaum, 1994.

[7] Meehan, J.R., Tale-spin, an interactive program that
writes stories. Proceedings of the ﬁfth international
joint conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, pp. 91–98,
1977.

[13] Wong, P., et al., Visualizing sequential patterns for text
mining. In Proc. IEEE Information Visualization, 2000.
[14] Young, R. M., Notes on the Use of Plan Structures in
the Creation of Interactive Plot. the AAAI Fall Symposium on Narrative Intelligence, 1999.

[8] Pemberton, L., A modular approach to story generation. Proceedings of the fourth conference on European
chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 217–224, 1989.
[9] Perez Mike Sharples, Perez y‘ R., MEXICA: A computer model of a cognitive account of creative writing.
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 119–139, 2001.
307

