2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Does the medium matter? An Experiment on the Impact
of Collaboration on Visual Sales Sessions
Roland A. Pfister
mcm institute, University of St.Gallen
{roland.pfister@unisg.ch}
where advisors overwhelm a prospect with slides, flyers,
and reports. Hence, customers frequently rely on visual
cues which allow them to concentrate on essential
information. The so-called pencil-selling technique often
used in sales addresses this preference. Pencil-selling is a
visual communication approach where a salesperson
visualizes his or her ideas on a piece of paper while
talking. The salesperson either starts a drawing from
scratch on a blank sheet of paper, or edits and highlights
information on printed information. The fact that
instructors and teachers are able to better explain
thoughts when sketching was already shown by Lanir
and Booth [1] and subsequently applied to business.
Selling by drawing together with customers is not a
brand-new technique. Vendors regularly use this
technique. However, since the advent of PowerPoint,
hand-drawn sketches often have been replaced by
computer presentations, and as Tufte notes, the normal,
direct channel of business communication has become
the projected slide [2]. Still, the benefits of sketching
have been widely recognized and researched. Stanford
psychologist and sketching expert Barbara Tversky
views sketches as thinking tools, not just for individuals,
but for groups as well. In her numerous articles on the
topic she emphasizes the speed of sketching, its
provisional nature before definitive commitments, in
order to enable an “expression of the vague”, and its
simplicity as key benefits [3]. In collaboration contexts,
she and her colleagues Heiser and Silverman [4] stress
the following benefits of sketching:
• establishing a joint focus among conversers,
• promoting interactivity and involvement,
• fostering efficient and enjoyable collaboration,
• being conducive to creating shared meanings,
• leading to better listening and better recollection
of the issues discussed.
In their studies, Tversky and her colleagues provide
experimental and observational evidence for these
benefits. Similarly, McGown and Green stress the
following collaborative advantages of hand-drawn
sketches: they are fast and seamless, easy to (re-) do,
have an immediate effect, can trigger a high quality
response, and they are highly expressive and only
constrained by the drawer’s imagination [5].

Abstract
In this paper we report on the results of an
experiment simulating financial sales meetings between
prospective customers and a banking advisor. The study
involves 112 subjects and examines effects of interactive
visual sales communication on the quality of a sales
encounter. We have simulated informative sales meetings
where a financial sales expert explains the functioning of
a mutual fund to a potential client. We have used a 2 by
2 experiment design varying the degree of interaction
(with our without customer involvement) and the medium
(paper versus computer) used in the meeting. The results
show that the use of customer involvement elements, that
is to say joint drawing, has a significant positive effect
on perceived client orientation and loyalty towards the
salesperson, but not on the salesperson’s (perceived)
expertise and trust. It also has a positive effect on
perceived empathy of the sales advisor. We also found
that the use of paper sketching leads to significant
increased loyalty towards the salesperson when it comes
to questions as "would you recommend this consultant?"
Computer presentations in lieu of paper sketching do not
lead to significant differences in terms of the
salesperson’s impact on a prospect – except if the subject
has a preference for affective information processing; in
this case sketching outperforms visualization software.
This article has relevance for visualization scholars and
practitioners, as it provides evidence that the
visualization medium and its involvement level affect
communication effectiveness depending on the cognitive
style of the participants.
Keywords--- sketching, visual sales, visualization,
sense making, communication quality, collaboration,
decision support

1. Introduction
With leaflets and brochures, websites, demo CDs
and DVDs, prospective customers are often
overwhelmed by product and sales information.
Especially in the financial industry, the wealth of
information makes it difficult for customers to make a
decision. The same applies to face-to-face sessions,

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.64

343

2

4

1

3

handout (1), or a paper-based, collaborative presentation,
where the salesperson used the pencil selling technique
(2), or a computer-based, non-collaborative presentation
using PowerPoint (3) and finally a computer-based,
collaborative sales talk, where the salesperson lead the
client through the talk using let’s-focus, a collaborative
visualization software environment (4). ‘Collaborative’
in this context designates the act of asking the customer
questions (about his or her preferences) and changing the
visualization accordingly in real-time. The image used
during these sales sessions was based on a real template
from (the Swiss universal bank) UBS’ “Hand Drawing
Library” [8]. To simplify matters, the pencil selling and
software presentation are considered to be the
collaborative presentations, whereas the handout and the
PowerPoint presentation are the non-collaborative sales
presentations.
Subjects were randomly assigned to one of the four
conditions, as suitable in most experimental settings.
Randomization of subjects is a requirement of
experimental settings (in the contrast to quasiexperiments) in order to ensure a non-biased distribution
of group characteristics [9]. The task given to each
subject has been to attend a sales session in order to get
an understanding of the mechanism and functionality of
an open investment fund. At the end, the participants had
to configure a mutual fund product which suited their
individual needs (or industry preferences) and reflected
their attitude. This is a highly realistic and relevant sales
task, as various retail banks use, in one form or another,
visualization techniques to explain something “invisible”
as financial products (some banks use the pencil selling
approach, while others conduct standard slide
presentations on a screen). All subjects were students
from diverse cultural groups and with a varying degree
of experience.
The physical setting remained constant for the
different experimental conditions. The following
variables were fixed as well: The salesperson (identical
person, dress, presentation style, intonation, body
language, etc.), environment (consistent lighting, screen
size, placement of laptop, handout, sheet of paper), and
the presentation duration (approx. 5 minutes). The
duration of the presentation was chosen since it is
realistic for this segment of a sales presentation and
allowed the salesperson to explain terms, functions and
give illustrative examples. This was the same for each of
the four conditions. As the salesperson used to work for
Swiss Bank, he had sufficient knowledge about mutual
fund products. The salesperson and the subject were
sitting around a table’s corner so that the salesperson was
able to either draw a picture or operate a laptop in front
of the prospective client.

Figure 1 The four experimental conditions
Many experiments in the field of information
visualization compare the effects of different
visualization techniques and formats on outcome
variables, such as performance or satisfaction. First
evidence, that the chosen visualization has a significant
impact on attention, agreement, comprehension and
retention has been provided for example by Eppler and
Kernbach [6]. In the experiment we have conducted and
which we will describe in this article, we do not focus on
the visual representation itself, but on the aspect of
collaboration and on the medium on which visualization
is used. While the visualization on the whole stayed the
same, the associated degree of collaboration changed.
The context for our experiment is financial services,
as this context consists of selling a service that is
invisible and intangble and thus requires visualization
(unlike selling tangible products that can be tried out,
such as furniture or cars). This is the reason, why retail
divisions of major banks like UBS and HSBC, but also
telecommunications service providers like Vodafone
employ visualization and pencil selling: The salesperson
sketches a picture of the product and thus makes it more
tangible. According to Blackwell and his colleagues,
sketching is especially supportive when applied in
domains where there is no pictorial description of a
product, such as financial products [7]. As pencil selling
is quite commonly used in the financial services sector
and as there is no research on its effectiveness, the
experiment has been conducted in this field. The
experiment also provides an informative testing ground
for non-numeric, qualitative visualization that so far has
not been the object of rigorous evaluation in business
studies.

2. Experiment

2.1. Research Question

An experimental study has been designed and
performed to assess the effects of medium and
collaboration on selling effectiveness. Specifically, we
have implemented four different conditions: Prospective
clients were given an introduction to how mutual fund
products work. They either received a paper-based, noninteractive presentation, where the salesperson used a

The motivation to conduct this experiment was the
fact that a sales presentation has a strong impact on sales
and in equal measure on the buildup of the relationship
between a customer and a salesperson [10]. Visualization
is furthermore eminent for information brokering. As the
interaction in sales is of a dyadic nature [11], it was

344

subject more an emotional or rational kind of customer,
how much does he or she know about financial products
and fund products in specific, how is their affinity to
technology and their perception of financial consultants),
as well as some demographic data. This allowed
measuring both prior knowledge and attitude towards
financial products and sales professionals of each person
participating in the experiment.
After having completed the questionnaire, subjects
entered the room where the salesperson was waiting. The
subjects were randomly assigned to one of the four
conditions and the salesperson started the sales session
by stating the goal of this five minute talk, namely
providing an overview on mutual funds. They were told
that whenever they would have any questions they could
interrupt the consultant and ask. The salesperson then
walked them through his presentation and explained
what a fund was. He pointed out the advantages of such a
financial product compared to buying regular stocks and
also mentioned the possible risks. The range of financial
products is manifold. It therefore might be quite
challenging to find the fund product which objectively
suits the client's needs the most. The subjects therefore
were given the possibility to add and/or remove sectors
and industries that they wanted to invest in and thereby
configure a fund which suited their individual needs or
reflected their investment attitude. After having done so,
subjects were asked if they could imagine investing in a
mutual fund like the one they had just configured and if
they would have any additional questions.
Their last task consisted of another questionnaire to
measure if the subject’s general attitude towards
financial products and sales professionals had changed
how they perceived the salesperson’s competence and
how satisfied they were with the meeting.
In total, we held 33 interviews supported by a paper
handout, 27 interviews using the pencil selling technique
on an initially blank piece of paper, and the same number
of interviews showing a PowerPoint presentation.
Another 25 meetings were facilitated by using the let’s
focus visualization software package [13].

Figure 2 Independent and dependent
variables
important to integrate the aspect of collaboration in this
experiment, first and foremost because there is no
research on the effect of involving the customer in
information brokerage. Although the introduction of
technology gained importance in the past years, there is
no proof that using technical support is beneficial for the
outcome of a sales presentation when using visualization.
The pivotal question we aimed to tackle therefore was:
How does the visual support medium and the degree
of collaboration affect the sales presentation
effectiveness, as perceived by the prospective customer?
Hence, the experimental study aims to address how
different kinds of visualization along with the degree of
collaboration affect a sales session. In order to evaluate
this aspect, four common modalities of visualizations
were chosen. Their rationale is described below.

2.2. Task and Procedure
As briefly stated before, the participants were asked
to attend a one-on-one sales session with a financial
consultant/salesperson. It is very common in the
financial industry that prospective clients are invited to
individual meetings as decisions about financial security
and portfolio strategy are often tailored to every client
and financial products often cannot be sold by just
handing out an advertising folder. Those sale sessions
were intentionally kept short and only one aspect of the
portfolio strategy was discussed with the subject, namely
the functioning of one particular product, a mutual fund.
Each session lasted five minutes.
In this section, the procedure followed in the
experiment will be described, as well as the task given to
the subjects. To avoid distortion of the experiment, the
customer service representative was the same person for
all 112 sales sessions. A so called between subjects
design was chosen. This type of design is often called an
independent measures design because every participant
is only subjected to a single treatment. This lowers the
chances of participants suffering boredom after a long
series of tests or, alternatively, becoming more
accomplished through practice and experience, skewing
the results [12].
First, each participant completed a pre-experiment
survey. In this survey, they were asked to answer
questions to capture personal characteristics (e.g. is the

2.3. Selection of the Subjects
The participants of this experiment were 112
undergraduate and graduate students from three
Dependent
Variable
Competence
Customer
Orientation
Trust towards
the salesperson
Empathy
Loyalty

CollaMean
Std. Dev.
boration
Yes
.1611814
.80993256
No
-.1447343 1.13305311
Yes
.2235096
.91406144
No
-.1891235 1.03689774
Yes
.0517863
.89387482
No
-.0451953 1.09040730
Yes
.2336784
.84861756
No
-.1961229 1.08000473
Yes
.1997377
.81184413
No
-.1653001 1.11231512

Table 1 Descriptive statistics (means and
standard deviation) for each independent variable

345

universities and varying degrees of experience. Their
average age was 24 years; 43% were male and 57% were
female. The descriptive statistics of the sample for each
condition show that age differs within a range of roughly
one year from the total mean.
The sales session of the experiment was held in
German 58 times and 54 times in English. 36% of the
subjects had already received professional advice on
financial products and 21% already had bought an
investment fund in the past. Their average familiarity
with the topic of financial products was 2.8 on a 7-point
scale. None of the subjects refused to take part in the
experiment.

[11], which is definitely the case for financial products in
general. Customer-oriented attitude was measured as the
amount of a salesperson’s affect for or against customers.
This measure is based on the scale for measuring
“affective customer orientation” developed by Peccei
and Rosenthal [15] and discussed by Stock and Hoyer
[16]. According to Saxe and Weitz, customer oriented
behavior is defined as the ability of the salespeople to
help their customers by engaging in behaviors that
increase customer satisfaction [17]. Examples include
behaviors such as trying to help to achieve the
customer’s goals, discussing the customer’s needs, and
trying to influence the customer with information rather
than by pressure. The scale with a high reliability (Į=.88)
consisted of four items that captured issues such as
enjoying interaction with customers and the conviction
that customer interaction contributes to their own
personal development in. "Empathy" is defined as the
ability to understand another person’s perspective and to
react emotionally to the other person [18]. Salespeople
with high levels of empathy would think more about, and
have a deeper understanding of, the customer’s thoughts
and feelings and therefore behave in a more customeroriented manner. Therefore, high levels of empathy
should increase the likelihood that the salesperson is able
to transfer his or her customer-oriented attitudes into
customer-oriented behavior. The four items used to
measure this variable covered aspects such as the ability
to understand customer needs and adopt a customer
perspective and were already used by Stock and Hoyer
[16]. The reliability of the scale was high enough
(Į=.83). As all values for the factor loadings were above
the threshold of .80, which is considered as a critical
value for the internal consistency [19], the total scores
for all five variables were used rather than each item
separately.

2.4. Measurements
The outcomes of the experiment were measured by
letting the subjects fill out two questionnaires: One
before and another one after the experiment.
For the subjects, the experiment began with a survey
where we measured nine elements. We first asked them
if they had ever received professional advice on financial
products or if they even had bought financial products
before. Attitude towards fund products and customer
orientation of financial consultants are validated with
scales of 6 and 8 items respectively. Knowledge about
financial products, motivation, affinity to technology,
factual and affective information processing (the
subject’s cognitive style) are all validated scales of 4
items. In addition, demographic data was also collected.
The survey after the sales presentation, measured
nine outcomes, based on the previously presented
research question: action (would the subject arrange
another meeting with the salesperson?), perceived
competence of the consultant, empathy of the
salesperson, satisfaction with the advice, attitude towards
the product and purchase intention, customer orientation
as well as confidence and loyalty towards the
salesperson. The subject was able to indicate, whether he
or she would like to arrange a follow-up meeting with
the consultant or not by simply stating yes or no. The
explorative dependent variables "Perceived salesperson
competence", "Customer Orientation", "Trust" and
"Empathy" have all been measured based on four
semantic differentials items and "Loyalty" based on three
semantic differentials items. To check the validity of the
various scales consisting of only four, respectively three
items, we have conducted a factor analysis which has
resulted in very acceptable, high factor loadings.
Reliability was measured with the Cronbach alpha
measure. "Perceived salesperson competence" was
assessed with a reduced scale of “Salesperson Expertise”
developed by Doney and Cannon [14]. The final scale
(with a very high reliability (Į = .90)) consisted of four
items as well. The items used to measure "Trust" have
been selected out of seven items that have been used to
measure the nature of trust in buyer-seller relationships,
as developed by Doney and Cannon [14]. The four-item
scale of salesperson trust exhibits sufficient high
reliability (Į=.81). Trust was measured as trust is
particularly important where uncertainty and risk are
inherent and contracts and warranties are often absent

3. Results
Our focus first and foremost was not to verify,
whether the handout, sketch, PowerPoint or Softwaresupport was the most effective, but rather whether the
aspect of collaboration has a significant impact on the
analyzed outcome variables. We therefore first
conducted an independent samples T test in order to find
out whether the identified differences for each condition
were of significance on an aggregated level
(collaboration vs. non-collaboration) and of which level
of significance.
Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for
the two conditions (collaborative vs. non-collaborative)
and the dependent variables competence, customer
orientation, trust, empathy and loyalty (see also figure 2).
The results of the T test displayed in table 2 show
significant differences between the collaborative and the
non-collaborative scenarios for customer orientation,
empathy and loyalty. The T test reveals a significant
effect (p  0.05) on customer orientation, empathy and
loyalty. However, no significance could be established
for competence and trust.

346

Dependent F
variable
(Sig.)
Competence
.303
.583
Customer
.753
Orientation
.387

Outcome

Trust
towards
salesperson
Empathy

Collaboration ļ
Non Collaboration

.621

2.001

Collaboration ļ
Non Collaboration

.026

Loyalty

.160
6.738

Collaboration ļ
Non Collaboration

.054

.957
.330

through many alternatives before I make decisions”), we
intended to earmark the subjects for generally deciding
either more in a more affective (emotional) or factual
(rational) manner. The reliability of the scale was
acceptable (Į=.76). In order to identify if customers, who
tend to process information more affective do respond
differently to sketches or computer-based presentations,
we conducted a T test. The results are displayed in table
4. Interestingly, the only difference we were able to
demonstrate was that affective people respond – in terms
of empathy towards the salesperson - more positively to
sketches, than factual people do. For all other variables,
as well as for the software presentation, no significance
could be established.
Ultimately, we also conducted a reality check, where
we wanted to bring to light whether the subjects assess
the sales interview as being realistic or artificial. This
item was evaluated through two questions in the
feedback questionnaire. 66% of all subjects held the
view, that this session could have taken place in reality,
and only 27.5% assessed the meeting as not being
realistic. Interesting in this regard was the fact that the
analysis of the variance (ANOVA) of all four conditions
revealed that only the handout showed significant results
(Sig. = .013), indicating, that subjects whose presentation
was supported by a handout rated the session the most
realistic. The explanation might be that subjects are
mostly familiar with paper-based, non-collaborative sales
presentations and the other forms, especially the
computer-supported presentations are less common.

Sig.
(2-tailed)
Collaboration ļ
.478
Non Collaboration
Collaboration ļ
.022
Non Collaboration

.011
Table 2 T test results for each dependent
variable
After having been able to confirm the hypothesis
that there is a significant positive effect on perceived
customer orientation, empathy and loyalty towards the
salesperson in collaborative sales presentations, the next
step was to examine, whether there would be a
significant differences between the two collaborative
sales presentation conditions, namely sketching versus
visualization software.
A Pearson correlation has been conducted in order to
find out, whether there is a correlation between the
independent variables and the collaborative presenting
techniques sketching (pencil selling) and visualization
software (let's focus). The results of this analysis in table
3 shows, that the only correlation which is significant at
the 0.05 level (2-tailed) is the one between sketch and
loyalty, which means, that the only advantage of
supporting a sales talk with pencil selling compared to
an interactive, computer-based solution like let's focus
we were able to prove evidence for is that the customers
loyalty towards the salesperson is slightly higher.
In the questionnaire that the participants had to
complete before the sales session, they were also asked,
how they would assess their own information processing.
Based on four different questions (e.g. “I tend to think
Competence

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
Customer
Pearson
Orientation
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
Trust towards Pearson
salesperson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
Empathy
Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)
Loyalty
Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)

4. Conclusion and Future Work
In this study we aimed to identify the effects of a
collaborative sales session in the financial services
industry on the perceived salesperson's competence,
customer orientation, the customer’s empathy, trust and
loyalty towards the salesperson. Over one hundred
prospective clients attended sales sessions and completed
two questionnaires about their perceived quality of the
session and the salesperson. The support of the sales
session was varied by the salesperson into four different
presentations supports: Two collaborative, and two noncollaborative formats.
The results of this study show that collaboration
indeed has a positive impact on customer orientation.
According to Saxe and Weitz, the probability of
prospective purchase decisions can be positively
influenced through a salesperson's customer orientation
[17]. The two collaborative sales presentations also had a
positive impact on the salesperson’s empathy and the
customer’s loyalty towards the salesperson. These
findings can be helpful for marketing- and sales
managers to more effectively support their sales
representatives by providing interactive sales materials
and educating them how to better involve the customer
and increase the collaboration in their sales talks.
A limitation of the study is the selection of the
subjects: As they all were students, most of them did not
have extra money to invest and therefore were not really
considering the idea of investing into a financial product

Sketch
Software
.069
.111
.510
.104

.289
.143

.260
-.022

.120
.081

.823
.096

.415
.161

.335
.197**

.104
.020

.43

.835

Table 3 Correlation between the independent
variables and the two collaborative
presentation techniques

347

Dependent
variable

Outcome

Competence affective
ļ
factual
Customer
affective
Orientation
ļ
factual
Trust
affective
towards
ļ
salesperson factual
Empathy
affective
ļ
factual
Loyalty
affective
ļ
factual

References

Sketch
Software
F
Sig.
F
Sig.
Sig.
(2-tailed) Sig.
(2-tailed)
1.767
.203
.007
5.67
.201
.934
.873

.156

.363
1.024

.210

.148

[2]

.512

[3]

.061

.483
.045

.260
2.294

.989

.129

.326
1.358

2.482

[1]

1.920

[4]

.347

.181
.577

2.549

[5]

.273

.125

[6]

Table 4 Independent samples T test results
for affective and factual subjects

[7]

such as a mutual fund. In addition, the study was
conducted during the year 2010, in the midst of the
turmoil in the financial market. Those events had
somewhat shaken people's confidence in those
institutions. Another limitation may also be caused by
the selection of the visual representation, which has been
based on an existing template to explain the function of
mutual fund products.
In future research, we would like to evaluate in more
depth if the effects of collaborative presentation formats
differs when facing analytical or emotional potential
clients. After the first evaluation of the collected data, it
is still unclear, whether the perception of competence or
customer orientation differs from analytical to more
emotional customers and if there is a difference for
people with more or less computer affinity in terms of
judging paper- and computer-based presentation formats.
It would be furthermore interesting to examine if the
results can be generalized or if they are only valid for
western cultures.
In conclusion, we believe this study to be useful as a
first step in advancing our understanding of the use of
interactive, collaborative presentation formats in face-toface sale encounters. It can help to better assess the
crucial role of visual support media and their levels of
collaboration (especially with regard to the likely
cognitive preferences of the target group). Our study also
shows the relevance of collaborative information
visualization outside its traditional scope (of IT), namely
in sales communication. In doing so we have extended
the traditional range of performance outcomes typically
examined in information visualization (such as task
speed and accuracy) to other important elements (i.e.,
perceived empathy, loyalty, or competence).

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Prof. Dr. A. Haas and Prof. Dr.
M. Eppler for their cooperation and support in
conducting this experimental study.

[19]

348

J. Lanir and K. S. Booth, "Understanding Instructors' use
of visual aids in classroom setting," in World Conference
on
Educational
Multimedia,
Hypermedia
and
Telecommunications 2007, Chesapeake, VA, 2007, pp.
788-794.
E. Tufte, The cognitive Style of PowerPoint. Chesire:
Graphics Press, 2003.
B. Tversky, "What do sketches say about thinking," in
AAAI Spring Symposium on Sketch Understanding, 2002,
pp. 148-151.
J. Heiser, B. Tversky, and M. Silverman. (2004,
21.12.2009). Sketches for and from collaboration.
Available:
http://wwwpsych.stanford.edu/~bt/gesture/papers/vr04.pdf
A. McGown, G. Green, and P. A. Rodgers, "Visible
ideas: information patterns of conceptual sketch activity,"
Design Studies, vol. 19, pp. 431-453, 1998.
M. J. Eppler and S. Kernbach, "The use of visualization
in the context of business strategies," in 14th
International Conference Information Visualisation
IV'10, London, 2010, pp. 349-354.
A. F. Blackwell, L. Church, B. Plimmer, and D. Gray,
"Formality in Sketches and Visual Representation: Some
Informal Reflections," in VL/HCC Workshop, Herrsching
am Ammersee, Germany, 2008, pp. 11-18.
UBS, Skizzenhandbuch (Kundenvermögen < CHF 1
Mio.) - Kommunizieren mit grosser Wirkung. Zürich:
UBS AG, 2007.
D. T. Campbell and C. J. Stanley, Experimental and
quasi-experimental design for research. Chicago: Rand
McNally College Pub, 1966.
A. Haas, "Kann zu viel Kundenorientierung nachteilig
sein? Eine Analyse der Wirkung der Kundenorientierung
von Verkäufern auf die Kaufentscheidung," Zeitschrift
für Betriebswirtschaft, vol. 79, pp. 7-30, 2009.
L. A. Crosby, K. R. Evans, and D. Cowles, "Relationship
quality in services selling: an interpersonal influence
perspective," The journal of marketing, vol. 54, pp. 6881, 1990.
M. Shuttleworth. (2009, 10.07.2011). Between Subjects
Design. Available: http://www.experimentresources.com/between-subjects-design.html
M. J. Eppler, "Facilitating Knowledge Communication
through Joint Interactive Visualization," presented at the
I-KNOW ’04, Graz, Austria, 2004.
P. M. Doney and J. P. Cannon, "An Examination of the
Nature of Trust in Buyer-Seller Relationships," The
Journal of Marketing, vol. 61, pp. 35-51, 1997.
R. Peccei and P. Rosenthal, "Delivering CustomerOriented Behaviour through Empowerment: An
Empirical Test of HRM Assumptions," Journal of
Management Studies, vol. 38, pp. 831-857, 2001.
R. M. Stock and W. D. Hoyer, "An Attitude-Behavior
Model of Salespeople's Customer Orientation," Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 33, pp. 536552, 2005.
R. Saxe and A. W. Barton, "The SOCO Scale: A Measure
of the Customer Orientation of Salespeople," Journal of
Marketing Research, vol. 19, pp. 343-351, 1982.
M. H. Davis, "Measuring individual differences in
empathy: Evidence for a multidimensional approach. ,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 44,
pp. 113-126, 1983.
A. Bryman, Social Research Methods, 3 ed.: School of
Management, University of Leicester, 2008.

