2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

MORE THAN MEETS THE EYE:
Cross-cultural Interpretations of Digitally Manipulated Photography: a case study of the
photographic artworks of Tae Yang ('Sunny') Hong in his exhibition ‘WOMEN TECHNOLOGY
UTOPIA’: an Australian Perspective
Christine Nicholls
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia
{Christine.Nicholls@flinders.edu.au}

Abstract

interpretive challenge. Sunny Hong uses a blurring
technique based on the Chinese philosophical
tradition of Taoism, arising directly from the Hun
Yuan Qi system. To understand and engage with
Hong’s oeuvre it is thus essential that one develop
a
visual
and
cultural
knowledge-based
understanding of the belief system underlying
Hong's approach. The aim of this paper is
therefore to contribute to a greater understanding
of the fundamental principle that cultural
difference is deeply encrypted in visual
information, and that such difference goes beyond
the visual, insofar as it resides at the level of the
episteme. It should be added that today, as a result
of increasing globalisation, there is very little
visual art that does not draw upon a range of
cultural influences, or evince a level of cultural
hybridity, and Hong’s oeuvre is no exception.
Rosenberg’s poetic model of research, developed
specifically in relation to visual art and design
research, will be brought into play here in order to
illuminate Sunny Hong’s body of visual artwork.

Interpreting visual information conveyed by artistic
traditions
based
on
culturally
different
epistemological and conceptual frameworks offers
significant challenges. There is a good deal of
anecdotal evidence that deeply monocultural
Australian students learning about certain ‘Asian'
artistic traditions for the first time are particularly
susceptible to making serious interpretive errors1
when reading ‘other-culture’ visual imagery,
despite the fact that such visual information may
look - on the surface at least - very similar to
imagery in artworks with which they are culturally
familiar. This is a problem that goes well beyond
the purely pedagogical, affecting all persons
working towards an understanding of the visual
information conveyed by cultural products outside
of their own experience. Furthermore, this applies
to digital art as much as to painting and other
media. Therefore it is important that when working
in such cross-cultural contexts the understanding
that there is often a good deal more to
understanding visual artwork than the purely
visual - or that which meets the eye – be nurtured
and developed. The following analysis of
photographic artworks exhibited by South Koreanborn, Newcastle-based digital artist Tae Yang
(‘Sunny’) Hong in his recent exhibition WOMEN,
TECHNOLOGY, UTOPIA, presents such an

Key Words
digital photography; visual information;
epistemology; cross-cultural interpretation;
hybridity; Taoism; Hun Yuan Qi system; poetic
research

Introduction

1

Personal communications to the author from five state
school Visual Arts teachers who in the past, have
introduced Asian visual art into the high school syllabus
in different schools in Victoria, Australia. These teachers
have all requested anonymity. In addition, the author has
been teaching tradition-oriented Australian Aboriginal
art for over 30 years now, to tertiary groups and
academic peers all over the world, and has extensive first
hand experience of the majority of students- and peers tending to understand visual art through the lens of their
own visual-cultural traditions.
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.93

Mutability and motion lie at the core of the digitally
manipulated photographs in Tae Yang (Sunny)
Hong’s 2008 exhibition WOMEN TECHNOLOGY
UTOPIA, held at the University of Newcastle’s
Gallery on its Callaghan campus (The University
Gallery, 3-12 December, 2008). This South Korean
546

born artist (b. 1972 in the university city of Wonju
in Gangwon Province, to the east of Seoul)
migrated to Australia in 1992, and has since made
Newcastle his home. This paper focuses on the
question of how students (in the broadest possible
sense of that word) from non-Asian backgrounds
understand the visual imagery of ‘Asian’ visual art,
particularly when it is presented to them for the first
Figure 1: Installation View of Tae Yang (Sunny) Hong’s

time. A case study of the underlying zeitgeist

exhibition WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA, at University

informing the visual imagery created by Korean-

of Newcastle Gallery, Callaghan Campus, Newcastle, NSW

born artist Sunny Hong in his intriguing exhibition
WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA is presented

This tendency of westerners to lump ‘Asians’ into a
single, broad category, willy nilly, was critiqued by
Edward Said, who famously described this
tendency as ‘Orientalism’, involving a constellation
of false assumptions and a long tradition of selfinterested, romanticised and gender-stereotyped
images of Asia [1]. Although Said was specifically
writing about the Arabic world and western
stereotypes that were prevalent about Arabs at that
time – and still are in many instances – Said’s
concept of Orientalism is equally applicable to the
conceptualizations that many dominant-culture
Australians have today about ‘Asia’ and ‘Asians’.
This matters because Australia is extremely close to
that broad region, particularly to South-East Asia,
and although some headway has been made in
terms of understanding the high level of diversity
that exists in our region, and more nuanced
understandings are gradually being reached, there is
still a considerable way to go.

here, in order to open up further discussion on this
subject.
Before broaching this subject however, it is
necessary to critique the notion that there is any
single, homogenous body of visual art that can
accurately be described as ‘Asian’ in any generic
sense. To use the terminology ‘Asian art’ is to elide
the artistic practices of a large number of ethnically
distinct ‘Asian’ groups into one single,
undifferentiated, rather hazy macro-category,
thereby obliterating the considerable historical,
religious, social, political and cultural differences
that exist throughout Asia, and to ignore the ways
in which such difference plays itself out in the
various visual arts practices that exist in this
putative Asia.
Within what the west has routinely described as
‘Asia’ there are a number of highly differentiated
ancient civilizations (India, China, Vietnam,
Cambodia, Japan, Iran, for example, to name but a
few). Each has its own semi-autonomous,
distinctive artistic traditions and practices.
Moreover, there is considerable internal diversity
within each civilization, often based on the fact that
several religious and philosophic traditions co-exist
within each civilization. The stereotyping and
homogenisation that results in the macro-category
of ‘Asian art’ completely disregards the diverse
histories, geographies and cultural practices that
subsist throughout the many ancient cultures,
countries and nation states that comprise Asia

To summarise, Said’s ‘Orientalism’ is a theory
of representation that refers to the way in which the
‘west’ thinks about, stereotypes, represents and
projects such perspectives onto those from ‘the
east’ or ‘the orient’. Orientalism, Said averred,
constitutes an entire system of thought with respect
the ‘east’ [2]. Political forces underpin such
conceptualizations of ‘Arabs’, ‘Asia’ and ‘Asians’.
Included among these, importantly, is the enduring
legacy of Western imperial activity, be that
colonial, economic, military or a combination of all
of these – because these strands are not so easily
disentangled from one another.
Key to Said’s notion of Orientalism is a single,
homogenous image of the so-called ‘Oriental’, a
view that prevails even today in many parts of ‘the

547

model of research in design (2000), Terrence
Rosenberg argues convincingly for a poetic model
of research in visual art and design, with the
potential to shed greater light on creative practice
by bringing together what he describes, after
Bakhtin, as both centripetal and centrifugal
approaches to research. In practice this means that
Rosenberg’s view of valid research is that research
that does not simply arise from scientific models
wherein there is an implicit expectation of a
common set of assumptions that are able to hold
across all time and all space.

west’ (which in itself a homogenising concept). [3]
According to this belief, or perhaps more
accurately, this ideologically-driven understanding,
Asian women are seen as passive, keen to please,
and happy, indeed eager, to be dominated by men –
including Western men. Moreover, the Orientalist
mindset deems Asian women to be sexually
submissive, strikingly exotic, conquerable, inferior;
while the ‘Asian male’ is regarded as slippery,
inscrutable, shifty, dishonest, not to be trusted,
sexually predatory, sneaky and dangerous - perhaps
because he is perceived as posing a sexual threat to
Western women?) The putative exoticism,
including the sexual exoticism of the ‘orient’ or
‘east’, is another key idea that emerges from Said’s
theoretical account of Orientalism. It is against such
a social background that many understandings
about Asian art have been developed, historically.

As Rosenberg writes, “[The centripetal force]
works in constant reference to what adheres or to
what is ordained within boundaries of an
established doxy. The program of the centripetal is
to make fast, secure and stabilize. Its tendency is to
ground or establish a grounding for [visual art and
design] research. It is a program creating certainty
through normalization of method and through an
aim to establish if not truths then justifiable
statements. It is foundationally driven; it
substantiates and draws connection through direct
reference to established theories and practices. The
centripetal force may be symbolized as a straight
line...The centrifugal force pulls away from the
ground, its movement is counter to the process of
grounding. It pulls into open water. Centrifugally
driven practice/research explores possibilities
beyond, and creates deviations from programs to
normalize. Its aims are to expand and develop
opportunities. It relies on the substantiations of the
centripetal, but it moves in the opposite direction
and in this movement it rattles the movement to
substantiate. The impulse is not towards certainty
but to escape from it. It pulls out in different
directions...Poetic research engages with the notion
of complexity, weaving together [these] disparate
elements in a complex and evolving structure.” [5]

Rationale and Methodology
Incorrect or inappropriate meanings are
frequently drawn from visual artworks (or other
visual imagery) when, as Ian Brown [4] has
suggested, people simply go ahead and ‘construct
their own meanings’ by ‘active interrogation’ of the
imagery. When such open-ended approaches are
taken to the interpretation of visual imagery, this
can lead to a serious misreading of the images
under interrogation, including the orientalist
approaches referred to above. Visual images always
have multilayered and contextual meanings.
Therefore guidance is required as part of the
process of interrogating the meaning of all visual
imagery. Since visual images are always embedded
in particular socio-cultural, locational and historical
contexts, this means in practice that there are no
real shortcuts to understanding any of the world’s
visual artistic traditions in those cases where one
lacks the socio-cultural and historical context
needed to understand these works in their visual
iterations. Another way of putting this is to state
that visual literacy is inevitably premised on
cultural literacy. In multicultural countries like
Australia, this reality calls for a different, more
humanistic approach to researching visual artworks,
an approach that calls into question the assumptions
behind unilateral interpretive responses, whilst also
recognizing the social formations of knowledge
production. The underlying impetus of such
research is to go beyond the boundaries set out by
the old science/arts binary.

In this paper I have adopted the errant, nonlinear methodology that Rosenberg suggests, to
account for the plurality, complexity and richness
of the multi-layered creative works created by
Sunny Hong. Such an approach, that has a poetic
research base, is necessary in terms of accounting
for the multidimensional nature of visual artworks.
The photographic artworks of Tae Yang
('Sunny') Hong in ‘WOMEN TECHNOLOGY
UTOPIA’: a case study in interpreting cultural

In a groundbreaking research approach outlined in
the seminal paper ‘The reservoir’: towards a poetic

difference in visual information

548

At the same time, other influences also prevail in
Hong’s WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA, as
Hong explained to the writer of this article:

In order to go beyond narrowly Orientalist
interpretations of visual imagery that still
characterize certain mainstream Australian cultural
readings of so-called ‘Asian’ visual imagery, this
section offers a means of understanding of Sunny
Hong’s work that takes into account his own
cultural and visual underpinnings, but also the fact
that at this point in human history that globalization
is playing an important role in the poetics and
politics of interpretation.

... “[My aim in this body of work] was to reveal two
competing narratives in the construction of
contemporary Korean identity: the utopian embrace
of new technology as a source of economic and
cultural liberation and the desire to retain the
established Korean social order [which in Hong's
case is closely related to Taoism]. These oftenconflicting forces most clearly expressed themselves
in representations of Korean women. These Korean
female images exemplified cyber-modernity, hypercapitalism and Western modernism, as she is seen
simultaneously as the anchor for, or embodiment of,
traditional values in the roles she is expected to
fulfil. The body of digitally manipulated
photographs represents an exemplary model for the
expression or critique of the unique hybrid culture
that defines contemporary Asian ethnic identity.”
[9]

An important caveat needs to be offered however,
insofar as there is a credible school of thought with
strong historical roots whereby it is argued that with
respect to literature authorial intent is irrelevant to
understanding a work of literature (see, for example
W.K. Wimsett, Monroe Beardsley, 1954, and others
including T.S. Eliot who have presented cogent
cases against factoring in authorial intent in the
interpretation of literary works) [6]. Whilst there is
no analogous body of work relating to the
interpretation of visual artworks, a comparable case
is often presented against what is known in literary
circles as the ‘intentional fallacy’ [7]. However, in
making their case Wimsett, Beardsley, Eliot et al
were writing overwhelmingly about AngloEuropean literary works, rather then literary works
that arose out of cultural traditions that differed
from their own. It is argued that in the case of
Hong’s digital artworks, such cultural difference
exists at the level of the episteme, and that such real
difference ought not be disregarded, and for this
reason Hong’s intention in making these works
needs to be factored in. So what has Sunny Hong
actually set out to do in these digital visualizations?

Whilst an argument can be mounted for the
‘cultural hybridity’ of everyone in the modernized
world (including those in the so-called ‘West’), it
must be remembered that we are all hybrids in our
own unique, and often highly country-specific
ways. Crude examples of this include the fact that
in Japan McDonalds sells Teriyaki burgers, whereas
in Austria McDonalds’s wiener schnitzel burgers
are very popular. So while we have all become, to
some extent at least, hybrids now, perhaps
ironically, we are hybrids in our own unique,
individual, culturally specific ways.
So, rather than creating such images for any other
explicit purpose (for example, of critiquing western
orientalism, and the fuzzy, unclear picture of Asian
women that emerges from such an entrenched and
lazy system of thought - although this may well be
the dominant interpretation of these images by
many predominantly non-Chinese or non-‘Asian’
audiences, and could well have been a subsidiary
objective on the artist’s part) in WOMEN
TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA Hong is engaging in a
vigorous, dynamic cross-cultural aesthetics. This
makes his work impossible to ‘read’ within any
uni-dimensional framework – and requires a
poetic/imaginative approach towards understanding
Hong’s creative visual project.

Through his use of contemporary digital media,
Hong is deploying traditional Chinese use of
blurring techniques arising directly from the
Chinese philosophical tradition of Taoism, and
from the Hun Yuan Qi system, of which he is an
adherent. The nebulous quality of Hong’s
photographic imagery lies at the heart of his artistic
expression and reflects Tao philosophy:
Imagine a nebulous thing
here before Heaven and Earth
silent and elusive...
not knowing its name
I call it the Tao
—Daode jing, Verse 11 (tr. Bill Porter) [8]

549

yellow and blue also hold considerable significance.
According to Stephen Little et al, the flow of Qi
through the earth means that which appears to be
solid is actually in flux [10]. In other words, the
shadowy bodies captured in fleeting movement in
Hong’s works, are vehicles for the expression of Qi.
These works connote the continual cycle of
emergence and destruction – the eternal flux of
existence. Hong’s Untitled No. 9 also exemplifies
this endless cycle of movement, flux, becoming and
then ultimately disappearing into nothingness –
only for the cycle to begin over again.
Yet these are multilayered works, which have
been created in a trans-cultural context that greatly
expands their range of possible meanings and how
they might be interpreted. It is therefore possible to
attribute several layers of meaning to the works in
WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA.
For example, the blurring effect and shadowy forms
in Sunny Hong’s works are also redolent of certain
contemporary cutting-edge ‘in and out of focus’
advertising imagery featuring both male and female
models, as well as a number of the recurring motifs
to be found in the fashion photography of today, in
other words an entrenched feature of contemporary
capitalism. The recurrent themes in many
advertising and fashion shoots include models
engaging in similarly strangely stylized, even
artificial, bodily poses. Often these are limited to a
restricted range of more or less unnatural,
sometimes even contorted, bodily postures. Such
photography is also, in some instances,
characterized by the centrality of the human face
(see, for example, Untitled No. 8), or sometimes the
entire upper body, within the frame; the deliberate
use of movement and motion blur; the use of more
than one light source in setting up the frame, often
with light shining in from behind the image and
from the sides, to create a glowing effect that
enhances the central human figure; a deliberate
interplay between the real and the artificial (Hong’s
marvelously suggestive Untitled No. 10 in which
the model appears, Janus-like – or perhaps Hydraesque, or even perhaps like certain Indian deities with two heads facing in opposite directions
embodies this idea); the occasional elongation of
certain bodily features such as the head or neck, as
is the case in Untitled No. 11 and Untitled Nos. 15
and 16, and/or augmentation of other body parts,
for instance the lips (such as occurs in Hong’s
Untitled No. 12 and Untitled No. 17), cheeks,
dimples or breasts; the conscious deployment of

Figure 2: Tae Yang (Sunny) Hong, 2008, Untitled Number
21, digital print, 120 x 90 cm, image courtesy of the artist

Sunny Hong brings together ‘western’ modes of
technological advancement through his use of
digital imaging, melding the latter with particular
schools of Chinese philosophical thought and older
ideas about Chinese calligraphy and ink painting.
From this latter perspective the sense of energy and
movement that inhabits and flows through Sunny
Hong’s photographic works affords WOMEN
TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA an entirely different set
of cultural meanings. Armed with such
understanding, it becomes possible for audiences to
imbue the outwardly strange postures adopted by
the women who are the subjects of the photographs
with culturally reified, predetermined meanings. In
Hong’s visual artworks, the principle of
individuation, the underlying paradigm of so much
‘western’ portraiture, which pervades a great deal of
‘western’ art history, plays little or no role.
The nebulous imagery in Sunny Hong’s digitally
manipulated photographs needs to be regarded as
revealing the inner-spirit landscape of each
individual woman’s body. The women’s primal
energy is conveyed by the strong sense of fluid
movement that inhabits each of these works.
Exemplifying this energy flow are, for instance,
Hong’s Untitled No. 5, Untitled No. 13, Untitled
No. 23 and Untitled Nos. 26 and 27. In each of the
latter works the background colours of white,

550

‘ectoplasmic’ atmospherics (that is, hazy or misty,
as can be seen par excellence in Untitled No. 4 and

symbolism of the colours used is always significant,
too.

Figure 3: Tae Yang (Sunny) Hong, 2008, Untitled Number 9,
digital print, 120 x 90 cm, image courtesy of the artist
Figure 4: Tae Yang (Sunny) Hong, 2008, Untitled Number
10, digital print, 120 x 90 cm, image courtesy of the artist

also in Untitled No. 22) and other special visual
effects; and sometimes, other futuristic (Utopian?)
imagery and effects. According to this vision, forms
yield to formlessness.

It is instructive to compare Hong’s works with the
German artist Caspar David Friedrich’s Romantic
masterpiece titled Wanderer above the Sea of Fog

Yet at the same time such attributes infuse certain
aspects of contemporary popular culture on a global
scale, a point acknowledged by the artist in his
accompanying artist’s statement, despite his
acknowledged adherence to traditional Chinese uses
of ‘blurring’ techniques as they relate to the
Chinese philosophical tradition of Taoism and
especially to the Hun Yuan Qi system.

(1818, 94.8 x 74.8 cm, Kunsthalle, Hamburg)
which has become a classic work in western art
history. Both artists make deliberate use of
‘fuzziness’ to decided artistic effect, in spite of the
fact that the two artists use different media, are
from different eras and very different cultural

In keeping with the ambiguous nature of these
poetic visual works, while on the one hand one
cannot rule out the hybrid nature of these visual
artworks, neither, on the other hand, can the cultural
specificity of the mystical nature of Taoism,
relating to the unity and inner harmony of all life,
be discounted as an important contributing factor to
the visualisation in this work. Those who adhere to
the Taoist philosophy believe that they achieve such
unity only through their awareness of being a part
of the underlying principle of the universe, the Tao,
the putatively inexpressible source of living. Both
visually and philosophically Hong’s approach is
very much in keeping with the deepest tenets of
Taoism, wherein the visual provides a metaphorical
or spiritual vision, wherein contrasts prevail:
contrasts between, inter alia, the vertical and
horizontal, the fluid and compact, between
emptiness (frequently represented as white) and
fullness, and between other colours as well. The

contexts. Both artists’ works conform, at least to a
certain extent, to their very different underlying
epistemologies, underscoring Rosenberg’s
contention that visual artworks cannot be
approached by exactly the same research
methodology as that undertaken by scientists.

551

making comparison between the two artists, what is
certain is that while both Friedrich and Hong
deploy mistiness – nebulousness - as a visual trope
in their artworks, the cultural presuppositions on
which such artistic choices are entirely different.
The blurriness of the fog in Friedrich’s work is
typical of German romanticism, and thus an entirely
different ‘beast’ from the fluidity inherent in the
Taoist vision. The visual nebulousness of the latter
is key to Taoism.

Such discussion points to the difficulty of ‘nailing
down’ visualizations in cross- or trans-cultural
contexts in any effective way – or attempting to
understand artistic works as simple or unidimensional visualizations - inevitably leads to
over-simplification. That this holds true with artistic
Figure 5: Caspar David Friedrich, 1818, Wanderer above

works generally has been amply demonstrated by

the Sea of Fog (‘Der Wanderer über dem Nebelmeer’), 94.8 x

research carried out by Finnish researchers Holm,

74.8 cm, oil on canvas, Kunsthalle, Hamburg, Germany

Siirtola and Laaksonen 2009-2010), who undertook
research with a relatively small sample group (of 71

Friedrich’s oil painting shows a wanderer (note that

people, 85% of whom were Finnish, and arguably

this word in German also means ‘hiker’, thereby

therefore representative of a unique, and possibly

adding another complicating layer to understanding

non-replicable demographic) participating. This

this artist’s artwork) standing on top of a cliff with

group of researchers attempted to represent a range

his back to us, staring out across an expansive

of musical genres, ranging from Latin music to pop,

mountain landscape that is veiled in fog. The fog

rock and more, by simple, unitary visual avatars.

suggests the limitlessness of the landscape, and,

Even where they had created rather stereotypical

according to writer John Lewis Gaddis, “the

avatars to represent a particular musical genre (for

insignificance of the individual within it” [11].

example a chocolate box figure of Mozart standing

Gaddis also notes that Friedrich’s work leaves a

next to a grand piano), not even then did was their

contradictory impression, insofar as it speaks

small sample group able to identify uniformly and

simultaneously to ideas about man’s mastery over

accurately the specific musical genre being

nature as well as the comparative ‘smallness’ of any

represented by that avatar [12]. It could be argued

individual with respect to nature’s grandeur. The

that it could be construed as an act of epistemic

figure of the ‘wanderer’ is however equally

violence (Bourdieu 1991) [13] even to attempt to

interpretable as lord of all he purveys. In terms of

552

compress complex musical (or other artistic genres)

into account and when inappropriate or inadequate

into such crude categories. Moreover, whether or

research methodology is deployed.

not those in the sample group researched were
actually knowledgeable (or not) about musical

As Rosenberg has written, “What is different or

genres was not discussed in the research paper.

difficult in practice will be required to submit to

Although the researchers were sanguine about the

that authority which validates it, but cannot without

possibility of more accurately representing musical

amputation (taking only that part that fits) or

genres by avatars in future attempts, it is posited

mutation satisfy its validating criteria. These are

here that the greatest strength of poetic works

formed without sensitivity to practice” [5]

(accepting Rosenberg’s formulation of the poetic as

(unpaginated).

that which imbues and to some extent, defines, art
forms, including musical and visual arts) is that

For Sunny Hong ‘Utopia’ not only relates to a

they defy any easy, ‘scientific’ categorisation. This

specific vision for a ‘better, utopian society – as

raises unanswerable questions about the validity of

demonstrated by his (digital) visualizations thereof

such approaches when it comes to representation of

- but also to a desire to think beyond the present

the ‘poetic’ art forms, including visual art, music,

boundaries and restrictions of human existence, and

dance, drama and literature, by anything approach

to conceptualise new possibilities. It is partially this

‘universal’ criteria that can be readily visualised

desire that links Sunny Hong’s digital visualizations

except by similarly complex means.

to the concept of Utopia. In a very real way these
works are visual externalizations of the Tao. In
WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA Hong quite

Conclusions

literally envisions Utopian potential as the
An analysis of Sunny Hong’s Taoist-inspired [14,

possibility of overcoming the limitations of

15, 16, 17] works points to the validity of

everyday life, via the practice of Taoism. Without

Rosenberg’s contention that research into visual

developing a basic understanding of the idea that

artworks and other ‘poetic’ creative works do not

for Hong Utopia is a comprehensive principle and

lend themselves to validatation through scientific

philosophical space closely associated with the Tao,

method alone, and that a poetic model of research

in other words a Utopia that has been deliberately

needs to be sought - and put into practice in such

mapped onto his visualization of Taoism as an

circumstances. The cultural specificity – but also,

artistic practice and visual principle, finding

counter-intuitively - the genuine hybridity and

expression in his suite of digital photographs

ambiguity of visual artworks are elided, or even

collectively titled WOMEN TECHNOLOGY

eliminated (Rosenberg deploys the blunt

UTOPIA, it is impossible to understand the

terminology of ‘amputation’ here) when the

aesthetic – and poetic - basis of Sunny Hong’s

ambiguity of their poetic dimensions are not taken

work.

553

References

[10] Stephen Little, Kristofer Schipper, Wu Hung,
Patricia Ebrey, 2000, Taoism and the Arts of China,
University of California Press, California.

[1] Said, Edward, 1978, Orientalism, Random

House, New York.

[11] Gaddis, John, 2002, The Landscape of History:
How Historians Map the Past, Oxford University

[2] Ibid, Said, 1978.

Press, Oxford, Oxfordshire.

[3] Nicholls, Christine, July/August 2011, Before

Heaven and Earth, feature article in Asian Art

[12] Holm, Jukka, Siirtola, Harri, and Laaksonen,
Lauri, 2010, ‘Associating Avatars with Musical
Genres’, in Information Visualization,
Visualization, Biomedical Visualization,
Visualization on Built and Rural Environments &
Geometric Modelling and Imaging, edited by Ebad
Banissi and others, publ. by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., London
U.K.

News, Hong Kong, Volume 21, Number 6, pp 5459.
[4] Brown, Ian, 2001, ‘Art education,
constructivism and visual literacy: an argument for
renewed partnerships’, Australian Art Education,
vol. 24, no. 2, p 28.
[5] Rosenberg, Terry E., 2000, ‘The reservoir’:

[13] Bourdieu, Pierre, 1991, Language and
Symbolic Power, edited and Introduced by John B.
Thompson, translated by Gino Raymond and
Matthew Adamson, Polity Press in association with
Basil Blackwell, Cambridge and Oxford, U.K.

towards a poetic model of research in design, in
Working Papers in Art and Design, 1, Unpaginated,
Goldsmiths, University of London.
[6] Wimsatt, William K., and Monroe C. Beardsley,
1946, ‘The Intentional Fallacy’, Volume 54: 468488; revised and republished in The Verbal Icon:
Studies in the Meaning of Poetry, University of
Kentucky Press, 1954: 3-18.

[14] Hunt, Anthony, 1999, Singing the Dyads: The
Chinese Landscape Scroll and Gary Snyder’s
Mountains and Rivers Without End, in the Journal
of Modern Literature, 23.1, pp 7-34.

[7] Ibid, Wimsatt, William K., and Monroe C.

Beardsley, 1946.
[15] McMahon, Cliff G., Spring 2003, ‘The Sign

[8] Porter, Bill (aka ‘Red Pine’), translator, 2009,
Lao-Tzu's Taoteching, (Tao Te Ching), with
selected commentaries from the past 2000 years,
revised edition, Copper Canyon Press, Washington,
U.S.A.

System in Chinese Landscape Paintings’, in the
Journal of Aesthetic Education, Volume 37,
Number 1, pp 64 – 76, University of Illinois Press,
Illinois.

[9] Hong, Sunny, 2008, ‘Artist Statement’, in

gallery brochure published in conjunction with his
solo exhibition WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA,
University Gallery, University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, University of Newcastle, NSW., and
Tae Yung (Sunny) Hong, 2010, Images of Asian
Identity; Asian Women as a Vision of Technological
Utopia, PhD. Thesis exegesis and solo visual art
exhibition submitted to the University of Newcastle
(School of Fine Art), Faculty of Education and Arts
and WOMEN TECHNOLOGY UTOPIA, Sunny
Hong’s postgraduate exhibition comprising digital
photographic works at the University Gallery,
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, University of
Newcastle, NSW.

[16] Snyder, Gary, 1996, The Making of Mountains
and Rivers Without End, in Mountains and Rivers
Without End, Counterpoint Press, Berkeley,
California.

[17] Wong, Wucius, 1991, The Tao of Chinese
Landscape Painting: principles and methods,
Design Press, New York.

554

