A Visualization Method for the Morphological Exploration
of Tensegrity Structures
Katherine A. Liapi
University of Texas at Austin
kliapi@mail.utexas.edu

Abz;tract

sports, traveling exhibits, movable hospitals,
provisional shelters and temporary storage facilities,
etc.
A characteristic feature of these structures is their
complex and intriguing morphology that derives from
their structural and mechanical properties [ 2 ] . In the
last two decades structural and mechanical aspects of
tensegrity systems have been addressed by various
researchers in the field [3, 41. Morphological aspects
of tensegrity systems have also been investigated and
methods for generating tensegrity networks have been
developed [3, 51. These methods address the initial
configuration of double layer tensegrity networks,
which are the most appropriate for applications in
building design, and occur from the assembly of
simple tensegrity units.
A tensegrity unit is an antiprismatic polyhedron,
formed by cables along its edges and bars along the
diagonals of the side faces in a consistent right handed
or left-handed sense. A characteristic feature of a
tensegrity prisms is that one of its bases is rotated in
respect to the other by an angle that is dictated by the
requirement for stability of the unit, and depends on
the number of the sides of the base polygon (Figure 1).
The form of a tensegrity network depends on the
geometric configuration of the composing tensegrity
units and the way units are connected to each other. In
order to maintain bar independence throughout the
structure, several patterns for connecting the units
have been identified. A common feature in all such
patterns is that adjacent units are not joined at their
vertices, but by a partial overlap of the sides of their
base (Figure 2).

Ensegrities are LI special type of tensile
structures that offer a viable alternative to
conventional space covering structures. The
morphology of tensegrity networks is uniquely and
direct& related to their structural and mechanical
properties. Geometric and topological complexity is
a characteristic of the morphology of tensegrity
structures and accounts for significant dfficulties in
the study of their initial configuration, and possibly,
for their limited applicat,;on in building design. In
this paper a computer visualization method that
involves animation procedures is proposed as a tool
for the exploration of their form. The method is based
on a graphical approach to the solution of their
complex 3 0 geometry that combines CAD fools with
Descriptive Geometry pro<redures.The display of the
tensegrity structure as an animation of moving parts
allows designers to asslss the efsect of a given
geometric parameter on their architecturalform.
Key Words: Tensegrity structures, morphology,
geometric configuration, tensegrity visualization.

1. Introduction
Tensegrity structures can be defined as spatial
lattices consisting of a continuous network of cables
maintained in tension by isolated compression bars
[I]. Potential applications of the tensegrity concept in
building design include space covering structures for

Figure I. Tensegrity units

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 1E:EE

523

Figure 2. Patterns for joining tensegrity units
anti-prismatic units attached to each other by a partial
overlap of their upper and lower ,base cables, which
are rotated with respect to one another, the
configuration of their 3D geometry cannot be
addressed as a space filling problem. In addition, for
the geometric resolution of a tensegrity network,
geometric features of typical units according to which:
a) all side cables and bars lie on asymptotic axis, and
b) for any change in the height
of the unit, side
cables and bars change both length and angular
relationship to each other, and to the members of the
unit, need to be taken into account.
The main issue therefore in resolving the problem
is to determine its geometric basis and to develop a
fonn generation method that takes into account the
interdependence of the various parameters and
constrains of the problem. A geometric construction,
that will be presented in detail in an upcoming
publication, and which addresses all these issues, has
been formulated by the author [7]. Basic features of
this approach are presented below.
Inscribing the tensegrity unit within the simplest
Euclidean solid- that is a cone for units with different
sizes of bases, and a cylinder for units with identical
bases- has been a key concept throughout the process.
Several geometrical constructions that simplify the
geometric problem and lead to other critical
constructions for identifying points, axis or planes, in
respect to which units needed to rotate or mirror, also
occur from the application of the concept of the cone
or cylinder (Figure 3a).

Despite the existence of specific rules for the
assembly of tensegrity modules, a method that allows
designers to determine the positioning in space of
individual members, as well as to graphically
generate the initial geometry of a tensegrity structure,
have not been adequately addressed yet. In fact, the
complexity of the geometry of tensegrity structures
and difficulties in their configuration and
representation account for the reluctance of designers
in applying the tensegrity concept in architecture [2].
Questions that have not been addressed yet
relate to the manner in which the proportions and
size of the composing units and the unit overlap on
each base affect the configuration of the network.
Answers to the above questions can be used to
generate digital models that will allow designers to
explore morphological variations of tensegrity
structures.
In the following sections the geometric
approach that led to an efficient method for the
geometric resolution and representation of tensegrity
structures is presented first. Then, a computer
visualization method that allows designers to explore
the effect geometric parameters on the structure's
shape and form, is presented.

2. Geometric configuration and graphical
generation of tensegrity networks
Regular space filling .problems handle spatial
organizations of regular polyhedra joined at their
vertices. Since tensegrity networks are composed of

Figure 3. Inscribing a tensegrity unit into a cone

524

When inscribing the unit into a cone, there can be
easily defined a triangular plane, drawn by the
projection of a
side of the lower square on the
base of the cone, and
the tip of the cone
(Figure 3b). A significant feature of this plane is that,
in Euclidean 3D Geometry, represents the geometrrc
locus that provides the length and exact position in
space of a side of the lower square of any tensegrity
unit thiit fits within the cone. To phrase it differently,
any intersection of this plane with a plane parallel to
the base of the cone, will provide a segment, that
represents the side of the smaller base of a tensegrity
unit that fits within the cone and the height of which is
given by the distance of the intersecting plane from
the base of the cone.
To obtain a tensegrity network with a curvature,
the axis of all units in the nctwork need to intersect at
a fixed point in space which represents
the center
of the curvature of the structure. The size and
proportions of the unit to be used, the upper and lower
overlap between the units and the radius of the
curvature are usually the basic parameters in the
problem. Because of an interdependence of these
parameters, the solution of the problem, when all but
one parameters are assigned a value -i.e. when the
radius of the curvature of the structure, the size of the
unit and the overlap of the upper bases of adjacent
units are given- determining the unknown value, in
this case the overlap of the lower bases, is not a trivial
problem. The following approach, that makes use of
the concept of the cone, can be generalized to be used
in similar problems:
On a first level of approach, considering two
tensegrity units, inscribed in cones, with overlapping
upper bases that lie on the same plane, and looking at
their top view, indicates that their projection consists
of two intersecting circles that share a common cord

(Figure 4). A significant observation here is that the
common cord bisects the overlapping section of the
sides of each base polygon.
The main problem that occurs when one tries to
resolve the geometry of two adjacent units that
contribute to a curvature, is to determine a plane in
respect to which the two units need to rotate, so that
the axis of the two units will intersect while respecting
the overlap constrains. The geometry of the two
intersecting cones with coplanar bases, reveals that the
plane defined by the axis that passes through the
middle point of the common cord and is perpendicular
to the plane of the bases of the cones before rotation,
and the common cord, fulfills this requirement (Figure
3c). Indeed, when a unit, placed at an angle, is
mirrored with respect to this plane, gives the other unit,
and
the
axis of the two units intersect on
the axis that passes through the common cord. At the
same time, the projections of the sides of the lower
squares that correspond to the overlapping sides of the
upper squares, on a plane perpendicular to the same
axis,
will also overlap.
The top view of the intersecting cones also reveals
that, when the sides of the lower bases of the units do
not overlap, the edges of the triangular planes, that lie
on the upper level, are parallel to each other (Figures
4b, 4c).
By rotating the cones in respect to the
plane that has already been defined, the triangular
plane
within each cone rotates with it. Since, as
already mentioned, the triangular plane represents the
geometric locus of all lower base sides of tensegrity
units that fit in the cones, the point where the two
parallel edges of the triangles overlap, coincides with
the point where the sides of the lower squares of the
units overlap (Figures 5.a, 5.b). Based on this
construction, the overlapping lower squares of the
units can be easily obtained (Figure 5.c).

Figure 4. Geometry of two adjacent tensegrity units with overlapping sides

525

Figure 5. Geometric construction of the lower bases of two adjacent tensegrity units

Once the relative position of two adjacent units
with overlapping sides is found, the next step is to
generate a grid, or network of units, that addresses the
entire structure and conforms to the constraints and
constants that derive from the construction of the unit
overlap. For the development of the spatial grid of
overlapping units different geometric approaches,
specific to the shape of the curved structure, can be
followed. For spherical configurations, dividing the
sphere using concentric greater circles, parallel circles
in both directions, or parallel circles in one direction
and greater circles in the other, represent different
methods for generating the grid that will be used in the
generation of the entire structure (Figure 6 ) .
Since the configuration of a tensegrity network
depends on the proportions and
size
of the
composing units and the way units are attached to each
other, any changes in the proportions of the unit, or the
pattern in which units are attached to each other, will
be reflected in the shape of the structure. A way to
visualize how such changes affect the morphology of
the structure is discussed in the next section.

3. Computer visualization
A computer visualization method that employs
computer animation procedures to display the effect
of various geometric parameters on the form of the
structure is recommended. Towards this effort, the
structure is considered as consisting of an array of
moving modules. In this process two distinct stages
of development can be identified:

3.1. Animation of the tensegrity unit
Each module is composed of a small number of
tensegrity units (Figure 7). The members of each
tensegrity unit within the module, perform a motion

that is determined by the parameter under
investigation. All members in the unit are linked to
each other in a hierarchical relationship, and can
rotate around the points at which they come in
contact with one another. In each unit, bars and
cables are defined, either as having a fixed length, or
allowing for a translation along their lengths. This
condition occurs from the requirement for stability of
the tensegrity unit, as described in section 1. The
practical application of this condition can be noticed
when, by changing the distance between the two
bases of a unit, the bases remain parallel to each
other, and retain their size, but the diagonal cables
and bars change length and angle of rotation.
The proposed animation allows designers to
observe how incremental changes in one of the
parameters in the geometry of the unit affects the
other parameters that determine its spatial
configuration and representation.

Figure 6. Generation of the entire tensegrity
network

526

generation of the geometry and the display of the
structure as an assembly of moving members, it is
worth mentioning that geometric constructions that
are used during the animation to facilitate the
generation of the changing geometry of the structure,
are preferably generated by-macro-equations,
are
stored in levels, which are tumed off during the
animation of the structure, so they are invisible.
The animation of the entire structure provides
information regarding the effect of various
parameters in the design of tensegrity structures. For
example, it can show how changes in the height of
the unit that is used in the development of the
network , affect the curvature of the, structure, or how
changes in the amount of overlap between the sides
of the upper or lower bases of adjacent units, can also
In the fiveaffect the curvature of the structure.
unit module, illustrated in Figures 7 and 8, the upper
and lower bases of the basic unit are kept constant, as
well as the amount of upper and lower overlap of the
sides of adjacent units. The changes in the curvature
of the structure occur from changes in the height of
the unit.
The effect of materials and light, such as the
effect of the shadows of the members of the structure
on the ground plane, or on one another, can be also
displayed at the animation (Figure 7).

3.2. Animation of a tensegrity structure
composed of moving modlules
Once the kinematics of the unit have been
defined, several constraints regarding its relationship
to adjacent units within a moclule need to be set.
Individual tensegrity units within a module,
perform identical motions, simultaneously, but, the
spatial relationship of one to another during the
motion, is a function of time and is determined by
constraints regarding tangencies, intersections etc, set
by the geometric construction. For example, as it
occurs from the geometric construction, adjacent
units are mirror images with regard to a plane that
passes through the middle point of the common cord
of their inscribing cones and is perpendicular to the
cord. For each new configuration of a tensegrity unit
in a module, all adjacent uniis acquire a new spatial
position. Frames that occur from the application of
the basic constraints regarding the adjacency of the
units provide the display of the module as an
assembly of moving parts. Similarly, all modules in
the array, that represents the entire structure, perform
the identical motions, simultameously, and are subject
to constraints regarding their spatial relationship.
Regarding the use of CAD tools for the

f'igure 7. Views of a 5-unit module

527

Figure 8. Animation of the changing geometry of a Sunit module

4. Conclusions
[31 Hanaor, A., "Aspects of Design of Double -Layer
Tensegrity Domes," International Journal of Space
Structures, Vol. 7,No 2, 1992, pp. 101-113.

Geometric constructions, that follow basic
Euclidean geometry concepts, and CAD procedures,
have been effectively combined to develop a method
for the generation of curved tensegrity structures.
The proposed method allows designers to explore and
visualize various morphologies of tensegrity
structures that respond to specific architectural
requirements.

[4] Motro R., "Tensegrity Systems: The State of the Art,''
lniernutionul Journal of Space Structures, Vol. 7, No 2,
1992, pp. 75-84.

[5] Emmerich, D.G., Structures Tendues ef Aufotendantes,
Ecole d' Architecture de Paris, La Villette, Paris, 1988.

5. Acknowledgements

[6] Liapi, K.A. (2001). "Geometric Configuration and
Graphical Representation of Tensegrity Spherical
Networks", Proceedings, ACADIA ZOOf, (in press).

The graphics illustrated in figures 7 and 8 have been
developed with the assistance of Jason Charalabides.

6. References
[ I ] Chassagnoux, A., S. Chomarat, 3. Savel, "A Study of
Morphological Characteristics of Tensegrity Structures,''
International Journal of Space Sfructures, Vol. 7, No. 2.
1992, pp. 165-172.
[2] Hanaor, A., "Tensegrity: Theory and Application,"
Beyond the Cube: The Architecture of Space Frames and
Polyhedra, edited by J. Francois Gabriel, John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., 1997, pp. 385-408.

528

