Visualisation of the Degradation of Building Flooring Systems
Dr. Farzad Khosrowshahi, School of Construction, South Bank university, London, UK,
khosrof@sbu.ac .uk
Dr. Ebad Banissi, School of Computing, Information systems and Mathematics, South Bank
university, London UK. Banisse@sbu.ac.uk
principals of anthropy to offer a methodology for
identifying the likely pattern of usage, as well as a
method for the visualisation of the usage. These
behaviours are then expressed mathematically.

Abstract
The development of a maintenance programme for
construction projects is a highly complex and data
intensive undertaking. This exercise is characterised by
the lack of relevant data on the one hand and the
overwhelming amount of irrelevant data on the other.
This is partly due to the existence of numerous events
which act upon the building and that all buildings
contain many components, each with several varieties.
The complexity of the process iF
. exacerbated by the fact
that the interaction between (!he events and building
components extends over the lijetime of the project. The
uncertainties and complexities have resulted in
increased conservatism in the development of life cycle
evaluation of building pefortnance and maintenance
programme development. Subsequently, almost all
maintenance programmes tend to display the symptoms
of one or both of the following pitfalls:
1. Maintenance actions are too early, thus
uneconomical.
2. Maintenance actions are too late, thus
compromising the quality of service.
The current research project is based on the premise
that the visual approach to maintenance programme
development offers a viable solution to the above
pitfalls. However, the retrospective nature of the
problem suggests that the only practical visual approach
is one which relies on the use oj. virtual simulation of the
building. Therefore the aim of the broader research is to
develop a 4 0 visual model of building degradation
through time.
This paper builds on our previows work which addressed
the overall model of building 4D visualisation and the
lighting system as an example. The focus of this paper is
on building flooring systems. The paper uses the

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEISE

Keywords: 4D visualisation, building maintenance,
flooring system, VRML.

Introduction
In comparison with building design, construction
and demolition, the maintenance phase of building
project assumes by far the greatest proportion of the
overall time and cost. A number of life cycle costing
methods have been in use for many years (Stone 1980;
Flanagan and Norman 1983; Robinson 1984) and the
attention to life cycle evaluation of building performance
has gained further momentum over the recent years.
Nevertheless, the shortage of relevant data and the
absence of an efficient methodology for life cycle
evaluation are apparent.
This paper is part of a major project which consists
of a study into the time-related behaviour of building
components in response to their environment and the
events acting upon them. The final product of the project
is to develop a 4D visual model of building degradation
through representation of the degradation of each
individual building component. This requires definition
of mathematical behaviour and representation of all
building components in response to events acting on
them.
While, the degradation of individual building
components can be undertaken and formulated without

507

be used to represent the pattern of usage for a
given situation. Further the method should be
represented mathematically.
Mapping: the realistic representation of the
usage should be based on both the level of
degradation and the pattern of usage, thus the
level of usage should be mapped on the pattern
of usage.
Visual representation of the usage: a method
is required to reflect the level of carpet
degradation and represent it in a visual form.
Here, the representation is undertaken through
the use of VRML.

the need for their visualisation, it is envisaged that only
the visual method offers the most effective approach.
The impracticality of current methods is due to the
presence of a large number and variety of components,
and events acting upon them. Therefore, unless a visual
approach is adopted, it would be impractical to develop a
maintenance programme that is based on a simultaneous
evaluation of the degradation of groups of building
components .
The overall model of 4D building visualisation,
shown in Figure 1, has been defined by Rad and
Khosrowshahi (1997). The model was then applied to the
lighting system of buildings: once the behaviour of the
lighting system is defined mathematically, the visual
representation of the degradation is implemented through
the light parameters of VRML (Rad and Khosrowshahi
1997).

The Pattern of Usage
Flooring systems undergo usage in a non-uniform
fashion. Normally, different parts of a carpet are used at
different rates. This non-uniformity of the usage has a
direct impact on the degradation of the carpet. Therefore,
a realistic visual representation of the degradation of
flooring systems relies on the identification of the profile
of usage. Since it is impractical to cater for all individual
cases, it is imperative to adopt a systematic method for
the evaluation of the usage profile. To this end, it was
found beneficial to examine the behaviour of people
within their environment.
The examination of human behaviour within their
spatial layout can be based on activity and/or behavioural
settings. While the activity setting is concerned with the
organisation of the sequence of activities (Chapin 1968),
the behavioural setting looks at the relationship between
the settings and the recurring pattern of behaviour
(Barker 1968). Traditionally, architectural designers tend
to he concerned with spatial layouts that cater for the
activity patterns of the building users (Lang et al. 1974).
But there have been equal attention to the need to
understand the behavioural constituents that underpin
the activities (Hall 1966; Sommer 1969).

Figure 1. Overall 4D Visualisation model.

The focus of this paper is on the flooring system and
carpets in particular. To this end, the paper addresses the
following major challenges:

1.

Formulation of the pattern of usage: flooring
systems are utilised in a non-uniform fashion.
There are parts that remain almost unaffected
over time and there are parts that are subjected
to excessive degradation. The evaluation of each
individual case is impractical and renders the
model useless, thus a consistent method should

Human behaviour is influence by several factors
such as their physiology, culture, social group
membership etc. One set of behaviour that concerns this
project is the human movement pattern as discussed by
Dreyfuss (1967). In search for a better understanding of
human movement pattern through their behavioural

508

setting, this research lends itself on the anthropological
science of human kind and behaviour. Two basic
behaviours of humans relate to their desire to acquire
wisdom (Anthroposophy) and their centric tendencies
(Anthropocentric). Therefore, on the one hand, humans
tend to place themselves in the centre of spaces and on
the other hand, they distance themselves in order to
acquire more wisdom. This would be the behaviour of an
individual (subject). Once the second subject is added
then the resulting behaviour is the combined effect of the
two subjects. Equally, the introduction of the third,
fourth and nth subjects will generate an overall combined
behaviour.
In order to develop a mathematical representation of
this combined behaviour, we look at the work by
Tregenza (1976) which suggests that in a given corridor,
the flow rate is the function of the mean speed, mean
density and width of the corridor.
Flow rate = mean speed x r " n densit). x width

where,

x is the random variable and

y determines the degree of centrality
As an example, graph a, in Figure 2 , shows the centrality
selected at 2 which is almost in the middle of the
arbitrary scale from 0 to 5 meters where:

.0.398947?.4

Equally, the Density is a furction of mean speed and
width. Therefore, for a given flow rate (people per
second), the number of people who can be accommodated
in a corridor is determined by \:heir walking speed and
the width of the corridor.

9
-5
L-5,

5

0
X

10

JL

Figure 2, The probability of presentation of
one, two and three subjects based on Anthropy.

Density = Function of (Speed, Width)
Here, since the walking Speed is already expressed
by a normal distribution (Tregenza 1976), and the width
being a constant, therefore, the distribution of the
movement density follows the standard normal
distribution, which assumes the following expression.

As shown in Figure 2, the centrality of the combined
curves is determined by the number of subjects. The
mathematical representation of this effect is given below
for graphs b and c for two and three subjects respectively.

Once extended to the whole population of n subjects,
the mathematical representation of the whole colony, as
n approaches infinity, assumes the following form;

An additional parameter y is introduced to the above
equation, in order to exercise control over the positioning
of the distribution. Therefore, in the absence of external
biases and interventions, the following mathematical
expression is a one dimensional (line) representation of
the behavioural pattern of an individual (subject). This
representation is referred to as anthropy.

509

The resulting graph is shown in Figure 3 showing
the behaviour of n number of subjects, between i=I and
j=5. Evidently, this behaviour displays the property of a
normal distribution curve.

Figure 5, presentation of the probability of
appearance of n creature in two dimensional
space

Long-Anthropy
Figure 3, shows g(x) for i=land j=5.

The extension of the above concept over the third
dimension provides the density probability of appearance
along a corridor. This is referred to as the lung-unthrupy.
Figure 6 , is the representation along a corridor with one
entrance (on the right) and Figure 7, is the same for a
corridor with a flow (two identical entrances at each end,
both with similar properties).

Flat-Anthropy
Figures 2 and 3, are the one dimensional (line)
representation of the pattern of behaviour. However, the
density or probability of appearance is better shown in
Figure 4 which is the two dimensional (flat)
representation.

F
igure 6, The presentation of probability of
appearance of n subjects in a long room
(Corridor) with one entry (Door).

Figure 7, The presentation of appearance of n
subjects in a long room (Corridor) with two
entries (Doors).
Figure 4, Shows the two dimensional
representation of the pattern.

/

The plan view of the Figure 4, given in Figure 5,
shows the density of appearance where lighter colours
represent the highest density (probability) and darker
colours represent the lowest density (probability). This
phenomenon is referred to as the flat-anthrupy.

Anti-Anthropy
In real life situations, the rooms and corridors have a
variety of shapes and layouts. This diversity of shape and

5 10

layout is accommodated throug,h the introduction of a
series of flat and long anthropies. In other words, the flat
and long anthropies form the building blocks of any
shape and layout. This is demonstrated in Figure 8 where
a standard room with two openings is represented by
combining one flat-anthropy and three long-anthropies.

Figure 9, Movement density pattern for a room
with one door and circular table on centre.
Figure 8, Movement density pattern for a room
with two communal doors.

Mapping

So far, all examples relate to non-biased and
standard situations. However, almost always, spaces are
intervened by additional objects such as tables, chairs,
decorative items and other objects such as an observatory
telescope at the end of the corridor. These interventions
have profound effects on the behaviour of subjects.
Clearly, the carpet below a cabinet tends to remain
almost unaffected by the passage of time. Conversely, the
space in the vicinity of an observatory telescope is
expected to undergo a heavy traffic activity. In this case,
an additional anthropy is introduced in order to simulate
the effect of the heavy traffic behind the telescope. As far
as objects like table and cabinets are concerned, negative
anthropy is introduced. This concept is referred to as the
Anti-Anthropp. This is demonstrated in Figure 9, where
an anti-anthrpoy (representing a table) is superimposed
on an standard anthropy.

Since the movement density is a localised
phenomenon (only affecting certain areas), the
simulation of localised degradation is not directly
possible through VRML. Therefore, a Visual Basic
programme has been written to generate the status of the
degraded carpet. This is carried out through the
application of weighted texture mapping. In Figure 10
the same carpet is shown in two extreme states: new and
fully used. Based on the rate of usage, time of
examination and other related factors, the Visual Basic
programme identifies the current texture of the carpet.

511

Visualisation Representation of the
Degradation of Flooring Systems
The degradation of a carpet is influence by several
factors. These include the fabric of the carpet, the
environment, the period of usage, etc. The impact of each
variable on the state of the carpet is implemented
through the application of coefficient which is applied to
the density pattern of movement. This information can be
partly obtained from the manufacturers and some are
derived through statistical analysis of data. As shown in
the generalised visualisation model of building
maintenance schedule in Figure 1, this information will
be accumulated into a repository.

Figure 10, Used and unused carpet texture.

However, as explained earlier, the pattern of usage is
non-uniform. It is determined by the spatial behaviour of
users, which is constructed through the application of a
series of anthropies and anti-anthropies. Therefore, the
weighted texture mapping will be based on the pattern of
usage. In other words, the colour attributes of unused
and used carpets textures are aggregated on the basis of
weightings produced by the density pattern. The Visual
Basic programme calculates and maps the textures, using
weighted textures produced by the movement density
pattern in Figure 6. The result is shown in Figure 11,
high1ig h t in g the affected area.

The model in Figure 1 also shows that the time
related state of building components is visualised
through the use of VFWL, by passing appropriate
parameters to the VRML module.
The use of VFWL for simulation of flooring
degradation is demonstrated in Figure 12, showing two
entrances into an standard room.

Figure 12, A room with two doors after two
years.
Figure 13, shows the same room with only one
entrance. The Figure shows the impact of the

Figure 11, the used carpet texture.

512

Next, the paper proposed a method for mathematical
representation of the degradation through weighted
texture mapping of the used and unused floor texture,
based on the movement density pattern.

introduction of a round table, which is implemented
through the use of an anti-anthropy.

Finally, an example demonstrated that VRML is a
viable medium for realistic representation of the
degradation of floor systems.

References
1. Stone, P.A., Building Design Evaluation: costs-in-use. (3ed)
London, Spon, 1980.
2. Flanagan, R. and Norman, G . Life cycle costing for
construction. London: Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors,
1983.
3. Robinson, J., Life cycle costing in buildings: a practical
approach. Australian Institute of Building Papers, 1: 13-28,
1984
4. Lang, J. et al, Designing for human behaviour, Dowden,
Hutchinson & Ross, Inc.,1974.
5. Sommer, Robert, Personal Space: The behavioural Basis of
design, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1969.
6. Hall, Edward T., “The maddening crowd: space and its
organization as a factor in mental health,” Landscape, Vol. 12,
26-30, (Autumn 1962)
7. Hall, Edward T., The Hidden Dimension, Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1966.
8. Chapin, F. Stuart, Jr., “Activity systems and urban structure;
a working schema,” The journal of the American Institute of
Planners, Vol. 34, 34 (Jan 1968)
9. Barker, Roger G., Ecologcal Pyschology: Concepts and
Methods for Studying the Environment of Human Behaviour,
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1968.
10. Morgan, Cliford T., et al., Human Engineering: Guide to
Equipment Design, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963
11. Dreyfuss, Henry, The Measure of Man: Human Factors in
Design, 2”d ed., New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1967
12. Rad, H.N and Khosrowshahi, F., Visualisation of Building
Maintenance Through Time, Proceedings International
Conference on Information Visualisation ”97, 27-29 Aug.,
London, England, 1997.
13. VRML 2.0 Final Specification, ‘‘http:N www.vrml.org/
VRML2.0IFtNAL”
14. International Standard ISOlIEC 14772-1:1997, The VRML
Consortium Incorporation, 1997.

Figure 13, A room with circular table in centre
after 18 months of use.

Conclusion
This paper tackled an important part of a broader
project the aim of which is to develop a 4D visual model
of building degradation. This model can help to evaluate
the life cycle performance of the building. It can also be
used to develop a long term maintenance programme
soon after the building design is produced.
The focus of this paper was on visual simulation of
the degradation of building flooring system. A major
challenge of the work related to the formulation of the
pattern of usage, whereby different parts of the floor are
degraded according to their respective level of usage. To
this end, the paper demonstrated that the study of human
behaviour from anthropologic perspective could offer a
viable solution to the determinatiton of peoples’ pattern of
movement. The mathematical representation of the same
revealed that for a colony of usen, the density movement
assumes a normal distribution curve. An additional
parameter was introduced to the expression in order to
cater for the centrality of the behaviour. This concept was
refereed to as the anthropy. The application of the
concept to more complex space configurations is catered
through the combination of a number of flat-anthropies,
long-anthropies and anti-anthropres.

5 13

