Client Expectations of Virtual Environments for Urban Design Development
Mr Sam Bucolo, Mr Phil Impey and Dr John Hayes
School of Design and Built Environment
Faculty of Built Environment and Engineering
Queensland University of Technology
Australia
s.bucolo(i~~qut.edu.au

Abstract

Environments related to two proposed urban development
projects.
In the first study the use of Virtual
Environments for enhancing community consultation is
considered, whereas the second study focuses on the
design development process, evaluating the expectation of
the designer.

This paper presents two case studies related to the
application of Virtual Environments f o r urban design
development based on an analvsis of client expectations.
Within theJirst study, comrniinity consultation is the fociis
of the appliccition of the Virtiiul Environment, whereas the
second stiidv considers the application of the technology
within the design development process. Therefore, client
btlithin this priper is considered cis both the community and
designer l i s end users of the technology. In both studies a
comparison is niude between traditionul tools used f o r
iirbrin design development and Virtital Environments.
Findings from the research indicates that both user
groups have preference f o r Virtiial Environments in
certciin aspects of the design development process,
hon,ever development time, disruption to the design
process and display niediiini all impact on the e.uperience
recorded.

2. Urban design representation
Good Urban Design can be considered as a ‘desired
environmental outcome’ which essentially depends on
effective communication through the use of a common
language, readily understood by all participants in the
urban design process.
Traditionally this has been
facilitated using conventional 2D plans, elevations and
cross-sections and (occasionally) 3D drawings in
perspective or axonometric form.
Such documentation is often far too complex for the
non-technical participants of the design process to fully
comprehend the responsiveness of the proposal to its
setting. Often, creating a scale model of a development
proposal is impractical due to cost and time constraints.

1. Introduction
Urban Design can been defined as “a design
intervention in the process of town and city planning to
deliver a higher, more sustainable quality of life to a
majority of a nation’s citizens” [ l ] . Bentley [2] describes
the Urban Design process as the process “which
provide(s) its users with an essentially democratic setting,
enriching their opportunity by maximising the degree of
choice available to them.”
He calls such places
‘responsive’ and describes key environmental qualities
that affect people’s ability to interact with and respond to
their environment and how the design of the urban
environment can effect the choices people make in their
responses.

However, such representations also only produce static
representations of the urban environment. According to
Rudolph Amheim, [3] “(the) unfolding perspective is an
essential part of the experience.... As we walk or drive,
the environment becomes a happening, in which things
follow one another and change shape while they change
position.” The constraints inherent in static representation
have been lamented by urban designers for a long time.
Kevin Lynch[4] has long held that true representation o f
the urban experience is essential to communicate
outcomes to the future users of the urban environment.
Bosselmann [5] identified the dynamic representation
of the urban experience as being critical to effective
environmental evaluation. He asserts, “the static nature o f
these media is to blame for the difficulty in evaluating the
effects of design and plans on the experience of an
environment”.
The advent of real-time computer
simulation technology has offered those involved in the
discipline of urban design development a real opportunity

The degree of choice people can make about a place is
directly dependent on how well they can understand its
layout. Bentley defines this quality as the ‘legibility’ of a
place.
The ability to ‘understand’ an urban development
proposal if the focus of this paper. Two studies are
presented which examine a client’s expectation of Virtual

690
0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.000 2001 IEEE

to experience the dynamics of the urban form before it
exists.

beyond the design development phase and move towards
design assessment within the context of assessing new
housing schemes or the impact of new housing schemes
in relation to transportation patterns, and access to
schools, shopping facilities, parks and other amenities.

3. Virtual environments
Virtual
Reality,
Artificial
Reality,
Virtual
Environments, Virtual Worlds, are all terms which are
used to describe some form of computer generated
environment. The common element between these terms
is that they refer to a 3-Dimensional computer generated
world, which allows ‘real time’ random interaction from a
viewer or multiple views. For the purpose of this paper
the term Virtual Environmmts will be used to describe
this technology.

However for this technology to be used effectively to
represent the real world (both present and future), the
computer generated virtual environment must be able to
imitate our experience of the real world and therefore
must meet the expectation of the intended viewer. As
outlined, this paper presents two studies, which
investigate an end user’s perspective on the application of
Virtual Environments for urban design development. The
first study, Study A, is focused on the use of Virtual
Environments for public consultation of a development
proposal.
Study B relates to the use of Virtual
Environments within the design development phase to
assist in the communication process. In this second study
the client is considered as the design team.

Virtual Environments are generally discussed in terms
of technology hardware such a display devices or the
application of the technology to enhance communication.
However, before it is possible to discuss the
application of Virtual Environments an understating o f
the technology is required. A brief overview of the
technologies discussed in this paper is briefly presented.

Overviews of both studies are provided with the
analysis of observations recorded presented in the
discussion.

The term Web Based VI< is a relatively new concept
related to interacting with computer generated
environments using a standard web browser (Netscape or
IE) and a standard PC. Virtual Reality Modeling
Language (VRML) is the only open standard 3D format
suitable for web delivery.
It is a hierarchical scene
description language that defines geometry and behaviour
of a 3D scene and the way in which the user navigates it.
VRML worlds can be played over the web, however they
require a web browser plug in to be viewed.

5. Study A - client as community
The focus of Study A was to determine whether the
medium of Virtual Reality web-based technology
provides the common language required by members of
the public to make better informed submissions in
achieving the desired environmental outcomes of a
development proposal. The urban design scenario used in
the research was a ‘hypothetical’ development proposal
consisting of a new mixed-commercial structure designed
within the context of a Local Government Plan (Redland
Shire Council, Queensland).

The term lmmersive VR :is related to how a user views
and interacts with a computer-generated scene. As
demonstrated with web based VR the user is limited to
viewing a world using a 2D-computer monitor. The
image is enhanced using shadows and reflection to create
a more realistic 3D scene, however it is still being viewed
on a 2D screen. To overcome this, it is possible to
immerse the user within the scene, by using additional
viewing hardware such as Stereoscopic Workbenches and
CAVES.

The site forms the northern boundary of the Capalaba
Town Square development. The site will become the new
town centre of Capalaba, a district centre in the Redland
Shire. The Town Square represents an urban design
intervention by the Council who purchased existing
residential land in the heart of Capalaba and aim, through
the re-configuration of lot boundaries and construction of
the Capalaba Library and Administration Centre, to create
a civic focus to the area.

Both technologies have application to urban design
development and are explored further throughout this
paper.

The new buildings, designed to comply with the
relevant planning codes, were modelled on computer
using combinations of graphics programs and Virtual
Reality
Modelling
Language
(VRMLZ) based
applications to create a virtual environment capable of
being displayed on web-based desktop PC monitors.

4. Virtual environments and urban design
Whyte [6] suggests that the benefits of using Virtual
Environments for urban de:jign development allows for
the design to be “viewed frclm different viewpoints: both
bird’s eye views which quickly give survey information
about the city, and eye-lcvel perspectives from the
vantage point of pedestrians and motorists can be
generated”. She suggests that the virtual model could go

A comparison was made between web-based desktop
PC displays and conventional iconographic presentations
to demonstrate whether interactive, dynamic displays
produce responses that enable the participants to better

691

apprehend the proposed environment. It was hypothesised
that any heightened apprehension would assist an
individual's 'reading' of the proposal, therefore resulting
in a more informed submission on the development
scenario. Due to the scale of the research, it was necessary
to limit the research to environmental responses of a
simple nature readily analysed by the research methods
used.

The statements were complied to test the participant's
responses to environmental features of the depicted scene.
The statements were derived from an analysis of
evaluative responses as outlined by Aotov [7] and Nasar
[8] arising out of environment aesthetic research and are
by no means exhaustive. They do, however, incorporate
environmental qualities that emphasise the responsiveness
of the setting and the response equivaIence of the two
representation methods. The concepts covered in the
statements are as follows:

5.1 Methodology
An experimental group of 16 lay-people (nontechnical) viewed the subject development proposal
through the use of traditional iconographic drawings and
the desktop PC simulation (Figure 1). These people were
'randomly' chosen from the administrative and nontechnical workforce of the Local Council. The 'nontechnical' bias was intentional to test the effectiveness of
VR as a 'common' language, readily understood by
individuals not trained in the iconic symbolism of
architectural presentation techniques.

0

a
a

a
a
a

a
a
a
a
a

a

being there (sense of presence)
explore (ability to explore the scene)
information (sufficiency for evaluation)
way-finding (navigability in scene)
relaxing (affective response)
description (recall)
scale apprehension (comparison of scale of buildings)
building elements (comparisons)
change of level (kinetic experience)
curiosity (affective arousal)
repetition of building elements (effect of movement
in form apprehension)
previous experience (with presentation technique)

5.2 Study
Each of the 16 randomly selected participants first
viewed the scene in iconographic form with it series of
architectural presentation drawings and then responded to
the statements dealing with the characteristics of the
depicted environment. The participants then viewed the
VR presentation on the desktop PC and responded to the
same statements on a new questionnaire. The
communication media were the independent variables.
The responses were collated and statistically analysed for
experimental validity using the two-group T-TEST.

Figure 1 VRML s c r e e n capture
A series of statements contained in the questionnaire
(below) was presented to the participants to be completed
after each respective viewing.
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
IO.
11.

12.

5.3 Analysis

I had a sense of being there.
I could easily explore the scene.
I gained sufficient information from the scene to
evaluate it.
I would be able to find my way around the scene in
real life.
I found being in the square a relaxing experience.
1 would be able to describe the scene to a friend.
1 could apprehend the scale of the new building.
The proposed new building had elements similar to
the existing library.
I could experience the changes in level in the square.
I am curious to discover more about the proposal.
The repetitious nature of the new building was
clearly obvious.
I had previous experience with this type of
presentation.

The purpose of this experiment was to compare the
response equivalence of two media types to demonstrate
the effectiveness of presenting an urban development
scenario for evaluation. It was hypothesised that the
desktop virtual reality scenario was a morc superior
method of environmental simulation than traditional
iconographic methods. The paired two-group T-TEST
was performed treating each pair of questions in the
'paper' (non-computer) and the computer presentation as
separate scores. In all paired scores (QI-Ql I ) , the
computer presentation scored higher than the paper
presentation with all statements except QlO and QI 1 were
found to be'statistically significant ( p =O.O I).

6. Study B - client as designer
The second study is part of a wider study related to
Collaborative Design, Development and Evaluation

692

The design team had access t o various display devices
and mediums to. view and interact .with the virtual model
and the relevant design scenario. These devices included:

utilising Virtual Reality tools; which was conducted .in
collaboration with the Brisbane Airport Corporation. One
aspect o f this study presented within this paper is the
analysis of the interaction by the design team responsible
for a development study of Brisbane Airport utilising a
Virtual Model of the airport.
The study uses
.observational analysis method, primarily interviews to
determine the designers’ expectation of the Virtual Model
for development planning compared to traditional tools
(eg 2D representations). In terms of client expectation,
this study considers the multidisciplinary design team as
the end user of the Virtual Environment.

Immersive Display using an Fakespace Immersadesk
. R2 viewing the model within Division 2000i2 (Unix)

PC.Real Time display, viewing the model within
Division 2000i2 (Windows NT)
Animation Sequences of set viewpoints generated
from the Division model. (As this was an animation
limited interaction was possible.)All devices were used at least once throughout the
study. Approximately five ( 5 ) scenarios were randomly
selected by the design team to be visualised using the
virtual model throughout the planning study. Viewing the
virtual model within a planning meeting required the
research assistant to b e present and assist in the
navigation of the virtual model. Observations were
recorded on usage of the model, in term of relevance to
design evaluation. At the conclusion of the study, the
project leader was interviewed to determine overall
relevance of the virtual model as compared with the
traditional tools utilised. The goal of the analysis was not
to statistically correlate the use of traditional tools with
that of the virtual, but to obtain an understanding of the
impact the virtual model had on urban design
development process. The results should therefore be
considered within the context of such an approach.

6.1 Study
As part of the wider study, an immersive Virtual
Environment of the Brisbanc: Airport percent was created
(PTC Division 2000i2) based on existing 2D digital
design data (GIS information / Architectural Information
etc) and contextual reference information (Figure 2).

7. Discussion
An analysis of the statistical responses from Study A
indicate that, in the majority of instances, participants
reported that the computer-generated presentation enabled
a better comprehension of the depicted scene as compared
to traditional media. The results indicate that the
participants
preferred
the
computer-generated
environment in terms of scene exploration, way-finding
and evaluating physical change. This is encouraging, as
aspects of legibility and coherence are critical in the
responsive of an urban environment and if this technology
can generate a higher response equivalence than
conventional static presentation, its effectiveness as an
assessment tool is justified.

Figure 2 - Virtual model of Brisbane airport
This model was then utiilised as part of the Brisbane
Airport Development Strategy to assist in the
visualisation of design scenarios during the development
phase of the project. The design team had access to the
virtual model and a research assistant (for 3D modelling)
in addition to the traditional lools.
Throughout the planning !study, the design team would
request various scenarios to be visualised (eg building
placement, road layout etc) within the context of the
existing Airport layout. Typically, information would be
provided to the research assistant in the form of 2Dsketch layout with notes on ,details relevant to the design
scenario. The research assistant would interpret the
information and translate this into a 3-Dimensional
representation, using an industry standard CAD program
(Rhino Vl.l), that would then be placed within the virtual
model of Brisbane Airport. Views would then be created
for presentation to the project team. Typical turnaround
time for visualisation of a d,:sign scenario would b e one
day.

An analysis of the observations recorded for Study B
indicates the value of the virtual model “greatly assisted
in the visualisation of alternative development concepts as
it enabled quick and accurate identification of impacts of
new developments on existing infrastructure” (project
leader). The design team frequently commented that the
benefit of the virtual model was the enhancement of the
visual communication of the design concept. However, it
was the time required to visualise the scenario (typically 1
day) that provided the greatest benefit. This suggests that
the development cycle required to visualise a particular
design scenario is an essential element of the application
of Virtual Environments for urban design development.

693

static tools. Advantages were found in terms of enhanced
communication and support of design evaluation.

Further consideration should also be given to the
additional detail required by a designer to translate the 2D
information into 3D interpretations. Within this study
minimal additional details were required to communicate
design intent, as the research assistant responsible for 3D
modelling was also a designer and therefore misinterperations were minimised. If considerable design
detail were required to be generated by the designer, the
benefits of the virtual model would have been reduced.

However, it is clear from the findings that additional
research is essential to further the use of this technology
within urban design and to develop a framework for its
continued use. Additional research is required in terms of
the level of detail required versus development time for
effective design evaluation at both the conceptual and
community consultation stage of design development.
Further research related to appropriate display devices
and techniques (animation vs real time navigation)
directed at urban design development is suggested. Such
research should be systematic to prove the reliability and
validity of any new techniques or tools developed.

The rapid development process and subsequent level of
detail of design representation also created some concern
among the design team for possible misinterpretation of
the design scenario if used for purposes outside the design
development process (eg marketing). A specific example
noted within the study was the use of extruded blocks to
represent multistorey building development to evaluate
density and land use concepts. Although the design team
could accurately visualise the actual detail of these
representations, without the necessary skills it would lead
to a false impression of the development.

Finally, the development of Virtual Environments
should be considered a skill of the designer, to allow for
maximum development time and reduction in misinterpretation of design intent. Integrating such skills into
a designer's education is suggested.

Alternatively, assuming detail would also provide a
false impression and add to development time, which may
take away the benefits of the virtual model identified
above.

9. Acknowledgment
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial
support of the Faculty of Built Environment and
Engineering, Queensland University of Technology, who
provided an internal grant associated with Study B. The
creation of the Virtual Environments mentioned within
this study was undertaken within the Synthetic
Environment Laboratory (www.sel.bee.aut.edu.au) an
initiative of the Faculty.

A further observation recorded from Study B was the
preference for animation sequences to evaluate design
scenarios. Although immersive and navigation tools were
made available to the design team, the ability to view a
pre-defined animation related to a design scenario and
pause the animation to view still images and discuss this it
in detail was preferred by the design team. This was an
unexpected outcome and should not be considered
conclusive. Possible suggestions for this observation
include: the PC navigation was considered by the design
team to lack sufficient quality in real time navigation (due
to the large polygon size of the model); and the immersive
display was not portable and viewing required the design
team to travel approximately I O kilometres to view the
model using this device.

10. References
[ I ] Katz P et al, (1994), New Urbanism-toward an Architecture
of Community, McGraw- Hill, New York.

[2] Bentley et al, (1985), Responsive Environments- a manual
for designers, Butterworth-Heineman, Oxford.

[3] Amheim R (1977), The Dynamics of Architectural Form,
University of California Press, Berkely 1977.

8. Conclusion and further research

[4] Lynch K, ( 1 976) Managing the Sense of a Region, The MIT
Press Cambridge.

The field of Virtual Reality is a constantly emerging
technology and its application to professional disciplines
should be re-evaluated continuously. This paper has
contributed to the body of knowledge related to the use of
Virtual Environments for urban design development.
Although the studies presented are not exhaustive in their
findings, they offer.an insight into the expectation of the
technology from an end user's perspective, namely the
community and the design profession.

[5] Bosselmann P, (1993) Dynamic Simulations of Urban
Environments, in Marans and Stokels, Plenum Press- New York.
[6] Whyte J et at (1998) Evaluating new housing: the potential
for developers and planners to use virtual reality techniques,

Online Planning, Issue 3.
[7] Aotov A (1998), Environmental Aesthetics, Journal of
Planning Literature, Columbus..

From the analysis of the studies presented, the use of
Virtual Environments for urban design development
offers certain advantages when compared with' traditional

[8] Nasar J (1997), The evaluate image of the city, Sage.

694

