Visualisation of a simple beam under a load in Virtual Environment

;S. Jankovic*, L. Jankovic**, A. H. C. Chan*, G. H. Little*
*School of Civil Engineering
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2lT, UK
e-mail: j ankovic@civ-fs3.bham.ac.uk

**InteSys Ltd, Bimlingham Research Park, Vincent Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2SQ, UK

F = 250 MN, which corresponds to the red colour. The
horizontal movement of the force was also programmed
to have a left and right limit of motion, which covers
the length of the beam. The force in the model shown in
the figure 1 was designed to move from the left support
of the beam with co-ordinate x = 0 m, to the right
support of the beam with co-ordinate x = 10 m.

Abstract
Visualisation is generally considered to be a problem in
structural design. Being an iterative process, structural
design is time consumingJgr engineers, and results are
difficult for clients to visualize. Current numerical
methods have slow dynamic visualisation capability,
which is usually separate ,from the calculation phase.
This paper investigates whether an analogue virtual
reality (VR) model of (2 structure can integrate
calculation and visual representation. Early results of
this research show that it is possible to have analogue
virtual reality models of structures capable of real time
user interaction. The paper shows how the user can
interact with a VR analogue model of a simple beam,
move a concentrated load d o n g the length of the beam,
change the value of theforce, and visualise deflection of
the beam using the analytical solution of the problem.

Figure 1 The VR visual beam model of a
simple beam of length L = 10 m, height h = 1 m
depth d = I m , Young’s modulus E = 207 GN/m2:
second moment of area I = 0.0833333 m4, with
application of a vertical concentrated load of F =
250 MN at position of x = 6.506 m from left support
of the beam and with displayed values of
deflection for
each
cross-section between
segments

1: Virtual beam model
The geometry of the visual beam object was
defined as an element with a finite number of cross
sections. The force was presented as an arrow shape,
indicating the direction and orientation of the vector on
the screen. The VR visual beam model divided in I O
segments is shown in figure 1. The parameters adopted
for the model were based on the properties of steel. The
force was calibrated for a significant deflection of the
simple steel beam, thus making the visualisation easier.

The communication between the two objects, the
beam and the force, is based on exchange of inputs and
outputs between them. The displacement of cross
sections of the visual beam is based on the analytical
solution for the simple beam as a function of the
position of the force, obtained from the classical
solution in the field of Strength of Materials [I]. As the
value and the position of the force on the beam is sent
to the visual beam object, the displacement is calculated
and displayed accordingly.

Dragging the force downwards with the cursor
changes the value of the force proportionally to the
dragging distance, and within a range between a
minimum and a maximum value, displayed by the
arrow interactively. At the same time, the colour of the
arrow changes proportionally to the force, from blue for
zero, to red for the maximum value. For the model
shown in figure 1, the maximum value of the force is

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.000 2001 IEEE

Let us consider a section of the beam at a
distance z from the left support. When the vertical force

589

loading case, before proceeding to a different loading
case.

is at a distance "a" from the left support, the deflection
o f the cross sections between the left support and the
vertical force ,for z < a, is given by:
v=--.

6.E.I.L

( L - U ) . 2 +-.

F -a

6 . E . 1 .L

( 2 . t- 3 . u . L +d).z

(1)

For the same position of the vertical force, the
deflection of the cross sections between the vertical
force and right support (for z > a) is given by:

Figure 2 A deformed and undeformed shape of the
simple beam obtained from LUSAS

where:

-

F is vertical concentrated load

-

z

-

E is Young's modulus

-

I is second moment of area

-

L is length of the simple beam

v i s deflection
is a distance between left support and
vertical force F

ci

Figure 3 An image of VR visual beam model of a
simple beam achieved with users interaction

is a distance between left support of the
beam and cross section

3: Conclusions and future work
Although the scope of this model, dealing with
one geometry only, is extremely limited, the basis of
this approach, if expanded, would have a chance of
becoming a useful tool for sketch design analysis or for
educational purposes. The same model with different
analytical solution was successfully applied in
modelling a cantilever beam as reported in [5].

The calculation of displacement of each cross
section was programmed on the basis of analytical
solutions ( I ) and (2) from the classical approach [ l ] .
Consequcntly, dragging the arrow resulted in a
proportional interactive bending of the simple beam.
The dcflection of each cross section between segmcnts
was displayed on the screen interactively.

The authors will consider other analytical
solutions, and their replacement with shape functions
from the Finite Element Method, which will enable the
model to be more general and to represent other
structural systems such as portal frame. The future work
will also include bending moment and shear force
diagram as a part of the model.

2: Results
The corresponding image obtained from LUSAS
is shown in the figure 2. In the case of the VR visual
beam model of the simple beam, it is easy to go from
the case shown in figure 3 to the case shown in figure 1.
T6e user just needs to move the cursor to the right, from
the position that represents x = 3.001 m to position that
represents x = 6.506 m, and to keep the magnitude of
the force the same. Furthermore, if the user wants to
visualise different positions with different magnitude of
the force, he needs to adjust the position and intensity
of the force by dragging it horizontally and vertically,
as desired.

References
[ I ] Chilver J.C. & Ross C. (1999). Strength ofmaterials and
structures. Fourth edition. John Wiley & Sons.

[2] FEA Ltd (1999) LUSAS Examples, Version 13.2-0.

However, the same level of interactivity is not
possible in LUSAS [2]. There is no provision for
interactive adjustment of the load, and the user needs to
wait for the calculation to complete and for the image of
the deflected beam to be produced for each different

[3] Jankovic L., Jankovic S., Chan A.H.C. and Little G.H.
(2000). Emergent Modelling for Structural Design. In
Proceedings of International Conference On Complexity And
Complex Systems. Warwick.

590

[4] Jankovic L., Jankovic S., Chan A.H.C. and Little G.H.
(2000). Structural Simulation iWodels That Build Themselves.
lntemational Journal of Simulation: Systems, Science &
Technology. Volume 1. Numbm 1-2.

Acknowledgments

[5] Jankovic S., Jankovic L., Chan A.H.C. and Little G.H.
(2001). Visualisation Of The Response Of A Cantilever Beam
Under A Concentrated Load. In Proceedings of the 91hAnnual
Conference of the Associatiort for Computational Mechanics
in Engineering. Birmingham

following industrial partners: WS Atkins Consultants
Ltd, Oscar Faber Group Ltd, Maunsell Ltd, Halcrow
Group Ltd, Mott MacDonald Ltd, Hyder Consulting
Ltd, Ove Amp and Partners, Kvaemer Technology Ltd,
R ORourke & Son Ltd, and InteSys Ltd.

This research is collaboratively funded by the
UK EPSRC grant No. G M 7 5 2 7 3 and by the

591

