Spatial Representation in Product Modelling
Monjur M Mourshed, PhD Student
Denis Kelliher, Marcus M Keane, Lecturer
IRUSE, Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering
National University of Ireland Cork. Cork. Republic of Ireland
m.moursh,ed@student.ucc.ie, d.kelliher @ucc.ie, marcwkeane @ucc.ie

Abstract

1.2. Efforts at Product Modelling
.

An urianibiguous definition of space is necessary
before a n j attenipt niade to develop product or process
niodels for concurrent engineering in the AEC Industry.
The ambiguit;\, is the resur‘t of cliffererit and even
conflicting approach to its definition in the various phases
o f the buildirig life cjcle f o r direrent stukeholders, e.g.
Architects, Eiigitieers, arid Brtii‘ditig Services Eiigineer etc.
Some researchers cotisider spcice as an abstract properly
of thirrgs, while others corisider as a thitig itsev
Regardless of the definition, the space can be referred to
LIS CI collector of imterial objects arid also LIS uti object
itseu: This paper- irivestigate:; the existitig coricepts &
criteriu of clefitiitiori in various phases, cornpares btitli the
factiinl arid ontological riieaiiii;!g,mid specifies coriceptriul
scheriias for represeritatiori of space. georiietri,, cirirl
briildiiigs.

1. Introduction:

1.3. Concept of space

1.1. Building Product Model

Space is the basic elcment a designer starts with while
designing any object. The first scratch on paper or
sketchpad in CAD system is about space and its
organization both in 2D and 3D. Even before selecting
construction method and articulation techniques, a
thorough understanding of space and its purpose is
required. In the case of Building design and construction
this is usually done in Architectural Programming phase,
subsequent clarification is made to suit purposes as the
design progresses.

“A Building Product Model is potentially a richer
representation than any se.t of drawings can bc
implemented in multiple ways, including an ASCII file or
as a database. The data in the model will be created,
manipulated, evaluated, reviewed, and presented using
computer applications, some of which are extensions 0 1
the current computer-based design and engineering tools”
[Eastman 19991. The goal of product modelling is to allow
the seamless movement of data (both physical and
abstract, adequate for representing the building over all its
life stages for all uses incurred) between existing and
future CADKAE applications by using a neutral and
vendor independent file format, backend databases, and
translators to and from that format. The file format in
question will be an international standard accepted and
agreed by the actors (commercial developers of software,
users, manufacturers, contractors etc.) in the industry.

0-7695-1195-3\01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

,

Mid - 1970’s mark the ,.beginning of efforts at
developing integrated systems, based on a single building
model supporting a suite of applications. The distinctive
early efforts were OXSYS CAD, and SSHA-Edinburgh in
UK and ARCH-MODEL, BDS, GLIDE -in US. [Eastman
19991 It was later understood’that a strong association was
needed between these geographically distributed efforts,
later gave birth to Non-commercial and vendor
independent alliance namely ISO-STEP (STandard for the
Exchange of Product model data) and IAI (International
Alliance on Interoperability). The schema of the former is
called STEP hence the later one is called IFC (Industrial
Foundation Classes). As AEC industry is the most diverse
one in terms of construction method, skill, and
fragmcntation of the process, developing a single product
model for information visualization is harder because of
the various levels of detail, conflicting definition and
expression.

As being a part of the material world, space is evident
in every construct we build to visualize and perceive the
surroundings. Already as infants we learn to know the
extension of our own body and how it is spatially related
to external things. Ekholm & Fridqvist divided spatial
experience into two: Experiential and Factual. The
experience of space within a cubic room can be termed as
factual whereas the feelings of space in an open field can
be experiential. The later is subtle and depends on our

651

imagination and we rely more fully on inter-subjective,
often culturally defined, understanding of experiential
space. [Ekholm & Fridqvist 19971

Figure1: Different Experience of Space

1.4. Requirements of space:

Neither in the old languages (space is derived from
Latin ‘spatium’ and French ‘espace’) [Webster’s 19951
nor in everyday speech today does the concept space have
a single or clear-cut meaning. It may be referred to as: a)
container with an existence independent of material
objects, b) a relation among material objects, c) a
geometrical concept, and d) a thing with certain spatial
properties [Ekholm & Fridqvist 19971. Figure 1 shows the
different kinds of spatial impressions we can get.

Table 1: Requirements of space in life-cycle
stages
Visuals

Scale: Requirement

/r,Urban:
Experiential
-I

a
a

!
i

g w

0

$ 2

22

Neighbourhood:
Experiential
Site Scale:
Experiential

u u

Site area &
volume: factual
~

z

3
n

I
0
U

a..
$ 2

a3 ”G
52
Y

~

~~~

Planning
regulations: factual
Open space
requirements:
factual
Space
Programming:
factual
between rooms:
Experiential
Connectivity,

clearance: factual

Y

Structure: factual

OZT

Energy Analysis:
factual
Simulation: factual
Services: factual

z
I2

0

3
U

”

SI-

$ 2

20

652

Construction
space: factual
Storage &
equipments space:
factual
Temporary
structures: factual

Use area and
volume: factual

..

2.2. IFC
Space may be seen either as a property or as a thing
having property. In IFC (Industrial Foundation Classes)
space is seen as a property of the IfcElement not as an
object itself. Though IFC release 2.0 identifies and defines
Architectural Space Programming and terms as
IfcSpaceProgram group, which can be manipulated
defining adjacency to each other and can contain data of
various life-cycle phases. IfcSpace must be an abstract
intermediary concept applied “ad hoc” rather an attempt to
develop a true representation of reality. [Ekholm Fridqvist
19971 A schema of the same shown below in Figure 3:

2. Space & Standards:
There are differences in representation of space in the
realm of information systems for building classification
and building product modelling. I S 0 identifies space as
concrete object with functions [IS0 19971 and in other
product modelling efforts, it is classified as abstract object
bounded by concrete building elements [Eastman &
Siabris 19951 This section will focus on the standards of
representing Construction Enti1.y and resulting space in
two standards namely STEP and IFC.

2.1. ISO-STEP
I S 0 (International Standards Organization) defines
space as “Three dimensional, material construction result,
contained within or otherwise associated with a building
or other construction entity. A space may be bounded
physically or notionally.” [IS0 19971 A schema produced
of the definition by Ekholm & Fridqvist as follows:

Figure 3: IfcSpace

3. Various efforts on Spatial Modelling
I

HasSIl:?l

Three approaches to spatial modelling, which represents a
considerable difference are considered in this paper:
Bjork [ 19921
Eastman and Siabiris [ 19951
Ekholm and Fridqvist [ 19971

I

Figure2: Relations of space to
construction results IS0

-

other

3.1. Proposition of Bjork

Here space is seen as a
constituent part or aspect of
the construction result
but again construction entity
part (e.g., prefabricated
bathroom) also have spaces
built in them. The conflict is that, ‘Construction Entity
Space’ is composed of ‘Construction Entity Parts’ and
again certain ‘Construction Entity Part’ contains
‘Construction Entity Space’. Here the class ’space’ can be
in two different levels and break the rule that classes of
the same rank must be disjoint [Ekholm & Fridqvist
19961.

According to Bjork [1992], the concept of space can be
defined in two complimentary ways: “One is based on the
complete physical separation of the space from other
spaces by physical obstacles which provide visual,
acoustic and inner climate shelter. Another way of
defining space is as the locus of a homogenous activity.”
To define space Bjork introduced a intermediary layer
between space and space boundary, and is called ‘shell’.
Here, each space is enclosed in a ‘shell’ and the physical

653

structures (walls, floors) enclosing the space are behind
the shell. The three levels of ‘space boundaries’ are thus
formed: “Patches with a uniform surface, space
boundaries shared by exactly one enclosing structure and
one space and space boundary assemblies.” A strongly
reduced version of the schema developed by Bjork
presented by Ekholm and Fridqvist [ 19971 is presented in
Figure 4:

The discrepancy of the model lies in the fact that,
spatial properties of activities are expressed multiple
times. For example the same surface of an element (e.g.
inside of a door) need to be related in
CONSTRUCTED-SPACE and USE-SPACE. This need
for consistency checking makes the model redundant.
[Ekholm & Fridqvist 19971

6
Activity

Enclosing

Surface
layer

*S[1.?]

Static
layers

Figure5: Basic concept in Eastman and
Siabiris’s paper

si1:?]

3.3. A new approach by Ekholm and Fridqvist

Figure 4: Bjork’s schema

Ekholm & Fridqvist after an in-depth ontological
analysis of the spatial requirements in different phases on
the life cycle, proposed a new schema for building
information systems. Buildings are considered as
construction entities with enclosed places or spaces. These
spaces again are characterised both by spatial properties
like area and volume, and by enclosing properties, e.g.
enclosing to light, sound, air or fire. Enclosing is not
necessarily a material property but may also be dependent
on a person’s interpretation. A space function program
developed in architectural programming contains
requirements on the buildings spaces, e.g. surface
materials, fire resistance and sound reduction levels.
Spaces are classified by their basic functions.

3.2. Eastman and Siabiris
To add various building typologies, construction
technologies or stylistic criteria a flexible kernel was
conceptualised based on three following component
concepts of building [ 19951:
CONSTRUCTED-FORM,
Material
used
in
construction of the building: bricks, glass, mechanical
equipment etc.
BOUNDED-SPACE, supported and bounded by
CONSTRUCTED-FORM, defining areas of human
occupancy and use, and
ACTIVITY, general (business lease space) and
specific (e.g. president’s office)
As seen in Bjork’s model, this approach also embodies
a concept of BOUNDED-SPACE as a “conceptual and
formational
link”
between
a
building’s
CONSTRUCTED-FORM
and
its
ACTIVITYs.
“BOUNDED-SPACES are the enclosed regions within a
building that are available to accept human activity,
bounded on all sides. The boundaries modulate the
dimensions of light, colour and texture, thermal energy
and so forth, defining the properties of the space
enclosed.” Ekholm and Fridqvist relate these concepts in a
schema described in Figure 5.

This schema represents Construction entity space as an
aspectual part of a construction entity like load bearing,
heating or electrical system. The construction entity space
is composed of Construction entity parts, which are
composed of Element parts. Both Construction entity
space and its parts have Shape and Spatial relations to
other entities of the same kind. The shape of the
Construction entity space is based on the shape of the
Construction entity parts and their spatial relations.
Topology, position, and dimensions define shape [Ekholm
& Fridqvist 19971. Their schema is shown in EXPRESS
notation in Figure 6.

654

In this schema, space can also be related to each other
in two ways: adjacency and surrounding and allows
manipulation of various set of relations among the spaces
in the buildings like indoor-outdoor, living-services,
utilitv-use and so on.

The class for describing space should be defined in
such a way that it does not conflict with the constituent
spaces (Space bounded by a wall and space enclosed in a
mefabricated bathroom. a construction element like wall).
Adjacent to

h

r.c?

orQanisation

ExternalInternal dividers

*

Bathroom
boundaries

I

parts

Figure 5:

Schema of Ekholm and Fridqvist

4. Conclusion
Most of the efforts have been given on the Space
programming and defining adjacency and relations to each
other. But space is also related to other elements, objects,
systems, and processes. Classes and schema should be
developed incorporating those aspects.

Defining space has been hard work for developers and
researchers because of its complexity in representation.
The various efforts analysed here are the launch pads for
further research. Most of the concepts are limited to their
use in terms of fields and specialization. To develop an
acceptablc representation encompassing all the phascs
should consider the following:

Space should be represented in the light of the true
reality without advocating any ad-hoc concepts and
schema.

Bjork’s idea of typical requirements should be stated
here as i t is still the philosophy behind product modelling:
“There should also be clear distinction on the entity level
between subparts of enclosed spaces and assemblies of
spaces (such as apartments, fire Lones and heating zones)”
[Bjork 19921

5. References:
[ I ] Bjork B. C. (1992). A conceptual model of spaces,
space boundaries and enclosing structures. Automation in
Construction, Vol. I , no. 3 , pp. 193-214.
1

Space can be represented as an aspect of the
construction entity and construction complex.

655

[2] Boman M., Bubenko J., Johannesson P., and Wangler
B. (1993). Models, concepts and information. Department
of computer systems and sciences, Stockholm University,
October 1993, fifth edition.
[3] Eastman C.M. and Siabiris A. (1995). A generic
building product model incorporating building type
information. Automation in Construction, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
283-304

[4] Eastman C.M. (1999). Building Product Models:
Computer Environments Supporting Design and
Construction. Florida: CRC.
[ 5 ] Ekholm A. (1996). A conceptual framework for
classification of construction works. Electronic Journal of
Information Technology in Construction (ITCon) Vol. 1.
pp 3 1-50. Stockholm: Royal Institute of Technology.
http://www.itcon.org/ 1996/2/
[6] Ekholm A., Fridqvist S. (1997). Concepts of Space in
computer based product modelling. 1 5'h ECAADE
Proceedings.
http://www.tuwien.ac.at/ecaade/proc/ekholm/ekholm.htm

[7] IAI (International Alliance for Interoperability) 2000
IFC Technical release 2.0.
http://iaiweb.lbl.gov/
http://cic.vtt.fi/niai/technical/IFC_2.0/index.htm

[8] IS0 (1997) ISO/CD 12006-2 Building constructionOrganisation of information about construction worksPart2: Framework for classification of information. Draft

IS0 Standard 20thMay 1997. Newcastle Upon Tyne: NBS
Services.
[9] Katranuschkov P. (1997). Interoperability of
Heterogeneous Building Product Models.
http://cib.bau.tu-dresden.de/-peter/proj-kurz/rep
1-97.htm

[IO] Webster (1995). Websters New Collegiate
Dictionary. Springfield Massachusetts: G.&C. Mcrriam
Company.

Note:
All schemas in this paper are produced/ reproduced using
EXPRESS - G notation.
www.steptools.com

656

