Virtual Access to Landscapes and Historic Gardens at Linked Locations
John Counsell
Faculty of the Built Environment, University of the West of England, Bristol, England
Telephone 01 17 9656261
Fax
01173443002
Email
John.Counsell @ uwe.ac.uk
Abstract
fully 3D spatial analytical tools in GIS would be desirable,
and the widely available GIS packages are still presented as
two-dimensional and map-based, 3D data can be usefully
stored and searched within them. The cost of keeping
CAAD based large area urban models up to date and in
continued use justifies a reappraisal of the breadth of
applications and a broadening of access. Broader access
requires lower access costs for group interaction and
updating with eased distribution such as that offered by the
Web. Hence UWE has moved from CAAD based modelling
by a small group holding substantial expertise to the
creation and use of shared models by larger groups without
specific CAAD expertise. In seeking to meet broader
demands and a less predictable and longer term range of
uses both graphical and non-graphical information is held in
the database and linked to VRML and Web output. Hence
the models are both visualisable and form a co-ordinating
spatial framework linking to associated images and nongraphical data.
More recent work at UWE has examined the question
of when it is useful to model and when video or highresolution images may be equally or more useful. This has
led to proposals for a mixture of modelling and other media
managed from the same spatial database. The Valhalla
project is about to receive funding from the European
Commission in order to explore this concept further. The
acronym stands for yirtual Access to Landscapes and
Historic Gardens at Linked Locations. This project aims to:
establish a methodology for the digital recording and
retrieval of information describing the ephemeral and
seasonal changes in historic gardens;
provide an overview not usually achievable at ground
level to increase and broaden public access;

Since I997 staff at UWE have been exploring the use
of underlying spatial databases which may be used to
manage 3 0 modelling and related information. The term
spatial database or Spatial Information System (SIS) is used
as more inclusive of different domains than 'geographic'
information system (CIS), although commercial GIS may
satisfactorily serve this and many similar jhctions. The
question of when it is useful to model and when video or
high-resolution images may be equally or more useful has
also been examined.
A new project, 'Valhalla: offers the opportuniq to test
these approaches as a basis dfor the integration of 3 0
modelling with real-time video J'br the on-line comparative
study of landscapes and historic gardens. While the project
is based on possibly the most ephemeral and at-risk portion
of our architectural heritage it is hypothesized that the
approach could be equally applicable to building sites and
to archaeological digs.

Introduction
Since 1997 staff at UWE have been exploring the use
of an underlying spatial database which may be used to
manage 3D modelling and related information. One long
term goal has been to improve the management and visitor
information systems for Historic sites. The spatial database
is used to generate visible anid interactively explorable
aspects of the model in Virtual Reality Modelling Language
(VRML) that is browsable using plugins on the Web. The
term spatial database or Spatial Information System (SIS) is
used here as more inclusive of different domains than the
conventional view of GIs, although commercial GIS may
satisfactorily serve this and many similar functions. While

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.000 2001 IEEE

645

improve the marketability of the historic sites by
establishing an interactive web site;
enhance tools for garden staff to digitally exchange
skills-andknowledge;
support responsive visitor management to minimise
damage to fragile locations;
and serve as a model for the implementation of
comparative digital video display of related locations
and information across Europe to increase
understanding of landscape history, design and culture.
These objectives will be trialled over the next year by
publishing comparative on-line and real-time digital video
of Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, UK, and the Chateau De
Villandry, Loire, France. The video will be streamed to
visitor information systems both on-site, on the partner site
and also on the Web. The information systems will
comprise spatial databases linking video and mapping. So it
will be necessary to survey and digitally map the gardens in
a computer based three-dimensional spatial information
system to enable simultaneous access to non-visual
information, e.g. local plant-names keyed to Latin. The
video images will be enhanced by matching viewpoints in
the VRh4L output from the spatial information systems to
the directional and field of view instructions used to drive
the video cameras.

Tower of London CAAD Model
experience. HRP used for several years an Oracle based
abstract building maintenance management system which
then lacked links to drawings. UWE undertook some
research with them to evaluate the use of a GIS to create the
links between this data and their digital survey drawings.
There followed in 1996 a commission to model the
environs of the Tower of London to create illustrative
material to support bids for funding to the Heritage Lottery
Commission. The model was to provide the context for
judging the visual impact of each stage of the increasingly
detailed development and refinement of the designs. Two
models were created, an as proposed and an as existing
model. Both models were highly detailed. All, structures,
hard landscape and trees were modelled in 3D down to
street furniture, railings and kerbs. These models were used

to generate video from a renderfarm, and very highresolution still images for presentation material.
Both models were based on highly detailed 2D survey
drawings of all the buildings and landscape procured by
HRP. Other bespoke 3D,photographic and video surveys
were obtained. The digital photographic survey alone
occupied 6 CD Roms with each image stored at a resolution
of 2048 by 1536 pixels. The more distantly viewed
background data was extracted from Ordnance Survey
1:1250 scale maps and from a photogrammetric 'Cities
Revealed' dataset from GeoInformation Ltd. Drawing detail
was automated, turned into 3D and managed within
Autocad, images were reconciled within Photoshop and
both translated into 3DS Max for visualisation. The team
task of creating these models was made particularly difficult
by the limitations of the survey drawings and by the
difficulties of searching for and retrieving and correlating
data from the wide variety of available sources. [ 11

Filming at the Chateau de Villandry
It is hypothesized that the trial will serve as a model
for other built environment sites of international and
comparative importance, for building and archaeological
sites and other places where the pace of change is rapid.

Shortcomings of CAD Models of Heritage Sites
Historic Royal Palaces (HRP) manage the Tower of
London and are responsible for all aspects from
conservation and maintenance management to the visitor

646

common elements and were in effect two different part
models with a common core. Each model comprised
approximately 100 Mbytes of geometry with 300 Mbytes
plus of bitmaps. Management of two such linked models
and their associated elements in Autocad and 3DS Max
proved difficult with the available CAAD tools.
It was therefore possible to predict that management of
many more historic part models stepping back through time
and allowing also for models of different expert
interpretations derived from the same archaeological data to
co-exist would be in itself a major task requiring a spatial
database. It was also concluded that use of such an SIS to
locate and manage all the various data sources and images
including drawings would enhance the capacity of the text
based Oracle management system. A specification for just
such a heritage site management information system was
drawn up in conjunction with the then Surveyor of the
Fabric to HRP and has guided subsequent work.

In many ways these heterogeneous sets of linked
information resemble those which prevail during the design
and communication of a major new building project.
Russell et al. describe a simillar approach to hyperlinked
architectural drawings.[2] Haas called for more specific
identification of building levels and elements such as beams
and columns in describing the STEP AP225 for exchange of
3D Building Models.[3] However a looser, more
heterogeneous association between representative geometry
and associated data may encompass both terrain, existing
surveyed structures and new building elements. In fact
experience at UWE indicates that while euclidean primitive
solids are generally used as the basis for geometric
description of CAAD based building models, these are less
appropriate for either terrain or the irregularities of existing
building structures based on imeasured surveys. In these
cases the Triangulated Irreguliu Network (TIN) describes
these surfaces better, the basis of the 3D studio based
models. Superior interactive liools for remodelling such
terrain surfaces were described in 'Virtual Terrain - a
procedural bulldozer' by Erwin and Westart.[4] TIN'S can
however create bloated files in VRML if used
indiscriminately. Recent work has therefore centred on
NURBS (non-uniform ratiorial B-splines) for which
extensions to the Cortona VRML browser have been
introduced recently.[5]

A GIS basis for 3D Modelling

Management and Visitor Information Systems
A further goal of joint research between HRP and

FBE/UWE was to develop more effective approaches to
historic building maintenance management, visitor
management and interpretation of historic sites to visitors.
These desired outcomes entailed a closer and more
interactive relationship between the model and other
graphical and non-graphical data. In addition a wide range
of archaeological data was examined with the intention of
later modelling the various hi.jtoric developments of the
site. This included borehole data to enable reconstruction of
the successive ground levels, with archaeological records
from digs from which the existence and form of demolished
or altered buildings could be projected. Data conversion and
amalgamation from all the diverse sources was the major
impediment to effective group working to create the

Tower of London in VRML from GIS
The Tower of London modelling process pinpointed
the desirability of a spatial database to manage the data
available from which to model. VRML models in particular
and VR in general lack the animated behaviour of crowd
scenes, traffic and plant movement which give life and
credibility to urban areas.
It is possible to introduce some of these effects through
integration of digital video into the scenes but this further
raises the question of when to model and when drawing or
map, film or image alone may suffice. It may also be
questioned whether it is essential to model at a consistent
level of detail. A multimedia application may provide a
credible sense of presence without additional 3D modelling

models.
It became apparent that retrieving all the appropriate
data that described the part of the model under creation
would be assisted by a spatial information system (SIS).
Such a system could also provide a robust audit trail from
the source data to the model, and vice-versa, an important
consideration when attempting to model an historic site.[6]
The two models, existing and proposed, shared many

647

exceptions where particularly complex forms such as ogee
roof forms or deep relief have not been capable of
satisfactory automatic generation from 2D plan forms or
swept profiles. In these instances the specific complex
element has been exported as VRML from CAAD and
referenced as an external in-line file within the generated
VRML model. This technique is also used for repetitive
geometric 'library' elements such as street furniture and
trees that can be instanced. These library elements can be
reproduced complete with pre-scripted dynamic behaviours
such as rotation of the sails on a windmill. VRML from any
external source can be integrated in this way. High level of
detail modelling can thus be viewed within a setting
modelled at various lower levels of detail. These models are
however still based on proprietary source data because of
which the current lack of security across the Internet
precludes publication on the Web.
The CASA research centre at Bath University initially
defined a consistent high level of detail for the whole of the
Bath City model and now generates reduced level of detail
part models from it. This creates difficulties in translation to
lower levels of detail which in the longer term may be
overcome by use of a NURBS based approach as is now in
use in modelling for computer games.[lO] An alternative
and less resource intensive approach may be to model the
whole at a lower level of detail and then to introduce
pockets of higher detail as these become available from
CAAD modelling or as debate and interactive use define a
demand for more detail at that location. This would accord
with the view that modelling and updating take place over a
long period and that software, bandwidth, standards and
detail will change over that time, rendering any fixed level
of detail potentially obsolete.

in the CAD sense as evidenced by the extensive use of
panoramic images to convey urban experiences on the Web.
Experience also shows that increasingly complex websites require an underpinning database management system
to manage pages and links based on metadata such as author
and expiry date. This trend is now being reversed with the
increasing use of active server pages generated on demand
from databases. A variety of multimedia outputs are
becoming available on demand as bespoke pages. By the
addition of locational data the underpinning database may
become a spatial information system.[7] One means of
reducing the total cost of use of such models is to broaden
their appeal and thus spread the cost of initial creation and
subsequent amendment and use across a wider range of
applications and participants. Mitchell defined designing a
building or development as fundamentally a collaborative,
interdisciplinary, geographically distributed multimedia
activity.[8] If this collaborative digital multimedia activity
is integrated and disseminated on-line, and encompasses a
large enough urban area, it may provide the context and
constraints for future development and serve to inform and
engage the public.
In the UK it will be mandatory that all local planning
authorities make much of this data available on-line within
the next two or three years. Smith argues for a broader 'VR
across the Web' based involvement in this activity so that i t
'should be both usable and attractive to the public, the
planner, the private sector and the political representatives
involved in the planning process. A system should offer
collaborative group interaction, with groups deciding and
acting together to plan an environment for the good of the
whole'. [9]
These considerations led FBE/UWE to start afresh
from the original source data,. to explore the use of a
collahorative spatial datahase based approach within which
to integrate models and interventions from various sources
and from which to generate an overall navigable interactive
whole. A succession of beta versions of a 3D VRh4L
generator called Pavan have been used based on the
Mapinfo 2D CIS, in collaborative feedback to the software
author. (Since this work commenced other CIS vendors
have introduced
more limited 3D model generation
processes).
The 2D plan source data from which both the Bristol
Harbourside and Tower of London models were generated
were re-entered into Mapinfo. The heights of each building
element and roof morphology were coded onto the
polygonal building outlines and associated with bitmap
elevational detail. It was found in practice that the resulting
VRML model accords closely with the majority of the
building modelling in the previous CAAD based models
including complex battlements and crenellations. There are

Collaborative Modelling
In three successive years groups of students drawn
from a wide ranpe of built environment disciplines from
Geography to Surveying, without specific CAAD
experience, have been engaged in collaboratively modelling
one campus at UWE over the course of two or three hours
per week in one semester. The available source survey data
was divided out. Each student pair recorded the appropriate
additional data and used digital cameras to acquire bitmaps.
Each pair then modelled part of the buildings and terrain
using Pavan and Mapinfo. The resulting jigsaw has then
been re-assembled and a complete VRML model generated.
This exercise has indicated that it is practicable for a
group working asynchronously to collaborate in creating
and maintaining a large area urban model and that
significant CAAD expertise is not required. (The students
have also learnt many of the issues of CAAD management.)

648

Roberts has described new site planning and design using
VRML.[II] It may be argued that asynchronous group
activity is increasingly necessary in both the collaborative
virtual design studio and for timely planning information
systems.

approximately I O Mbytes of VRML including terrain (less
than 10% the size of the previous CAAD models) takes
almost two minutes to publish on a typical 350mhz Pentium
PC. Amendment of any part such as a change of elevational
bitmap detail or plan form or output of one part of the whole
can be regenerated in less than one minute. Hence the GIS
based VRML model can be used to swiftly review the
outcome of changes to a major urban area, generate a
sequence of part-models or compare alternative proposals in
context side by side in a frameset. The process is fast
enough to compare favourably with the time taken to
initiate similar visual modelling review of complex models
within 3DS Max on more powerful PCs. In this respect a
VR review function is also an important adjunct to
discovering flaws during the creation of a complex CAAD
model. However this alone does not enable on-line users of
the VRML model to instigate searches in the underlying
database which can be returned to modify or update the
information or structure of the model. This is technically
achievable, has been demonstrated in small trials, and is still
one goal for the expansion of this approach to the large area
models.
Therefore current exploration of the combination of
event driven behaviours and Structured Query Language is
seeking to define how appropriately to modify objects in the
VRML model on demand. This will enable the results of the
spatial database search and analysis tools within the GIS
database to be displayed interactively within the VRML
representation. Queries such as 'where is...?, 'where is the
nearest.. .?, 'what is near to this point.. .?, 'what has
changed? or 'what are the consequences of a proposed
change? may be demonstrated both visually and also by
associated in frame on-demand web pages of abstract data.
Similarly sensors within the VRML world may be used to
instigate a search and output from the database. This is
beginning to realise the potential for use of this process for
asynchronous group modelling or updating along the lines
of the collaborative virtual design studio and planning
information system defined by Smith.

Levels of Detail of Associaked Information
A useful analogy for the relationship of associated
information to models is that of the distinction between
physical relief maps and political maps. The political
boundaries generally change more frequently than the
rivers, mountain ranges and other natural borders in the
relief map. The two are associated in conventional GIS
using what has often been described as a 'cookie cutting'
process. The physical map is used as a background overlaid
with thematic layers of points of interest and polygonal
boundaries that are used to appontion it.
In the VRML 3D model access to information can be
made appropriate to the equivadent of the 'map-scale' at
which the model is viewed through the use of a hierarchy of
levels of detail. This is done by associating information with
an abstract normally invisible boundary representing the
cookie cutter rather than with the representation of the
physical elements of the model. Thus at a distance
equivalent to a scale of 1:lOOO from the Tower of London it
is named as a place in the contexl of other streets and placenames. At ]:I250 information can be invoked about the
names, addresses and occupancy of its over fifty constituent
buildings. At a distance equivalent to say 1:100, at which a
single building or small group fills the display, information
is triggered about the constituent zones of each building and
the components such as windows, doors and materials from
which each is composed.
Yet much of the available planning brief information
has proved in practice to be associated loosely with
localities or fuzzy regions rather than precise geometric
limits. In this respect the model can readily serve as an
electronic 'Yellow Pages' street directory, but more work is
needed to define both how best to associate other
information with specific levels of detail and viewer
distance and viewpoint, how to make it easy to understand
and access,[l2] and how to provide effective access to the
underlying database through the medium of the VRML
model.

Valhalla
This project is a continuation of the previous work at
UWE in VRML and spatial databases applied to visitor
information and heritage site management. The first phase
of this project is to to:
place real-time controllable digital video cameras
within the two Historic Gardens;
direct the video output to the Visitor Information
Centre and Gardens Office;

Tighter Integration of Spatial Database and VRML
Currently changes to the VRML model are made by
publishing the whole or any part of the model from the
spatial database in the GIs. Each complete model of

649

later development of a virtual reality 3D model. This may
also enable effective use to be made of video or highresolution images in many instances where resources are
currently put into modeling alone.
VRML models based on spatial databases have the
potential to become actively served with appropriate
associated detail and data on demand. VRh4L is a useful defacto standard both for defining and interacting with such
models, and in enabling the process of selection and
presentation of appropriate information with images to the
viewer.

implement video conferencing linked to the real-time
video between the two locations for use by garden staff;
and map information about plants, trees and hard
landscape features into the GIS,from which a 3D web
based model is generated, to enable comparative
identification of the elements visible in the video.
Common plant names in French and English are
indexed in Latin.
The next phase will add World Wide Web access to a
subset of the same video and 3D (VRML) information as
available on site. This is intended to enable the comparative
study of similar information within both gardens from a
Web Browser, so broadening public access to this part of
European cultural heritage. This phase also adds visitor
interpretation and responsive Garden Staff site management
facilities, to empower staff to keep the information in the
GIS up to date.
The other phases include evaluation and dissemination,
in which expert garden staff from a wide range of European
Historic Gardens, together with specialist and generalist
focus groups, are brought together both physically and
virtually to exchange views, to evaluate the outcome, and
appraise the benefits and difficulties of broader
implementation. The proceedings, the evaluation and
analysis, and the resulting reports will be added to the
public Web Site, which contains the comparative study of
both gardens.

References
[I]Counsell,J, Phillips, R.: The Tower of London Computer
Models'. Proc. "97, the International Conference on Information
Visualisation,published by the IEEE Computer Society,
California, August 1997, pp 186-191.
[2] Russell,P.,Kohler,N.,Forgber.U.,Koch,V.,Rugemar.J.
1999:
Proc. of the 17mEcaade Conference. Ecaade and the University of
Liverpool. pp 459465.
[3]Haas, R. 1998: The Exchange of 3D Building Models using
Step AP225, Scope, Functionality and Industrial Practice'.
ECPPM2. Product and Process Modelling in the Building
Industry'. R.Amor (ed). Building Research Establishment Ltd.
Watford. UK. pp 229-237.
[4] Erwin, S.,Westart,C. 1995: Proc. of CAADFutures95
Singapore.The National University of Singapore.
[SIDescription of NURBS extensions to VRML at
litto://www.uarallelgrauliics.coinalso

Conclusion

h tt~:l/www.hlaxxun.develooer
[6] Worthing, D., Counsell, J. 1999: 'Issues arising from computerbased recording of heritage sites'. Structural Survey Vol 17, N0.4
I 999, pp 200-2 10.
[7] Counsell, J:' Recording and Retrieving Spatial Information
with Video and Images': Proc. IV'ZOOO, the International

Large area urban models will probably in time consist
of different parts created independently and to different
scales and standards. This will permit collaborative groups
to share in the cost of developing and maintaining them
without being limited to a single defining standard.
However a common underlying co-ordinating geometric
structure or primary model to which all relate is likely to
emanate from the lowest level of detail at which data can be
captured without extensive reinterpretation. Much more
metadata requires to be captured and entered into a database
with visual images and information than is currently the
norm. VRML is a useful de facto standard for defining and
interacting with such models although the I S 0 standard
VRML has yet to support the seamless simplification of
geometric detail into the distance that NURBS now offers.
A spatial database can be used to serve appropriate
information with images or video clips on demand. There
appears little difference between the data management and
retrieval issues that apply to web-based multimedia
interpretations of historic environments and those that are
particular to large area 3D models. A common approach
may serve an initial web site based outcome and also assist

Conference on Information Visualisation, published by the IEEE
Computer Society, California,August 2000.
[8] Mitchell,W.J.: 'Virtual Design Studio', ed Wojtowicz, J.
Published by Hong Kong University Press, 1995.
[9] Smith, A.1998: 'Metaworlds and Virtual Space -Towards the
CollaborativeVirtual Design Studio'. Proc. of the International
Journal of Design Computing DCNET98, on-line at
htpp://www.arch.usyd.edu.aun<cdc/joumallvolIldcnetl
[IO] hte,.D, Knowles, M. 2000:'Ahead of the Game'. Article on
games development by Acclaim Entertainment Inc. in CGI
magazine, Vol5, Issue 5 , May 2000. pp 50-53. www.cgima com.
[l 1J Roberts A. 1999. 'Virtual Site Planning'. Proc. of the 174.
Ecaade Conference. Ecaade and the University of Liverpool. pp
442-447.
[ 12]Counsell, J., Phillips, R.: 'Appropriate Symbols and their use
in Detailed 3D Cityscape Models'. Proc.2nd Joint European
Conference & Exhibition on Geographic Information, published
by IOS Press Amsterdam March 1996.

650

