Interactive Metamorphic Visuals: Exploring Polyhedral Relationships

Jim Morey’
jmorey @uwo.ca

Kamran Sedig]‘*
sedig @uwo.ca

Robert E. Mercer]
mercer@csd.uwo.ca

Department of Computer Science’ and Faculty of Information and Media Studies’
Cognitive Engineering Lab
The University of Western Ontario
relationship between one family of mathematical objects
to another. Such relationships can be explored by
observing transitions between these associated objects.
This suggests that visualizing such transitional processes
between these objects can support cognitive activity and
sense making [ 12,111. However, transition-based
visualizations
can
have
different
degrees of
interactivity-from
highly passive observation of
animations, to highly active control of the pace, rate, and
sequencing of the transitional visuals [ 141. While
interacting with mathematical structures, a high degree of
continuous visual feedback and control is important as it
allows learners to adapt their actions and to reflect on
their goal-action-feedback cycle [9].
This research is aimed at supporting learners’
understanding of polyhedral figures, in particular the
Platonic and Archimedean solids: their visual
representations, their properties, and their relationships.

Abstract
This paper presents an interactive visualization tool,
Archimedean Kaleidoscope ( AK), aimed at supporting
learner’s exploration of polyhedra. AK
uses
metamorphosis as a technique to help support the
learner’s mental construction of relationships among
different polyhedra. AK uses the symmetric nature of the
Platonic solids as the foundation f o r exploring the way in
which polyhedra are related. The high level of
interactivity helps support the exploration of these
relationships.

Keywords
Metamorphosis, polyhedra, mindtool, kaleidoscope, 3 0
visuals, interaction, learning, symmetry, Platonic solids,
Archimedean solids

1. Introduction and Background
Learners often find complex mathematical concepts
difficuit to understand. It has been argued that learners
would benefit from examining these mathematical
concepts visually [ 11,13,16,15]. Visualization tools can
act as cognitive aids-i.e., mindtools intended to make
cognitive activity more productive and fruitful [2,8].
These tools augment and support learners’ mental
activities to interpret and make sense of structural and
causal relationships among the constituent elements of
these mathematical concepts [4,8].
One of the areas of mathematics in which learners
can benefit from visual exploration of concepts is
geometry [6,15]. Visual, rather than algebraic,
representations of concepts promote development of
insight into the underlying general principles [6].Visual
representations by themselves, however, are not
sufficient. Often times, learners need to understand the

Figure 1: Platonic Solids-L to R: tetrahedron, cube,
octahedron, dodecahedron, icosahedron
A polyhedron (plural: polyhedra) is a geometric solid
bounded by polygons [17,7]. The polygons form the faces
of the solid; the intersection of two polygons is called an
edge, and the point where three or more edges intersect is
called a vertex. Two of the subsets of polyhedral figures
are the Platonic and the Archimedean solids. Figure 1
depicts all the Platonic solids, and Figure 2 shows a few
examples of the Archimedean solids. A solid in the
above-mentioned subsets has faces which are regular
polygons (i.e., identical sides and angles), and vertices
which are indistinguishable. The dodecahedron in Figure

483
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

learner through interaction with the visual solids
themselves [ 15,131. Allowing learners to experience such
relationships through interactive exploration of the
environment before explicit verbal explanations is more
conducive to better mental construction of the concepts
[15]. This can be done by allowing the learner to interact
with the visuals and to observe the effects of such
interaction. The learners can observe how controlling
parameters of a visual object (in this case, polyhedral
solids) can change the object from one form to another
passing through intermediate stages. This process of a
shape gradually transforming into another shape is
referred to as metamorphosing (or in short form,
morphing) [5]. Metamorphosis can play an important role
in understanding difficult-to-visualize mathematical
processes [ 1 I].
The system described below uses the concept of
interactive metamorphic visuals to allow learners to
explore the existing relationships among polyhedral
solids.

1, for instance, has twelve faces (all regular pentagons)
and twenty identical vertices.
What distinguishes the Archimedean from the
Platonic solids is( the number of different types of
polygons in the polyhedron. The Archimedean solids have
at least two different types of polygons, whereas the
Platonic solids have only one type of polygon. Thus, the
dodecahedron is a Platonic solid since it has only one type
of polygon.

Figure 2: Archimedean Solids-L to R: truncated
octahedron, truncated icosahedron, cuboctahedron,
rhombicosadodecahedron, rhombicuboctahedron
The Platonic and the Archimedean solids are closely
related. Their relationships are multifaceted. One example
of these relationships between polyhedra has to do with
planes of symmetry. For instance, the planes of symmetry
of the cube are the same as the planes of symmetry of the
octahedron. Mathematicians understand and describe
these relationships though abstract algebra, in particular
through group theory [3,10]. However, these relationships
also
be
understood
through
observing
can
correspondences in the structures of the solids (i.e., their
faces, edges, and vertices). For instance, there is a
correspondence between the faces of the cube and the
vertices of the octahedron. One can observe a
correspondence between the centres of each of the faces
of the cube and the vertices of the octahedron (see Figure

2. Archimedean Kaleidoscope
Archimedean Kaleidoscope (AK) is a computerbased visualization mindtool designed to support users’
exploration of complex geometric solids.
A kaleidoscope is an instrument made of mirrors
used to produce a collage of images [l]. The produced
collage consists of an original wedge (i.e., piece, image,
or shape-see Figures 4 and 5 ) and many reflected copies
of the original wedge. The collage has many symmetries.
The symmetries of the collage come from the symmetric
nature of the regular polygon on which it is based.

3).

wiih symmetries based
on a square

Figure 5: Kaleidoscope
with symmetries based
on a pentagon

The design of AK is inspired by the kaleidoscope
meiqhor described above. The kaleidoscope in AK
produces 3D collages. The symmetries of these collages
come from a Platonic solid rather than that of a regular
polygon. This means that the wedges of the AK’s
kaleidoscope cover all the faces of the solid. Figures 6
and 7 depict screen captures of two of the Platonic solids
visualized in AK. They represent their respective

Figure 3: Octahedron in cube
The relationships described above can either be
communicated to the learner explicitly through verbal
explanations, or they can be experienced implicitly by the

484

analogues in Figures 4 and 5. However, the number of
their wedges are different-the cube has 48 wedges and
the dodecahedron has 120.

Figure 6: Cube

simultaneously changes all generated kaleidoscopic
images. Figure 11 shows a generated polyhedron as a
result of KV being near the upper right comer of the
wedge. In this polyhedron none of the faces are regular
polygons. Figure 12 shows a generated Archimedean
solid as a result of KV being near the centre of the wedge.
In this polyhedron (i.e., rhombi-truncated cuboctahedron)
the faces are octagons, hexagons, and squares.

Figure 7: Dodecahedron

Unlike the 2D images produced by ordinary
kaleidoscopes, AK produces :ID images-the image in
each wedge is three dimensional (Figure 8). These 3D
images seamlessly fit together to create the collage-i.e.,
the produced polyhedron. Figure 9 shows a polyhedron
produced by AK. The highlighted wedge (upper right
corner) contains a 3D image represented by three different
col ours.

Figure 11: Generic
polyhedron produced
by AK

Figure 12:
Archimedean solid
produced by AK

2.2 Interaction
AK provide the learner with two levels of interaction:
formative and perspective.

Figure 8: Image in one
wedge

Figure 9: Archimedean
solid produced by AK

This construction differs from the Ball’s [ 11
description of the polyhedral kaleidoscope since it is
based on a sphere. AK’s coinstruction, based on the
Platonic solids, has the advantage that all of the polygons
are the familiar 2D ones rai:her than spherical ones
described by Ball.
In the following subsections, important aspects of
AK will be discussed. These aspects relate AK’s
functions to their roles in supporting exploration and
learning.

Figure 13: Two perspectives on a polyhedron
Formative:AK provides the learner with control over
KV. This control allows the leamer to experiment with
different placements of KV, and as a result observe the
formation of different polyhedra. This interaction takes
place within a bounded area-i.e., the highlighted wedge
(see Figure 11). Although at the formative level the
leamer operates within a bounded area, the learner can
still explore and observe countless number of unique
polyhedra. However, although there are countless number
of polyhedra, the leamer can still develop a sense of the
similarities of these polyhedra because they are all based
on the same base Platonic solid. Every base Platonic solid
has a wired frame associated with it. As the learner forms
new polyhedra, the original frame stays the same. This
allows the leamers to make mental connections between
the base Platonic solid and the newly generated
polyhedra.

2.1 Kaleidoscopic Vertex
Each generated polyhedron is comprised of many
vertices. AK uses one single vertex in the kaleidoscope to
control the shape of the produced polyhedra. This vertex
is referred to as the kaleidoscopic vertex (KV). KV is
represented using a black dot (see Figure 11). The
location of KV determines the size and shape of the 3D
image in each wedge. A change in the location of KV

485

There are countless numbers of transitions that can be
observed by the learner since there are countless numbers
of polyhedra to move between. Many notable transitions
like the one above exist.

Perspective: Once a polyhedron collage is generated,
the learner can manipulate the entire collage by changing
its orientation. This allows the learners to observe the
polyhedron from different perspectives. Figure 13 shows
a truncated octahedron from two different perspectives.

2.4 Relationships
2.3 Metamorphosis
As mentioned in the introduction, many relationships
among polyhedra can be seen as correspondences
between faces, edges, and vertices. AK supports these
correspondences by colour coding the faces of the
constructed polyhedra. The colouring is with respect to
the base Platonic solid. In the diagrams, the colouring
translates to shading. The white faces of a constructed
polyhedron correspond to the faces of the base solid. The
light grey faces of a constructed polyhedron correspond to
the edges of the base solid. Lastly, the dark faces of a
constructed polyhedron correspond to the vertices of the
base solid. For example, the relationship between the
truncated cube and the cube can be seen by the
correspondences of their structures. The dark triangles
present in the truncated cube correspond to the vertices of
the cube. The white octagons in the truncated cube
correspond to the faces of the cube (see Figure 15). This
relation can be viewed statically or can be experienced
dynamically by metamorphosizing the cube to the
truncated cube.

As stated before, visualizing metamorphic processes
can assist learners in understanding mathematical
concepts. Observing a continuous transition from one
polyhedron to another helps the learner see some of their
existing properties and relationships. In AK the learner
can experience metamorphic processes in two ways: by
formative interaction with KV and by observing AK
simulating the process.
Figure 14 shows some of the intermediary stages of a
continuous transition between the two polyhedra. This
continuous transition has some interesting properties.
First, the shape of dark polygons is constant; they are
always regular decagons. They start with length of zero
and grow until the decagons meet each other. Second, at
the start and end of the transition the white polygons are
triangles. The intermediary shapes are irregular hexagons
except for one location of KV that has the white polygon,
a regular hexagon (see the bottom left image of Figure
14). One other thing of note is that the triangles change
their orientation. At the start, the centre triangle has one
of its vertices pointing downward, whereas, at the end, the
same polygon has a vertex pointing upward.

Figure 15: Truncated
cube

Figure 16: An
intermediary polyhedron

The example of the octahedron in the cube (see
Figure 3) can also be seen through AK. Figure 16 shows a
polyhedron that is very close to being an octahedron. Its
triangular faces are dark, its thin rectangular faces (on the
verge of being edges) are light grey, and the small square
faces (on the verge of being vertices) are white. This
suggests the following correspondences: the octahedron’s
faces correspond to the cube’s vertices; the octahedron’s
edges correspond to the cube’s edges; and the
octahedron’s vertices correspond to the cube’s faces. This
intermediary polyhedron is more suggestive than viewing
the octahedron. Even though this intermediary polyhedron
is not a Platonic solid (or an Archimedean solid), i t
suggests a relationship between two Platonic solids. The
correspondence between the cube’s edges and the

Figure 14: Morphing from icosahedron (top-left) to
truncated dodecahedron (bottom-right)
The learner can recreate this transition in Figure 14
by slowly dragging KV from the top-right corner of the
wedge to a location on the far side of the wedge. In the
transition in the figure, all of the locations of KV lie on a
straight line. The simulating part of AK accurately shows
this transition since it moves KV along a straight line. The
paths through which learners usually move KV are not
straight and so the location of KV would be slightly off
the line. This means that the dark polygons may not be
exactly regular decagons for the entire metamorphosis.
This is one the tradeoffs of the active control of the
formative interaction.

486

octahedron's edges is often difficult for learners to
understand. It is possible that exploration of the
intermediate polyhedron through AK will make these
subtle relationships more appar,ent.

Two Archimedean solids that AK produces with
rotational symmetries are the snub cube (see Figure 20)
and the snub dodecahedron (see Figure 23). Many of the
polyhedra with the rotational symmetries appear to have
twists in them. For example, in Figure 22 the squares in
the polyhedron appear vertically twisted. Learners may
find the switch from 2D rotational symmetry to 3D
rotational symmetry difficult to understand.

2.5 Extending the Kaleidoscope Metaphor
One of AK's goals is to have learners interact with all
of the Archimedean solids. Noit all of these solids have a
symmetry of reflection. For in,stance, the snub cube (see
Figure 19) does not have any lines of symmetry and yet
has rotational symmetry. Figures 17 and 18 show
rotational symmetry based on regular polygons. To
include this type of symmetry, AK must extend the
metaphor of the kaleidoscope. The extension' is that
resulting collages consist of either the original wedge and
many reflected copies or the original wedge and similarly
oriented copies.

Figure 21 : Snub cube

Figure 22: Twisty
intermediary
polyhedron

. __..
., .:'..
I
,

:
:

/

,,'

'.

.....
._ ,.
... i
I

'..

: I'
: ,......._.
x
,'
................. ........... ......I;:

Figure 17: Rotation
symmetry based on a
square

"

,..I

.'

,
._.,.

Figure 18: Rotation
symmetry based on a
pentagon

All of the faces in Figures 17 and 18 appear in
Figures 4 and 5. Visually, this shows that rotational
symmetries of a polygon are half of all of the total
number of symmetries of a polygon. This also is the case
for the platonic solids; there are half as many rotational
symmetries as there are symmetries. Figure 19 and 20
shows the rotational symmetries, depicted by wedges, of
the cube and the dodecahedron.

Figure 23: Snub dodecahedron

Figure 19: the truncated
cube.

With the rotational symmetry, each edge of the
Platonic solid, on which the constructed polyhedron is
based, can be represented by two similar triangles rather
than a rectangle. In Figures 21, 22, and 23 these similar
triangles are shown as the two differently shaded
triangles.

Figure 20:

487

4.

3. Future Work and Conclusions
This paper has presented the Archimedean
Kaleidoscope (AK), an interactive visualization mindtool
which uses metamorphic techniques to support learners
exploration and understanding of complex polyhedra
relationships. There has been informal usability studies of
AK with at least a dozen university students. Currently,
the most significant impression of leamers is that the
polyhedra figures are related. However, most learners
have difficulty constructing a mental model of the
intermediary connections between the Archimedean
solids. This difficulty may be due to the fact that
transitions between the figures take place in time. One
future enhancement to AK will be to make these
relationships and transitions visible through providing a
spatial map of the relationship and transition space and
allow leamers to interact with this map.
Another possibility is to superimpose temporal
interaction on the spatial map to allow learners to see how
much of the space has been explored

5.

k,

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

4. Acknowledgement

13.

This research is funded by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada.

14.

References
1.

2.
3.

Gordin, D.N., Edelson, D.C., & Gomez, L. Scientific
visualization as an interpretive and expressive medium. In
D. Edelson & E. Domeshek (Eds.), Proceedings of the
second international conference on the learning sciences.
409-4 14, 1996.
Gregory, A., State, A., Lin, M.C., Manocha, D., &
Livingston, M.A. Interactive surface decom osition for
polyhedral morphing. The Visual Coniputer,
453-470,
1999.
Hanson, A., Munzner. T.. & Francis, G. Interactive
methods for visualizable geometry. lEEE Coniputer, 27,
78-83, 1994.
Holden. A. Shape, space, and synmerty. Columbia
University Press, 1971.
Jonassen, D.H., Peck, K.L.. & Wilson, B.G. Learning with
technology: A constructivist perspective. Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 1999.
Laurillard, D. Rethinking University Teaching: A
Framework for the effective use o j edrrcational technology.
Routledge, 1993.
Mobius. August Ferdinand, Gesaninielte Werke / hrsg. auf
Veranlassung der Koniglichen Sachsischen Gesellschaji
der Wissenschaften. Wiesbaden: M. Sandig, [Neudruck der
Ausg. 1885-871, 1967.
Palais. R.S. The visualization of mathematics: Towards a
mathematical exploratorium. Notices of the Anierican
Mathematical Society, 46(6), 647-658, 1999.
Rieber, L. P. Animation in computer-based instruction.
Edircational Technology Research & Development, 38( I).
77-86. 1990.
Sedig, K., Klawe, M.M., & Westrom. M. Role of Interface
Manipulation Style and Scaffolding on. Cognition and
Concept Learning in Learnware. ACM Transaction on
Computer-Human Interaction, In Press.
Shedroff, N.Information interaction design: A unified field
theory of design. In R. Jacobson, Infortnation Design, 267292.The MIT Press, 1999.
Skemp, R. R. The sychology of learning mathematics (2nd
ed.). Middlesex,Uk!Pengum Books, 1986.
Tweedie, L., Spence. R., Dawkes, H., Su, H. Externalizing
abstract mathematical models. Proceedings of CHI’96,
406-41 2. Association for Computing Machinary, 1996.
Wenninger, M.J. fo/yhedron models. Cambridge
University Press, 1971.

15.

Ball, W.W.R. Mathematical recreations and essays.

16.

Macmillan &Co. Ltd, 1939.
Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. D., & Shneiderman, B. (Eds.).
Readings in information visualization: Using vision to
think Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.
Coxeter, H.S.M. Regular complex polytopes (Zd ed.).
Cambridge University Press, 1991.

17.

488

