Utilization of 2D, .3D, or 4D CAD in Construction Communication Documentation
Clark A. Cory, Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Graphics Technology
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
E-mail: cacorv~tech.purdue.edu
-

Abstract

The AEC industry is going through several changes
in the technological and processes area for creating
construction documentation- just like the Department of
Computer Graphics.
The AEC industry and more
specifically individual companies must look at other
parameters
and
aspects
of
the
construction
communication process other than technology. Production
and profitability play a large factor in any construction
project. Can the document be generated at a specific rate
in order to sustain profit within the project guidelines?
Can the incorporation of technology make the production
process less time consuming and without technological
headaches? These are questions that most AEC
professionals are asking before the technological switch
will take place in their business.

The transition from trczditional graphics into
computer graphics over the past decade has brought
about a multitude of changes which graphic educators
and other graphic professional:: have had to address and
incorporate into their curriculum or industry. The ever
evolving integration of Computer Aided Design (CAD)
into the architectural and engineering areas have
revolutionized the design and construction documentation
process. But, when is it cost efJ’2ctive to utilize 2 0 , 3 0 or
4 0 CAD in the construction documentation processes or
in business practices? A problem that most professionals
are encountering is when to utfilize the most technology
has to ofer and when to get b,v with minimal standards.
This paper will discuss the components of 2 0 , 3 0 and 4 0
CAD in construction communication documen tation and
when professionals and educators should utilize these
different types of drmvings.

2D CAD
For thousands of years, graphic representations have
been one of the main forms of communication. [ l ] From
the earliest prehistoric drawings to current drafting
standards, graphical illustrations are a natural means for
communicating ideas, concepts or actions. Graphical
standards for 2D illustrations came into effect around the
beginning of the 20th century. [2] The advantages to
standardizing especially in the 2D Multiview area were:
They were easy to construct
0
Only concerned with 2 dimensions in individual
views
0
Gives true size and shape for features
Most accurate and descriptive type of
engineering graphic
Some of the disadvantages were:
Difficult to visualize
Required interpretation
Limited usage
Multiview drawings were commonplace in the industrial
world, but it usually took several years of training for
individuals to understand and interpret the new visual
language. Multiview orthographic projection also form

Introduction
The Department of Computer Graphics Technology
has been on an evolving process for the last several years.
The Department developed four specialty areas that the
curriculum is based on utilization of 3D models and
advanced technologies. Over the last couple years, the
author and other colleagues have been consulting with
several Architectural, Engineering, and Construction
(AEC) companies trying to solve the construction
information problem. The knowledge gained from the
consulting and the incorporation of the technology has
been the guiding influence for the curriculum in the
Construction Graphics Communication (CGC) area. The
Department has been a strong promoter for the use of the
3D model as the basis for all construction documentation,
but the Architectural, Engineering, and Construction
(AEC) industry has a completely different perspective on
the problem.

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

2 19

3D. Other benefits include all database of material that
can produce a very accurate bill of materials for the
project. It can take traditional estimators anywhere from 2
days to several weeks to estimate the amount of material
in any given construction project by traditional hand
methods, that is usually a by-product of producing the
model within the computer. Jim Risch of Argos BDS
Incorporated states, “Through the use of forms, macros,
databases, and architectural data created in a parametric
intelligent model, you can extrapolate the data that is
needed to put the model into production”. [5] When
working correctly, 3D modeling software can efficiently
generate all the working drawings and estimate an entire
structure. Griffis, Hogan and Li [6] defined several
benefits for utilizing 4D CAD:

the basis for the most drawings used in graphical
communication. [3] With Multiview drawings comprising
a majority of drawings used in industry, years of
procedures and processes cannot be changed overnight.
That is the driving force for resistance to change from
traditional 2D working drawings to utilizing 3D models.
But the AEC industry has shown promise over the last
couple years with companies embracing technology, and
utilization of the 3D model to generate all construction
working documentation for projects.

3D Modeling
The implementation and utilization of 3D models,
especially architectural, had become significantly easier
and more efficient to construct. [4] This one statement is
the driving force behind the utilization of 3D computer
models in AEC projects. It was originally financially
impossible to utilize models in construction projects due
to the fact that individuals were not educated in model
creation, and the software was not efficient or easy to
understand. Other information, like the still traditional 2D
Multiview orthographic illustrations, from the model was
not easily extracted either, so most firms utilized
Computer Aided Design as a replacement for the pencil,
triangles, and T-squares.
It has only been recently that software companies are
creating the 3D Model in the form an Architect or
Engineer understands the traditional 2D way of drafting.
Most software packages to date are drawing Architectural
documentation by creating the documents in a traditional
2D fashion but adding the height to create a 3D model.
Some packages take the model a step further- Vertex for
example can “Construct” the entire building inside the
computer. You design and build the structure the same
way you build the building in the real world. Building the
structure inside the computer can have huge benefits as
well as tremendous complications for the user.
Vertex is a residential specific AEC parametric
software package. Like the other parametric software
packages, it stores all the project data into a database.
Building design and project information is organized into
a project specific database that includes all the files
relating to that project and stores it in a single project
directory on the hard disk. This allows for easy access to
all information such as materials, customers, and project
parameters. This also allows for universal project
changes. Since all the information is tied together, one
change will universally change the project. For example,
if you would change the wall height from 8 feet to 9 feet,
all information and graphics that are tied to that height are
updated to reflect the change both in the 2D and in the

Most Common Usage
Checking clearances and access
Visualizing details from non-standard
viewpoints
Using the model as a reference during
project meetings
Performing constructability reviews
Greatest Perceived impediments to the use of 3D in
construction
0
Undetermined economic impacts
Inertia
Lack of trained people
0
Cost (perceived as an impediment by nonusers)
Perceived benefits by users
Reducing interference problems
Assisting in Visualization
Reducing rework
Improving engineering accuracy
Improving Jobsite Communication
Life is not all a bowl of cherries when using 3D
construction modeling software.
Architectural 3D Modeling software does have some
downsides, as well as the benefits stated above. First and
foremost, architectural software packages, especially
parametric, have an extremely high learning curve. The
user usually has to spend several hours training and
utilizing the software before he/she can become proficient
and productive.
During this learning period, most
individuals might end up reverting to a package they
know and are productive with.
Another possible problem with 3D Model creation is
an individual draws or builds the entire structure inside a

220

would have a “complete” knowledge of residential
construction techniques and procedures. Most AEC
individuals have a complete knowledge in areas that are
important to their daily work, but have a general or
introductory knowledge in fields like electrical or HVAC
that is sufficient to understand the subcontractors during
installation. To be called a master at all the areas of
construction would be an exaggeration for any one
individual- especially drafting individuals that have never
picked up a hammer or been on a construction jobsite.
Architects, Engineers, and General Contractors probably
have a good understanding of the concepts of installation,
but I don’t think any one person would have “complete”
understanding of all aspects of framing, drywall
installation, finish trim, stairs, windows, doors, HVAC
system, wiring, and plumbing without professional
installers helping at various stages within the project.
With technology progressing at astonishing rates these
days, it is virtually impossible for one individual to know
and implement all the variables associated in the day-today activities of all trades in construction. It is even more
relevant for the designers that design the buildings due to
the fact that most have minimal interaction with the
construction process. Unless designers are experienced in
three-dimensional design, there are probably few benefits
to be gained for relatively simple buildings. [7]
As more and more professionals are educated and
utilize the 3D model for generating construction
documentation, the model in construction will inevitably
become the driving force in the construction
documentation. More and more industrial professional are
starting to realize the benefits within construction
documentation, but while others most are just
implementing 3D models- other more progressive firms
are experimenting with and using 4D CAD in their
construction projects.

computer instead of representing the structure with 2D
lines. 3D modeling is not just drawing the image, but also
defining heights for walls, elevation heights for floors
within the entire structure, iselecting material, and
defining stud and joist spacing tlo be used on those walls
and floors. Users first start drawings by specifying the
number of floors for the house, type of foundation system,
and height of walls for all floors. Next, the user must
select wall or floor drawing toclls with specific material
representations within the software. The user can draw in
a traditional 2D format (figure l), but the user is actually
constructing all components of the house as a 3D (figure
2) model and all information concerning material type in
a database.

Figure 1. Drafting Area for Modeling Software

4D CAD
A new wave is rippling through the AEC industry
and 4D CAD is the cause of the tidal wave. What exactly
is 4D CAD? To Date, 4D CAD appears to be focused on
integrating the technical design information respectively
within the design and construction phases. [8] More
simply put, 4D CAD utilizes project geometry in three
dimensions and the one dimension for the projects
schedule of construction over time. The timeline can be in
all stages of the project: pre-construction, construction
and post-construction for the life of the building.
According to Webb and Haupt, some anticipated gains
from 4D CAD for the entire construction project team
include:

Figure 2. 3D Representationof House
What is wrong with these statements? Nothing is
particularly wrong about 3D “odeling software- just the
fact that an individual needs a wide range of construction
knowledge about several different trades just to design
and create working drawings for construction projects.
The author knows of only a couple of individuals in the
Architectural, Engineering, and Construction industry that

221

approached these problems yet. The author is a strong
advocate and promoter of 3D modeling in the
construction documentation process and also believes that
4D CAD will only benefit the construction industry. But
until a formally defined and proven document identifying
the benefits for 4D CAD are compiled, it will only be a
process used by a select few. Those select few companies
and professionals will inevitably struggle in the
beginning, as do many trying to incorporate a new
technology, but will eventually overcome those burdens
or fail in the process and revert to traditional means.

Facilitate the evaluation, implementation, and
monitoring of design changes
Evaluate alternative materials or other processes
to used in the facility being planned and built
Evaluate and develop the most effective material
staging and handling procedures for the project
Identify and develop alternatives when
disruption to the original plan on the
construction project occurs
Effectively train and communicate with
construction crews specially before engaging in
an intricate, challenging, or hazardous activity or
a new construction method or technique
Monitor progress on the project by comparing
as-planned with as-built
Improve the use of just-in-time material
deliveries which would be particularly important
on construction sites where space is at a
minimum or premium
Help overcome language barriers for members of
the construction team, especially in the context
of international construction activities.

Higher Education Goals and Observations
The Department of Computer Graphics Technology
at Purdue University strives to teach and prepare students
to be the nation’s best practitioners and managers of
applied computer graphics. Higher education in a school
of technology tries to incorporate the both theory based
and hands-on training in latest and greatest technology the
industry has to offer. It seems that the latest and best
versions of the most popular software are constantly being
installed while older out-dated versions are retired and
discarded. Software is not the only items retired;
computer hardware is constantly being repaired, replaced,
and upgraded. Printers, monitors, keyboards, and CPU’s
are just a few items which higher educational institutions
constantly upgrade. With the newest technology, students
have the best education technology has to offer and a piein-the-sky education. The Department offers several
courses that allow students to incorporate new
technologies into current curriculums or utilize conceptual
technologies to solve the courses problems.
This idea of utilizing the biggest and the best has
produced a false representation for students of industrial
standards of software and hardware utilization. Most
students have no experience of the design process in
industry and higher educational institutions are their only
means of comparison. This comparison will come as a
huge shock when they graduate and become employed.
Incorporating the best of the best without on-site
industrial field-testing is turning out to be detrimental to
our student’s ideas and beliefs of what industry is
uti1izing.
Computer technology is giving students more to learn
during their school years. In other words, putting on more
hats within a profession. For the education of current
students, in order for them to be productive from the first
day of work, it is important as educators to give them all
the foundation knowledge for their chosen field, identify
current trends in technological use in that field, show how
the new technology might affect the industry- both

However, to be able to meet the pronounced and
presumed benefits that these applications present, 3 D and
4D CAD must become more adaptable and interactive
with the individuals utilizing them and in the media being
viewed.
As defined above, 4D CAD in construction has both
benefits, as well as problems, just as 2D and 3D
construction documentation. The first of the problems is
that several people are just getting acclimated to utilizing
3D CAD and now the design and construction
documentation process has an equation with one more
variable. It is hard enough for designers, through years of
generating two dimensional drawings, to start thinking
and designing in the third dimension, and now industry is
asking that they think about a scheduled time-line of the
construction process for every project. It’s not only
dimensions that are introduced into the equation, but
actual jobs and professions.
How many people does the designer need to replace
by continually incorporating more and more jobs into the
construction documentation process? How many jobs
must the designer do and understand by designing and
generating a simple set of construction documents? Can
one individual truly understand every aspect of multiple
trades while generating construction documentation?
These questions are extremely important and should be
addressed. How does the industry answer these questions?
The author has not found anyone that has formally

222

How is this technology going to benefit every
department within my company?
What can the Internet do for my company and
why should my employees need to know how to
create items on the web?
How can technology get me jobs?
These questions are common in today’s AEC industrial
companies. Some of the questions are more relevant to
technology in the AEC industry, while others were just a
chance for the owners to vent some frustrations. The
bottom line is- they want whatever is going to be
productive. If that is new technology or employees with
new ideas to utilize new technology, then so be it. Some
employers are basing their companies on new and
innovative 3D modeling technologies while most, the
author has encountered, are grasping to traditional 2D
methods. The process of designing, constructing, and
operating buildings is among the least computerized of all
industries. [ 121 Certain problems occur when headstrong
ex-students try to implement or impose new 3 D and 4D
technology into proven 2 D industrial practices of existing
firms- only with disastrous results. Most employers want
production, proven processes, and profit.
The AEC industry is built on visualization. Seeing a
product in the design stage, watching the building be
erected, and closing the sale with a client all have
foreseeable endings. Visualizing the entire process is
what AEC professionals excel at- so it would seem
natural that utilizing a product or 3D models would just
be another more efficient step in the visualization process.
Why are most AEC firms resisting the change?

benefits and troubles, demonstrate how to utilize the
technology on-site, and last but not least- identify current
technology used by industrial fiirms. A curriculum that
shows the benefits and troubles from all aspects of
industry comprising everything from knowledge,
technology, and industrial standards might be more
beneficial than introducing them to the latest and greatest.
The specialty area of Construction Graphics
Communication (CGC) within the Department of
Computer Graphics Technology has implemented this
philosophy into the curriculum. The professors are getting
out into the AEC industry to identify standards, practicing
those standards along with industrial partners, attending
workshops to learn new technology, participating in
national and international conferences to research and
incorporate multiple technologies to solve AEC problems,
and then implementing these ideas into thought provoking
problems within the curriculum. The result has been a
well-rounded student that is able to adapt to any
technology and solve day-to-day problems.

AEC Industrial Goals, Observations and
Comments
“Practitioners complain that recent graduates come to
them unprepared for real work: !;chools increasingly focus
on experimentation with sophisticated design software,
while firms grumble that young graduates can’t even do
simple computer drafting. At the same time, some
“interns” are entering firms with computer-aided design
skills that far out-strip those of their employers.” [ l 13
Other questions and statements from industrial
professionals on site visits include:
Why is it that the AEC industry has a mandatory
minimum 2-month training period for every
employee?
When can we get an employee that can jump
right in and produce?
The employees are great at solving problems, but
cannot interact with clients.
The new employees have a belief that changes
do not occur in business and everything in the
construction process will fit exactly per working
drawings and specifications.
Employees have the misconception that the
workday for a person in the AEC industry is only
8 hours
The new employees take things to personal- they
believe a change to a design drawing is their
fault.
How is this technology going to benefit my
company?

Construction Schedules
Today’s construction project schedules are the key to
success. Webb and Haupt state,”4D CAD enhances
communication,
approval
and
improvement
of
construction schedules by various parties, such as
construction managers, clients, designers, subcontractors,
and community members. However, for 4D CAD to be
implemented effectively, a considerable amount of detail
work is necessary that is project specific and in many
cases unique.” [9] The amount of detail required for
unique individual projects does not make it costs effective
to utilize 4D CAD. Most Architectural and Engineering
firms generate many construction documents from
existing 2D drawings, therefore the costs associated with
converting 2D to 3D and even 4D documents is more than
most professionals are willing to spend. They are getting
by with existing materials and will not or cannot change.
Until software becomes easier to create all details,
material estimation, and schedules, most AEC firms will

223

only dabble in 3D and 4 D CAD until they foresee a
profitable outcome.

[4] M. Giambruno, “3D Graphics and Animation: From Start
Up to Standing Out”, New Riders Publishing, Indianapolis, IN,
1997.

Conclusions

[5] Risch, J., Argos Systems, Inc. (1998). Application
information. [On-Line]. Available: http://www.argos.com

This .paper
has defined typical components and all
.
areas for the generation of construction documentation
utilizing 2D, 3D, and 4 D CAD. The fact that there are
multiple software products and multiple ways to generate
construction documents only fuels the problem within the
AEC industry for a unified construction documentation
process. The fact that designers are being introduced to
more and more processes and wear multiple hats, required
to incorporate multiple positions or jobs into the design
process, and produce more data within documentation
only increases the frustration of designers and discourages
the AEC professionals from totally adopting 3D or 4D
CAD.
In today’s extremely competitive AEC industry, it
seems logical to identify ways to combine tasks, save
time, and ultimately save money. The advent of 3D and
4 D CAD in the construction process could save an
abundance of time and energy, but these tools are not
being utilized to their fdlest potential. Until 3D and 4D
CAD can be proven cost effective to industrial
professionals, higher education will just have to educate
students and industry to all forms of construction
document creation.

[6] Griftis, F. H., Hogan, D., Li, W., An Analysis of the Impacts
of Using Three Dimensional Computer Models in the
Management of Construction. Research Report 106-11.
Construction Industry Institute, September 1995.

[7] Griftis, F. H., Sturts, C. S., (2000) FIAPP and the ThreeDimensional Computer Model. Proceedings from the 4D CAD
and Visualization in Construction Workshops. Gainesville, FL.
pp. 17-22.
[8] Aalami, F., Fischer, M., (1998) Joint Product and Process
Model Elaboration Based on Construction Method Models. The
Life Cycle of Construction Innovations. CIB Publication 226
[9] Webb, R. M., Haupt. T. C., (2000) The Potential of 4D CAD
as a Tool for Construction Management, Proceedings from the

4D CAD and Visualization in Construction Workshops.
Gainesville, FL. pp. 23-30
[ I O ] McKinney, K., Kim, J., Fischer. M.. Howard, C., ( 1996)
Interactive 4D CAD. Computing in Civil Engineering,
Proceedings of the Third Congress. Anaheim CA. American
Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 383-389
[ I I] Novitski. B. J., The Computer education received by
today’s architecture students may not provide them with skills
sought by employers. Digital Architect
[Online]

Reference:

http://www.archrecord.com/digital/da-art id
da4-99. asp

Luzadder, W. J., Duff, J . M., Introduction to Engineering
Drawing. Prentice Hall, Inc. Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 1989.
[I]

[ 121 Laiscrin, J., Emerging Standards for Design Data. Digital
Architect
[onI in e].
http://www.archrecord.com/digital/da-artic/daIO-O0.asp

[2] Schantz, H. F., Banking, Information, and Imaging Standards
from
a
Users’
Perspective.
http://web.ansi.org/public/news/l998feb/shantz.4html
[3]
Unknown
Author,
Multiview
Prqjection.
http://mane.virginia.edu/-engr 16O/graphics/multivie~.html

224

