2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

The Aesthetic and the Poietic Elements of Information Design
Anna-Lena Carlsson
Mälardalens University, Sweden
{anna-lena.carlsson}@mdh.se
Abstract
In this paper I address two types of perspectives
on the aesthetic that are of relevance for a
discussion of contemporary information design.
Firstly, the ’aesthetic’ understood as aesthetic
perception of beautiful form. Secondly, the
’aesthetic’ recognized as the poietic activity, i.e. the
production of an object, in which the recipient also
takes part. These perspectives are discussed, in
brief, in relation to questions of form and content,
and I argue that aesthetic elements in some
contemporary information designs cannot be
understood as aesthetic perception of beautiful
form. The aesthetic is still present, but as poietic,
creative, elements. Finally, I discuss the poietic
activity in the light of McLaughlin’s Heideggerian
view, that the passing on of information is never
neutral.

representations of abstract data to amplify cognition” [3].
This definition incorporate information visualisation into
the field of information design, if “visual representation”
is regarded as designed information, in contrasted with
mere data that in itself does not inform of anything.
One of many definitions of the term ’information’,
according to Oxford English Dictionary, is “[k]nowledge
communicated concerning some particular fact, subject,
or event” [4]. As we shall see, the aesthetic understood
as a creative activity, rather than a passive sensuous
perception vis-à-vis beautiful form, is linked to the
understanding of information as an event.

2. The Aesthetic and the Poetic
2.1. Aesthetic Quality and Experience
For an understanding of the term ’aesthetic’, we
have to turn to philosophical aesthetics. Welsch (1997)
writes that aesthetic perception refers to “connections
and contrasts, harmonies and correspondences, countersupports or analogies […]. Questions of form and
proportion constitute its domain. Thus, wherever
’aesthetic’ refers to such perceptions, a form- and
proportion-related element shifts into the foreground”
[5]. Beauty “denotes the perfecting form of the sensuous,
and this perfection consists of a free joining of the pieces
to a whole” [5]. How has this come about?
Baumgarten (1954) coins the term aesthetics in the
eighteenth century. He uses the Greek term ’aisthesis’
[E. sensuous perception] to designate aesthetics as the
autonomous science of sensitive knowing. Baumgarten
focuses not only on works of art, but also on sensuous
perception in general [6]. Kant’s (1952) use of the term
’aesthetic’ later became of great importance for the
succeeding aesthetic paradigm. In Critique of Judgement
1790, he writes that an aesthetic judgement does not
have to do with objectivity, but with the feeling of
pleasure and pain in relation to beauty and the sublime in
nature. He associates the aesthetic experience with
disinterestedness, i.e. an aesthetic judgement is detached
from subjective interests or desires [7].
The term ’aesthetic’ soon became associated with
artworks. Aesthetics became synonymous with

Keywords--- aesthetics, aesthetic, poietic, art,
form and content, information design, information
visualisation, McLaughlin, Heidegger

1. Introduction
Pettersson (2002) describes information design as
including “analysis, planning, presentation and
understanding of a message – its content, language and
form. Regardless of the selected medium, a well
designed information set will satisfy aesthetic, economic,
ergonomic, as well as subject matter requirements” [1].
The goal of information design should be clarity of
communication. Horn’s (1999) definition is: “the art and
science of preparing information so that it can be used by
human beings with efficiency and effectiveness” [2].
With reference to Tufte’s work in information design,
Horn argues: “communication can be both beautiful and
useful” [2]. With reference to these definitions, it is the
role of aesthetic matters in information design that will
be addressed.
Concerning information visualisation, Ware’s
(2004) definition is “the use of interactive visual
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.69

444
450

With a few exceptions - for example in early
romanticism and in the writing of the Friedrich Nietzsche
- the poietic activity was not in focus during the
eighteenth- and nineteenth century’s thoughts about our
interaction with art.
Art changes with modernism and the beholder of art
cannot remain passive, but must participate in the
creation of the work. Aesthetic experience corresponding
to qualities in the work is replaced by a poietic activity.
Jauss (1982) writes that the aesthetic understood as the
poietic can transcend the classical aesthetics where the
focus was on perception of beautiful form. With
reference to Valéry’s aesthetic theory, Jauss points out
that this is seen in modern art’s forcing of a change, with
shock values, upon the former contemplative viewer.
Modern art has abandoned the perfect beautiful form and
the observer cannot remain passive. Acknowledging the
poietic perspective thus also means participating in the
creation of the work. Jauss’ examples are Dada and
ready-mades, in relation to which the beholder has
problems in attempting to establish aesthetics perception
of beautiful form, but not in participating due to the
poietic element. With reference to Valéry, Jauss also
writes on how the poietic activity comes to mean an
abolishing of the distinction between content and form
[12].
There is no essential difference between form and
content. How could information even be understood as
information, if it was not creatively designed (with
participation of the reader/viewer) on the level of
signification? It is pragmatism and contextual
competence that establish these differences. Form and
content are not separated, because content would not be
understood as content, as in a message, if it were not
formed (in this case by both the sender and the reader).
Just the same way as a (semiotic) sign isn’t a sign if it
isn’t constructed as such.
A change in content is a change in form. Consider
two textual examples Style (classified as a litotes and a
notation) from Raymond Queneau’s (2009) famous
Exercises in:

philosophy of art. Binkley (1977) writes: “The work of
art has come to be construed as an aesthetic object, an
object of perception. Hence, the meaning and essence of
all art is thought to inhere in appearances, in the looks
and sounds of direct (though not necessarily unreflective)
awareness. The first principle of philosophy of art has
become: all art possesses aesthetic qualities, and the core
of a work is its nest of aesthetic qualities“ [8]. According
to this, the aesthetic paradigm concerning art that grew
out of the eighteenth century sustains a notion that
aesthetics has to do with the perception of a work of art.
After Kant, the aesthetics, according to Beardsley
(1966),’’aimed to carve out a sphere of autonomy for
art’’ [9], and art became separated from the sphere of
utility.
The development of the theme of disinterestedness
continues in the idea of the autonomy of art. Art should
be valued for itself, not for external purposes. The
movement “Art for art’s sake” was allied with the cult of
beauty. ’’Nothing is really beautiful, unless it is
useless,’’ the French author Théophile Gautier writes in
1835 [10]. This is an approach to art that claims to be
’’contextless’’. Aesthetic values were considered to
depend on properties internal to the work of art. Bell
(1949) writes that aesthetic emotion arises from forms,
relations of forms, and relations and combinations of
colour and lines. The qualities shared by objects such as
the windows of Chartres Cathedral, Giotto’s frescoes and
the art of Cezanne are called ’significant form’ [11].
This short overview only underlines some of the
important thoughts that have located the aesthetic
perception of beautiful form as the dominant idea
regarding art, from the early eighteenth century until
modernism in the late nineteenth century. To summarize:
•

aesthetic qualities are located in the form (in a
separation of form and content/function), which
makes the

•

aesthetic experience disinterested, i.e. detached
from subjective interests or desires

1) A few of us were travelling together. A young
man, who didn’t look very intelligent, spoke to
the man next to him for a few moments, then he
went and sat down.

Today, beautiful form is (again) rather an issue
outside the realm of art. (Some contemporary
movements in philosophical aesthetics have turned to
everyday- and environmental aesthetics, and analyse
aesthetic experiences in relation to, for example, sport,
weather and landscape.) As we shall see, the
understanding of the aesthetic quality as beautiful form separated from utility - is also found in discussions on
information design.

2) On the S bus, in the rush hour. A chap of about
twenty-six, soft hair with a cord instead of a
ribbon, neck too long, as if someone’s been
tugging at it. People getting off. The chap in
question gets annoyed with one of the men
standing next to him. He accuses him of jostling
him every time anyone goes past. A snivelling
tone which is meant to be aggressive. When he
sees a vacant seat he throws himself onto it
[13].

2.2 The Poietic Activity
The ’poietic’, or ’poesis’, is also a term used in
ancient Greece. It refers to the “making” of an object, as
opposed to the term ’aisthesis’, which regards the
sensuous perception of that which is already constructed.

To say that these two texts have the same content is to
say that there exists a pure, i.e. non-styled, not designed

451
445

theoretically not be taken away in favour of a “pure”
function. If function is there, so is aesthetics - and it is
understood as beautiful form.
Turning to the poietic activity in information design,
it can, for example and to a certain degree, be seen in a
comparison between the “aesthetic collaboration of
image and text” [18] in Jule Chéret’s famous posters
(such as “Bal de Moulin Rouge” from 1889) and Dada’s
break with beautiful forms in the early twentieth century
(for example in “Kleine Dada Soirée” from 1922, by van
Doesburg and Schwitters). The role of aesthetic in Dada
requires something else of a recipient, in order to inform
about the upcoming event. Lester (2006) writes that
Dada’s “critical examination of the social structures that
allowed [the horrors of World War I] to occur”, is seen
in the “use of absurd, asymmetric designs”. Their
graphics were intended to both confuse and gain
attention, but also to educate [19]. Dada’s then aimed at
activate the recipient through form.
In comparison, we can turn to a contemporary
example from Sweden, an ad from the Swedish Armed
Forces advertising for new employees as well as
informing of certain important qualifications. The textmessage is grammatically incorrect. The correct sentence
should be “Are you good at solving unexpected
problems?” [“Är du bra på att lösa oväntade problem?”]
but the ad says “Unexpected solving at problem you
good are? [”Oväntade på lösa attproblem du bra är?”]
The inaccurate grammar attracts our attention. But when
the message is understood, although it is not present as
clear communication in the ad itself, it is a message
created by both sender and the reader, fused with the
form; i.e. the problem solving is the poietic element here.
Yet another example is the following (middle) road
sign, saying “It hurts” [S. “Det gör ont”], was sited in
Stockholm (and a few other Swedish cities) 2004. It was
advertising for the play War [S. Krig], directed by Lars
Norén. The signs consisted of quotes from the play. It
was also part of an information campaign from “The
Living History Forum”, a Swedish public authority, on
the subject of war crimes against civilians. The road
signs had discrete stickers with the word “Info” and a
number to the information phone at “The Living History
Forum”. Posters were also placed nearby the signs.
Is this an artwork or an object of communicating
information? It is indeed an artistic duo, FA+ (Ingrid
Falk and Gustavo Aguerre), that created the signs.
Influenced by the French philosopher Michel Foucault,
one might say that our discourse is in need of a
separation between, for example, textual information on
driving instructions and a poem. These texts might even
be identical, but they would still be treated as different
texts depending on the discourse. In the circulation of
novels and poems (i.e. art) the author is given a certain
function, which is lacking in another context [20]. It is
our cultural competence, not something essential in the
words themselves, that differentiates them. This
competence also establishes our behaviour in relation to
novels and poems. A certain function of the object is
highlighted concerning designed information –

and possible to change, version of the content. What
would this original, not designed piece of text, look like?
Consequently, a meaning of a message is not only
restricted to a formless content, but must also be a matter
of the form. The form then cannot be separated from
meaning. The poietic activity (just like the act of
communication according to the semiotic school),
sustains this perspective. To summarize:
•

poietic activity does not set up a distinction
between form and content

•

poietic activity is not a passive disinterested
contemplation, but a participating in the
creation of meaning

3. The Aesthetic and the Poietic in
Information Design
The aesthetic understood as the experience of
beautiful form is frequently acknowledged as an
important part of information design. Communication, it
is argued, for example by Horn (1999), can be both
beautiful and useful [2]. This is a result of a separation
of content and forms, i.e. a division of “the meaning of
the message” and the “decorative and aesthetic” [14].
The founder of the website “Information is beautiful”
[15], David McCandless, says that graphic design must
have meaning and integrity, be interesting, structured,
beautiful, and aesthetically attractive” [16]. The aesthetic
quality, i.e. beauty, is related to form in his graph “What
Makes Good Information Design?” Form is not entirely
distinguished from function in “successful information
design”, according to McCandless. In this graph,
however, is it also possible for something to have
function but no form [16] - which enforce a separation
between form and function.
Sven Ove Hansson writes, in “Aesthetic
Functionalism” (2005), of a similar position regarding
form and function, as an Independent Thesis, because
aesthetic and practical values are independent of each
other [17]. This has its roots in Kant’s thoughts of the
aesthetic judgement as disinterested, which were later
applied to art. In the separation of form and the useful
content, the aesthetic is restricted to form, and usefulness
has nothing to do with beauty. In theory, the aesthetic
then belongs to an embellishment that can be taken
away, leaving an intact message.
In the context of design, we also find the reduction
of the aesthetic form to the function. This Reduction
Thesis, Hansson continues, is found in architecture and
industrial design, where “objects are created with the
intention to satisfy not only aesthetic criteria but also,
primarily, criteria of utility and practical function” [17].
In 1941 Herbert Read stressed: “Fitness for function is
the modern definition of the eternal quality we call
beauty” [17]. According to this position, where form
follows function, the aesthetic decoration that can
452
446

something else is underlined in the realm of art
(including novels, poems etc.).
Contemporary art (since modernism) has
nonetheless come to play with - as well as within different contexts. The information campaign by “The
Living History Forum” can illustrate this change in
aesthetics - both in art and information design. The
aesthetic is not always to be understood as aesthetic
perception of beautiful form – in a separation of form
and content - but sometimes as the integration of form
and content, in a poietic activity involving both the one
whose intention it is to inform and the recipient.

show up from different perspectives” [21]. Information
understood like this, is an activity, not an entity.
Heidegger contrasts the Cartesian space, as an empty
container, with space of lived experience. Concerning the
former, McLaughlin writes: “It is only when we come to
think about these areas of light and shade in the form of
plans and elevations, in the context of shading diagrams
or developing plans for landscaping, say, that we might
begin to think of these regions as areas of space laid out
in pre-given dimensional ’space’” [21]. This is a
quantitative measurement of space, which cannot capture
the way space is turn up in our everyday experience, i.e.
as qualitative space in the light of our concerns. It is in
the interacting with things of our concerns that the space
of our lived experience is created [21].
McLaughlin draw out some implications of these
thoughts, by referring to Tufte’s Envisioning Information
(1990). Information is understood as an entity, for
example when he writes that colour is “’carrying
information’” [21]. He equate information with “data and
images that have been refined or effectively arranged,
but he also – towards the end of the book – expand the
concept ’information’ when ’envisioning information’ is
associated with the “portrayal of ’interesting worlds”
[21].
Tufte (1990) writes about Constantine Anderson’s
Isometric Map of Midtown Manhattan (1989), that the
“only major concession to paper flatland is the widening
of the map’s streets to reduce masking of some buildings
by others” [22]. Mc Laughlin argues that this is not
merely a compromise by the designer, but a possibility to
locate oneself in the drawing: “From a Heideggerian
perspective the widening of the streets show up as an
important strategy for organizing the information,
allowing the viewer to activate their own understanding
of the world referred to in the map, allowing the viewer
to bring that world close” [21]. For the purpose of clarity
in regard to our lived experience, not for the purpose of
revealing exact data, the form is altered and a “flaw” (in
regard to perspective) is added to the map – making it
truer to our lived experience.
In this Heideggerian perspective, described by
McLaughlin, the aesthetic of information design can be
considered as poietic; the perspective of aesthetic matters
here is not linked to disinterestedness, but a participation
in the creation of meaning.
McLaughlin writes: “If information design is to be
anything more than the unreflective passing on of data,
then consideration of mood [as in frame of mind] should
be a central aspect of both practice and critique” [21].
This perspective must be considered by the designers of
information: “If information design is conceived
primarily as technology then the task of the information
designer is to organize and present information in such a
way that the information gets passed on. The issue is an
ethical one, for to merely pass on information is, at best,
to circulate those perspectives on the world that allowed
the information to show up and, at worst, to pass on
information devoid of any meaningful context. The
passing on of information is not neutral” [21]. One of the

3.1. The Relevance of Poietic Activity in
Information Design
Does it really matter if we have the perspective of the
classic aesthetic or the poietic outlook in regard to
information design? In answering this question, we can
turn to McLaughlin (2009), who’s perspective on human
being’s interaction with information design can indeed
be considered as a poietic activity, when she discusses
how our understanding of information design can be seen
as an ethical question.
McLaughlin aims at revitalising information, so that
it matters for us in our lived experience. In this attempt,
she turns to the German philosopher Martin Heidegger,
who underlines human beings fundamentally creative,
i.e. poietic, existence in the world. Heidegger stresses
that technology reveals the world in certain ways, i.e.
that technology is not neutral but cultivates a particular
outlook on the world - that of pure presence. When we
conceive of information as neutral facts, we “by into”
this metaphysics of presence. Our lived experience is
thereby set aside. Art is an alternative to technology in
Heidegger’s philosophy, in that it is a form of making
that unveil the world of importance to us (this was also
Nietzsche’s perspective in nineteenth century German
philosophy).
Being in the world [Ty. Dasein] for Heidegger, is
awareness, an openness, that allow the world to “show
up” for us in relation to our interests. Accordingly, our
understanding is always a matter of perspective.
McLaughlin writes: “In the context of information
design, data, statistics and images show up as resources
to be organized and presented” [21]. But when we reveal
something of the world, for example in information
design, at the same time we conceal something else: “To
view a series of names as a list, as a data set, or as the
basis of a statistic, is to conceal other possibilities” [21].
Heidegger argues that instead of encounter with
things as objects with properties, we are more true to our
existence in the world if we acknowledge that the world
shows up to us related to our interests. Information, in
this perspective, becomes equipment for “drawing
attention to aspects of the world” [21]. This, McLaughlin
writes, is in fact what information designers already do;
they are “constantly involved in searching for
appropriate forms to express aspects of the world as they

453
447

questions the information designer then should ask is:
“How do I create a space and a context where people are
able to consider the way in which the information might
relate to a larger ethical context?” [21]
In the light of the twofold perspective pictured
earlier, and considering McLaughlin’s Heideggerian
perspective on information design, aesthetic matters in
information design are not innocent matters: We reveal a
world (as in a perspective) - and conceal something else in regard to how we design information.

[11] Bell, C. (1949), Art (London: Chatto & Windus). First
published 1914.
[12] Jauss, H. R. (1982), “Poiesis”, p. 591-608, in Critical
Inquiry, vol. 8, no. 3 (Spring).
[13] Queneau, R. (2009), Exercises in Style, transl. by
Barbara Wright (Richmond: London House). First
published 1947.
[14] Pettersson, R. (2008), Informationsdesign från a till ö
(Tullinge: Institutet för infologi).
[15] http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/
[16] “Information är vacker” (2010), p.56-63, in CAP&
Design, no. 2. Interview with David McCandless.
[17] Hansson, S. O. (2005), “Aesthetic Functionalism”, in
Contemporary
Aesthetics,
on-line
publication,
http://www.contempaesthetics.org/newvolume/pages/arti
cle.php?articleID=324.
[18] Pettersson, R. (2004), Bild och form I informationsdesign
(Lund: Studentlitteratur).
[19] Lester, P. M. (2006), Visual Communication: Images
with Messages (Belmont, CA: Thomason Higher
Education).
[20] Foucault, M. (1998), “What is an Author?”, in
Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology, ed. by James D.
Faubion, transl. by Robert Hurley & others (New York:
The New Press).
[21] McLaughlin, S (2009), “Information design and the
world that comes before us”, p. 303-316, in Visual
Communication, vol. 8, no 3.
[22] Tufte E R (1990), Envisioning Information (Cheshire,
CT: Graphics Press).

Conclusions
In this paper I have addressed two types of
perspectives on the aesthetic that are of relevance for a
discussion of contemporary information design: The
’aesthetic’ understood as aesthetic perception of
beautiful form and the ’aesthetic’ recognized as the
poietic activity, i.e. the production of an object. These
perspectives have been discussed in relation to questions
of form vs. content and the role of the recipient. It has
also been argued that aesthetic matters, in some
contemporary information designs, cannot be understood
as aesthetic perception of beautiful form, but as poietic,
creative, activity. In the light of McLaughlin’s
Heideggerian perspective of our creative Dasein in the
world, aesthetics in regard to information design are not
to be considered as harmless matters, but can reveal as
well as suppress – perspectives of the world.

References
[1]

Pettersson, R. (2002), Information design (Amsterdam,
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
[2] Horn, R. E. (1999), “Information Design: Emergence of
a New Profession”, p. 15-33, in Information Design (ed.)
Robert Jacobson (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press).
[3] Ware, C. (2004), Information Visualization. Perception
for Design (Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers).
[4] Oxford English Dictionary. On-line publication.
http://dictionary.oed.com.
[5] Welsch, W. (1997), Undoing Aesthetics, transl. by
Andrew Inkpin (London: SAGE Publications).
[6] Baumgarten, A. G. (1954), Reflections on Poetry:
lexander
Gottlieb
Baumgarten’s
Meditationes
philosophicae de nonnullis ad poema pertinentibus,
transl. by Karl Aschenbrenner & William B. Holther
(Berkeley: University of California Press). First
published 1735.
[7] Kant I. (1952), The Critique of Judgement, transl. by
James Creed Meredith (Chicago: Encyclopedia
Britannica).
[8] Binkley, T. (1987), “Piece: Contra Aesthetics”, in
Philosophy Looks at the Arts: Contemporrary Readings
in Aesthetics (Philadelphia: Temple University Press).
[9] Beardsley, M. C. (1988), Aesthetics: From Classical
Greece to the Present: A Short History (Tuscaloosa: The
University of Alabama Press).
[10] Gautier, T. (1981), Mademoiselle de Maupin, transl. by
Joanna Richardson (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books).

454
448

