2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

How Users Perceive and Use Interactive Information Graphics:
an Exploratory Study
Michael Burmester, Marcus Mast, Ralph Tille, Wibke Weber
Information Design, Stuttgart Media University
{burmester@hdm-stuttgart.de, mast@hdm-stuttgart.de, tille@hdm-stuttgart.de,
weber@hdm-stuttgart.de}
Interactive information graphics are a relatively new
form of visual or multimedia storytelling [2, 3, 14]. They
have emerged as a product of the era of media
convergence. Several terms describe this kind of
storytelling: interactive graphics, animated graphics,
multimedia features, interactive narratives, and
explanation graphics [cf. 14, p. 14]. In our work, we
define interactive information graphics as (1) a hybrid
presentation of different modalities: text, photos, audios,
videos, charts, maps, graphs, illustrations are combined;
the interplay of these is more than the sum of the parts.
(2) In addition to multimodality, interactivity and
hypertextuality are main characteristics of interactive
information graphics. (3) Each information graphic
focuses on one story, one topic [14, pp. 20-23].
Information graphics as visual representations
belong to several scientific fields: to journalism,
information visualization, and information design. While
the information graphic in print has been widely studied
[cf. 8, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21], the interactive information
graphic as a form of visual storytelling remains to be
investigated. The difference between a print graphic and
an online graphic mainly lies in three aspects: animation,
interactivity, and multimodality. These three additional
aspects fundamentally change the way in which users
perceive, click, and navigate through information
graphics on the web. The non-linear nature of the Web
offers readers the opportunity to choose their own
navigation path through the information graphic. Online
graphics allow to control pace and order of the
perception of information. Therefore, each user acts like
a director who composes his own story. The user himself
decides at which point the story begins and ends,
whether he clicks first on the video or starts to read the
text. George-Palilonis [6, p. 33] assumes that “the most
effective online graphics are those presented in a manner
that promotes a high degree of interactivity while at the
same time observing a clear and logical organization
with attention to the variety of ways different online
readers may choose to engage with the content.”

Abstract
This paper presents an exploratory empirical study
about users’ reception and usage behavior with
interactive information graphics. 14 participants took
part in the study. We assume users to act interest-driven.
Therefore no explicit tasks were assigned to participants.
In order not to distract the user, retrospective thinking
aloud was employed. Results show that (1) usage
durations were heterogeneous between users and
between different types of interactive information
graphics; (2) users tended to watch introductory
animations; (3) initial orientation without interaction on
the first content screen (after intro) was rather long with
23 seconds on average; (4) story-based approaches seem
to motivate users but might lead to less intensive
reception of information; (5) several reception and usage
problems have been identified regarding information
presentation and interaction. Interactive information
graphics tend to overwhelm users with too much
information and disregard well-known principles and
rules of the old media and web design.
Keywords:
interactive
information
multimedia storytelling, usage behavior

graphic,

1. Introduction
Whether in online journalism, in business
management, technical writing or in education:
interactive information graphics become more and more
important for conveying information. News sites, such as
nytimes.com, elmundo.es, or bbc.co.uk use interactive
information graphics to explain complex information
clearly and intelligible, e.g. the White House health care
plan or the earthquake in Chile. Information graphics
have the potential to make statistical data truly
comprehensible; they can make the data engaging, point
out causal relationships, and tell the story behind the
story.
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.57

355
361

3. Design of the Study

In order to produce such effective and attractive
information graphics the designers, graphic reporters,
and journalists should know more about the strengths
and the weaknesses of interactive information graphics.
They need to know more about the user and his or her
perception of interactive information graphics: How do
readers interact with online information graphics?
The research about interactive information graphics
is at its very beginning. Scientific publications about
interactive information graphics are rare. Schumacher
[14] provides a good overview of user experiences with
interactive multimodal representations. George-Palilonis
[6] gives more practical guidelines and describes the
professional skills for designers and journalists. Cairo [3]
provides support particularly for the process of
developing interactive news information graphics.
In our research we focus on four aims: (1) building a
typology of interactive information graphics; (2) gaining
insights about the basic design principles for interactive
information graphics; (3) exploring and investigating
interactivity as a key component; (4) understanding user
perception and user experience. The study described in
the present paper is part of our efforts for reaching the
fourth aim.

3.1. Stimuli
The interactive information graphics used as stimuli
were chosen according to the following criteria:
(1) All information graphics were to be of interest
to a broad audience and to cover a current topic.
(2) The level of interactivity was to be high. The
user was to have many interactive options, in
particular influence on the narrative of the story.
Some of the criteria were navigation elements,
links, and control elements.
(3) The information graphics were to be in German
language due to the participants of the study.
(4) The graphics were to be accessible on the World
Wide Web.
Finally, the information graphics were to cover
aspects from all four main types of interactive
information graphics as defined by Nichani and
Rajamanickam [9]:
(1) Narratives: “The objective is to explain by
giving the reader a vicarious experience of the
intent through a story.” Narrative information
graphics are characterized by a story “told with
a distinct point of view”.
(2) Instructives explain step by step how things
work. Here, the objective is to explain, “by
enabling the reader to sequentially step through
the intent”.
(3) Exploratives offer the reader “an opportunity to
explore and discover the intent”.
(4) Simulatives allow the reader “to experience the
intent (usually a real world phenomena).”

2. Research Questions
A potential user will use interactive information
because he or she is searching for a specific topic or the
user is confronted with the information graphic by
browsing through electronic information. We think that
in many cases using interactive information graphics is
driven by the current interest of the user, which means
that users are not driven by clear information goals but
by interest. If information and interest matches, more
concrete information goals can be formed. Due to this
assumption and compared to other studies [14] users
should be able to use interactive information graphics for
as long as they wish and they should be able to select
information elements driven by their own interest. With
this assured, we expected to observe fairly realistic
reception and usage behavior in an experimental setting.
The following research questions were asked:
(1) For how long will a user engage with an
interactive information graphic when he or she
can interact freely?
(2) Are there candidates of typical usage behavior?
In an exploratory study we can find possible
usage patterns that would have to be confirmed
in follow-up studies.
(3) Which problems can be identified regarding
reception and usage behavior?

In pretests participants used information graphics for an
unlimited duration. This showed that at a given
maximum session duration of 90 min and with the
subsequently described experimental procedure, three
interactive information graphics could be presented to
participants without restricting usage durations. The
following information graphics were chosen:
(1) Nuclear power graphic:
This is an explorative interactive information
graphic about the issues of nuclear power in the present
and future in Europe (Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4),
published on the website of the business magazine
Wirtschaftswoche [10]. The information graphic is based
on a print version. The structure, the visual storytelling,
and the interaction patterns seem not well optimized for
the different requirements and possibilities of online
graphics. It mainly employs pop-up windows on a static
background image. We supposed that this is a common
type of information graphic used by online newspapers.
The design uses vector-style elements with a restrained
color scheme.
362
356

(2) Space shuttle graphic:
This graphic (Figure 7) is a simulative information
graphic about the space shuttle and ten minutes of its
takeoff. The graphic also includes elements of instructive
information graphics and was produced by a graphic
design student [12]. The space shuttle graphic is based
on a linear, timeline-oriented story: the first ten minutes
after the space shuttle launch. It has redundant
interaction patterns and short additional text parts. The
style of the design is clear without ornamental elements.
One special feature in this graphic is the attempt to
involve the user with some clouds in the scene. The
layers of these clouds repeatedly come in front of the
interaction controls for a few seconds. Like the
definitions of the second and third interactivity-levels of
Schulmeister [13], this graphic allows to manipulate the
content directly: some parts can be moved or rotated and
the user has the possibility to view the information from
multiple views.

recorded. After that, a short interview was carried out in
order to capture the participant’s first impression of the
information graphic. In order to understand the specific
interests as well as usage and information reception
behavior and problems of the participants, a retrospective
think-aloud phase [1] followed the first impression
interview. Participants were asked to talk about their
thoughts while watching the recording of their usage
phase. Retrospective think-aloud is a reliable method
when usage videos are used as stimulus [7,17,18].
Retrospective
think-aloud
was
supported
by
interventions of a session moderator. The moderator
reminded participants to keep talking when they stopped
for more than about 30 seconds. Also, the moderator
occasionally asked questions to clarify ambiguous or
vague statements. Participants could pause and resume
video playback according to their speed of talking.
To analyze the distribution of visual attention, eye
movements were recorded during the usage phase. Eye
movement analysis can provide information about
elements of interest and sequences of visual attention.
Since there were no particular hypotheses, the eye
movement data were analyzed in an exploratory manner.
Finally, a questionnaire was used to obtain
information on experienced effort, intuitiveness of
interaction, joy of use, comprehensibility, knowledge
expansion, previous knowledge, and interest in the
information graphics’ subject matter. All items were
rated on a five-point Likert scale.

(3) Privacy graphic:
This is a narrative information graphic (Figure 5,
Figure 6) published on the website of the news magazine
spiegel.de [11]. The information graphic explains the
background of privacy intrusions in everyday life of the
citizens in Germany. A special feature of this
information graphic is that the screen design looks like a
criminal thriller illustration; the protagonist of the linear
frame story is called Paul. The story is told in five phases
representing episodes of Paul’s day (e.g. getting up or at
work). The user can watch the scissor-cut, dark-colored
scenes from the perspective of an investigator or like in a
role-playing game. Therefore, this graphic has a high
level of the explorative type of interactivity too.

3.4. Technical equipment
The study was carried out in the usability research
lab at Stuttgart Media University, Germany. A Tobii
1750 remote infrared eye tracker with a frame rate of 50
Hz was used to record the eye movements. Spatial
resolution is 0.25° and average accuracy is 0.5°. Tobii
Studio software 2.0 recorded the eye movements, the
screen, the interaction (all clicks), and a video of the
participant’s face. For the retrospective think-aloud
session the eye movement indication was switched off
and the participant’s video was recorded with the lab’s
digital video equipment.

3.2. Participants
14 participants took part in the study with an
average age of 24 years (SD = 9.9). 10 participants were
students and 4 were employees (consultants,
technicians). All participants held or were in the process
of obtaining university-level education (study courses
e.g. engineering, computer science, natural sciences,
history) and had extensive Internet experience. Gender
distribution was 9 male and 5 female participants. All
participants had at least some experience with interactive
information graphics.

3.5. Procedure
All participants used all stimuli in the usage phase.
The presentation order of the stimuli was
counterbalanced throughout participants. An open
scenario introduced the usage phase: “You used Google
to search for <search term>. You found this interactive
information graphic. Use it as long as you would under
normal conditions.” There was no minimum or
maximum usage time introduced.
The procedure of a session was the following:
1. Welcome, presentation of the lab, informed
consent
2. Introduction to the study

3.3. Methodological approach
Since usage behavior was to be as realistic as
possible and interest-driven, we had participants
interacting with the information graphics without any
disturbance by methods like concurrent think-aloud [4]
or other types of co-operative evaluation [22]. Based on
an open scenario, participants used the interactive
information graphics as they would under daily usage
conditions. During the usage phase the interaction was

363
357

3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

Calibration of the eye tracking system
Usage phase with each artifact being introduced
by the open scenario, followed by free usage,
and closing with a short interview
Introduction to retrospective think-aloud
Retrospective think-aloud for all stimuli
Final questionnaire on demographic data

Table 1: Minimum and maximum usage duration
Graphic
Nuclear power
Space shuttle
Privacy

Mean
5:01
2:57
8:15

Min
1:15
1:07
2:27

Max
11:43
5:43
15:18

4.3. Usage duration and reception behavior
during initial usage phase

3.6. Data analysis
The main focus was the qualitative analysis of the
observations and retrospective think-aloud protocols.
The first step of the analysis was to identify themes in
the protocols. After having completed theme descriptions
these were related to the research questions.
By applying a method and data triangulation
approach of qualitative research [5], data obtained with
the different methods were combined and interpreted.
The eye movement data were used to identify elements
of special interest in combination with the verbal
protocols. Statistic analysis was applied for usage
duration and questionnaire ratings in order to test
differences and correlations.

The privacy graphic and the space shuttle graphic
start with an intro that can be skipped. Participants
tended to wait for the end of the intro. Some were
interested in the intro but others just failed to notice the
skip option. One participant using the space shuttle
graphic said, “I thought that I have to wait till the end of
the launch phase which would be annoying”.
After the intro, it seems that users first want to get
the “big picture”, before they click on anything. The time
from after the intro (if present) to before the first click
was rather long with 30.4 sec (SD = 16.6) for the nuclear
power graphic, 28.9 sec (SD = 45.6) for the space shuttle
graphic and 9.6 sec (SD = 7.2) for the privacy graphic,
resulting in an overall average of 22.9 sec. During that
time participants (often repeatedly) looked at important
information elements and hovered over elements with the
mouse pointer. Five participants stated that they wanted
to get an overview of all interactive elements in the
information graphic at the beginning: “I first wanted to
check everything I could click on here.” Figure 1 shows
heat maps of the initial usage phase for all three
information graphics. Red areas indicate high fixation
frequencies and green areas lower frequencies. It can be
observed that almost all elements received attention
during this phase.

4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Overview
The result of the triangulation analysis consists of 34
observations. 13 observations deal with candidate usage
behavior patterns and 21 observations with reception and
usage problems.

4.2. Total usage duration
The usage durations of the three information
graphics differed substantially (F(2.26) = 21.81, p =
.000, partial eta squared = .627). The mean usage
duration of the nuclear power graphic was 5:01 minutes,
space shuttle 2:57 minutes, and privacy graphic 8:15
minutes. Correlation analysis of usage duration and items
of the questionnaire (effort experienced, intuitiveness of
interaction, joy of use, comprehensibility, knowledge
expansion, previous knowledge, and interest on
information graphic subject) reveal no statically
conclusive results. In particular, there are no statistically
significant correlations between interest and usage
duration. Therefore, the reason for the differences in
usage duration between the information graphics might
be just due to the differences in the amount of
information offered. The nuclear power graphic and the
privacy graphic provide more information than the space
shuttle graphic. There was a wide range of usage
durations (see Table 1), showing large differences
between participants.








Figure 1: Heat maps of initial usage phase
(duration from after intro to before first click)

364
358

On the following pages the participants started to
interact after a much shorter delay. For the privacy
graphic the difference between the initial usage phase of
9.6 sec and the time to first click on the second page of
3.9 sec is statistically significant (F(1,13) = 8.042, p =
.014, partial eta squared = .38).

8 participants (57%) complained about missing text in
the space shuttle graphic. Text would have been
necessary to comprehend what happens during the
launch phase and to understand the components of the
spaceship.
For graphical information presentation, the nuclear
power graphic in particular received much criticism. 12
participants (86%) mentioned that many graphical
elements of the nuclear power graphic were presented in
such a way that it was difficult to understand the main
point. For this reason, 6 participants (43%) stated to have
increasingly skipped graphical information. Figure 2
shows a graphical element that was difficult to
understand. The upper line shows the projected energy
supply in case all nuclear power plants in Germany
would proceed with power production. The line in the
middle shows the energy supply in case Germany would
stop running nuclear power plants in 20 years. The lower
line shows the energy supply in case Germany would
stop building nuclear power plants from now on. The
difference between the upper line and the two other lines
shows how much energy is missing. This was often not
understood. One problem was that there are colored areas
between the lines leading to misconceptions. In addition
to that, it was difficult to read the vertically aligned text.

4.4. Interest and attention
All participants stated that “interest” was the main
background of their usage behavior, giving credibility to
our initial assumption. Curiosity and interest were
responsible for the reception and usage of information
elements. Users scanned text elements for interesting
words or phrases making them curious, like the word
“orbiter” in the space shuttle graphic. The opposite also
occurred when users avoided uninteresting material:
“’employers’ are not relevant for me, that’s not
interesting”. When the interest for an information
graphic was low, users tended to skip texts and links: “I
just clicked around a little bit in a half-hearted manner.”
If an information graphic provides a story, like the
narrative privacy graphic, people tend to be fascinated by
the story and are curious how it proceeds and ends.
While this is an element of motivation, it also has some
shortcomings. Users follow the story and therefore tend
to skim and miss important information. About the
privacy graphic a user said “It is all about personal
information but I would like to continue seeing what
Paul will do the rest of his day”. The space shuttle
graphic tells a story of the first 10 minutes of the shuttle
launch phase. One participant said, “I was interested to
see what happens after 9 minutes”. Participants had the
impression that when an animation is running from the
beginning, like in the space shuttle graphic, or an oral
introductory text is spoken, like in the privacy graphic,
they would have to wait until the end. For the space
shuttle graphic this is particularly suboptimal because the
concept of the graphic is that people interact during the
animated launch of the space shuttle.

4.5. Information presentation
Figure 2: One of the illustrations causing
massive problems in understanding

Several
problems
concerning
information
presentation have been identified. Some of them are
well-known problems that can be found on web pages,
too. One example is the design of text. Textual
information was hard to read and was not optimized for
screen reading. Text should be short, readable, well
structured, simple, and provide a clear message. The
privacy graphic provides a lot of text elements. 8 of the
14 participants (57%) said they tend to use text
information less than graphical. Apart from the text
presentation, participants were bored by redundancy in
the texts. In other cases, text would have been necessary
to explain a graphical element, but the text was missing.

Another common point of criticism (9 participants,
64%) was that information density was too high, again
particularly for the nuclear power graphic (Figure 3).

365
359

Figure 5: Slider or indicator? The left element is
a slider that can be manipulated; the right
element is an indicator that cannot be
manipulated

Figure 3: Information density on nuclear power
graphic was considered too high; dotted
rectangle: navigation perceived as legend

4.6. Interaction
A severe problem with interaction was the missing
indication of interactive elements. Two types of
problems can be identified.
First, participants expected interaction, but it was
not present. Figure 4 shows links to further information
on reactor types. 4 participants (29%) expected that they
could click on the pictograms in area of interest 1 (AOI
1), but they are not click-sensitive. After trying out the
pictograms, the participants used the much smaller text
“details” (AOI 2). Similar problems occurred with the
privacy graphic. 9 participants (64%) tried to interact
with an indicator element (right in Figure 5), but only the
slider element (left in Figure 5) could be manipulated.
Further, several elements are used to illustrate Paul’s
story, for example the lamp in Figure 6. Participants tried
to interact with these elements even though they do not
have any interactive function. One participant said, “I
would have liked to click on the lamp to light up the
room”.

Figure 6: Graphical elements for illustration
purposes are perceived as interactive elements
Second, there were interactive elements but
participants were not aware of their interactivity. For
example for the orbiter in the space shuttle graphic
(Figure 7, left) the view can be changed into an exploded
assembly drawing (Figure 7, right) by a mouse
movement from the center of the graphic outwards while
holding the left mouse button. No participant noticed this
interactive feature. In the nuclear power plant graphic,
there is an area called “navigation” (Figure 3, dotted
rectangle) where several overlays on the map can be
activated and deactivated to show locations of current
and planned reactors or reactor safety incidents. 5
participants (36%) perceived this area as a legend (i.e. an
informative element only) and did not expect interaction.
One participant said: “This is a legend. I didn’t think that
I could click on a legend.”

Figure 4: Detailed information on nuclear
reactor types

366
360

information in order to learn more about the story. This
means that a strong story bears the risk of distracting
people from essential information.
Most of the observations in this study deal with
problematic reception and usage behavior which was the
third question addressed. It is noteworthy that many
detected problems are typical website usability problems
that have been known for a long time. The most
prominent example is the design of text. Fonts were too
small, text paragraphs too long, sentences difficult to
understand. But also the design of graphical elements
caused difficulties in understanding. High information
density discouraged users to use the information graphic.
Regarding interaction, the main problem was for
participants to identify, which elements were interactive
and which were not.
The new challenge for designers is to combine the
“old” media (text, photos, videos, audios, maps,
diagrams) with the concept of interactivity in an effective
way so users will understand the message easily.
However, so far we do not know how much information
the users can remember, whether they prefer a linear or
non-linear storyline, which topic is particularly suitable
for interactive storytelling, whether less media is more,
or at what point users struggle with an information
overload. To shed light on these questions, more
empirical studies are required.
Our next step will be to create various
systematically modified versions of one interactive
information graphic to test the effect of different design
strategies on user perception. Also, we will develop
guidelines for designers, journalists, and graphic
reporters based on empirical findings.

Figure 7: The space shuttle can be viewed as an
exploded assembly drawing through mouse
interaction which none of the participants
realized
A different type of interaction problem occurred
with the privacy graphic. The user is guided through
Paul’s day in five phases. 12 participants (86%) stated to
have been impatient about the progression of the story.
They did not know the total number of phases and were
afraid that it might take too long to go through all of
them. Therefore, they started to skip and skim
information. However, they were very interested in the
end of the story, “I didn’t know how long it [the story
and its phases] goes, otherwise I would have explored
more of it”. There is a link “navigation” in the footer of
the information graphic that would have provided users
with an overview of all phases of Paul’s day, but this was
rarely clicked. Eye tracking analysis showed that 13
participants (93%) looked at the navigation link.
However, only 3 used it. From the verbal protocols it
became clear that participants were focused on the
information on the main screen. They became used to
navigating there and did not want to leave the scene.

6. References

5. Conclusion and Future Work

[1]

Three research questions were addressed in this
study. The first question was about the time structure of
reception and usage behavior. Interest-driven usage
durations were heterogeneous between participants. We
suppose that the amount of information provided by the
interactive information graphic mainly caused
differences in average usage durations.
The second question asked whether there are
candidates of typical usage behavior. This question is
difficult to answer, but some candidates have been
identified: (1) Users tend to watch introductory
animations and not skip them. (2) Users show a rather
long phase without interaction on the first content screen
after the intro (23 seconds on average in this study)
where many users scan elements with the eyes and
mouse. An often-stated reason was to get an overview of
all interactive elements. (3) If an interactive information
graphic provides a narrative, users are motivated by this
storyline and want to find out how it continues and ends.
Doing so, users tend to skip, skim, and overlook

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

367
361

R.L. Bowers, H.L. Snyder. Concurrent versus
retrospective verbal protocols for comparing window
usability. In Proceedings Of Human Factors Society 34th
Meeting. 1270-1274. Santa Monica: HFES. 1990.
P. Boczkowski. The Process of Adopting Multimedia
and Interactivity in Three Online Newsrooms. In Journal
of Communication 54 (2). 197-213. 2004.
A. Cairo. The Future is Now. In Design Journal 97. 1617. Winter 2005.
K.A. Ericsson, H.A. Simon. A Protocol Analysis: Verbal
Protocols as Data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1993.
U. Flick. Triangulation.Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften. 2004.
J. George-Palilonis. A Practical Guide to Graphics
Reporting. Burlington, MA, Focal Press. 2006.
Z. Guan, S. Lee, E. Cuddihy, J. Ramey: The Validity of
the Stimulated Retrospective Think-Aloud Method as
Measured by Eye Tracking. CHI Proceedings. 12531262. 2006.
A.L.
Mendelson,
F.
Darling-Wolf.
Reader’s
interpretations of visual and verbal narratives of a
National Geographic story on Saudi Arabia. In
Journalism 10 (6), 798-818. 2009.

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

M. Nichani, V. Rajamanickam. Interactive Visual
Explainers
–A
Simple
Classification.
2003.
http://www.elearningpost.com/articles/archives/interactiv
e_visual_explainers_a_simple_classification/ (Retrieved
Feb 28, 2010)
Nuclear power graphic. Information graphic available at
wiwo.circ-it.de/infografiken/atomkraftwerke_in_europa
/index.html
Privacy graphic. Information graphic available at
www.spiegel.de/flash/0,5532,15385,00.html
Space shuttle graphic. Information graphic available at
www.thomasglaeser.de/studium/neuemedien/space_
shuttle/flash.php
R. Schulmeister. Taxonomie der Interaktivität von
Multimedia - Ein Beitrag zur aktuellen MetadatenDiskussion. it+ti, Ausgabe 4, 193-199, 2002.
P. Schumacher. Rezeption als Interaktion. Baden-Baden,
Nomos. 2009.
E.R. Tufte. Visual Explanations. Cheshire, CT, Graphics
Press. 1997.
E.R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press. 1990.
M.J. Van den Haak, M.D.T. de Jong, P.J. Schellens.
Retrospective versus concurrent think-aloud protocols:
Testing the usability of an online library catalogue.
Behaviour & Information Technology, 22, 339. 2003.
M.J. Van den Haak, M.D.T. de Jong, P.J. Schellens.
Employing think-aloud protocols and constructive
interaction to test the usability of online library
catalogues: a methodological comparison. Interacting
with Computers, 16, 1153-1170. 2004.
H. Wainer. Picturing the World. Princeton, New Jersey,
Princeton University Press. 2009.
C. Ware. Visual Thinking. Burlington, MA, Morgan
Kaufmann. 2008.
B. Weidenmann. Wissenserwerb mit Bildern. Bern
Huber. 1994.
P.C. Wright, A.F. Monk. A cost-effective evaluation
method for use by designers. In International Journal of
Man-Machine Studies. 35, 891-912. 1991.

7. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the students of the study
course information design during the summer semester
2009 for supporting us in carrying out the studies with
enthusiasm and much hard work: R. de Buhr, M. De Ita
Bautista, N. Grabez, M. Grandl, M. Ramic, J. Röhm, M.
Romppel, S. Sawall, B. Schäfer, A. Schäffler, V.
Schocker, S. Seidl, F. Spahr, and A. Theile.
The research project “Interactive Information
Graphics” is funded by the Federal State of BadenWürttemberg, Germany, Ministry of Science, Research,
and the Arts.

368
362

