2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Zero and Low Carbon Buildings: A Driver for Change in Working Practices
and the Use of Computer Modelling and Visualization
Robina Hetherington, Robin Laney, Stephen Peake
The Open University
r.e.hetherington@open.ac.uk, r.c.laney@open.ac.uk, s.r.peake@open.ac.uk
software could assist the visualization, design,
construction and management of low and zero carbon
buildings.

Abstract
Buildings account for significant carbon dioxide
emissions, both in construction and operation.
Governments around the world are setting targets and
legislating to reduce the carbon emissions related to the
built environment. Challenges presented by increasingly
rigorous standards for construction projects will mean a
paradigm shift in how new buildings are designed and
managed. This will lead to the need for computational
modelling and visualization of buildings and their energy
performance throughout the life-cycle of the building.
This paper briefly outline how the UK government is
planning to reduce carbon emissions for new buildings.
It discusses the challenges faced by the architectural,
construction and building management professions in
adjusting to the proposed requirements for low or zero
carbon buildings. It then outlines how software tools,
including the use of visualization tools, could develop to
support the designer, contractor and user.

1.1 The built environment and climate change
The human race needs buildings, yet they make
significant demands upon the earth. In 2009, it was
estimated that buildings use 45-50% of global energy,
most of which is associated with the burning of fossil
fuels which result in carbon dioxide emissions [3]. In
addition, energy produced by burning fossil fuels is
consumed in the manufacture and transport of materials
to site in order to construct the buildings. When the
buildings are in use people then move between them to
work, for education and relaxation, again using energy.
The EU Energy Performance of Building Directive
(2002/91/EC) identifies construction as the sector with
the greatest potential to achieve energy efficiency [3].

1.2 Government legislation
Keywords--- Visualization, Sustainable, BIM,
Building Modelling, Zero Carbon

1

In 2007 the UK Government announced the
intention that all new houses would be carbon neutral by
2016 in the “Building a Greener Future: policy
statement”. This is to be achieved by progressive
tightening of Building Regulations legislation over a
number of years [2]. Consultations are currently taking
place on the practicalities of legislating for public sector
buildings and all new non-domestic buildings to be
carbon neutral by 2018 and 2019 respectively [4]. The
Welsh Assembly Government has announced its
intention of implementing legislation at a much faster
rate [5].
This rate of change in the Building Regulations is
unprecedented, 2002 and 2006 saw tightening of the
existing regulations, and the new low and zero carbon
standards will require even more changes with proposals
for revisions in 2010, 2013 and 2016 for new domestic
buildings. There will be a necessity for an equal or
greater level of legislative changes for non-domestic
buildings. Existing buildings will not be exempt; they
will have to comply with the CRC Energy Efficiency
Scheme (CRC), formerly the carbon reduction
commitment, which comes into effect in April 2010 [6].

Context - Climate change

The threat of climate change is forcing us to
contemplate a total re-design of our built environment
and of all the products and services that we consume.
This paper does not seek to challenge or add to the
debate regarding the urgency or severity of the predicted
changes. Nor does it debate the numbers or question
government policy. Climate change is thought to happen
primarily because of increased anthropogenic emissions
of green house gases. One of the major greenhouse
gases is carbon dioxide. In the UK the Government is
taking the issue extremely seriously. The Climate
Change Act of 2008 sets legally binding targets to reduce
the emission of carbon dioxide by 80% from 1990 levels
by 2050 [1]. As buildings account for almost 50% of
UK carbon dioxide emissions the alteration of practices
related to the construction and use of buildings will have
a significant role in achieving these targets [2].
Proposed legislation in the UK is driving the
requirement for all new buildings to be ‘carbon neutral’
or ‘zero carbon’. The aim of this paper is to explore how
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.86

580
590

very high standards of ‘energy efficiency’, so that little
or no energy is required to heat or cool the building.
This includes very high levels of insulation of the
building fabric (U-values), the control of thermal
bridging, significantly reducing air permeability,
incorporating thermal mass and utilizing incidental gains,
such as metabolic, lighting, solar and appliances. These
are expected to be robust methods, entailing lower lifecycle costs than other, possibly higher maintenance, low
or zero technologies which constitute the other two tiers.
There are limitations to the effect of fabric and
energy efficiency measures. ‘Carbon compliance’, the
middle band of the triangle, covers a number of measures
including generation technologies, such as solar panels
incorporated into the fabric, ground source heat pumps
and combined heat and power plants located within, or
closely connected, to the development.
To achieve net zero carbon emissions through
energy efficiency and onsite ‘carbon compliance’
measures may not be technically possible for many
building types. In order to meet the proposed standard
there may be a need to apply (predominantly) off-site
measures, or ‘allowable solutions’. Off-site solutions
considered within the consultation are local energy
schemes, credits for paying for local energy
infrastructures, upgrading existing local buildings, etc.,
as illustrated in Figure 2. Other allowable solutions may
include equipment within the building such as energy
efficient appliances, for instance ultra low energy IT
equipment, or advanced heating/cooling/lighting control
systems.

1.3 Grand challenge in computing research and
software development
Software has an important role in tackling climate
change. It is “a critical enabling technology” [7]. The
UKCRC [UK Computing Research Committee] has
chosen climate change as one of four major societal
grand challenges for 2010 and beyond.
The changes in praxis facing the construction
industry in the next 20-30 years are profound [8]. This
paper proposes a number of ways in which software
could be developed to support the designer, contractor
and user in creating and using low or zero carbon
buildings. It outlines what LZC [Low and Zero Carbon]
and sustainability mean, how architects have traditionally
worked, the available software and how it is used. It
discusses the challenges faced by building designers in
achieving zero carbon buildings, describes the available
types of software and then outlines how software tools
might develop to meet not only the zero carbon challenge
but also take the concept further to help design
sustainable buildings.

2

Background

This section gives the background to the concepts
involved in climate change and working practices in the
construction industry.

2.1 Low and zero carbon
The Government set out a definition for ‘zero carbon
homes’; they must have zero net emissions from all
energy use in the home over the course of a year. [2].
Consultation to add further detail on the definition of
zero carbon and to extend it to non-domestic buildings
was initiated at the beginning of 2010 [9]. A three-tiered
approach for reaching net zero emissions is proposed by
the Government, shown as a hierarchical triangle in
Figure 1.
Zero carbon

Allowable
solutions

Carbon compliance

Figure 2 On-site and off-site compliance

Position of
boundaries
still to be
determined

The position of the boundaries between the areas of
the triangle, that is for example, the percentage allocated
for ‘Allowable solutions’, are still being discussed. See
Building a Greener Future: Towards Zero Carbon
Development – Consultation for further information [9].

Energy efficiency

2.2 Sustainability
The zero carbon legislation does not specifically
mention sustainability. It is, however, included in the
BREEAM [BRE Environmental Assessment Method]
assessments and the Code for Sustainable Homes, which

Figure 1 Hierarchy of permissible methods to
achieve zero carbon developments [9]
The priority, represented by the bottom tier of the
triangle in Figure 1 is to construct building envelopes to

591
581

whilst not a legal requirement, can be a condition of
public funding.
Sustainability is concerned with many more issues
in addition to the reduction of fossil fuels. The
Brundtland definition of sustainability is “meeting the
needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs” [10]. This is
now considered over simplistic. The triple bottom line
of economic, ecological and social sustainability is
considered better criteria for measuring organizational
(and societal) success [11]. The BRE [Building research
Establishment] further describes it as “a complex web of
systems and cycles in science, economics, politics, ethics
and engineering” [12].
In addition to the energy required to light, heat or
cool, and run appliances within a building there is energy
to construct, refit and demolish it. This energy is
embodied within the building. A sustainable approach,
‘cradle to cradle’, would have the building reprocessed
into another building, as illustrated in Figure 3.

Table 1 Stages of a building project [13]
The design of buildings is a complex process. When
designing a building the architect will consider
aesthetics, technology, sociology, geography, history,
philosophy, law and psychology. Hellman visualizes the
architect as trying to control two wild horses labeled Art
and Science [14]. There is always a balance between the
two. Traditionally Art (or design) has lead the process
with the Science (or technology) following. This
approach has been followed for a very long time and is
implicit in the stages of a project as set out by the RIBA
[Royal Institute of British Architects], currently used in
the UK, as set out in Table 1 [13].

2.4 Paradigm shift in the design process
It can be seen from Table 1 that the technical design
is scheduled to occur after the client has “signed off” the
design and planning permission has been granted for the
project. Historically, energy intensive technological
solutions would then be used to “solve” problems arising
from lack of environmental considerations at the design
stage, for instance over/under heating or lack of day
lighting. In the future the consideration of significant
technical consideration and detail will be required at a
very early stage to overcome these energy penalties. The
design of zero carbon buildings will require an
unprecedented paradigm shift in how new buildings are
procured and designed. Software will have a significant
part to play in how designers assimilate, handle,
visualize and design with the extra information necessary
to achieve these proposed standards.

Figure 3 Sustainable building life cycle
Energy use is one important consideration of
sustainable construction; there are many other life cycle
considerations such as water resources, pollution,
biodiversity, habitat, ecosystems. Whilst this paper deals
with zero carbon legislation as a driver for change, the
larger picture should be borne in mind.

2.3 How buildings are designed
A and B:
C
D
E
F
G and H

Figure 4 Laws, Codes and Guidelines

Appraisal and Design Brief
Concept, the client signs off the brief
Design development and detailed
planning permission
Technical design includes the required
details, choice of materials and standards
of ‘workmanship’
Production information
Tender process

The architectural and construction professions are
becoming subject to ever-increasing legislation, stringent
building codes and guidelines relating to energy use and
sustainability. To achieve zero carbon the building
designer will need to implement a significant amount of
technical data at very early design stages, see Figure 4.
The move to sustainable design requires collaboration
between all stakeholders, again software has a role to

592
582

play in facilitating team work between construction
professionals, regulatory bodies and end-users.

BIM, energy analysis and visualization software requires
a significant amount of time, to learn and to achieve
proficiency [16].
There is a plethora of tools available to designers to
design and assess proposals. However, these tools are
not easy to use and the environmental data they produce
is difficult to interpret. Nor are the different software
packages well integrated with each other. At present
there is an iterative process, with geometric meshes and
data transferred between the design package and the
various analysis tools. Specifically, the geometry of
meshes requires manipulation for movement into the
analysis software from the modelling environment and
data such as material properties needs to be re-entried,
with a significant penalty in time and possible loss or
corruption of data [20][21]. Interoperable standards such
as the ifcXML [Industry Foundation Classes eXtensible
Markup Language] specification and gbXML [Green
Building eXtensible Markup Language] enable this
movement of models between various types of software.
The ifcXML specification, developed by the IAI
[Industrial Alliance for Interoperability], was designed to
facilitate the movement of information from and between
BIM software. It was designed in a “relational” manner,
as a result of the BIM database concept. Accordingly
there is concern about the potential file size and
complexity of the standard arising from the XML format
and the amount of data it can contain [22] [23]. Also, the
seamless interoperability it is intended to support has
proved to be elusive. Take up has been slow and
incomplete with software companies not always
supportive [24]. The language designed specifically for
interchange of data between design modelling
environments and energy analysis packages is gbXML.
In comparison with ifcXML it is considerably simpler
and easier to understand, but therefore is lacking in detail
[25]. The limitations are apparent in the geometric detail
contained in the file which inhibits the transfer back to
the design package [26].
CAD, BIM, energy analysis and visualization
software packages are almost all developed in the USA
by large and well-resourced companies with the
associated bias towards American procedures. In the UK
the BRE [Building Research Establishment] has been at
the forefront of the development of assessment and
building code checking software, but this is not part of
the early design process [16][27].

2.5 Current design and analysis software
Architecture has gone through significant changes
since the 1980s when CAD [Computer Aided
Draughting/Design] was introduced. The use of software
has significantly altered working practices and enabled
imaginative and inspiring designs, sometimes using
complex geometries, only achieved through the use of
advanced modelling and engineering computational
techniques. However, advances in digital design media
have created a complex web of multiple types of
software, interfaces, scripting languages and complex
data models [15]. The types of software used by
architects can be grouped into four main categories:
CAD software that can be used to generate 2D or 3D
visualizations of buildings. This type of software
evolved from engineering and draughting practices,
using command line techniques to input geometries.
This software is mainly aimed at imitating paper based
practices, with designs printed to either paper or pdf.
Visualization software, generally used in the early
design stages for massing studies and generating high
quality renderings of the project. This type of software is
often used in the gaming and movie industries.
Analysis software, used to perform calculations
such as heat loss, solar gains, lighting, noise, etc.
BIM [Building Information Modelling] software has
been a significant development in the last few years.
BIM software contains not only the building geometry
and spatial relationship of building elements in 3D; it can
also hold geographic information, quantities and
properties of building components. Each component is
an ‘object’ that is recorded in a backend database. The
software can be used to facilitate team working with
consultants and manage building data during its life
cycle. Building models are key to the calculations now
required to support zero carbon designs. Working in 3D
reduces errors in buildings by reducing the conflicts in
building structures and components and thus
significantly reducing wasted effort and materials on site
[16]. However, significant numbers of designers are still
working in 2D and the take-up of BIM is still low [17].
CAD, BIM, energy analysis and visualization
software is extremely expensive. More than one package
may be used in any one project. The software requires
top end workstations and multiple display devices to be
used efficiently. The architectural profession includes a
number of large architectural practices with excellent IT
resources and their own in house energy analysts who
can afford a wide range and selection of software.
However, there are a significant number of smaller firms
in the profession. A recent survey showed that 11% of
the profession work as sole practitioners [18]. It is
estimated that 55% of all architects work in practices
with less than 10 employees [19]. These small practices
will struggle with both the knowledge and data demands
of designing to zero carbon standards. In addition CAD,

3

The software challenge

The following section suggests how software could
be developed to help and support the various
stakeholders in any project. The software discussed is
primarily aimed at the supporting SME [Small to
Medium-sized Enterprises] mentioned in the previous
section, who along with their clients, may not have the
financial freedom to employ engineers to analyze and
advise on zero carbon design. Figure 5 shows how we
have chosen to group the stakeholders and the type of
information flow between them. These groupings then

593
583

leading to a streamlined and efficient building design
process.
At present, there is no software that “does
everything”; that is an environment where design and
environmental analysis can take place concurrently.
Models need to be moved between analysis and
modelling software packages. There is a significant time
penalty for designers to prepare the geometry for
analysis and data needs to be added in the separate tools
leading to possible loss or corruption of data [20][21].
Whilst there are opportunities for creating one piece of
software incorporating building information modelling
and analysis we suggest a different approach. This
solution would be a suite of modular software, based on
open source principles, well integrated to enable the
transfer of data.
Key to this are standards for
interoperability of data. This would enable smaller
software companies to penetrate the CAD and BIM
market with the benefit of more competition and the
development of country specific software.

make up the following sections. Some software types
will sit or span between the groups.
Laws and codes

Architects
AEC professionals
Construction and
site staff

Information and
visualisations

Intelligent
building
model

Feedback
loop

Government
Local government
Community groups

Energy use
information

Clients
Building managers
Users

Training

Figure 5 Software user groupings

3.1 Software to assist the design process
Visualization is key to all software discussed below.
Modern modelling methods give the designer the ability
to create and visualize the building virtually before it is
created physically.
Building environments can be
simulated and tested.
However, energy analysis
produces copious amounts of data, this data will require
presentation in a meaningful way to enable it to be
understood and the building model manipulated.

3.1.2

Training and advisory systems for zero
carbon building design
The major challenge for the designer is
understanding the key issues and learning how to set up a
model and the parameters for running a simulation that
produce results on which practitioners (and consequently
clients) can rely. The “Zero Carbon Homes Programme
Delivery Timeline” states that it is critical that 75 % of
all architects are trained in low and zero carbon homes
concepts between 2010 and 2013 [29]. A report
published by Revelation Research showed that the
percentage of designers using BIM software was small
compared to 2D draughting [17]. Opportunities exist to
provide digital training material both to learn how to use
and better understand BIM and energy analysis concepts
and the new skills/knowledge required by designers to
interpret and use the energy data. The skills will include
the ability to carry out the analysis required by the
proposed legislation.
Designers and construction
professionals will need training in detailing and
implementing
highly
insulated
and
air-tight
constructions. Designers will need to understand and be
able to specify devices such as solar panels, ground
source heat pumps, biomass boilers, CHP [combined
heat and power plants] and wind turbines.
Consultation carried out by the Department of
Communities and Local Government showed that there
was demand for sustainable practices which go beyond
zero carbon buildings [30]. In the future architects will
be required to handle new and demanding knowledge
pertaining to designing sustainable and zero carbon
buildings.
Opportunities exist to create advisory
systems, integrated into BIM software, which would
provide timely, appropriate, relevant and understandable
data to the architect to support design decision making.
We propose that this data should be more than online
text, it should be an interactive multimedia experience,
including pictures, building details, 3 D models, graphs,
animations, etc.

3.1.1

Quality of software to design and visualize
zero carbon buildings
There is a need for high quality software that will
encourage designers to work in 3D and BIM and allow
for better visualization and integration of energy data.
Although there have been significant improvements
since the early days of Computer-Aided Draughting,
opportunities still exist to make better software that is
simpler, easier to use, quicker to learn with interfaces
that are more intuitive. The rapid take-up and popularity
of SketchUp [28] demonstrates that the opportunity is
there to radically re-think the modelling process, user
interface and visualization.
Software should be designed to allow for countryspecific adaptation, integrating local building products,
national building codes and legislation. This data could
then be used to support early design decisions that would
support effective sustainable solutions, as opposed to
retrospective design validation such as BREEAM [27].
Software should be developed that supports a more
sensible approach to design, with the software supporting
and facilitating optimization of the building model as the
design progresses. The ability to test and evaluate design
options in real-time would be of enormous benefit. An
example would be the ability to visualize the effect of
altering areas of glazing on the quality of the space and
at the same time see how this affects the thermal and
lighting performance. Again, this represents a paradigm
shift away from retrospective code compliance checking,

594
584

3.2 Software to assist regulatory bodies and
communities to understand the proposals

Conclusion
Buildings are major contributors to carbon
emissions, yet unlike other industries/technologies,
workable solutions are available to achieve a significant
reduction. All of the five plans for Britain to be
sustainable in energy by 2050 outlined by MacKay are
based on the assumption that all new buildings will
require no space heating from 2010 [34], not 2019 as
proposed by the UK government. Legislation is being
used to force change on the construction industry; many
buildings currently considered as exemplar could not be
built under the proposed regulations.
This paper has dealt with very complex issues, with
the aim of giving an overview of how software could be
designed to help with a multifaceted set of problems. It
has not challenged either the feasibility or reach of UK
government policy in being primarily concerned with the
reduction of the operating energy requirements for a
building rather than total embodied energy. Nor has it
chosen to query the details of achieving zero carbon
through both ‘Carbon Compliance’ and ‘Allowable
Solutions’ and the probable use of mechanical systems
and renewables this will entail. It has focused instead on
how software can support designers.
There is also another significant limitation; the
government proposals concerning new buildings will not
meet the targets set for reducing carbon used by all
buildings. There are approximately 26 million existing
domestic buildings plus an estimated 2 million nondomestic buildings in the UK [35]. Hence, new
buildings form only a small part of the problem,
upgrading existing stock present even greater, and
arguably, more urgent challenges.
This paper has outlined how software could be
designed to help and support the various stakeholders in
any building project.
The proposed changes in
legislation have the possibility of leading to ‘safe’, but
arguably dull, buildings. We advocate that software has
an important role to play to support architects in
decision-making, enabling them to create imaginative
and beautiful, yet sustainable, designs. It has drawn
upon the buildings codes and legislative drivers that exist
or are proposed in the UK and uses them to formulate a
set of proposals. These are relevant, irrespective of a
countries legislation, to the development of quality
enabling software.

Visualization is key to understanding buildings and
their environmental credentials; making this data
available and understandable to decision makers and
communities constitutes another software engineering
challenge.
The Web has transformed the availability of
information relating to planning decisions. However,
most information is simply in the form of a pdf of
traditional architectural drawings, which lay people can
often struggle to understand. The developments in the
display of 3D models over the web that are happening
currently offer new opportunities for the display of
consultative information. The development of HTML 5
may mean that browsers will not require 3D plugins to
display augmented virtual models and thus lead to more
extensive use of 3D models [31].
New developments, such as tangible devices which
allow a user to interact with digital information through
the physical environment, enable new and interesting
methods of interaction with building models [32].

3.3 Software to assist the management and use
of buildings
Software is needed to deal with the complete life
cycle of buildings, where one data set is used from
inception
through
construction,
management,
refurbishment and eventual re-cycling of the building
fabric.
3.3.1 More energy efficient building usage
The way in which occupants uses and manage a
building can have significant impact on the energy
consumption.
There are opportunities for the
development of ubiquitous devices and management
systems both to control and educate building usage. For
instance, rather than the static graph of energy use now
required in public buildings, there could be interactive,
real-time displays of energy usage. The data could be
used to actively manage and educate users. The efficacy
of these devices will rely on the quality of visualization
of the data and warnings. Tightening of legislation will
require regular review of building energy usage.
3.3.2 Post-occupancy feedback loop
There are significant problems of obtaining adequate
data for effective life-cycle analysis of buildings [8].
Post occupancy evaluation shows that there can be
significant differences between design predictions on
energy usage and the actual fuel used [33]. Lessons need
to be learnt on how a building performs and how people
use it to enable a feedback loop to inform future designs.
Again, software has an important enabling role, the
building information model needs to record energy used,
along with comfort and satisfaction with the building.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

595
585

Great Britain, Climate Change Act of 2008, 2008.
Department for Communities and Local Government,
“Building a Greener Future: policy statement,” Jul.
2007.
B. Edwards, Rough guide to sustainability, London:
RIBA, 2009.
Zero Carbon Hub, “Consultation on Zero Carbon NonDomestic Buildings”
http://www.zerocarbonhub.org/events_details.aspx?even
t=3 [Accessed January 28, 2010].
Welsh Assembly Government, “Welsh Assembly

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

Government | Programme of action to tackle climate
change,” Welsh Assembly Government | Programme of
action to tackle climate change
http://wales.gov.uk/news/archivepress/environmentpress
/2007/1420889/?lang=en [Accessed May 6, 2010].
Y. Baker, “NetRegs - CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme
(CRC),” CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme (CRC)
http://www.netregs.gov.uk/netregs/legislation/future/975
15.aspx [Accessed February 25, 2010].
S.M. Easterbrook, “First international workshop on
software research and climate change,” Proceeding of
the 24th ACM SIGPLAN conference companion on
Object oriented programming systems languages and
applications - OOPSLA '09, Orlando, Florida, USA:
2009, p. 1057.
T. Oreszczyn and R. Lowe, “Challenges for energy and
buildings research: objectives, methods and funding
mechanisms,” Building Research & Information, vol.
38, 2010, pp. 107-122.
Great Britain., Definition of zero carbon homes and nondomestic buildings : consultation., London: Department
for Communities and Local Government, 2008.
World Commission on Environment and Development.,
Our common future, Oxford; New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987.
J. Elkington, Cannibals with forks: the triple bottom line
of 21st century business, Gabriola Island BC; Stony
Creek CT: New Society Publishers, 1998.
C. Atkinson, Sustainability in the built environment : an
introduction to its definition and measurement,
Bracknell England: IHS BRE Press, 2009.
Royal Institute of British Architects., Architect's job
book., London: RIBA, 2008.
L. Hellman, Architecture A to Z : a rough guide,
Chichester West Sussex: Wiley-Academy, 2001.
R. Oxman, “Digital architecture as a challenge for
design pedagogy: theory, knowledge, models and
medium,” Design Studies, vol. 29, 2008, pp. 99-120.
E. Krygiel and B. Nies, Green BIM : successful
sustainable design with building information modeling,
Indianapolis Ind.: Wiley Pub., 2008.
Revelation Research LLP, 2008 Architectural CAD
User Survey Summary Report, Revelation Research
LLP, 2009.
The Fees Bureau, Architects’ Earnings. How do you
compare?, Mirza & Nacey Research Ltd, .
D. Chappell, The architect in practice, Oxford ;;Malden
MA: Blackwell Pub., 2005.
I. Pritchard and E. Willars, Climate Change Toolkit, 05

[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]
[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]

596
586

Low Carbon Design Tools, RIBA, 2007.
A. Lawton and D. Driver, “Autodesk Sustainable Design
Curriculum 2010 – Lesson 1,” 2010.
V. Bazjanac, “Building energy performance simulation
as part of interoperable software environments,”
Building and Environment, vol. 39, 2004, pp. 879-883.
R. Howard and B. Bjork, “Building information
modelling – Experts’ views on standardisation and
industry deployment,” Advanced Engineering
Informatics, vol. 22, 2008, pp. 271-280.
R. Jardim-Goncalves and A. Grilo, “Building
information modeling and interoperability,” Automation
in Construction, 2009.
B. Dong, K. Lam, Y. Huang, and G. Dobbs, “A
comparative study of the IFC and gbXML informational
infrastructures for data
exchange in computational design support
environments,” Tenth International IBPSA Conference,
Beijing: IBPSA China: 2007.
N. Hamza and M. Horne, “Building Information
Modelling: Empowering Energy Conscious Design,”
3rd Int’l ASCAAD Conference on Em‘body’ing Virtual
Architecture, Alexandria, Egypt: .
BRE Group, “BRE Group: BREEAM,” BRE
http://www.bre.co.uk/page.jsp?id=829 [Accessed
February 28, 2010].
Google, “Google SketchUp”
http://sketchup.google.com/ [Accessed February 25,
2010].
D. Adams, Zero Carbon Homes Programme Delivery
Timeline, Zero Carbon Hub, 2009.
Department for Communities and Local Government,
Building a Greener Future: Towards Zero Carbon
Devlopment - Analysis Report of Consultation
Responses, 2007.
J.A. Stewart, “X3D a write once, render anywhere,
anytime 3D graphics format for HTML 5,” Dec. 2009.
H. Ishii, “The tangible user interface and its evolution,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, 2008, p. 32.
W. Bordass, R. Cohen, and J. Field, “Energy efficiency
in non-domestic buildings: closing the credibility gap,”
Proceedings of the International Conference on
Improving Energy Efficiency in Commercial Buildings,
Frankfurt, Germany: 2004.
D. MacKay, Sustainable energy--without the hot air,
Cambridge England: UIT, 2009.
I. Pritchard and E. Willars, Climate Change Toolkit, 01
Climate Change Briefing, RIBA, 2007.

