2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Multiple Shape Attributes in Information Visualization:
Guidance from Prior Art and Experiments
Richard Brath
Oculus Info Inc.
Toronto, Canada
rbrath@oculusinfo.com

Abstract - Multiple shape attributes can be used within
information visualizations. Prior art from many fields and
experiments inform what the attributes of shape are and the
potential ways that we may effectively utilize shapes to
represent multiple data values within an information
visualization.
Keywords—Shape Attributes, Glyph Design.

I.

Fig 1. Icons ([Ber67] p. 156), Scatterplot of numbers ([Ber67] p. 249) and
Compound Glyphs ([Ber67] p. 338)

Motivation for this exploration was initiated in part by
the document “Illuminating the Path, The R&D Agenda for
Visual Analytics” [Tho05]. One recommendation is to
“Create a science of visual representations”. However, in
order to utilize shape effectively as a visual representation,
we first need to characterize the components of shape that
can be utilized within a visual representation.

INTRODUCTION

Data can be mapped to different shape attributes within
a visualization. Traditionally, shape has been poorly
characterized within the information visualization
community, although successive researchers have identified
shape attributes that may be effective, based on
psychological research [Ber67, Cle85, Hea09, Mac95,
Mac06, Maz09, War00, Wol04].
In particular, the use of shape within an information
visualization, e.g. within a glyph, to convey more than a
single data value, is potentially valuable for increasing
information density in visualizations. However, to achieve
this, it is necessary to understand what the potential shape
attributes are, and how they may be combined together to
depict more than one data value.
In the context of this paper, shape attributes refer to
independent attributes of shape, such as curvature,
terminators, closure, etc; which can be utilized separately or
together to convey multiple data attributes within a singular
visual marker (e.g. Fig 18); as opposed to other ways of
considering shape, such as icons (which are often an
abstracted pictographic representation); letters, numbers and
common symbols (which may act as a mnemonic label) or
compound glyphs (which may utilize only one or two shape
attributes in the creation of a shape; and then contain a
collection that shape to convey multiple data attributes) as
shown in Fig. 1.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.66

II.

BACKGROUND

There is a wide variety of background information
applicable to understanding the attributes of shape and the
use of multiple shape attributes together. There are many
different potential domains of reference to consider and
many more examples that could be considered than covered
herein.
A. Information Visualization Research
Bertin [Ber67] originally identified shape as a
potentially useful visual variable for representing
categorical data, although Bertin did not go into detail
regarding additional shape-based attributes. Bertin is
somewhat skeptical regarding the use of shape, and
comments that it is “tempting to abuse it”. Bertin has
numerous examples of poor use of shape within a visual
display.
Several information visualization researchers have
followed on from Bertin’s pioneering work, and have also
looked to perceptual psychology to create a list of
427
433

potentially effective visual attributes including several
shape-related attributes:
• Termination
• Closure
• Hole
• Curvature
• Added Marks
• Angle
• Intersection
(derived from [Cle85, Hea09, Mac95, Mac06, Maz09,
War00, Wol04]). These shape-based attributes could
potentially be combined when generating glyphs to
represent multiple data variables.

Fig 4. Blobs create amorphous curved surfaces.

C. Information Visualization
Whereas scientific visualization is often based on
representing physical real-world phenomena and is therefore
constrained to fitting representations within a spatial
context, information visualization does not have these
constraints. Many information visualizations which utilize
shape tend to use shape to represent only a single data
attribute, and use simple shapes or icons. Some novel
techniques utilizing shape have been explored.
For
example:

B. Scientific Visualization
The field of scientific visualization has utilized shapes particularly curvature - for several decades as a means to
convey data within a glyph. Most of the techniques have
been focused on generating smooth, curved shapes based to
represent continuous quantitative data, such as tensor data.
For example:

• Chernoff faces, represent multiple features through the
use of multi-attribute glyphs that look like familiar
objects, i.e. faces. Although the effectiveness and
proper use of Chernoff faces is debated, the faces
typically utilize shape based attributes to create features
such as head eccentricity. Of particular interest, from
the point of view of shape attributes, are Chernoff
visualizations which utilize multiple shape attributes in
a singular visual element, such as the combination of
mouth curvature and mouth openness, such as in
Mathematica:

• Superquadrics [Bar81], and similar variants of
curvature-based parametric shapes in scientific
visualization, have been used in numerous expressive
visualizations:

Fig 2. Glyphs using curvature [Bar81]; curvature, hue and thickness
[Rop07]; curvature in two dimensions, height & depth [Kin06].
Fig 5. Chernoff faces [Che73]. Note mouth curvature and openness

• In Iconic Techniques for Feature Visualization, a
variety of compound glyphs are utilized. Some of the
glyphs use attributes such as curvature and twist to
indicate data attributes.

• Use of physical objects as markers on a scatterplot,
such as geographic regions or animals, (e.g.
[Woo98,Tuf96]), relies on the unique shapes of these
objects entities as identifiers. This suggests any of the
visual attributes used in the representation of these
objects could be used. In the long history of
cartography there could be various techniques refined
over time that could be leveraged, such as a wide
variety of boundaries. These shape features are inherent
in the objects, not data-driven attributes, and the
effectiveness of objects as glyphs is suspect. (e.g.
Wyoming and Colorado are both rectangular, Tufte’s
mouse and rat are very similar).

Fig 3. Elements of the glyph use curvature and/or twist [Pos95].

• Blobs, or more specifically, implicit surfaces based on
volume rendering of density fields, provides another
algorithmic means for generating smooth, closed,
curved shapes based on data. Different areas of the
surface (different parts of the curvature) correspond to
different data attributes.

434
428

Fig 10. Furry and hairy shapes.
Fig 6. Glyphs as states [Woo09] and animals [Tuf96].

D. Other Fields
• Star, sticks, and radar plots: Star Coordinates [Kan01]
utilizes angle (and length) to convey multiple attributes
in a single glyph.

Other fields have explored use of multiple shape
attributes to convey multiple data attributes. In chemical
notation, use of line thickness, line dash style, curvature,
angle, terminator/thickness and parallel lines are used.

Fig 11. Sample molecular notations utilizing angle, line styles, etc. (from
Wikipedia)
Fig 7. Star Coordinates use of angle and length to create a glyph.

Biology extensively utilizes shape in classification,
with examples from bird, fish, tree and leaf identification
showing multiple different shape attributes used for
identification purposes. For example, leaves are identified
by a global form (e.g. rhomboid, ovate, deltoid); edge (e.g.
spiny, serrate, undulate); and venation (e.g. rotate,
longitudinal, parallel):

Radar plots offer an interesting opportunity for
emergent shapes, although the shapes are based on
straight lines and each angle is an artifact of three data
values.

Fig 8. Series of radar plots. Shapes emerge.

• Organically inspired “growth” visualizations, such as
Fry’s Anemone [Fry97] and Dragulescu’s Malwarez
[Dra08]; utilize generative algorithms and shape-based
attributes such as angle, curvature and terminators to
generate incredible variety of visual representations.

Fig 12. Samples of three shape-based attributes used in leaf identification
(from Wikipedia)

Similar to biology, heraldry also utilizes boundaries and
has a long tradition formalizing many different types of
boundaries with rules for combining them:
Fig 9. Bulbous terminator on branching curved lines [Fry97] and
curls and bulbous terminators [Dra08]

• Other novel shape-based techniques can be found in
other organically inspired visualizations, such as furry
or hairy shapes in Anymails [Car07] or C.E.B. Reas’
Puffs [Rea05].

Fig 13. Sample lines from heraldry [Fea08]

Graphic design is not bound by a set of formal rules but
potential shape-based attributes may be outlined in various

435
429

would be challenging to test all the various permutations of
combinations.

textbooks and guides or may be inferred from large samples
of design. Based on a review of icon categories at Logo
Lounge (logolounge.com) and graphic design texts (e.g.
[Dre72,Kra04]), the following attributes may also be useful
for the design of visualization glyphs, in addition to the
shape-based feature list in section 2.1:
• Edge type
• Corner type
• Warp
• Notch

A. What Are the Attributes of Shape?
Which shape attributes to include on the working list of
shape attributes is debatable. For example, early on, we
considered concavity to be a shape attribute. An “Email
Visualization” used basic shapes and then concave
variations of those shapes used to indicate a second data
dimension. However, within a visual field of many of these
shapes, the more complex shapes (i.e. concave shapes) did
not seem to visually pop-out. This led to a reconsideration
of concavity: is it just a special case of a notch; or did the
design of this particular visualization with partially
overlapping glyphs interfere with the perception of
concavities and thus affect how we were able to visually
identify concavity?

Fig 14. Logos categorized as “particle fields” by Logo Lounge, all
displaying warping; and sample corners from [Kra04]

E. Background Summary
This background provides a basis for different shape
attributes as used in different fields, and potentially
applicable to information visualization. As outlined at
IV09’s keynote [Bra09], a working list of shape attributes
may be considered as follows:

Fig 15. Email visualization relying on concavity.

Furthermore, for any shape attribute, there may be
multiple factors available to define that attribute. A
terminator at the end of a line or on a corner may have many
possible options, including length, height, fill, closure, etc.
There is the potential to apply recursive principles to shape
attributes, with limits determined by the size of the object
and the quality of the resolution – e.g. there are not many
options for terminators if the space available is only 2 x 2
pixels; but with interactive zooming techniques, lower
priority data variables could be encoded in a “serif” that
become visible when zoomed in.

III.

EXPERIMENTS AND LESSONS

In our work we have been cautious regarding the use of
shape. Using more than one shape attribute to convey more
than one data variable within a singular glyph has largely
been limited to experimental visualizations.
These
experiments have been done to “see what’s possible”, have
not been rigorously tested, evaluated simply by review by
experts within our firm, and acknowledged that some of
these experiments are not particularly effective. At this
point, the criteria for understanding which combinations
may or may not work well together are uncertain; and it

Fig 16. Sample of possible sub-attriubtes for terminators, including type,
closure, fill.

436
430

B. Like Interferes with Like
A number of experiments utilize the same type of shape
attribute to convey more than one variable. For example, a
“Chappe Telegraph” visualization uses two angles to convey
two data attributes; and a morphological approach uses two
curves to convey two data attributes in a “Gas Survey”
visualization.

Fig 19. Stock correlations to commodities using twist and bulge to indicate
2 variables of correlation to each commodity.

Fig 17. Chappe Telegraph (using angle) and Gas Survey (using curvature)

The corollary to the rule may be that like shapes should
be used for like variables, with clear separation, e.g. by use
of a transformation.

Other visualization experiments map different data
attributes onto different shape attributes. For example, a
variant of Gas Survey (4var) maps four different data
variables onto four different shape variables: curvature,
edge type, terminator and angle. Similarly, “World
Demographics” visualization maps three data variables onto
three different shape attributes: curvature, angle and
terminator.

C. Integral vs. Separable Shape Attributes
The issue of integral vs. separable dimensions [War00,
Wil05] is related to the like vs. like issue. Integral
dimensions are perceived holistically not independently.
Early experiments creating shapes based on morphologies of
curved vs. angular corners did not result in glyphs
understood as having four separate attributes, but were
rather understood as simply being different (fig 20). With
the Gas Survey (4 vars) visualization, some of the visual
entities are very separable, such as the terminator or angle
which can be readily understood as separate from the rest of
the glyph. The top line has both curvature and line style
which are separable, but presumably not as perceptually
separable as the terminator:

Fig 18. Gas Survey (4vars) and World Demographics (3vars) use different
shape attributes for different data.

In general, it seems that it is easier to perceive and
understand mappings more easily when different variables
are mapped to different shape attributes. This should follow
from the general rule “like interferes with like” [War08] or
“use different visual dimensions differently” [Bra97] and
therefore using different shape attributes can help
maximizes distinctness.
However, this general rule must be applied with care.
For example, scientific tensor visualization utilizes
curvature to convey more than one dimension and seems to
be effective. Similarly, a “Stock Correlation Visualization”
we created depicts 5 pairs of variables as arms of a star, with
twist being used consistently to represent one variable, and
bulge being used to represent the second variable.

Fig 20. The four separate attributes defining the shapes on left (i.e. corners)
are not as easily distinguishable as the four separate attributes defining the
shapes on the right.

The issue regarding concavity discussed earlier may be
an issue of separable vs. integral, and the particular use of
concavity in the experiment is integral, therefore making it
difficult to visually parse concavity separately.
D. Shape as a Frame of Reference
Rather than using shape attributes to form a glyph,
shape attributes could be used to form a common reference
upon which data is displayed, much like Tufte’s Small
Multiples [Tuf90]: the common reference in each frame

437
431

provides a basis to locate and compare visual elements
across each frame. In this case, the reference shape could
represent data structures such as trees, graphs, baselines, etc.
This use of shape will require a different set of criteria to
understand and evaluate. An example of an experiment is a
visualization of the Fortune companies by sector and state:

[Cle85] W. Cleveland. Elements of Graphing Data. Hobart Press.
Summit, NJ. 1985.
[Dra08] A. Dragulescu. Malwarez. url: www.sq.ro/malwarez.php
[Dre72] H. Dreyfuss. Symbol Sourcebook. John Wiley & Sons. New
York. 1972.
[Ebe99] D. Ebert, R. Rohrer, C. Shaw, P. Panda, J. Kukla, A. Roberts.
Procedural Shape Generation for Multi-Dimensional Data
Visualization. url:
cobweb.ecn.purdue.edu/~ebertd/papers/vissym99.pdf
[Fea06] J. Fearn. Discovering Heraldry. Shire Publications. Princes
Risborough, UK. 2006.
[Fry97] B. Fry. Organic Information Design. url:
benfry.com/organic/thesis-0522d.pdf
[Kan01] R. Kandogan. Visualizing Multi-Dimensional Clusters Trends
and Outliers using Start Coordinates. In Proceedings ACM
SigKDD 01. ACM. 107-116. 2001.
[Kin06] G. Kindlmann, C. Westin. Diffusion Tensor Visualization with
Glyph Packing. url: lmi.bwh.harvard.edu/~gk/vis06
[Kra04] J. Krause. Design Basics Index. HOW Design Books. Cincinnati.
2004.
[Maz09] R. Mazza. Introduction to Information Visualization London.
Springer-Verlag. 2009.
[Mac95] A. MacEachren. How Maps Work. New York, NY. Guildford
Press. 1995.
[Mac86] J. MacKinlay. Automating the Design of Graphical
Representations. In ACM Transactions on Graphics Vol 5, No.2.
2006.
[Mac06] J. MacKinlay. url: www.tableausoftware.com/files/designinggreat-visualizations.pdf
[Pos95] F. Post, F. Post, T. Walsum, D. Silver. Iconic Techniques for
Feature Visualization, in IEEE Visualization ’95. IEEE. 1995.
[Rea05] C.E.B. Reas. Puff 1-12. url:
reas.com/iperimage.php?section=works&view=&work=p6_imag
es3_p&id=0
[Rop07] T. Ropinski, M. Specht, J. Meyer-Spradow, K. Hinrichs, B.
Preim. Surface Glyphs for Visualizing Multimodal Volume Data.
url: viscg.uni-muenster.de/publications/2007/RSMHP07/vmv07glyphs_500dpi.pdf.
[Tho05] J.J. Thomas, K. A. Cook. Illuminating the Path: The Research
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. url:
nvac.pnl.gov/docs/RD_Agenda_VisualAnalytics.pdf
[Tuf90] E.R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT, Graphics
Press. 1990.
[Tuf90] E.R. Tufte. Beautiful Evidence. Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press.
1996.
[War00] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. San
Francisco. Morgan Kaufmann. 2000.
[War08] C. Ware. Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufmann.
Burlington, MA. 2008.
[Wil05] L. Wilkinson: The Grammar of Graphics 2nd ed. Berlin, Springer
Verlag. 2005
[Wol04] Visual Search. Table 1: Classification of Guiding
Attributes(derived but modified from Wolfe & Horowitz) url:
www.scholarpedia.org/article/visual_search
[Woo98] A. Woodruff, J. Landay, M. Stonebreaker. Constant Density
Visualizations of Non-uniform Distributions of Data. in
Proceedings of the 11th annual ACM symposium on User
Interface software and Technology. 1998.

Fig 21. Fortune 500 by sector and state. The background (light grey) tree
indicates sector hierarchy, repeated once per each state. Nodes along
branches indicate companies.

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

The use of multiple shape attributes increases the
expressive range and the information density of
visualizations. The experiments show the potential to
convey 1-10 or more different data attributes within a glyph
based on shape attributes. Experiments have shown
potential value as well as problems regarding effective
combination of shape attributes.
There is much future work to be done. At this point in
time, we are becoming more comfortable with the working
list of shape attributes, although there is uncertainty as to
where this list should end, as well as the sub-attributes
within any attribute (e..g. a terminator may have both a
length and width and therefore represent two data
attributes).
We are still unsure of which shape combinations work
well together. There is the opportunity for much more
research in this area, the results of which would reduce the
amount of trial and error in glyph design.
REFERENCES
[Bar81] A. Barr. Superquadrics and Angle-Preserving Transformations. In
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 1. p 11-23. 1981.
[Bra97] R. Brath. 3D Interactive Information Visualization: Guidelines
from experience and analysis of applications. In Design of
Computing Systems: Social and Ergonomic Considerations.
Elsevier Science. Amsterdam. 1997.
[Bra09] R. Brath. The Many Dimensions of Shape. IV09. url:
www.oculusinfo.com/expertise.html
[Car07] C.Horn, F. Jennett. Anymails. url: carohorn.de/anymails

.

438
432

