2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Guidelines to Visualize Vessels in a Geographic Information System
Dario Rodighiero
University of Milan-Bicocca
c/o Joint Research Centre, European Commission
Ispra (VA), Italy
dario.rodighiero@ext.jrc.ec.europa.eu

II. P RINCIPLES OF VISUALIZATION

Abstract—In information systems the data representation
covers a great importance. In fact the visualization of information is the last point of contact between the user and the
information system. This is the space where the communication
takes place.
In real-time monitoring systems, this passage covers a great
importance, especially for reasons related to the time and
the transparency of relevant information. These factors are
fundamental to vessel monitoring systems. This is the beginning
where we start to define a guidelines manual, act to help
specialists of information visualization in the vessel monitoring
field, and in the GIS field more in general.

When he was conceiving his classification system, Ranganathan wondered what could be the better way to arrange
subjects. The question brought him to write the Principles
for an helpful sequence. Our work extends these principles to
GIS visualization. With such as approach, it will be possible
to get an objective and fresh overlook on all details needed
for a geographic visualization.
Imagine to be in front of your laptop, the screen
is showing you a geographic interface focused on the
Mediterranean basin. On the surface there’s an information
layer populated with icons. Each icon is a vessel and
from here we start to apply principles in order to obtain
guidelines.

Keywords-information visualization; geographical information system; vessel monitoring;

I. I NTRODUCTION
The Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) is used by fisheries
authorities all over the world for fisheries control and
surveillance, based on GPS-derived positions transmitted
regularly from the fishing vessels having transponders onboard (bluebox) to their flag state Fisheries Monitoring
Centre (FMC). Currently, all European Union member states
(MS) fishing vessels over 15 length are subject to VMS.
Although VMS is a powerful tool, there are some problems to overcome, like satellite communications errors,
bluebox malfunctioning and fishermen switching off or
manipulating-spoofing their position. For those reasons,
JRC developed in-house software satellite-based, the Vessel
Detection System (VDS), in order to support inspections
to improve fisheries compliance [1], cross-checking with
VMS positions. Satellite detected targets are also integrated
with Automatic Identification System (AIS) positions from
transponders on-board of certain vessels (mainly commercial
cargo and tankers) for safety navigation.
The purpose of this paper is not to go into details of these
signals, but to define a language act to visualize these kinds
of data. In particular we would like to stress the visualization
of vessels, considering the principles of order introduced by
Ranganathan [2].
In this paper we define a set of guidelines to be employed
as a manual, to help people involved in vessel monitoring
system in exploring the potentiality of this particular kind
of communication.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.70

A. Increasing Quantity
We assume that each vessel is profiled by a set of quantitative measurements, aimed to describe the object. Having a
very simple symbol - the icon - to bring information, it’s
useful to know which are the characteristics that can be
manipulated.
In vessel monitoring systems, size, color, shape, transparency, orientation are all characteristics which can be
manipulated. Size can represent the length of the vessel,
color a classification, shape the kind of object (vessel, cage,
etc.), transparency the reliability of its position, orientation
the course of the vessel [Fig. 1].
The characteristics employ the principles by linking
to the metadata and conveying the most information
in as few expressions as possible [4]. In the field of
information visualization Otto Neurath proved the power
of communication throughout symbols simplicity [5]. He
teach that this part deserves attention, because this is the
basic design. An error in this part could compromise the
following, so to decide these fundamental concepts requires
time.

B. Spatial Continuity
Latitude and longitude describe the vessels position on
the map. For vessels height need not to be considered,
449
455

Figure 2. The flat representation of the figure can not properly represent
distances.

with having object in one’s hand which can be grasped,
rotated, shifted, and zoomed as a real object. Furthermore
the perception of spacial measures is a real experience [7].

Figure 1. Size, transparency and course are part of information that vessels
can bring themselves.

C. Later-in-Time

anyway in land visualization it offers useful prospective
views, especially in mountain terrains.
Simplifying the concept, we can reduce the latitude as
a sequence from bottom to up or from top to down, and
the longitude as left to right and right to left. However the
Earth can not be compared to a Cartesian coordinate system,
because its shape is more complex. To use an ellipsoid is
more correct, but it must be considered that different types of
ellipsoid exists, some are more correct that others depending
on the area to be focused on [6].
Visualizing data on a 2D or 3D model is really different.
If one has ever travelled by plane from Europe to USA, he
has surely seen these geographical views of the flight path
on screens and he probably asked himself the reason for that
funny curved trajectory of the flight [Fig. 2]. Why to cover
the longest way? The point is that the airplane trajectory is
distorted by the geographical flat representation. If he see
the same path in a 3D model, maybe he could be surprised
by seeing the same trajectory exactly straight.
The described fact is fundamental even for another kind
of spacial sequence, the distance. In fact, in a flat representation, the distance between two objects is quite faithful if
your position is close to the equator, but the closer vessels
are to the poles more the perception of distances is distorted.
This issue covers a great importance in vessels monitoring
systems, especially when distance is relevant. For example,
when different signals are overlapped and elaborated to point
out the position of a vessel in a fixed time, by observing the
distance from supposed position to the relative signals it is
possible to evaluate the information reliability.
This reason should bring us to reflect on how is important
to work on a 3D environment, especially for application
for which distance is fundamental. To have the support
of applications like Google Earth is important as such
applications put the user in relation not simply with a
representation, but with a simulation. It is comparable

Each single vessel position is related to a time-sequence.
The time is the third dimension in the visualization and we
are going to see how can be important and how it can change
the representation.
Initially we divide time in two moments: still time and
moving time. Still time is a fixed, snap-shot in time. In this
case all the data are relative to a time zero. The moving
time is a time series visualization. The connection between
these two moments is like a record player needle. The needle
indicates the point, that is where a fixed visualization takes
place, then it can be decided to play the sequence and the
visualization changes according to the time. One can control
the time trough a time bar by which it’s possible to pause
or skip. These two moments are powerful models, but the
proper one has to be thoughtfully chosen.
For example, to communicate the most populated sea area
in a precise moment of the day, the still time will be the
correct way to display data. Alternatively to show the change
of vessels density through the day, the moving time would
be better suited.
But if I introduce a new quest, for example what areas
are not occupied in the first four hours just after the dawn,
I will have to introduce a new measure: the span time.
The span time can be seen as an extension of the still time
and it represents the sum of several still time data. It’s
particular useful because it reveals an unreal situation, that is
a configuration of vessels not available in the reality [Fig. 3].
D. Later-in-Evolution
The evolution is the order where space and time go
together. This solution is well described by Scott McCloud
when he introduces the concept of closure for comics [8].
Closure is the panel-to-panel transition. It is the act made
by the reader, aimed to fill the gap between two panels in
456
450

Figure 3. Three time visualization approach all relative to the time: a)
still time moving, b) span time expanding and c) span time moving.

Figure 5.

Manage complexity bring us to point out relevant information.

of information. They are rather more interested in how to
manage complexity to let data become more comprehensive
[Fig. 5].
Inspired by the facets theory of Ranganathan, we would
like to introduce facets for our purposes. Vessels can be
classified in three different kinds of classes: signals, size and
area. Signals can be classified by sources: VDS, VMS and
AIS. Size kind has three groups: small, medium and large.
Finally areas are two: inside or outside of defined borders.
We can add as many facets as necessary, three different
divisions are enough to explain how to work with. By them,
we can visualize all the vessels available in a precise area
where the signal is equal to AIS. We can also obtain all the
big vessels outside a delimited area. Or we can visualize
inside the area all vessels whose size is small or medium
but only belonging to the VDS signal.
In Google Earth for example the data are set up in a
taxonomy. However taxonomy is not enough sophisticated
to manage complexity because it does not allow data intersection between folders. A new approach based on facets,
where each vessel can be shared among categories, could be
a drastic improvement for an interface like Google Earth.
Moreover, if facets approach makes librarians able to
manage big libraries, why shouldn’t this method work for
vessel monitoring systems?
Three time visualization approach all relative to the time:
a) still time moving, b) span time expanding and c) span
time moving.

Figure 4. Closure transforms several positions in a meaningful sequence.

sequence. For comics closure is the concept one step before
the movement, for vessels monitoring systems it is the track.
The vessel track is a sequence of positions in time. The
perception of a sequence is communicated by the frequency.
In fact, radio signals are timed. This means that different
positions must be merged to obtain the track [Fig. 4].
In the visualization phase, one can choose between still
time and moving time to display the tracks. This choice is
related to the frequency of signal. In fact if the frequency of
data is not enough dense, it will not be possible to visualize
tracks as a movie clip and the use of still time representations
will be the only solution. Instead if the frequency of data
is high a moving-time visualization can be created, which
is very easy to understand by playing. In such a case,
one can choose between the still-time and the motion-time
representation.
At this point it is also interesting to observe how these
principles work among them. It is easy to figure out how
the direction of vessels could be integrated with a still-time
or a moving-time representation, or to notice how the size
of a vessel influences its speed, intended as frequency of
sampling.

E. Increasing Complexity
Complexity is a very interesting fashion to show information if you need to have a perspective to the whole data. Obviously people using monitoring systems are not interested
in visualizing the data complexity, because it enables a loss

F. Canonical Sequence
In vessels monitoring systems it is difficult to talk about
traditional sequence, probably we can not talk about tradition
457
451

J

A
C

F

A
B

E

G

C
D
E

H
I
J

Figure 6.

Radar systems has an origin as visualization reference.

D

H

B

G

I

F

Figure 7. Mapping between a list and a geographic visualization improves
understanding.

because the field is so recent. It is useful to intend the canonical adjective as the tradition of the previous technology in
monitoring field, in other words the interface people were
used to work with, the radar systems.
What is different in the actual monitoring systems, compared with the radar visualization, is the absence of origin.
Consider an old war film, one can easily figure out the
radar display of a naval vessel [Fig. 6]. This round-shaped
monochrome display, characterized by a radial refresh, has
the vessels itself as origin. The center was the reference
for all objects in the radar, so the system was absolutely
relative, while the new monitoring systems are absolute.
This difference between relative and absolute influences
relative measures: the first uses distance and degree, the
latter latitude and longitude of a geographic system.
So the canonical sequence can be interpreted as the point
of view. If our tasks are based on the comprehension of
distances referred to a single point in a relative system,
the relative approach is what we need. If our view needs
to be more complete and general, probably the absolute
visualization will be the right solution.

meanings are not required, so we skip it and go to the
example.
Consider the display of one dimensional and two dimensional views side by side. Vessels are represented in
both ways: as an alphabetical list first, as geographical view
second. Since the objects are shared in both visualizations,
it is important to notice that the two representations are
connected each other by a mapping relation: each vessel on
the list corresponds to a vessel to the geographical view and
vice versa [Fig. 7]. Imagine how this double visualization
works. If you select a vessel from the list, the same will be
highlighted on the geographic view. If you focus on a vessel
on the geographic view instead, you will see it also on the
list.
The mapping between different visualizations could be
interesting and it could involve more views. We must think
of this method as a way to improve comprehension.

III. V ISUALIZATION AS A LANGUAGE
In conclusion Ranganathan makes librarians reflect, but
his thought is relevant also in other disciplines. All principles
enumerated in library science are referable to information
visualization, probably because they share some characteristics as creativity, order, thinking and even both study a
field tuned toward to the people use. However, besides the
concept of orders, in this digression we find the fundamental
principles of a GIS visualization.
When a person interacts with a computer through an
interface, data has to be completely available and reachable.
People should feel in complete control on all information.

G. Favored Categories and Alphabetical Sequence
All the sequences introduced are arranged from the most
to the less useful according to the Ranganathan thought [2].
These two last arrangements should be used only if all other
sequences are not available, but we would introduce them
as a fashion to support information displayed to this point .
All the previous sections have introduced concepts relative
to a bi-dimensional visualization. Latter two instead are
related to a single dimensional list and this is a good point to
begin with. For the demonstration purposes, the sequences
458
452

Only in this way a dialog between the human and the machine can take place. Computers have to offer informations
and tools act to work with data, users - manipulating them
- have to be able to obtain answers to their questions.
This language between humans and computers has to
be based on a controlled vocabulary, whose concepts
are the constituents of information. If the concepts are
used by both sides, then the interactions happens: only
by a two-way communication based on a language users
can manipulate information - working on filters, orders,
positions, direction, etc. - to finally arrive to a clearness
of visualization. A moment in which computer data are
transparent and readable to humans.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank my working group: Marlene Alvarez, Tulay Cokacar and Juan Ignacio Cicuendez
for their support. Harriet and Guido for their hospitality.
R EFERENCES
[1] N.Kourti, I.Shepherd, H.Greidanus, M.Alvarez, E.Aresu,
T.Bauna, J.Chesworth, G.Lemoine, and G.Schwartz. Integrating remote sensing in fisheries control. Fisheries Management
and Ecology, 12(5):295307, 2005.
[2] S.Ranganathan. Prolegomena to library classification. 1967.
[3] S.Ranganathan. Colon classification: basic classification.
Asia Pub. House, 1963.
[4] P.Lambert, W.Oechslin, D.Mertins, P.Eisenman, R.Koolhaas,
K.Hays, and L.Van DerRohe. Mies in America. Canadian
Centre for Architecture, 2001.

IV. C ONCLUSIONS

[5] N.Vossoughian and D.Camp. Otto Neurath: the language of
the global polis. NAi Publishers, 2008.

Information visualization specialists are not only responsible for comprehensive visualizations, but are responsible
to build with users a language act to exchange information.
Moreover we have to take in account that this language has
a lot of dialects, as many as spoken technical languages. So
this paper is an effort to go into detail of a particular one,
the vessels visualization language.
In recent decades visual information has gained weight.
Bertin [9], Spence [10], Shneiderman [11] and Tufte [12]
all made significant contributions. In recent years more
specialized languages have been deconstructed, among them
geographic information is increasing in popularity [13] [14].
In this field more work is needed, because the language
needs to be fed.
This paper would be the preamble to a work. In fact, at
the Joint Research Centre in Ispra, we are carrying out a
system act to monitor vessels behaviors. Even though the
software has been used in several campaigns with success,
we believe that a real improvement in data visualization
could be still realized. So the paper represents a compulsory
passage to the next phase, where all principles will be
applied in order to obtain an improved visualization.

[6] M.Crossley. A guide to coordinate systems in Great Britain.
Ordnance Survey, 1999.
[7] M.Jones. Googles Geospatial Organizing Principle. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, pages 813, 2007.
[8] S. McCloud. Understanding Comics. 1993.
[9] J.Bertin. Semiology of graphics. University of Wisconsin
Press, 1983.
[10] R.Spence. Information Visualization. Harlow, 2001.
[11] B.Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations. In Proc. Of the 1996 IEEE
Symposium on Visual Languages, IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, pages 336343, 1996.
[12] E.Tufte and E.WeiseMoeller. Visual explanations: images and
quantities, evidence and narrative. Graphics Press Cheshire,
CT, 1997.
[13] P.Longley, M.Goodchild, D.Maguire, and D.Rhind. Geographical information systems and science. John Wiley and
Sons Inc, 2005.
[14] M. Dodge, M. McDerby, and M. Turner. Geographic visualization: concepts, tools and applications. Wiley, 2008.

459
453

