2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

The Management of Sharing, Integrating, Tracking, and Maintaining Data-sets, is a
New and Rather Complex Task
James Harty

Richard Laing

Copenhagen School of Design & Technology
KEA
Copenhagen, Denmark
jmh@kea.dk

Scott Sutherland School of Architecture & Built
Environment, RGU
Aberdeen, UK
r.laing@rgu.ac.uk
At The Copenhagen School of Design and Technology
methods are being explored to marry the divergent
disciplines or at least to allow them to mutually co-exist.
This paper attempts to map the issues and demonstrate a
method of integration.

Abstract: With the improved uptake of Building Information
Modelling (BIM) new issues are emerging. Prime in these tasks
is how it is presented to the various stakeholders, in tailor made
views to reflect their demands and requirements. In this
fragmented sector strong in the concept of phased handovers new
methods of feedback loops need to be developed, and other
stakeholders outside the procurement process need to be included
to progress and manage the practice.

II.

Within this scenario is the role of the facility manager, who
currently operates separately to the procurement stakeholders.
Bridges need to be built to bring them closer together especially
in light of life cycle costing and sustainability if the buildings
operations and maintenance issues are to be addressed in the
design phase. The model's ability to host work phases or stages
opens up a method to co-inhabit the model to accommodate both
sets of stakeholders.
This filtering of the model has both tremendously positive aspects
but conversely larger issues of ownership and custodianship have
not to date been satisfactorily resolved. There is a major role for
proper management here, which has not been appropriately
identified. Initially there was a clarion call to architects to adopt
this role and a few years ago this seemed to return the lead role
to this noble profession.
But patently they are neither prepared nor keen to take on this
role. Constructing architects however do seem to want this
discipline which can raise their profile and possibly lead to
professional recognition and prestige.
Keywords- Management, Integration, Collaboration

I.

INTRODUCTION

Processes need to change and furthermore there has to be
what many are calling a cultural change in the way we make
buildings. Life Cycle Assessments (LCA) and sustainability
are bringing the facility manager more and more into the
procurement process, instead of the traditional method where
both were divorced from each other.
This widening of the scope of procurement brings with it
an increase in responsibility and adds more layers of
complexity. How it can be integrated broadens the role of the
model in both how it performs before a design brief is in
place and how its legacy could behave after project
handover.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.102

CONSTRUCTING ARCHITECT

A constructing architect in Denmark graduates with a
Bachelor of Architectural Technology and Construction
Management after three and a half years, Pedagogically, and
traditionally, the course is structured through group work in a
matrix diagram on project driven semesters. This is a huge
benefit where collaborative work is involved and this is the
case with BIM. A broader definition of BIM is Integrated
Project Delivery (IPD) where collaboration is critical
(Eckblad, Rubel, et al. 2007) which is at the core of this
process.
The work can be divided into two parts, one where
authorship is to the fore and the other where analysis is
primo (Hardin 2009). Authoring involves building the model
and developing it through the various work stages of the
project. Analysis allows the model to be checked and
controlled so that certainty is achieved, bringing projects on
time and to budget (Eastman et al. 2008). Allowing the data
generated to be mined and tested is not new, it is in fact an
integral part of the planning process and of great concern to
the client.
While this can be described as the kernel part of the
process, there is increasing concern for the lead up and post
practical completion stages, essentially outside the
procurement part, where Facility Management (FM) holds
sway. FM is becoming a critical player in the process now
that LCA casts a critical eye on the initial design decisions
where most influence is placed. In the design business it is
often said that 80% of the costs are determined in the first
20% of the design process (Smith and Tardif 2009). LCA is
increasingly growing in its stature beyond the building
procurement phase (Sapp 2010).
FM plays a major role in this initial dialogue where the
80/20 imbalance still figures large and even more so after
practical completion with operations and maintenance issues
accounting for up to 80% of the building life time costs.
FM'ers regularly complain that the procurement model is
unsuited to their modelling regimes meaning that they wait
until the building is complete before moving in to begin their

600
610

Figure 2 Building model using FM data © Harty

Figure 1 Bubble Diagram using Room Separators © Harty

maintenance models. Their initial models are to date also
separate and indifferent to the procurement model (Sørensen,
Tom, Focus Group discussion on role of FM in BIM. 2010).
The school's new course syllabus is making inroads in
this direction, looking to introduce an appreciation of
sustainable mechanisms from the first semester to parallel
elective classes in facility management in the fourth
semester.
Sustainability tells us that there is an inefficient and
excessive use of materials and energy today which needs to
be addressed. FM'ers are primarily interested in
alphanumeric data rather than geometry and methods need to
be found to allow them an input in the early stages as well as
handing over a model that can be used by them instead of
them having to drive parallel models. This aspect is being
tackled at the school, trying to harness the demands and
requirements of the FM process within the BIM process.
III.

maintenance schedules can be developed. Typically this can
be seen when the contractor takes over the model and begins
describing just how it will be built. This allows the
contractor and project/construction manager control to
administer the procurement process in earnest.
Strategically this means that objects can occur in the
same 3D space of the model without interfering with the
geometry but being able to share common data. This is a 4D
feature. By extension having differing phases allows for
differing scenarios. This feature is what is called open
architecture (in terms of information technology) which can
be expanded and utilised to allow flexible non-defined
objects to be placed non-intrusively in the model. The model
now has an architectural filter retaining the architects
conceptual design, together with a detailed contractor filter
showing a living organic development which can lead to the
as-builts upon completion.
This allows a volume to be entered, as a data holder,
having the length and breadth of the site together with the
permissible height according to the local plan or desired
finished gross area for the building. This volume can
ultimately co-exist with the proposed building but exist
separately in the virtual world of the model. The paradigm
though is that data entered into one can be simultaneously
used in the other.
Modelling in the initial stages allows the user to form
massing elements. These are merely geometrical and as such
have little or no data attached. But imagine an entity that can
be tagged and the situation is now set where data can be
added to the mass.
As said earlier there is a volume or 3D box with defined
levels, acting as floor plates. On these levels there is a feature
which bounds areas into rooms (or zones) and spaces into
which we can add data.
Generally a major problem at the start up project is that
showing a client, or developer or any other stakeholder
drawings with line defined spaces, however well unintended,
equate to bounding walls in most people’s perceptions,
meaning that most FM protocols tend to use bubble

FACILITY MANAGEMENT

So the question is can BIM host FM data? BIM can
contain graphic and non graphic data, contractual
information and even risk registers. It is, in general, a pool of
coordinated information with the keywords being it should
be shared and structured. If it is shared then the maximum
value may be extracted out of it and if it is structured then as
many different processes as possible can use the information
in as many different ways as possible.
Moreover a feature in BIM modelling software allows for
the notion of phasing in the building process, and it is
important to stress that it is a process. If phasing is employed
then a pre model (FM) can be hosted, the procurement model
can developed as currently understood, and a post model can
be prepared for future deployment after hand over. Crucially
too the use of tags (whether type or instance) allows fields to
be generated but only used when appropriate to do so. A
good example of this is in tendering where all specifications
and data should be generic unless entered as prime costs
sums.
Post tender, as each object becomes defined, it is
important to populate these fields so that stem data and

611
601

other model types allowing a host of differing files to coexist which provides generative options for various reports
regarding clash collision, resources and man power to be
compared and contrasted.
IV.

PROJECT CERTAINTY

Beyond FM, all the differing stakeholders in the project
team have an agenda and a goal to both enter data into the
model, and interact with the other stakeholders to progress
the project through all phases to practical completion
(Jernigan 2007). Issues arise in how that data has to be
protected. Issues also arise in who controls the entry of data,
who checks the fidelity of the entered data and who
integrates and filters the entered data for the other
stakeholders in the equation.
Generally the above calls for some form of management
(Elvin 2007). For the model to be robust enough and to
manage itself is a recipe for disaster. For each to be
responsible for their own data has potential, but also
challenges how well the data is entered. Finally who takes
overall responsibility for the wealth and well being of the
model and who owns the model all leave much unanswered
and the water's muddied.
If there are two or more models, then the likelihood of
uncorrelated mistakes increases. If there is one model then
practical considerations come into play. Prime here is
ownership. Is it part owned by each stakeholder or is there
mutual or communal ownership. Ultimately ownership will
resort to the client, so therefore maybe the client should
adopt the model at the earliest, as in Terminal Five at
Heathrow where the British Aviation Authority (BAA) took
out professional indemnity insurance for the whole project
and hired all stakeholders as sub contractors (Potts 2006).
Next is size and manageability, several stakeholders will
have a multitude of differing needs and requirements from
the model. Some will be all-consuming, others will be
marginal. Methods are then necessary to marshal and protect
each stakeholder's input, while making it available to the
others for inspection and use. This system of bells and
whistles is not thoroughly accepted and endorsed by all the
disciplines and needs more work from vendors to make it
transparent and robust.
Finally should all stakeholders have the same set of work
tools or the same workbox of tools to author and analyse the
project. The answer is no and this is the most interesting
paradigm shift in building information modelling (Laiserin).
The reality is that there will never be a single source and so
appropriate management considerations need to come into
the equation. Some form of transparency can be attained
with the use and enforcement of standards such as Industry
Foundation Classes (IFC's) being the lowest common
denominator for all programmes. Viewers, such as
Navisworks, Tekla Viewer and Solibri, also allow the
various models to be assembled into a viewer where clash
collision and time lines can aid a construction manager.
At the other end of the equation, the data can be also
extracted in the form of quantities, allowing resources and
costs to be allocated for the procurement stage of the project.
Here the model is transformed from graphic data to numeric

Figure 3 Quantities exported for estimating © Harty

diagrams/function diagrams to avoid the obvious
misinterpretation or at best largely misleading information.
The model can accommodate this and the room boundary
feature can use circles and ellipses to comply with the
sensitive nature required at the early stage. The process
therefore can proceed with all the functions being committed
to the model in a fashion where a rough method can be
enabled to get an overall picture of how many square meters
of differing qualities of floor space can be designed in the
project. Rough estimates can then be applied such as square
meter prices together with quality weightings of the spaces
into high retail/leasing or low level service types. This allows
the stakeholders to play with their balances or a mix of uses
to make the project a success.
This modelling means that schedules of the spaced can be
extracted or exported to other programs to test the validity of
the proposal from a financial point of view. No architectural
decisions have been taken at this point. No one has
committed to the buildings form other than the total square
meters or volumetric studies needed to copper fasten the
project.
Should this initial phase be successful then the next phase
can begin. This involves the decanting of the data over to the
initial building model proper. The architect’s role is now to
look at the agreed areas and convert them into rooms. In this
phase the architect can look at the bubbles which have had
data added and begins to consign rectangular spaces over
these formless bubbles to begin the form making process that
is the architect’s role. As the forms emerge the data is kept
and so the schedules are maintained and updated.
This is the first seamless transition of collaborative
integration of the life cycle assessment. Later using a
proprietary viewer the other phases can be added as well as

Figure 4 Export to activity, time and resource tool (note:
time has not been allocated at point of import) © Harty

612
602

finally there would be consultants who are required to advise
both clients and professionals on strategies and short,
medium and long term paths, to massage the model adoption
through the differing disciplines, as seamlessly as possible.
Jonassen (Jonassen 2006) has stated that "…the
management of sharing, integrating, tracking, and
maintaining data sets that make up the total project model is
a new and rather awesome endeavour. While it will be done
in collaboration with many modelling entities, it requires
overall leadership” I firmly believe that the discipline best
suited to that role is the constructing architect.
If they can establish a beach head, then the rewards can
be immense. Changes to the workplace will then see the
adjunct manager establish a holding role in effecting project
realisation. This can eventually give the discipline
professional recognition and redefine the whole procurement
process. (Harty and Laing 2010 Chapter 24).

Figure 5 Viewer showing 3D/4D/5D overlaid for clash
detection and timeline sequencing © Harty

data and a new set of programmes allow the fourth and fifth
dimensions to be added to the model. The fourth dimension
is time and the fifth resources (materials and manpower).
This phase is being driven by contractors, with the
Association of General Contractors (AGC) in America
recommending their members not to bid on non-BIM work,
and that if they do, to build their own model before bidding,
in order to give a qualified bid (Young, Jones, et al. ). It will
also control the subsequent phase onsite. Here the previously
mentioned tagging plays an important role.
It does not end there either, the next wave will see subcontractors accessing the model to extract the material and
quantities they need to complete their portion of the work
and to also liaise with others as to when the work will
commence and when it will be expected to be completed.
This is in a formative stage but under trials electricians found
that after being forced to consult with the model (akin to
pulling teeth), that they found out that the guessing, the
waste and the contingencies evaporated so much so that
those in the trials wondered how they ever managed without
it before. All in all the shape of the model at handover is
looking better and better.
V.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

CONCLUSION

Bridges need to be built to align facility management
with the procurement (design) phases. Collaboration and
sustainability demand this. This lengthening of the model's
life cycle makes more demands of the model and the
modellers.
One option would be to establish the model on an
independent plane, with an adjunct role of BIM manager
emerging. This removal from the coal face to a more robust
position, would steady the ship and offer a more consolatory
arrangement. This would have the effect of making the
adoption of and transition to BIM less risky. It would
standardise the format and it would remove the technical
obstacles which are perceived as a barrier to many at the
moment.
Three levels of competence are envisaged; the first where
there is a hands-on approach where resources are required to
physically integrate the various programmes and process
together in the project; next there is a need for managers to
control access to the model across the board ensuring
indemnity and safeguarding the various stakeholders stakes;

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

613
603

EASTMAN, C. et al., 2008. BIM Handbook A Guide to Building
Information Modeling for Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers,
and Contractors. USA: John Wiley & Sons.
ECKBLAD, S., RUBEL, Z. and BEDRICK, J., 2007. Integrated
Project Delivery What, Why and How. 2nd May 2007. AIA.
ELVIN, G., 2007. Integrated Practice in Architecture
Mastering Design-Build, Fast tract, and Building Information
Modeling. First ed. USA: John Wiley & Sons.
HARDIN, B., 2009. BIM and Construction Management
Proven Tools, Methods and Workflows. Indianapolis, Indiana, USA:
Wiley Publishing.
HARTY, J. and LAING, R., 2010. Handbook of Research on
Building Information Modeling and Construction Informatics:
Concepts and Technologies. In: J. UNDERWOOD and U. ISIKDAG,
eds. First ed. Hersey, New York, USA: Information Science
Reference (an imprint of IGI Global). pp. 546-560
JERNIGAN, F., 2007. BIG BIM little bim. Second ed. USA: 4 Site
Press.
JONASSEN, J., 2006. Report on Integrated Practice. AIA.
LAISERIN, J., AEC software by the clock (AEC insight column).
[online]
Cadalyst
AEC.
Available
from:
http://aec.cadalyst.com/aec/Column:+AEC+Insight/AEC-Softwareby-the-Clock-AEC-InsightColumn/ArticleStandard/Article/detail/566219 [Accessed 15/03/2009
2009]
POTTS, K., 2006. Project management and the changing nature of the
quantity surveying profession – Heathrow Terminal 5 case study.
SAPP, D., 2010. Computerized maintenance management systems
(CMMS) | whole building design guide. [online] Plexus Scientific.
Available from: http://www.wbdg.org/om/cmms.php [Accessed
3/11/2010 2010]
SMITH, D.K. and TARDIF, M., 2009. Building Information
Modeling
A Strategic Implementation Guide for Architects, Engineers,
Constructors and Real Estate Asset Managers. Hoboken, New Jersey:
John Wiley & Sons Inc.
SØRENSEN, T. , 2010. Focus Group discussion on role of FM in
BIM.
YOUNG, N.W.J., JONES, S.A. and BERNSTEIN, H.M.,
SmartMarket report on building information modeling (BIM) research & analytics. [online] McGraw-Hill Construction. Available
from:
http://construction.ecnext.com/coms2/summary_0249296182_ITM_analytics [Accessed 19/12/2008 2008]

