2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

The use of visualization in the context of business strategies
An experimental evaluation

Sebastian Kernbach

Martin J. Eppler

Institut of Marketing and Communication Management
University of Lugano (USI)
Lugano, Switzerland
sebastian.kernbach@usi.ch

Institute for Media and Communication Management
University of St. Gallen (HSG)
St. Gallen, Switzerland
martin.eppler@unisg.ch

to produce superior performance if it is not successfully
implemented.
[4]
The
importance
of
strategy
implementation is further supported by the results of various
surveys conducted with senior executives. In 2004,
according to an Economist survey of 276 senior operating
executives, 57 percent of firms were not successful at
executing strategic initiatives over the past three years. [5]
In 2006, a global survey by The Monitor Group asked
senior executives about their priorities, and found that the
number one result, by a clear margin, was strategy
execution. Chief Executive Officers would rather have a
good strategy that their organization can execute than a
brilliant strategy that their people do not understand and
cannot deliver [6]. In other words, strategy implementation
is the most difficult and most important step in the strategy
process. The best test of managerial excellence is an
excellent implementation of a strategy which is the most
reliable formula for turning companies into outstanding
performers. [7] But why is this still a problem?
The major problem in strategy implementation is that
companies underestimate or ignore the importance of the
role of lower-level management and employees for the
successful execution of the strategy. A successful strategy
implementation is not just determined by those people who
defined the strategy, but also by the decisions and actions of
all employees at all levels of the organization. [8]
Organizations depend on all of their employees to achieve
strategic initiatives; not on top-management alone. [9]
However, research by Kaplan and Norton revealed that, on
average, 95 percent of a company’s employees are not
aware of, or do not understand, its strategy. [10]
The literature research about the problems of strategy
implementation shows four dominant areas of problems: (1)
Awareness of and attention to strategy information, (2)
Understanding of the strategy, (3) Agreement and Support
of the strategy, and (4) Retention of the strategic content.
Attention (1): Among employees, the first area of
problems is missing attention, awareness and interest for the
strategy. According to Noble, consensus cannot be achieved
if lower-level management and non-management are not
aware of the same information concerning strategy. [4]

Abstract— An experiment was conducted to add empirical
evidence whether the use of visualization is better than text in
the communication of business strategies.
Seventy-four managers who took part in an Executive
MBA program saw a presentation of the simplified strategy of
BMW Financial Services. The visual support of the
presentation was manipulated by the author and the according
effects were measured. Three different types of visual support
were chosen: text in the form of PowerPoint (1), visualization
in the form of a visual metaphor (2), and a roadmap (3). Each
subject saw only one of the three types of visual support. The
effects measured were attention, comprehension, agreement
and retention. In addition the perception of the visual and the
perception of the presenter were measured for each of the
three conditions.
Subjects who were exposed to visualization in the form of
visual metaphor and roadmap paid significantly more
attention to the strategy, agreed more with the strategy and
recalled the strategy better than did subjects who saw text in
the form of PowerPoint. No significant superiority was found
for visualization compared to text in understanding the
strategy.
Subjects who were exposed to visualization in the form of
visual metaphor and roadmap perceived the visual and the
presenter significantly better than did those subjects who
where exposed to text in the form of PowerPoint. In addition
the perception of the visual accounted for 69% of the variation
of the perception of the presenter.
Keywords: strategy visualization, knowledge visualization,
strategy communication, visual metaphor, roadmap, diagram,
PowerPoint, perception of presenter, perception of presenter,
visual representation)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Considerable research has mentioned the importance and
problems of strategy implementation. Strategy is about the
current situation of an organization, the goals of an
organization and especially how it is going to achieve these
goals. The essence of the strategy is the competitive
advantage of the organization [1] and according to Henry
Mintzberg with strategy ‘you can shape the future’ [2] of an
organization. Strategy implementation is important because
it is essential for the optimal performance of an
organization. [3] Even a well-formulated strategy is not able
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.55

343
349

Kaplan and Norton state that ‘employees cannot help
implement a strategy that they are not aware of’. [6]
Comprehension (2): Shared understanding of middle
management and those at the operational level to the top
management team’s strategic goals is of critical importance
to effective implementation. [11] Employees who do not
understand the strategy cannot link their daily activities to
its successful execution. [6]
Agreement (3): Strategy implementation efforts may fail
if the strategy does not enjoy support and commitment by
the majority of employees and middle management. [11]
The management must align employees with the strategy.
Unless all employees understand the strategy and are
motivated to achieve it, successful execution of the strategy
is highly unlikely. [6]
Retention (4): The strategic content does not reside
within the employees; rather, it is hidden away on a static
piece of paper in a strategic plan. [12] Executives cannot
remember and summarize their company’s strategy in their
own words, and even if they could, it is not clear if their
colleagues would put it the same way. [1]
Strategy implementation is problematic because
organizations underestimate the importance of nonmanagement for executing the strategy. Non-management
that is unaware of the strategic content cannot understand it
and therefore will not support and remember the strategy.
The key to better execution of strategies is to engage
employees by a better way of communicating the strategy.
[13] A lot of researchers have mentioned the importance of
communication for the strategy implementation process and
‘communication is mentioned more frequently than any
other single item promoting successful strategy
implementation’. [14]
When comparing companies achieving an outstanding
performance with underperformers, research showed that 73
percent of companies achieving outstanding performance
clearly communicate their strategy, whereas only 28 percent
of the underperformers take such an action. In other words,
communication of strategy enables and is promising in
terms of better strategy implementation. [6]
It is therefore surprising that researchers in strategic
management put a lot of effort into the analysis and
definition of strategies, but neglect the process of
communicating the strategy. While the focus of a number of
studies was explicitly on the role of information and
communication in strategic business alignment, according to
the most accurate current knowledge, no one has ever
looked into how the information that is communicated is
displayed. [15] Li, Guohui, and Eppler underline that
‘several researchers just point out that communication is
important, but there is no in-depth analyses on exactly how
communication influences strategy implementation’. [14]
PowerPoint is ubiquitous in corporate, governmental and
pedagogical settings. It is most often chosen as the unit of
display either because of habits and preferences of a
particular individual, professional community or

organization, or because it is driven by the capabilities of
the tools (i.e. PowerPoint) at hand. The normal channel of
business communication has become the projected slide,
and PowerPoint is the slideshow program that enables the
creation of billions of presentation slides each year. [16]
Even though PowerPoint is used everywhere, the results
of the measurement of its effects is surprising. [17] Gold
found that even though the projected slide read by the
audience as a group while listening to a speech is the normal
way of communicating in business, the effect of such
communication is unclear. [18]
The major drawbacks of PowerPoint are the constant use
of the hierarchical bullet points and the low spatial
resolution allowing only a few words on each slide. This
results in the inability to establish a logical connection
within and in between slides. [19]
A study published in the Harvard Business Review
found that bullet points are widely used in corporate strategy
and that in the presentations of strategies bullet points fail to
clearly show even simple, one-way causal models. In
addition, they note that bullet point lists and written
statements are not the best way to communicate often
complex, strategic ideas and instead, using diagrams or
images is suggested. [20]
Communicating with or through a visual metaphor is an
indirect way of communication because the reader has first
to mentally reconstruct the displayed picture correctly and
therefore finish the thinking about the shown content/image
in his or her mind. It allows the reader to transfer existing
knowledge to new areas and allows for a better
understanding of complex thoughts, which is the main
element of successful knowledge communication. [21] In
terms of functions, visual metaphors fulfill a dual function:
first, they position information graphically to organize and
structure it and secondly, they convey insight about the
represented information through the key characteristics of
the metaphor that is employed. [22]
Visual metaphors’ core competence is the reduction of
order and complexity by carrying elements from a mastered
subject to a new domain. By doing so, the metaphor
provides the path from the understanding of something
familiar to something new. It improves understanding; this
is why Aristotle calls the metaphor a tool of cognition. [21]
A roadmap is a diagram which is defined as ‘a visual
language sign having the primary purpose of denoting
function and/or relationship’. [23] As in any other diagram
representation, a roadmap contains information that is
organized by location, so that the information can be
accessed and processed simultaneously. It uses standardized
shapes to convey mostly analytical knowledge in a highly
structured and systematic format. [24]
A roadmap has two major advantages. First, it makes
abstract concepts accessible by reducing complexity through
structuring information. Second, it illustrates and explains
causal relationships, which allow the audience to explore
and discuss structural relationships among parts. A good

350
344

roadmap or diagram in general, can ‘convey instantly and
memorably a relationship that would otherwise require a
laborious and easily forgotten explanation’. [25]
Due to its flexibility in terms of format and structure, the
roadmapping approach can be customized to many different
strategic contexts. Today, it is one of the most widely used
management techniques and it is increasingly applied for the
development, communication, and implementation of
business strategies. Roadmapping has gained acceptance
and it is considered a key supporting technique that uses
simple visual frameworks to support dialogue and
communication necessary to develop, deploy and implement
the desired strategy. [24]
Eppler concludes in his article about visual metaphors
that a central focus of research is the evaluation of the
effects of visual metaphors and underlines that there is a
strong need for a systematic control of effects for the
application of metaphors. [21] Phaal and Muller in their
article about the use of roadmapping for the visualization of
strategy, conclude that even though the visual aspect of a
roadmap is the main reason why it is so attractive, guidance
is needed to support the development of roadmaps as
effective aids for knowledge communication. They propose
to conduct experiments to assess how to best use roadmaps
and to identify requirements for its enhancement. [24]
Finally, in their study in the Harvard Business Review
Shaw, Brown, and Bromiley found that bullet points are
widely used in corporate strategy and conclude that bullet
point lists and written statements are not the best way to
communicate often complex strategies and suggest using
diagrams or images instead. [20] This previous research
provides strong arguments for why diagrams and images
should be used in the communication of business strategies
and it also shows that it is desirable to empirically evaluate
the effects of such methods.
II.

Figure 1. Independent and dependetn variable(s).

Subjects were 76 managers from various industries and
companies with an average age of 35 years with an average
work experience of eleven years and an average strategy
experience of three years. (Table 1) All subjects took part in
an Executive MBA program at the University of Geneva.
IV.

First, the strategy of BMW Financial Services was
simplified to 17 information units namely the major goal,
three sub-goals with three elements each, three success
factors and one barrier. Second, based on the strategic
content the three types of visual support were created; text in
the form of hierarchical bullet-points in PowerPoint and
visualization in the form of a visual metaphor and a
roadmap. The authors were aware that PowerPoint slides are
not always limited to hierarchical bullet-points but also can
be enriched by decorative graphics. However, for
experimentation and evaluation purposes PowerPoint was
limited to text in the form of hierarchical bullet-points.

METHOD

Managers were exposed to a strategy presentation of a
simplified strategy of BMW Financial Services. Each
subject saw only one of the following visual supports: Text
in the form of PowerPoint (1), Visualization in the form of a
visual metaphor (2) or roadmap (3). After the strategy
presentation the effects were measured in terms of attention,
comprehension, agreement and retention. In addition the
perception of the visual and the perception of the presenter
were measured.
III.

PROCEDURE

Figure 2. Three types of visual support; PowerPoint, Visual Metaphor,
Roadmap (in order)

Third, the strategy was presented with one of the three
types of visual support. The presentation was conducted in
the way that the visual support was projected on a large
screen (3x2m) and a presenter was explaining the strategy
verbally and referring to the visual support. Straight after
the presentation a questionnaire was handed out through
which attention, comprehension, agreement, perception of
visual and perception of presenter were measured. After a
one hour distraction task, in which subjects were asked to

DESIGN

The visual support is the independent variable which the
researcher manipulated in order to measure the differences in
the effects on the dependent variables which are attention,
agreement, comprehension, and retention.

351
345

work on a case study, the second questionnaire was handed
out to measure the retention of the strategy. In addition the
following variables were fixed: presenter, environment
(lighting, screen size, screen placement), and the
presentation duration (7.30 minutes). For the presentation of
the strategy the same presenter was used for all three types
of visual support. The presenter has been chosen since he
was familiar with the content of the strategy. However, the
presenter was the lecturer of the EMBA class and therefore
biases might exits towards the perception of the presenter.
Further more, the following variables were measured to be
controlled for: Subject background information, legibility,
and a visualizer/verbalizer tendency in cognitive style.
V.

to PowerPoint while the visual metaphor is for the only
time, the worst among the three conditions.
An analysis of the variance (ANOVA) was conducted in
order to find out whether the found differences were of
significance and of which level of significance. Table 3
shows the results for each dependent variable.
TABLE III.

Dependent
variable
Attention
Agreement
Comprehension

RESULTS

The descriptive statistics of the sample for each condition
show that the age and work experience of the subjects differ
within a range of +/- one year from the total mean. For the
level of strategy experience and subject English skills, the
mean values differ only by +/- 0.1 for each condition
compared to the total average.

Retention

Subject’s
Work
Experience

Subject’s
Strategy
Experience

Subject’s
English
Skills

PowerPoint
(PP)
Visual Metaphor
(VM)
Roadmap
(RM)
Total

35.0

9.6

3.1

4.1

34.3

9.8

3.1

4.1

35.7

12.3

3.0

4.0

35.0

10.6

3.1

4.1

In the following the descriptive statistics of the sample
will be shown. The table shows the means and standard
deviations for each of the three conditions and the dependent
variables attention, agreement, comprehension and attention.
TABLE II.

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF EACH INDEPENDENT
VARIABLE

0.9

2.9

0.8

1.3

0.7

6.2

2.5

VM

4.0

0.8

3.4

0.6

0.9

0.7

8.0

2.6

RM

4.6

0.7

3.5

0.9

1.4

0.7

7.9

3.3

SD

Mean

3.2

SD

PP

SD

Mean

Retention

Mean

Comprehension

SD

Agreement

Mean

Attention

F
(Sig.)
17.6
(0.0)
3.1
(0.5)
4.2
(0.0)
2.9
(0.1)

Outcome
Visualizations
<-> Control
Visualizations
<-> Control
Visualizations
<-> Control
Visualizations
<-> Control

Sig.
(2-tailed)
.000**
.016*
.306
.019*

The results of ANOVA displayed in table 3 show
significant differences between the visualization methods
and the control method for attention, agreement, and
retention. While the significance for attention is at a ‘p <=
0.01’ level, for agreement and retention it is at a ‘p <= 0.05’
level. For comprehension, the difference between the two
visualization methods and the control method is not
significant.
Control variables: The purpose of the analysis is to
account for the correlation of the control variables on the
four dependent variables as well as on the two dependent
variables of the additional explorative research. The analysis
of the correlation will be conducted by applying mediated
regressions for those control variables that are scales and
independent t-test for the nominal control variables since all
three of them have two values. Overall, there is every reason
to believe that the results reported represent valid statements
in association with acceptance or rejection of the hypotheses
intended to test the propositions associated with the theory
under investigation.
Measurement of the perception of the visual and the
perception of the presenter. The reason for measuring these
variables is two-fold. First, from a theoretical perspective,
research exists that the use of visualization compared to no
use of visualization in a speech positively affects the
perception of the presenter. This was shown in the Wharton
study and has been replicated by the work of Vogel. [26]
Second, from a practical perspective, the application of the
visual metaphor for the strategy communication of BMW
Financial Services has led to a positive perception of the
visual, but was not measured and is only based on anecdotal
subjective feedback.
The explorative dependent variables ‘Perception of the
Presenter’ (PR) and ‘Perception of the visual’ (VR) have
both been measured based on eight semantic differentials
items. These items have been selected by three researchers
out of a scale consisting of eleven items that has been used

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF SAMPLE BY CONDITION

Subject’s
Age

TABLE I.

ANOVA RESULTS FOR EACH INDEPENDENT VARIABLE

The results show a clear pattern and superiority of both
visualizations for Attention, Agreement and Retention
compared to PowerPoint. However, for the measurement of
comprehension, the roadmap is slightly superior compared

352
346

to measure the perception of the presenter by the Wharton
study as well as the study of Vogel. [26]
In order to check for the validity of the scale consisting
of eight items a factor analysis was conducted which
resulted into high factor loading. The reliability was
measured with the Cronbach alpha measure. The Cronbach
alpha for the perception of the presenter was .930 and for
the perception of the visual, the Cronbach alpha was .943
and both values were highest with all eight measures
included. Both values are high and far above .8, which is
considered as a critical value for the internal consistency.
Therefore, the total score for the perception of the presenter
as well as for the perception of the visual was used rather
than each item separately.
Based on the total averages, the descriptive statistics for
the perception of the presenter and the perception of the
visual are shown in the following table.
TABLE IV.

TABLE VI.

Mean
4.3
5.3
5.7

SD
1.2
0.9
1.1

SD
1.2
0.9
1.1

The ANOVA analysis was done with the same contrasts
as for the measure of the other four dependent variables. The
results are shown in the following table.
TABLE V.

ANOVA RESULTS FOR EXPLORATIVE RESEARCH

Dependent
variable
Perception
of Presenter
Perception
of Visual

F
(Sig.)
9.9
(.000)
20.5
(.000)

Outcome
Visualizations
<-> Control
Visualizations
<-> Control

Pearson
Correlation
Sig. (2-tailed)

Perception
of Visual
.829**
.000

The Pearson correlation analysis indicates that there is a
significant correlation at the p<=0.01-level between the
perception of the presenter and the perception of the visual.
In order to find out if the influence of the perception of the
visual on the perception of the presenter is significant, and
of which level, a linear regression is conducted. In this
linear regression, the perception of the visual is the
independent variable while the perception of the presenter is
the dependent variable. The results of the linear regression
are shown in the following table.
The results of the linear regression show a value for R
square of .687, which means that the perception of the visual
can account for 68.7 percent of the variation in the
perception of the presenter. Furthermore, the F-ratio with
156.001 at the significance-level of p<=.001 indicates that
with this result there is less than a 0.1 percent chance that an
F-ratio this large would happen by chance alone. Therefore,
we have statistical evidence that the perception of the visual
is a very good and strong predictor of the perception of the
presenter.

Perception of Visual

Mean
3.8
5.2
5.7

CORRELATION BETWEEN PERCEPTION OF VISUAL AND
PERCEPTION OF PRESENTER

Perception
of
Presenter

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR EXPLORATIVE RESEARCH
Perception of Presenter

PP
VM
RM

condition the question remains if the perception of the visual
indirectly also affects the perception of the presenter.
A Pearson correlation analysis has been conducted in
order to find out whether this correlation between the
perception of the visual and the perception of the presenter
exists. If this correlation is significant, a linear regression
will be conducted.

Sig.
(2-tailed)
.000**
.000**

VI.

CONCLUSION

Strategy implementation is important for organizations
since even a well-formulated strategy fails to reach superior
performance if it is not implemented. At the same time, the
implementation of strategies is problematic due to the lack
of attention, comprehension, agreement, and retention for
the strategic content among employees and managers.
Strategy communication is promising in overcoming these
problems, but a lack of research existed in how to
communicate strategies.
PowerPoint is mostly used due to its availability, but its
effects are unclear. Visualization provides promising
methods for improving strategy communication. However,
the measurement of such methods was limited to anecdotal
and qualitative feedback and a lack of empirical evidence
existed.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to answer the
research question if the use of visualization is better than
text in the communication of business strategies. To answer
this question, the study provided empirical evidence by

The results in the table above show that the perception
of the presenter is significantly better when the
visualizations are used compared to when the control
variable with text-only is used. This is true for both
visualizations aggregated (Visualizations vs. Control ->
.000) compared to the control variable.
The same is true for the perception of the visuals. The
perception of the visual is significantly better when the
visualizations are used, compared to when the control
variable with text-only is used. This is true for both
visualizations aggregated (Visualizations vs. Control ->
.000) compared to the control variable.
The results for both the perception of the presenter and
for the perception of the visual show a high level of
significance. The presenter is held constant for all three
conditions, while the visual as the independent variable is
manipulated by the researcher. Since the results indicate that
the perception of the presenter is evidently dependent on the

353
347

conducting an experiment in which a real strategy of BMW
Financial Services was presented to EMBA students. The
display of the strategy was manipulated by the researcher
into text in the form of PowerPoint and two visualization
methods, visual metaphor and roadmap. The resulting
effects were measured in terms of attention, comprehension,
agreement, and retention.
The results of this study show that visualization was
significantly better than text in terms of attention,
agreement, and retention. This implies that the use of
visualization has the potential to be better than text in the
communication of business strategies. The fact that this
research was not able to demonstrate significant differences
between visualization and text in terms of comprehension
should not be taken as an indication that no differences
exist, but rather that the creation of the visuals and the
measurement of comprehension need to be better
understood and improved in future applications.
The additional explorative measurement of this study
was measuring the perception of the presenter and the
perception of the visual, and the results show a constant
superiority of visualization compared to text. The perception
of the presenter and the perception of the visual were
significantly better when visualization was used compared
to text. In addition, the perception of the visuals accounts
for more than two thirds of the perception of the presenter.
This has an implication for the use of visualization in the
context of strategy communication and in general. These
findings imply that by using visualization instead of text, the
perception of the presenter is improved. These new and
interesting findings encourage the use of visualization in
practice and encourage future research to further investigate
this area.
Summarized, the aim of the study was to provide
empirical evidence that visualization is better than text in the
communication of business strategies. The results show that
visualization is better than text for all dependent variables
apart from comprehension; coupled with the findings of
previous research, the findings of this research illustrate the
potential
of
visualization
to
improve
strategy
communication. Moreover, this research is the first known
empirical test of different visualization methods to
communicate a real strategy in an experimental setting, and
this serves as an important addition to previous work within
the field of strategy visualization.

Implementation. ICA Working Paper, Business School Beijing,
University of Lugano.
[6] Kaplan, R., Norton, D. (2008). The Execution Premium, Boston:
Harvard Business Press.
[7] Thompson et al. (2005) in Schaap, J. (2006). Toward strategy
implementation success: An empirical study of the role of senior-level
leaders in the Nevada gaming industry. UNLV Gaming Research &
Review Journal, 13(25), 13-37.
[8] Schaap, J. (2006). Toward strategy implementation success: An
empirical study of the role of senior-level leaders in the Nevada
gaming industry. UNLV Gaming Research & Review Journal, 13(25),
13-37.
[9] Van Riel, C., Berens, G., Dijkstra, M. (2006). Creating strategic
business alignment through information and dialogue. 10th anniversary
conference on reputation, image, identity and competitiveness,
Erasmus University, Rotterdam School of Management.
[10] Kaplan, R., Norton, D. (2005). The office of strategy management.
Harvard Business Review, 83(10), 72- 80.
[11] Rapert et al. (2002) in Yang, L., Guohui, S., Eppler, M. (2008).
Making strategy work: A Literature Review on the Factors influencing
Strategy Implementation. ICA Working Paper, Business School
Beijing, University of Lugano.
[12] Van Riel, C. (2008). Creating a strategically aligned workforce.
Corporate Reputation Review, 11(4), 351-359.
[13] University of Lugano (2009b). Lecture material: Visualisation in
Business Communication – Module07: Strategy Visualization.
http://corsi.elearning.org (15th July 2009).
[14] Yang, L., Guohui, S., Eppler, M. (2008). Making strategy work: A
Literature Review on the Factors influencing Strategy Implementation.
ICA Working Paper, Business School Beijing, University of Lugano.
[15] Frank et al. (1989) in Van Riel, C., Berens, G., Dijkstra, M. (2006).
Creating strategic business alignment through information and
dialogue. 10th anniversary conference on reputation, image, identity
and competitiveness, Rotterdam School of Management.
[16] Tufte, E. (2003). The cognitive style of PowerPoint, Cheshire:
Graphics Press.
[17] Levasseur et al. (2006) in Stoner, M. (2007). PowerPoint in a New
Key. Communication Education, 56(3), 354-381.
[18] Gold (2002) in Stoner, M. (2007). PowerPoint in a New Key.
Communication Education, 56(3), 354-381.
[19] Stoner, M. (2007). PowerPoint in a New Key. Communication
Education, 56(3), 354-381.
[20] Shaw et al. (1998) in Tufte, E. (2003). The cognitive style of
PowerPoint, Cheshire: Graphics Press.
[21] Eppler, M. (2004). Visuelle Kommunikation – Der Einsatz von
graphischen Metaphern zur Optimierung des Wissentransfers. In
Wissenskommunikation in Organisationen: Methoden, Instrumente,
Theorien, 13-31. Berlin: Springer.
[22] Lengler, R., Eppler, M. (2007). Towards a periodic table of
visualization methods for management. IASTED Proceedings of the
Conference on Graphics and Visualization in Engineering (GVE
2007), Clearwater, Florida, USA.
[23] Garland, K. (1979). Some General Characteristics Present in Diagrams
Denoting Activity, Event and Relationship. Information Design
Journal, 1(1), 15-22.
[24] Eppler, M., Burkhard, R. (2004). Knowledge Visualization – Towards
a new discipline and its fields of application. Paper #2/2004,
University of Lugano.
[25] Platts, K., Hua Tan, K. (2004). Strategy visualisation: knowing,
understanding and formulating. Management Decision, 42(5), 667676.
[26] Vogel, D. (1986). An experimental investigation of the persuasive
impact of computer generated presentation graphics. PhD dissertation,
University of Minnesota

REFERENCES
[1] Collis, D., Rukstad, M. (2008). Can you say what your strategy is?
Harvard Business Review, 82(9), 83-90.
[2] Mintzberg, H. (2005). Strategic Seeing as ‘Seeing’. In Strategy Bites
Back, 139-143. Harlow: Pearson.
[3] Nobel (1999) in Van Riel, C. (2008). Creating a strategically aligned
workforce. Corporate Reputation Review, 11(4), 351-359.
[4] Nobel (1999b) in Yang, L., Guohui, S., Eppler, M. (2008). Making
strategy work: A Literature Review on the Factors influencing Strategy
Implementation. ICA Working Paper, University of Lugano.
[5] Allio (2005) in Yang, L., Guohui, S., Eppler, M. (2008). Making
strategy work: A Literature Review on the Factors influencing Strategy

354
348

