2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Database Narratives: Conceptualising Digital Heritage Databases in Remote
Aboriginal Communities.
Hart Cohen, Rachel Morley, Peter Dallow, Lisa Kaufmann
School of Communication Arts University of Western Sydney
{ h.cohen@uws.edu.au, r.morley@uws.edu.au, p.dallow@uws.edu.au, l.kaufmann@uws.edu.au}
the author’s father, Pastor Carl Strehlow – Lutheran
missionary at Hermannsburg (Ntaria) – down the Finke
River in a vain effort to reach medical assistance.
Beyond this main story, Strehlow invokes a myriad of
scenes and narratives punctuated by evocations of the
landscape and Aboriginal culture and history in Central
Australia.
The database draws on a broad range of visual
representations (including images, maps, concept
diagrams, text and other media resources), and through
hyperlinks connects these to specific annotated points in
an electronic version of the book. The project is a
partnership with the Strehlow Research Centre (SRC),
Alice Springs, and members of the Aboriginal
community in Hermannsburg (Ntaria) where the book’s
narrative is set and whose characters are related through
kinship relationships. The project seeks to facilitate the
Arrernte/Arrarnta community’s access to these materials.
To achieve this JTHB is transposed into a networked
media context, with the added information sources that
expand the intelligibility of the explicit and implicit
contextual fields of the original work. Earlier work was
undertaken in 2004, in concert with similar initiatives in
Australia that self-identified as online Australian
Indigenous heritage projects, e.g., Ara Irititja on Anangu
Pitjantjatjara/Yankunytjatjara lands, Paradisec (Pacific
And Regional Archive for Digital Sources in Endangered
Cultures), and the IKMS (Indigenous Knowledge
Management System). This work is also associated with
the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI), a consortium that
collectively develops and maintains a standard for the
representation of texts in digital form and is, therefore,
aligned with the great migration of textual materials of
all kinds towards digitisation on the Internet.
At the core of this collaborative research is whether
a digital heritage resource can be conceived as a
sustainable emerging “thing-in-the-making” to reflect
community, cultural and knowledge interests? The
answer to this question is dependant upon community
consultation. This project is intended as part of the
ongoing strategy to develop and refine the newer
methods of databased virtual engagements with heritage.
Thus this paper is a work-in-progress account of a
project that has been subject to the complex, evolving

Abstract
Interactive web-based resources are significant to
the mediation of culture in that they act as an interface
[10] between communities and information structures.
The focus of this paper is on the use of digital media arts
and user-centered technologies to develop a digital
heritage resource to revitalize a community’s cultural
capital. The paper addresses the creation and use of an
interactive database that forms the portal to a digital
repository of archival media. The database supports and
extends an Australian classic memoir, Journey to
Horseshoe Bend by [15]. Journey to Horseshoe Bend is
a vivid ethno-historiographic account of the Aboriginal
(Arrernte/Arrarnta), settler and Lutheran communities of
Central Australia in the 1920’s. The Journey to
Horseshoe
Bend
database
<http://jhsb.bugs.commarts.uws.edu.au/heurist/> draws
on a broad range of visual representations (including
images, maps, concept diagrams, text and other media
resources), and through hyperlinks connects these media
to specific annotated points in an electronic version of
the book. The paper focuses on the book’s use as a
digital heritage resource and explores the link between
information architectures and knowledge practices in
particular contexts to address the following question:
How can a digital heritage resource be conceived as a
sustainable emerging “thing-in-the-making” to reflect
community, cultural and knowledge interests?
Background
Resources:
bugs.commarts.uws.edu.au/cocoon/jhsb/item/69994/ and
project website: http://www.commarts.uws.edu.au/jthb/

Introduction
This paper builds on earlier research that produced
an online database of digitised archival sources
connected to the anthropologist [15] biographical
memoir Journey to Horseshoe Bend (JTHB, 1969). JTHB
is a vivid ethno-historiographic account of the Aboriginal
(Arrernte), settler and Lutheran communities of Central
Australia in the 1920’s. This work is variously described
as autobiography, memoir, novel and creative nonfiction. The main story describes the journey taken by

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.65

416
422

worlds of convergent media, digital heritage preservation
and intercultural communications.

The cultural history of the Hermannsburg
(Ntaria) community

The JTHB database

Hermannsburg (Ntaria) is a key node in Australian
culture especially in relation to Twentieth Century and
contemporary Indigenous art movements. But as the
notion of place itself in Arrernte/Arrarnta suggests, place
(pmere — camp or country) is not so much a
geographical entity as being about spatial relations, of
historical and cultural relations to particular land, and to
people, ‘real’ and Dreaming (Wilkins 2002). In relation
to Hermannsburg (Ntaria), the first key Indigenous
person, under the tutelage of the painter Rex Battarbee
(French 2002), to express this relation to country in
accessible terms was Albert Namatjira (1902-1959). His
distinctive watercolours of the country around
Hermannsburg (Ntaria) are not only iconic of the ‘Red
Centre’, but gave rise to the Hermannsburg School of
landscape painting (Taylor 2005).
Today, women who paint their unique form of
pottery, link their work to Namatjira and in one instance,
scenes from JTHB were recorded in this medium as
well. 1 The Hermannsburg artists are part of the inherited
knowledge transfer that occurs in Central Australia in
relation to the sense of place and belonging. It is part of
what makes Hermannsburg (Ntaria) and environs a
profoundly important location for cultural and social
development. This has recently been recognised as
important in the Northern Territory (NT) and Federal
Government’s priorities by being identified as one of the
NT’s Twenty Towns, and reinforces the longer-term case
for Hermannsburg (Ntaria) being developed as a place
for establishing a major Community Knowledge and
Heritage Centre and a key location for culturally
specific educational resources.

The intention to develop the existing JTHB database
towards a public access version with both
Arrernte/Arrarnta and broader public input will disclose
the wider educational and cultural value of the database,
particularly for residents of the Hermannsburg (Ntaria)
community. The JTHB database and website both have
the potential to encourage indigenous and nonindigenous involvement with Australian historical and
cultural knowledge (both Aboriginal and White), using
the connecting facility of the computer and the Internet,
as a means of interacting with cultural experiences. In
supporting the movement to digital cultural heritage, the
project aims to build capacity for users to engage with
the narratives of the text and to contribute to digital story
telling, online learning, and the preservation and
management of archival materials to further cultural
sustainability and community awareness. The project
seeks to interrogate the character and quality of
knowledge practices and knowledge transfer through the
further development of the database.

Designing the Interface
Following [10] an interface design can move from a
“taken-for-granted” interaction to one that “prompts,
through intervention, the user to think again about what
it is they are doing, and how it relates to other
considerations.” The difference is theorized as a
provocation to the user to be more conscious of the
diverse and unfolding dynamic of meanings embedded in
the interface design [14]. The second potential as noted
by [10] invokes the notion of visual disclosure [7]. This
is a developing notion that describes an approach to
interface design where the value lies in the actual design
process over some fixed, final product. The JTHB
digitisation and encoded text is used to construct an
interface through which visual and audio-visual materials
can be utilised in relation to the extensive historical and
cultural archives in a form appropriate for a range of
publics, but principally the Hermannsburg (Ntaria)
community. The process is based in the various iterations
and models that will issue from community consultation
and user-based scenarios and what [3] calls the
evaluation of story complexities and what [13] terms a
full-scale transmedial narrative theory through an
awareness of multiple viewpoints and perspectives. In
this objective we follow [12] view that innovating
software for enhancing data already existent in
databases is a key strategy to providing meaningful
access for both researchers and the public.

JTHB as Collective Biography
The fragmentary life histories illuminated in JTHB
continue to hold significance in contemporary culture,
particularly for the descendents of the indigenous
personalities that feature in the work, many of who
continue to live in Hermannsburg (Ntaria). The
development of the existing database will build on the
historical biographical accounts inherent in JTHB
through an interlinking of past and present lives and will
provide immediate visual and textual points of contact
for database users in the Hermannsburg (Ntaria)
community. Users will be encouraged to contribute to the
evolving and organic narratives of JTHB, and the
evolution of the database, by connecting to the familial
links evidenced in the Strehlows’ genealogical charts.
These remain one of the most comprehensive
genealogical mappings of Australian Aboriginal people
1
A work of Irene Mbitjana Entata depicts the departure of Pastor Carl
Strehlow for the last time (see below) as the community sings the
Lutheran hymn, Wachet Auf. This is a key scene in the narrative of the
Journey to Horseshoe Bend and the inspiration for a cantata by the
same title (Gordon Williams, Librettist and Andrew Schultz,
composer.)

423
417

on record. The inclusion of the unique genealogies
collected by the Strehlows (Carl and TGH) make a key
contribution to the cultural capital of a digital heritage
database. As a text, JTHB can be said to take the form of
a fragmentary collective biography, one that reflects
what Craig Howes [6] has called a ‘community’s sense
of itself’. The database connects these communities to
historical and contemporary times using the genealogical
maps as portals into the numerous biographical
narratives of the main text.

biographical and museological resources. The new
electronic version of JTHB, developed out of the
database, demonstrates the potential for further reconstructing an expanded and mutable iteration of the
book’s ‘snapshot’ of the actual world within which it was
set. In so doing, it performs a new formal information
complex that enables the user to experience various
digital ‘journeys’ through a meta-textual framework of
curated digital pathways. As Roland Barthes [1, pg61]
suggests, ‘[t]he metaphor of the Text is that of the
network’. Understanding how these networks and their
possible meanings operate within the digital meta-textual
environment opens out the time-space relations of the
book. This has been described as its ‘thickening of time,
and charging of space’, as [9] put it, in order to sketch
the ‘field of historical, biographical, social relations’ as
digitised visual data knowledge sets. In terms of
innovation the project focuses on what occurs when print
texts are imported into electronic environments,
especially the online digital interactive formats, and then
applied to an educational environment in a remote
community. It enables us to ‘see print with new eyes’, as
[4] suggests, to see the form and content of a work in a
new material and experiential sense through the reengagement with the materiality of the new medium.

Cultural heritage and knowledge practices
These aims – (linking data to design, enhancing
collective cultural identities and analysing and assessing
the suitability of new knowledge resources) – converge
three lines of inquiry that are germane to defining the
idea of preserving cultural heritage through digitisation.
We are working with and on concepts of knowledge –
both as a feature of the learning process and as a means
of inquiring into the design of new forms/representations
of knowledge. In this regard we will investigate whether
visual representations in their forms as interfaces
composed of animations and dynamic diagrams can
function not only as representations of knowledge, but
can also gravitate towards representations as knowledge.
If so, we will have demonstrated the emerging potential
of visualization as a process of knowledge disclosure. In
testing the suitability of these heritage materials for the
learning contexts of a specific remote community,
educators at the Hermannsburg (Ntaria) School will
engage with the issue of identifying which resources best
enhance knowledge transfer in this context.

Digital heritage hubs
The quality and form of digitized learning resources
and activities the cultural heritage in remote
communities, particularly in Hermannsburg (Ntaria)
links up with a recent initiative in the Northern Territory
that has sought to increase indigenous access to culture
and knowledge through the development of the
Territory’s Libraries and Knowledge Centres (LKCs).
These have produced over a dozen knowledge and
cultural centres, mostly in the Top End (Northern
Territory) with two located in Central Australia - one in
the Anmatjere community of Ti-Tree, the other in the
Arrernte/Arrarnta community of Ltyentye Apurte (Santa
Teresa). The impetus for these initiatives, according to
the World Summit on the Information Society is as
follows: ‘Equitable access [to information services] has
to be contextualised and as far as possible based on
local linguistic/cultural, economic and technological
imperatives of communities so as to bolster their local
knowledge content and its ownership and management,’
(quoted in Gibson, J., 2008).
Significantly there is no such facility at
Hermannsburg (Ntaria) that responds to these needs. As
Darrell Jupurrula Fowler, principal of Hermannsburg
(Ntaria) School, states: “At the moment Hermannsburg
residents have very limited access to historical records,
photos and films. The project will work towards fulfilling
that gap,” (Letter to Cohen, January 09). The JTHB
database will open access to archived cultural knowledge
and ‘equitable access [to information services]’ through
the development and implementation of a culturally
appropriate database interface. It also actively brings past
and present communities into dialogue (contact) with

Knowledge management/Content Management
The problems of making tacit knowledge explicit
within a database are embedded in this project. This
duality of knowledge production may not capture a
specific quality of knowledge that is, its “embodied
context”. This takes knowledge management beyond
content management and suggests that cultural heritage
is always context dependant. The interest in the heritage
qualities of JTHB re-connects the linkages that bind this
community to an important story. The JTHB database is
rich in the objects and events that give both traditional
owners and community member’s opportunities to
engage within their expertise and most significantly
enhance the sense of place that is a core cultural value.

Innovation
The innovation of the database developed on the
basis of this project’s ongoing iterations lies in the
networking of text and image within emergent electronic
environments. The online digital version of JTHB
‘explodes’ the multilayered textuality of the book,
weaving into the narrative a ‘thickened’ textual complot
of relevant digitised historical records, links to recent
oral histories, and other external (web-based)

424
418

each other by creating a database interface for
indigenous access, digital storytelling engagement and
the recording of inherited knowledge. This is enabled by
the development of web-based educational tools that
touch on and enhance historical and cultural knowledge
– the cultural heritage relevant to the community such as
language revitalization and maintenance. Recognising
the importance of integrating local linguistic/cultural,
economic and technological imperatives of communities,
the project explores the potential of visualised datadesign sets as educational resources. This makes the
database site and culture-specific and will link
individuals living in Hermannsburg (Ntaria) today with
the lives and cultural histories documented in JTHB.

that can be analysed and studied in the contexts of its
cultural, intellectual and cerebral properties. Nor do we
assume that new communication technologies are simply
a magical answer to the education challenges faced by
remote communities. There is significant literature on the
limitations of introducing new technologies in education
without an adequate support context in the form of
human resources - teachers whose role is as significant in
sustaining the learning imperative as the technology
itself [2, 16). The remote community is one that is suited
to “learning that can grasp subjects within their context,
their complex, their totality” [8]. We are mindful that
“remote communities” are remote relative to those who
do not live in those communities, but who may live in
densely populated urban centres. To the people of
Hermannsburg (Ntaria), in the context of their immediate
environment – they are locals.

This is a critical opportunity to make a muchvalued and unique resource more accessible and
usable to the communities to which they pertain and,
importantly, to repatriate key cultural and heritage
texts to those communities.

Linking data to design
The interest in data visualisation takes from [12], the
noted Swedish researcher in global development, the
idea that we must create a highly contextualised analysis
of the needs and wants of indigenous communities in
Central Australia. Because of the differences within
countries these dictate that solutions will not be adequate
if they are imposed externally from models developed
for fundamentally different living conditions [12]. We
therefore adopt [12] recommendation to develop
software solutions to data visualisation and
representation. [12] has emphasised the usefulness of
innovating software for enhancing data already existent
in databases, to “link design to data”, thereby
transforming data sets into animations, dynamic
diagrams and searchable functions that locate relevant
data for re-organisation and disclosure. Data transformed
into graphic formats allows for publicly available data to
be accessed by many more people than would normally
be the case [12]. A second point [12] makes concerns the
double investment in technology and schools/education
required to help lift people out of poverty.
Developing cultural heritage resources is a key
partner to any other material developments enhanced by
technology, e.g., agronomy. Significantly [12] ranked
human rights, and especially cultural rights, as the
highest ranked outcomes as a consequence of the means
of development. These ideas are consonant with our
focus on education and knowledge as a means of change.
The key outcome is community participation in the
creation of cultural heritage. Our view is that we will
substantially advance the discipline’s understanding of
what is possible in the field of knowledge transfer and
digital heritage resources using new communications
technology and guiding the use of these resources via
intensive consultation with its community of learners.
We see this work as a bridge to “an increasingly complex
and tumultuous world [that] requires individuals and
communities to have the capacity to continually develop
and utilise different kinds of knowledge frameworks,
value systems, intelligence structures and skills in order

The database of digitalized cultural heritage will
make a significant cultural contribution by addressing
access to information and “cultural rights” [11, 12].
Cultural rights are a variant of human rights but with an
emphasis on access to cultural information, cultural
knowledge and the forms and structures (e.g.,
genealogies) through which these are made available.
Cultural rights include a group’s ability to preserve its
way of life, such as child rearing, continuation of
language, and security of its economic base in the nation
in which it is located. (Cultural rights are enshrined in
the Friebourg Declaration of Cultural Rights May 7,
2007.) We see our project as contributing to the
protection of cultural rights in opening up access to
JTHB to its cultural community of interest. Community
engagement is key to the project and includes criteria of
respect for cultural sensitivity, ethical research practice,
and community participation in the processes through all
stages of the project’s development and realisation.

The Text Encoding Initiative
Given the historical and largely factual nature of
JTHB, and its cultural, geographic and post-colonial
specificities, we see our work as a unique and innovative
contribution to the Text Encoding Initiative ([5] asserts
that TEI represents the most significant intellectual
advance in humanities computing activity) and wellsuited to benchmarking on an international stage. The
development of the project will take advantage of the
theoretical parameters and the awareness of the emerging
creative and technical possibilities of the Web 2.0
environment. This makes the audience testing and
exploration of specific community reactions and
relations to the text crucial to its development. As
another register of innovation, we see the purpose of
education as a means to transmit knowledge, but we also
seek to question the nature of knowledge – to see it not
as a ready-made thing but as a “thing–in-the-making”
425
419

of the concept of “fluid ontologies” 3 and a respect for
cultural diversity and community consultation needs to
inform any further development of database knowledge
resources in Central Australia.

to make sense of, adapt to and contribute to change in
their social and physical environment in constructive and
non-violent ways” [8]. In supporting both “lifelong and
lifewide learning” we agree with [8] that learning moves
beyond the School into the community and beyond the
boundaries of age and vocation.
The
JTHB
project
is
focused
on
intergenerational knowledge transfer in both content and
process – the manner through which content will be
accessed and used in the community/school learning
context. It will foster the right of individuals to choose
and to actively construct the learning communities to
which they belong. This involves opening opportunities
for individuals and communities wishing to engage in
different learning opportunities. More fundamentally, it
involves “…a systematic rethinking of the basic
assumptions, processes, roles, relationships, approaches
and discourses underlying conventional education
systems and in creatively constructing new learning
communities, and environments in which such
communities can flourish, that are more responsive to
diversity of learning needs, (meta-) cognitive styles and
cultures around the world” [17].

Conclusion: Datadiversity: Creating Digital
Heritage Databases
One of the longest lasting indigenous database
projects, Ara Irititja, as a result of a new collaborative
partnership with the Northern Territory Library Services,
have developed a new program called “Our Story
database”. One of the most successful aspects of this
project is the ability to offer a vehicle for Aboriginal
people in remote communities to develop a digital
cultural heritage resource that is robust and stable and to
which they could contribute at their leisure. It is
described as:
Our Story enables community members to connect
with their history in a simple and direct manner. It
provides a measure of ownership over local historical
and cultural records. It inspires a sense of pride and self
worth in individuals. Young people particularly are
learning how to use the database and developing the
skills needed to manage it. It is bringing more people
into the local library, where they can access a range of
library services, designed to promote literacy and
lifelong learning. 2

Figure 1 ‘Journey to Horseshoe Bend’ by Irene
Mbitjana Entata

References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

These are key aspects of the value of a digital
heritage and knowledge resource and the JTHB site
while based on a text shares the same intent to provide
access, skills and resources. The Our Story database has
gone through evaluations and iterations to improve its
effectiveness in remote Indigenous Australia. This
suggests that the development of virtual heritage
facilities through on-line databases has a way to go
before the ease of access and usefulness to end-users is
fully exploited. Irregardless, the need for the application
2

[5]
[6]

[7]

Barthes, Roland. 1986. Image, Music, Text. New York:
Hill and Wang.
Berg, D & J Vogelaar. 1998. ‘The need for a new
perspective: Creating learning networks for African
teachers, change, professional development and ICTs’, in
Marshall, G., & Ruohonen, M. (Eds.), Working
Conference on Capacity Building for IT in Education in
Developing Countries (pp. 263-274). London, New
York, Tokyo, etc.:
Grigar, Dene 2002 ‘Mutability, Medium, and Character’,
Computers and the Humanities, vol. 36, pp. 359-378.
Hayles, N.K. 2004. ‘Print Is Flat, Code Is Deep: The
Importance of Media-Specific Analysis’, Poetics Today,
vol. 25(1): pp. 67-90
Hockey, S. 2000. Electronic Texts in the Humanities,
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Howes, Craig Collective Lives. (2001), in Encyclopedia
of Life Writing: Autobiographical and Biographical
Forms. London: Routledge. Retrieved February 09, 2009
from http://www.credoreference.com/entry/6777962
Kahn, P & K Lenk. 2001. Mapping Websites, Hove, UK:
RotoVision

3
See Michael Christie,
http://www.cdu.edu.au/centres/ik/pdf/WordsOntologiesAbDB.pdf

http://www.ntl.nt.gov.au/our_story_version_2_project

426
420

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

Morin, E. Les. 1999. Sept Savoirs Necessaires a
I’education du Futur’, pub Nov 1999 by the United
Cultural
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Organization, France
Morson, Gary S. and Caryl Emerson. 1990. ‘Mikhail
Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosaics’, Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Newton, S., Interface as Totem, in L.Haddon, E.ManteMeijer,B. Sapio, K-H. Kommonen and A.Kant (eds) The
User and the Future of ICT, Proceedings of Good, Bad.
Irrelevant Conference, Media Centre Lume, Helsinki, pp.
52-55.)
Phillip, Conrad. (2005). Window on Humanity. New
York: McGraw-Hill
Rosling, H. 2006. ‘Debunking Third World Myths with
the Best Stats you’ve ever seen,’ RED Talks, retrieved
11 February, 2009 from
Ryan, Marie-Laure (Ed.) 2004. Narrative across Media:
The Languages of Storytelling, Lincoln, NB: University
of Nebraska Press.
Spinosa, C., Flores, F. and Dreyfus, H.L. (1997)
Disclosing New Worlds: Entrepreneurship, Democratic
Action, and the Cultivation of Solidarity, MIT Press:
Cambridge.
Strehlow, TGH, 1969. Journey to Horseshoe Bend,
Sydney: Rigby
Turkle, S. 1997. Seeing Through Computers: Education
in a Culture of Simulation, The American Prospect,
March/April. pp 76-82.
UNESCO. 1999. The need for a new perspective creating
learning networks for African teachers, change,
professional development and ICTs. In: Marshall, G. &
Ruohonen, M. (Eds.) Capacity Building for IT in
Education in Developing Countries. London, New York,
etc.: Chapman & Hill.

427
421

