2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Taggram: Exploring Geo-Data on Maps through a Tag Cloud-based Visualization
Dinh-Quyen Nguyen, Heidrun Schumann
Institute of Computer Science, University of Rostock
{nguyen, schumann}@informatik.uni-rostock.de
through zoom-and-pan interfaces. Consequently, we
exploit texts as a special metaphor for a supplemental
technique for geo-data exploration. The idea is based on
the 1976 Milgram’s “collective mental maps of Paris” as
he showed a collection of tags in various font sizes
representing how often landmarks in Paris were
mentioned in a survey (Fig. 1) [6]. Milgram’s work can be
seen as the first example of Tag Clouds, the visualization
which is nowadays very popular in social tagging
software [7], although in those applications, the idea of
Milgram has not been well reflected, as the tagged data
are very often not connected to a geographical context.
In this paper, we introduce Taggram (“tags” +
“gramme”) as a visualization technique adopting exactly
the original idea of Milgram for the presentation of geotagged information. The terminology of gramme can be
understood as “thing written”, as used in cartogram
(where carte means “card” or “map”). In other words,
maps act as the context, while aspatial data are presented
and explored on maps through the tags.
In doing so, we analyze general issues and strategies
for the ideas of placing and handling various labels on
arbitrary-shaped geographical regions, following the
viewpoints of InfoVis. We did the same as Jo and Ryu [5]
in combining texts with other visual metaphors for the
exploration of information on maps, instead of using just
conventional cartographic approaches.

Abstract
Searching and exploring on digital maps are
normally performed through simple text boxes and zoomand-pan interfaces. In this paper, however, we present a
novel technique, namely Taggram, which combines texts
onto maps to support geo-tagged data exploration. It is
designed to show geo-tagged data in form of size-varied
and colorized tags, benefiting by the concepts of Tag
Clouds, and to support exploring those data interactively
through a fisheye menu adaptation. The technique was
demonstrated for geo-tagged data exploration; however,
as other thematic geo-data can be partially represented in
abstract form of texts, Taggram can be a method for the
presentation and exploration of such geo-data in other
application scenarios.
Keywords--- Text Visualization, Tag Clouds, GeoTagging, Map Labeling, Cartography.

1. Introduction
Text, the special kind of visual artifacts commonly
used for social communication [1], and geospatially
referenced data, which exist in almost all our everyday
life topics [2], have been the subjects for many studies in
information science as well as information visualization
(InfoVis). Nevertheless, the combination of the two is not
commonly found in InfoVis due to the different
characteristics of text visualizations and geovisualizations, except, for instance, traditional techniques
on label placement in digital cartography [3].
In contemporary geovisualizations, maps with
conventional zoom-and-pan interfaces play the central
role, where the popular way of representing aspatial (aka
thematic or attribute) data is using cartograms and other
cartographic techniques, leveraging by visual metaphors
for the encoding of the data (i.e. using choropleth color
and other Bertin’s visual encodes [4]). However,
according to Jo and Ryu [5], it is still sometimes
insufficient for the users to explore geospatial data just
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.52

Figure 1. Stanley Milgram’s collective mental map
of Paris [6]
316
322

based placement of tags) [17][18]. However, all of those
Tag Clouds designs are more or less the static form of text
decorations on SNS applications (normally in form of
HTML-based web) [11]. Consequently, it does not reflect
all common features of a visualization tool (among which
interaction for exploration is a necessity).
Furthermore, since Tag Clouds is normally placed at
fixed rectangular regions on SNS interfaces, existing tag
clouds are only designed for rectangle-based regions,
except the one developed by Seifert et al. [12] where tags
can be placed into convex polygons.
Following that, the motivation for the investigation
into Tag Cloud-based visualizations is general concepts
and strategies for the placement of tags in arbitraryshaped regions (including concave and complex
polygons), and the ideas of supporting interactively
selecting the tags for presentation following user actions.

The contribution of our development is making Tag
Clouds no longer be simply considered as a social
signaler [8], but a dynamic and interactive tool for geovisualizations through textual data. For instance, we can
examine and discover trends or patterns in geo-referenced
data by dynamically displaying a set of tags on a
geographical region; or, we can also analyze the
correlations between different regions by linking tags
which share the same attributes on them. This
consideration, which has not been focused in existing Tag
Clouds (e.g. [8-18]), as a result, can make our Taggram a
promising choice for geovisual analytics, relevant to
current research directions on visualizations, as proposed
in [19].
The remainder of this paper is as follows: Section 2
presents related work as the background for our
developed technique. Section 3 provides general analyses
for the design of Taggram in the viewpoints of InfoVis.
Section 4 will then give an example for our current
Taggram’s implementation. And finally, we conclude our
paper and present future directions in section 5.

2.2. Geo-Tagged Visualizations
As mentioned, existing Tag Clouds techniques are
about the placement of tags on application interfaces for
attraction (aka social signalers [8]). However, in reality,
visualizations with texts are much more than that,
benefiting by the meaningful relationships of textual data
(semantic, linking, comparison, searching, and so on - see
more on [21]). In this regard, tag clouds and many
features of tag words must be taken into account dealing
with specific contexts to arrive at suitable forms of Tag
Cloud-based visualizations. In the context of geospatial
data, tags therefore can be organized to support
representing geo-referenced information. This is
necessary, since according to Jo and Ryu [5], spatial
information (e.g. place where an event occurred, place
where a report referred to) is always the very centric data
that human beings do normally recall when referring to
any story. As a result, text-based spatial information can
be used to change the ways Tag Clouds are available in
SNS.
In fact, the use of geo-referenced information is not
new in Tag Clouds’ research. In [9], Jaffe et al. suggested
placing tags on general purpose maps, namely Tag Maps,
for the exploration of geotagged photos. Based on their
ideas, Slingsby, Wood, and their colleagues [22][23] took
advantage of mash-up tools (LandSerf GIS 2, KML,
Google Earth 3,…) to present tags and tag clouds on maps
as labels separately linking to maps or floating on them.
Similarly, Dörk et al. developed Tag Clouds as a view,
namely a VisGet, for the coordinated view of georeferenced tags linking to general purpose maps [24].
The development of those techniques has provided
first concepts for the browsing and exploration of geo-

2. Related Work
2.1. Collaborative Tagging and Tag Clouds
One of the main features provided in social network
software (SNS) is sharing personal data in form of
annotation and collaborative tagging [20]. This simple
form for data sharing has been attractively accepted by
SNS users, where Tag Clouds is amongst the most
common supported visualizations. Tag Clouds has been
known since 2002 through its implementation in Flickr 1.
Since then, there have been many investigations into this
kind of visualization.
According to Hassan-Montero and Herrero-Solana
[10], Tag Clouds was suggested for information retrieval
interfaces, since the visualization promisingly supports
the overview of indexed and clustered data. However, this
has not been the focus of recent research on Tag Clouds,
as a matter that users seem not to notice it as a data
analysis tool but a kind of decoration: a social signaler
[8]. Following that, researchers on Tag Clouds mainly
concentrate on how to nicely fit the tags onto a view (i.e.
drawing algorithms [11][12]) for SNS usages (in form of
their evaluations on usability studies [13-18]).
In detail, those studies on Tag Clouds drawing
algorithms mainly concern the static placement of tags on
screen, in 2D. In this case, the authors proved that users
prefer the alphabetical order placement best [15], and are
interested in and affected by tags’ font size, then font
weight [14][16], while color and position of tags play
lesser roles (e.g. in the case of clustering tags, or centric

2
1

3

http://www.flickr.com
323
317

http://www.landserf.org
http://earth.google.com

referenced information through tag clouds. However, in
those cases, they simply attach general tag clouds to
general purpose maps, while text visualization strategies
are not well considered. As analyzed by Jo and Ryu [5],
navigating on fixed geometric maps for the exploration of
some textual data while all maps features are incoherently
displayed seems not to be a sufficient solution. User
actions in zooming in and out on those maps for the
overview or detailed exploration are not always
beneficial. It is sometimes a redundant task, and even not
applicable in linking related (historical) user’s actions.
Besides, using maps with detailed data will occupy
presentational space as well as computer resources
(rendering time, memory).
Therefore, geo-tagged data to be visualized on maps
should not be simply organized as the separate or floating
clouds attaching to general purpose maps as in existing
techniques [9][22-24]. Instead, we should analyze the
shapes of the regions to provide additional visualizations
for the presentation and exploration of geo-tagged data on
maps, adapting to the trend of general InfoVis in trading
off shape and area adjustments with other abstract visual
data [25].

association of the tags with the positions, and (3) the
strategies for handling a large number of tags, larger than
the number of available positions.

3.1. The Analysis of the Geographical Region
As the shape of the geographical region is arbitrary, it
is insufficient to use existing Tag Clouds drawing
algorithms [8-18] for the placement of tags. In fact, in
those existing techniques, tags are often linearly placed
one after another (alphabetically) or symmetrically
arranged around a simple (rectangular) region; while in
this situation of arbitrary-shaped area, tags depend heavily
on the available spaces of the region.
Therefore, given a geographical region, the first
problem in designing Taggram is a method for finding
suitable positions/places on the region so that tags can be
attached to. There would be two strategies to solve this
problem. First, we can subdivide the whole geographical
region into subareas. Each subarea will be a place for a
tag. In this regard, placing tags now means to solve the
area labeling problem. There, the challenges will be the
matters of how to subdivide the region, and into how
many subareas? The second solution strategy is
identifying the positions following the topological form of
the region (e.g. the geometrical skeleton). In this case,
placing tags means to solve the problem of point labeling,
and the challenge now will be how to specify the
appropriate positions along the skeleton.
The most difficulty in such analysis of a geographical
region is due to the shape of the region, since normally
available spaces along the geographical area can be very
narrow, and the region may be formed with holes or
concave shapes (for instance, star-shaped), while tags are
generally comprehensible when horizontally shown
(which requires wide in width spaces and short for the
height).

3. General Issues on Taggram Design
The goal for this novel visualization is to be able to
organize and represent a number of tags in association
with a geographical region. But in contrast to
conventional cartographic labeling problem, where texts
are placed on maps at places close to the objects to be
labeled, tags in this technique are planned to be freely
positioned within the associated region.
In general, we are interested in the issues of tag
clouds and cartography for the development of Taggram
with the following considerations:
x Concerning the geographical region, only its
spatial feature (the shape) is taken into account
for the design of the technique.
x Concerning tags, for our geo-data visualization,
they can be freely placed, but must be inside the
geographical region, so that different tag clouds
can be distinguishable for different regions.
x Tags are to be flexible in size, color, orientation,
and transparency, where the constraint of those
attributes is to maintain the relationship and the
meaning of the displayed cloud.
x The number of tags is not necessarily fixed, but
might vary depending on the actual shape of the
region or the exploration process.
With the above considerations, there would be three
main problems to take into account for the development
of this Tag Cloud-based visualization on maps: (1) the
analysis of the geographical region to find appropriate
positions to place the tags, (2) the mechanisms for the

3.2. Mechanisms to Relate Tags to the Positions
The second issue for Taggram design is how to relate
tags onto the region. Given a set of subareas/positions and
a set of tags, which tag should be associated with which
location?
One strategy can be sorting both tags by size and
subareas by size, and then relating the biggest tag to the
biggest area, and so on. Another alternative is sorting all
tags by size, or alphabetically, then starting from the
central position of the whole region (e.g. identified by its
skeleton) to place the biggest tag, and finding new
positions along the axis to relate the sorted tags step by
step. The challenge here will be the size of a tag (its
bounding box) may not always adapt to the size (shape) of
the subareas or the available space around the related
position (e.g. tag can be longer, not bendable along the
subarea…).
324
318

new location may not be always accomplishable, as its
expected size can be, for instance, greater than the
available space on the new area.

3.3. Handling More Tags than Available Positions
As the number of tags is not necessarily fixed, but
might vary depending on the actual shape of the region or
the exploration process, the third issue in designing
Taggram is how to nicely handle different numbers of
tags, especially when the tags are much more than the
available positions.
In fact, for comprehensibility, a common design of
Tag Clouds normally supports presenting less than 150
tags in a cloud (e.g. 30 tags [12], 93 tags [11], 76 tags
[18], or about 100 tags [17]), while the number of tags in
a geographical unit can be varying up to hundreds or
thousands of tags, but available positions may be just
about dozens of places. As a result, tags must be selected
to be shown on screen.
Considering this problem following existing Tag
Clouds’ research [15][16], we know that people do often
scan the cloud for the highlighted tags rather than read all
of them to find information. There, just some tags are
meaningful in a tag cloud. Consequently, selecting some
tags (e.g. a dozens of tags) and showing them
dynamically or interactively can be the straight forward
solution. Besides, the matter of computer resources for
visual rendering is also taken into account for this issue.
Therefore, one solution can be rendering a tag,
finding the next suitable place for the next tag, and adding
more tags on demand (interactive selections). The process
stops when no more suitable place is found, or after a
number of iterative steps. Another alternative is rendering
all tags for the estimated positions, and then doing postprocessing to place the remaining ones, e.g. using the
particle-based labeling approach [26].

4. Current Taggram’s Implementation
In this section, we provide an example of Taggram in
presenting some demonstrated geo-tagged data on maps.
It has been developed to illustrate a strategy of mapping
the tags onto the arbitrary-shaped geographical region
along the main vertical axis indicating the skeleton of the
region, and a mechanism to update its view according to
user interactions. Anyway, before describing our
approach in detail, we take a look at the application
scenario of our demonstration.

4.1. Application Scenario
As one characteristic of Taggram is supporting
browsing geo-referenced information without taking
general purpose maps into account, geographicallydetailed data such as exact roads, buildings, and other
geographical point-of-interests are not necessarily
presented in the general view of maps in Taggram. This is
also relevant to the ways people conduct spatial reasoning
for places, about which just high-level areas of towns,
cities, states, countries, and continents are prominently
indicated [5].
For tagged data, we demonstrate to show the most
popular tags (keywords with highest frequencies) from
geo-tagged photos in Flickr, retrieved through its API 4. In
general, geo-tagged data can be extracted by combining
web-services and geo-services (such as GeoNames 5,
Panoramio 6,…). This, in combination with text extraction
techniques for websites, blogs, online news (e.g. through
GeoRSS [27]), and geo-databases, will provide more
opportunities for research and applications in text and
visual analytics scenarios.

3.4. Further Remarks
To support visualizing Taggram interactively or
dynamically, tags are expected to be organized in the way
that the updated ones (on new positions) can preserve the
form of the old ones in the cloud. In addition, semantic
relations between tags must also be taken into account for
such design of Taggram. With meaningful textual
relationships [21], tags can be highlighted, organized by
groups, or linked together or to specific cartographic
objects. In this case, browsing and exploring on Taggram
can be done through brushing and linking techniques.
This assists the user in classifying, comparing, or jumping
into relevant data on maps, while not eliminating the
default zoom-and-pan interfaces if available.
The challenge here will be how to preserve such
coherent view of the visualization while still keep the
relational meaning of the updated tags. Since in contrast
to many other popular cartographic features (color,
texture…), where aspatial data can be easily encoded on
any-shaped area, tags when examined for re-placing on a

4.2. The Overview of Our Approach
According to Tag Clouds evaluations, in arbitrary
tagged data exploration, people often pay attention to tags
with bigger font sizes, and contrast colors [16][17], and
the center of the cloud will be the place tags normally get
most noticed [17]. Therefore, our strategy is placing the
most focused tags from the center of the geographical
region. Besides, as presented in [15], tags are most easily
comprehensive if organized in alphabetical order. As a
result, we will arrange tags alphabetically on the region.

4

http://www.flickr.com/services/api/
http://www.geonames.org/
6
http://www.panoramio.com/
5

325
319

place the tag) to the center of the region as well as its
available space. There, we examine tag’s font size and its
bounding box to get the most suitable place in the
available space.
The biggest and the expected smallest sizes (smax,
smin) for tags in Taggram are computed based on the
expected number of tags n to be placed and the region’s
area A.

Following that, the general ideas for our approach,
concerning the discussed problems (section 3), will be:
1) Analyzing the geographical region to find out the
center of the region as well as its geometrical
form (the main vertical skeleton).
2) Sorting the tags alphabetically. Placing the
median of the sorted-list tags at the center of the
region, and the next ones along the skeleton.
3) The remaining tags are displayed on demand
(interactively) or automatically updated on
screen, where the general view of Taggram
always remains coherent.
The overall implementation
summarized in Alg. 1.

of

Taggram

(4)
where ș and ĳ are pre-estimated (e.g. 0.66 and 0.33 in
our implementation) so that the scale ratio scale between
tags can be computed:

is

(5)
Algorithm 1.

Overall implementation of Taggram

In this manner, tag’s sizes are updated when a new
tag is examined for the next placement:

Given an initial set of tags and a geographical region
1. Sort tags alphabetically and identify the first
tag to be placed
2. Find the center place of the region
3. Place the first tag at the region’s center
4. Follow the vertical skeleton of the region
5. while a new position can be found d o
5.1. Select the next tag to be shown
5.2. Identify the new position based on the
skeleton and the size of the tag
5.3. Place the tag on the new position
end while
6. Handle the remaining tags

(6)

4.3. Placing Tags on the Region

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

The center (cx, cy) of a geographical region is
computed based on its boundary’s points, following
Bourke’s formulae [28]:
(1)
where (xi, yi) are the consequent points in a polygon
of N points, and A is the area of that polygon:
(2)
In case there are many separated polygons (with area
Aj and center cj) in a geographical region (e.g. map of
US), the center place will be the weighted center of mass:

Figure 2. An example of our demonstrated Taggram:
(a) the most popular tags retrieved for “United
Kingdom” (using Flickr API), (b) tags are placed
along the main vertical skeleton of UK’s map, (c) tags’
positions are updated as Taggram is scrolled up, and
(d) some interesting Flicker’s geo-tagged places are
highlighted as the tag “light” is selected

(3)
The size and position of a tag to be placed depends
heavily on the relative distance of the examined area (to
326
320

visualized with colors, transparency, orientation… can be
meaningful for the analysis of geo-data, benefiting by
their specific relationships [21]. Some illustrations are
shown in Fig. 2c-d.

Nevertheless, tags’ sizes and positions are flexibly
adapted within a predefined threshold (we allow a tag to
be scaled up to 70% of the examined size, and inside a
wider checking box) so that many tags can be shifted
inside the arbitrary form of the region.
When sorting tags alphabetically, we suppose that
tags’ sizes do not represent their frequencies (as in most
of conventional Tag Clouds). Therefore, the first tag to be
placed at the region’s center is tag i = n/2, amongst n
sorted tags. The next tags to be selected will be tags i-1
and i+1 to show above and below tag i, along the main
media axis of the region. Further tags are iteratively
selected (i-2, i+2…) for the next places, until no more tag
or no more new position is determined.
The demonstration of Taggram presenting the most
popular tags retrieved for “United Kingdom” using Flickr
API is presented in Fig. 2.

4.4.2. Dynamically displaying the tags. What if the
user does not interact with the tags (i.e. scrolling) but still
needs to see all the tags in the cloud? We follow the
concept of “passive interaction”. Passive interaction (in
fact, it is a special case of dynamic visualization) means
that the user does not need to actually interact with the
interface for data exploration. Instead, the interface is
unconsciously updated, and s/he can incidentally get
information through its current view, and switch to the
interactive process when needed [31]. This kind of
dynamic visualization is supplemented to the above
interaction implementation in the same manner.

4.4. Handling the Remaining Tags

5. Conclusion

To handle the remaining tags, we support two
strategies in current Taggram implementation: (1)
interactively showing the updated tags through a fisheye
menu adaptation, and (2) dynamically presenting all the
tags, in turn, on screen.

In this work, we present a design for a novel textual
geovisualization technique. The Taggram emerges from
the ideas of Tag Clouds visualization on maps, taking
advantages of geospatial information of tagged data, and
characteristics of map visualizations.
The important contribution of our Taggram is making
Tag Clouds no longer just a social signaler or a decoration
of texts on SNS, but a geovisual analytics option for the
presentation and exploration of geospatial data, which can
be textually abstracted in geo-referenced context.
Tags positions are computed and displayed inside
arbitrary shaped region, which has not been investigated
in existing tag clouds drawings. And fisheye menu
adaptation can be exploited for a demonstration of focusin-context tags, while tags can be flexibly displayed on
screen according to user interactions (with mouse and
keyboard). During the interaction process, geo-tagged
data can be explored and navigated following user actions
on tags and their brushing-and-linking data.
The technique has been developed for the exploration
of geo-tagged data on maps. However, in reality, as
abstract textual data can be extracted from many geodatabases, we intend to extend Taggram to integrate into
contexts of exploring online news, online blogs, and so
on. In addition, concerning visualization aspects, future
work will be the investigation into user studies for
usability as well as in testing tags against other
cartographic encodings, and the implementation of
Taggram in 3D interfaces.

4.4.1. Fisheye menu- based interaction. As tags
closer to the center of the region get more focuses
[17][18], the idea of the implemented Taggram is relevant
to the concept of “focus in context”. Therefore, in order to
remain the tags placement strategy, as well as to provide a
coherent view for the users in easily comprehending and
exploring geo-data, Taggram is implemented as an
adaptation of a fisheye menu [29].
As tags are sorted and displayed alphabetically,
interaction in Taggram is performed simply, relevant to
the action of scrolling mouse or arrow keys on traditional
menu contexts. We design the navigational exploration on
Taggram with the supports of PC-equipped inputs
through two main functions:
x Using arrow keys (up, down) or mouse’s scroll
button to shift up and down the updated focused
tag, which is the one close to the central one. As
tags move across the top-end or bottom-end of
the displayed region, they will disappear, and
new ones (which have not been shown in the
previous step) are added to the opposite ends of
the geographical area (bottom- or top-side).
x For a faster scrolling, mouse’s scroll button
keeps pressed, and tags are updated as mouse is
moved up and down.
In doing so, instead of just using text boxes [30], we
have added an alternative to the conventional ways of
searching and exploring textual data on maps. Besides,
similar to many other cartographic techniques, tags when

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Anh-Tuan
Ta in implementing prototype software to demonstrate the
concepts presented here.

327
321

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

David R. Olson. The World on Paper: The Conceptual
and Cognitive Implications of Writing and Reading.
Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Glen Hart and Catherine Dolbear. What’s So Special
about Spatial? In The Geospatial Web: How
Geobrowsers, Social Software and the Web 2.0 are
Shaping the Network Society, pp. 39–44. Springer, 2007.
Martin Nöllenburg. Geographic Visualization. In A.
Kerren et al. (Eds.): Human-Centered Visualization
Environments 2006, pp. 257–294, Springer, 2007.
Jacques Bertin. Semiology of Graphics (translated by W.
J. Berg). University of Wisconsin Press. 1983.
Hyungeun Jo, Jung-hee Ryu. Placegram: A Diagrammatic
Map for Personal Geotagged Data Browsing. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Computer Society. 10 Jun. 2009.
Stanley Milgram and D. Jodelet. Psychological Maps of
Paris. In Environmental Psychology (Eds. W. I. H.
Proshansky and L. Rivlin), pp. 104–124. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston. 1976.
Fernanda B. Viégas and Martin Wattenberg. Tag Clouds
and the Case for Vernacular Visualization. ACM
Interactions 15(4), pp. 49-52. July-Aug 2008.
Marti A. Hearst and Daniela Rosner. Tag Clouds: Data
Analysis Tool or Social Signaller? In Proceedings of
HICSS 41, IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
A. Jaffe, M. Naaman, T. Tassa and M. Davis. Generating
Summaries and Visualization for Large Collections of
Geo-Referenced Photographs. 8th ACM SIGMM
International Workshop on Multimedia Information
Retrieval, pp 89-98, ACM, 2006.
Yusef Hassan-Montero and Víctor Herrero-Solana.
Improving Tag-Clouds as Visual Information Retrieval
Interfaces. In InSciT2006. Mérida, Spain. Oct 2006.
Owen Kasser and Daniel Lemire. TagCloud Drawing:
Algorithms for Cloud Visualization. In WWW2007, Banff,
Canada, May 2007.
Christin Seifert, Barbara Kump, Wolfgang Kienreich,
Gisela Granitzer, and Michael Granitzer. On the Beauty
and Usability of Tag Clouds. In IV '08, pp. 17-25, 2008.
Takeharu Eda, Toshio Uchiyama, Tadasu Uchiyama and
Masatoshi Yoshikawa. Signaling emotion in tagclouds. In
WWW’09, pp.1199-1200, Madrid, Spain, April 2009.
Rivadeneira, A. W., Gruen, D. M., Muller, M. J., and
Millen, D. R. Getting our head in the clouds: toward
evaluation studies of tagclouds. In Proc. CHI 2007, pp.
995-998, ACM Press, 2007.
Martin Halvey and Mark T. Keane. An Assessment of Tag
Presentation Techniques. In WWW 2007, pp. 1313-1314.
ACM, May 2007.
Scott Bateman, Carl Gutwin, and Miguel Nacenta. Seeing
Things in the Clouds: The Effect of Visual Features on
Tag Cloud Selections. In HT '08: Proceedings of the
nineteenth ACM conference on Hypertext and
hypermedia, pp. 193-202. ACM Press, 2008.
Steffen Lohmann, Jürgen Ziegler, and Lena Tetzlaff.
Comparison of Tag Cloud Layouts: Task-Related

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

328
322

Performance and Visual Exploration. In T. Gross et al.
(Eds.): Interact 2009, Part I, pp. 392–404, 2009.
Johann Schrammel, Michael Leitner, and Manfred
Tscheligi. Semantically Structured Tag Clouds: An
Empirical Evaluation of Clustered Presentation
Approaches. In CHI 2009, pp. 2037-2040. ACM, 2009.
Ben Shneiderman and Catherine Plaisant. Information
Visualization. In Designing the User Interface: Strategies
for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, 5th ed.:
Addison Wesley, 2009
Qingfeng Li and Stephen C-Y Lu. Collaborative Tagging
Applications and Approaches. IEEE MultiMedia 15(3),
pp. 14-21. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2008.
Christopher Collins, Sheelagh Carpendale, and Gerald
Penn. DocuBurst: Visualizing Document Content using
Language Structure. In Proc. Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC
Symposium on Visualization (EuroVis '09) 28(3), pp.
1039-1046, June 2009.
Aidan Slingby, Jason Dykes, Jo Wood, and Keith Clarke.
Interactive Tag Maps and Tag Clouds for the Multiscale
Exploration of Large Spatio-temporal Datasets. In 11th
International Conference Information Visualization
(IV'07), pp. 497-504, 2007.
Jo Wood, Jason Dykes, Aidan Slingby, and Keith Clarke.
Interactive Visual Exploration of a Large SpatioTemporal Dataset: Reflections on a Geovisualization
Mashup. IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13(6), pp. 1176-1183, 2007.
Marian Dörk, Sheelagh Carpendale, Christopher Collins,
and
Carey
Williamson.
VisGets:
Coordinated
Visualizations for Web-based Information Exploration
and Discovery. IEEE Trans. on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 14(6), pp. 1205-1212, 2008.
Daniel A. Keim, Stephen C. North, and Christian Panse.
CartoDraw: A Fast Algorithm for Generating Contiguous
Cartograms. In IEEE Trans. on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 10(1), pp. 95-110, IEEE Computer
Society, 2004.
Martin Luboschik, Heidrun Schumann, Hilko Cords.
Particle-based labeling: Fast point-feature labeling
without obscuring other visual features. In IEEE Trans. on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 14(6), pp. 12371244, 2008.
Marc Wick and Torsten Becker. Enhancing RSS Feeds
with Extracted Geospatial Information for Further
Processing and Visualization. In The Geospatial Web:
How Geobrowsers, Social Software and the Web 2.0 are
Shaping the Network Society, pp. 105–115. Springer,
2007.
Paul Bourke. Calculating the Area and Centroid of a
Polygon. July 1988. http://local.wasp.uwa.edu.au/
~pbourke/geometry/polyarea/
Ben Bederson. Fisheye Menus. In Proc. ACM Conference
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST 2000),
pp. 217-226, ACM Press, Nov 2000.
M. C. Schraefel. Building Knowledge: What's beyond
Keyword Search? Computer 42(3), pp. 52-59, IEEE
Computer Society, Mar. 2009.
Robert Spence. Information Visualization: Design for
Interaction (2nd Edition). Prentice Hall, 2007.

