2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Molecular Rendering with Medieval and Renaissance Color Theory

Francis T. Marchese and Suzanne M. Marchese
Computer Science Department
Pace University
NY, NY 10038 USA
e-mail: fmarchese@pace.edu
Abstract—This paper describes the application of Medieval
and Renaissance color theory to the computer graphic
rendering of molecular models. In particular, Alberti’s and
Cennini’s color theories were employed to render shaded
geometric primitives such as cylinders and spheres that are the
components of traditional ball-and-stick and space filling
molecular models. These results were compared with standard
rendering based on the OpenGL API or through ray tracing. It
is found that by implementing Alberti’s and Cennini’s color
theories as color maps within a simple chemical illustration
program it is possible to create molecular imagery comparable
to contemporary computer graphics schemes.

influenced by Brunelleschi. Leon Battista Alberti, a lawyer,
natural philosopher, artist, and architect, educated in
Euclid's, Ptolemy's, and Alhazen's Optics as well as Euclid's
geometry, endowed Brunelleschi's empirical methods with a
firm mathematical underpinning. In his seminal treatise On
Painting (De Pictura, 1435) he proclaimed Brunelleschi's
work to be a scientific principle of art [2], and proceeded to
recast it in the language of Medieval optics. Perspective then
became a system for recording the intersections of light rays
on a plane as they proceeded in a pyramidal pattern from
object to eye.
Optics-based lighting is another matter. Geometric
optical theory had existed at least from Hellenistic times
(323 – 146 BC) [3]. But it was during the thirteenth century
that optics became the premier medieval science and an
integral component of the university curriculum. The
teaching of optics was most influenced by the Islamic natural
philosopher known as Alhazan who lived from the late tenth
to early eleventh century. Alhazan revised and enhanced
Greek optics by first recognizing that light was transmitted,
reflected, and refracted into the eye, not out of the eye as
theorized by the Greeks. He analyzed mathematically the
nature of radiation associated with light and color, reflection
and refraction, and even offered an influential discussion of
the psychology of visual perception. Integral to his work was
the direct experience of natural phenomena analyzed through
mathematics.
While formal study and teaching of optical theory
proceeded in parallel at medieval universities, the practice of
painting by artisans essentially relied on a growing set of
prescriptions or procedures for rendering spatial relationships
and portraying light and shadow. By the onset of the
fifteenth century artists had already become facile observers
of nature, creating vivid images of flowers, animals and
other objects, precisely recorded with characteristic features
accurately detailed [4]. This artistic practice was codified in
texts by thinkers and practitioners such as Leon Battista
Alberti and Cennino Cennini [5], both of whom included the
specification of systems for modeling color to render shadow
and light.
These color models and those that followed influenced
succeeding generations of painters. The Impressionist
painters in the late 1800's relied on color modulating
methods that were similar to the Cennini system. Auguste

Keywords-molecular visualization; artist color models; art.

I.

INTRODUCTION

“It must be recalled that a painting, before it is a war
horse, a nude or some anecdote, is essentially a flat surface
covered by color assembled in a certain order.”
Maurice Denis
Geometry alone is not sufficient to provide the visual
cues required for perception. In its abstract limit, geometry
deals with an ideal world of dimensionless points, lines of
infinitesimal diameter, and planes with infinite boundary. As
cast within a computer visualization context, geometric
representations are typically minimally expressed on a
monitor or paper. By judicious application of color and
texture to geometric representations it becomes possible to
create more visually stimulating, natural looking scenes. This
task is usually accomplished in computer graphics and
visualization by rendering a scene employing linear
perspective in concert with an optics-based lighting model.
The Renaissance development of linear perspective is
well known. Fillippo Brunelleschi, an artist and architectural
engineer (1377-1446), is attributed with the institution of
visual perspective and the application of this optical theory
to painting [1]. By placing the artist's/viewer's eye position at
an image's center point and defining a horizon line he made
it so all parallel receding edges of buildings appear to
converge to a center point creating an illusion of depth. Art
historians believe Brunelleschi's painter friend Masaccio
explored these procedures in his work on the Trinity fresco
in 1426, the first perspective demonstration directly
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.74

477
487

Renoir and Edgar Degas traveled to Italy and read Cennini's
handbook. While other artists like Monet, Pissaro, and
Cezanne began to work plein air, painting landscapes with a
large number of pure hues, reviving the use of Medieval and
Renaissance color models in creating brightly lit landscape
paintings and figurative works with bold contrasting
shadows.
By the turn of the twentieth century artists had begun to
detach color from representation. In paintings by artists like
Wassily Kandinsky, Mark Rothko, and Piet Mondrian color
is not used as a modeling device to depict three dimensional
surfaces, or to represent a landscape, still life or figure.
Rather it is used in planes to divide the canvas, or as veils of
color on the surface of the work. Color could symbolize,
energize, or decorate the surface without regard to illusion.
Today, visualizers are as free as contemporary artists in
their use of color. Because data and color may not be
intrinsically related, color may be used in any fashion to craft
an image that maximally communicates data’s meaning. Yet,
the beauty of art has stimulated the development of computer
graphic rendering methods influenced by artistic styles and
techniques. Non-photorealistic or expressive rendering has
looked to art and illustration for its inspiration, generating a
wide range of rendering methods from line drawings to water
colors and oil paints [6] [7]. A number of visualization
researchers have taken inspiration as well, either applying
existing expressive rendering methods to visualizations or
developing new ones [8] [9].
One area that remains open for research is the application
of artist-created color models to visualization applications.
And that is the focus of this paper. Specifically, Alberti’s and
Cennini’s color theories are applied to the rendering of
geometric primitives that are the basis for scientific
visualization software. Our goal is to explore how well these
artist color theories compare with standard optics-based
lighting methods for rendering primitives such as spheres
and cylinders. One application area in which visualization
software relies heavily on these primitives is molecular
visualization, where they are the foundation for creating the
traditional ball-and-stick and space filling molecular models.
Conceptually, molecular visualization makes a good
comparative test case for artist theories because visualization
and illustration have had a long history in chemistry,
predating by a century the invention of computer graphics
and visualization. And like the Medieval and Renaissance
artists who experimented with the use of color, chemists
have continually experimented with and invented new ways
of visualizing complex chemical information. The seminal
work of Cyrus Levinthal at MITs Project MAC in 1965 is an
example [10]. It was one of the first applications of
interactive computer visualization. In applying Alberti’s and
Cennini’s color theories to molecular graphics we are
continuing in the tradition of chemical visualization while
benefiting from the rich culture of theory and
experimentation that exploded in Italian Renaissance art.
In the following section we will briefly discuss methods
used. Section 3 presents a discussion of painting and color. It
will be followed by the application of Alberti’s and

Cennini’s color theories to molecular display. Section 5 puts
forth comparisons between contemporary rendering methods
and molecular rendering employing artist models. The paper
will conclude with a summary and discussion.
II.

METHODS

To generate a comparison between artist theories and
contemporary visualizations of molecular models a three step
process will be followed. First, an artist will paint an image
of a ball-and-stick molecular model from observation of a
traditional wooden model under room illumination
employing the theories of Alberti and Cennini. Second, the
theories of Alberti and Cennini will be incorporated into a
molecular illustration program to render images similar to
the paintings. And third, the molecular illustrations will be
compared with the optics-based rendering methods that
chemists use to generate their interactive visualizations and
publication quality illustrations.
The artist color models were implemented in Schakal, a
molecular illustration program designed to facilitate the
creation of publication quality molecular rendering, typically
line drawings [11]. Written in the 1980s, its raster images are
rather minimal in comparison with contemporary molecular
visualization standards. Schakal supports only a palette of
256 colors with smooth shading simulated by dither. Yet it
can produce Phong-like shaded images of space-filling and
ball-and-stick molecular models including cast shadows
without formally invoking the Phong algorithmic form.
Instead, it contains a simple empirical linear model that
allows users to create and modify darkening functions which
define the extent of an object's specular highlight and the rate
at which the total illumination declines across its surface.
This function is used to create a color table in Schakal,
which is then sampled by employing the angle between the
surface normal at a pixel and the light source vectors as an
index to the color table. Schakal's strength for this research is
its ability to allow a color map to be defined so that Cennini's
and Alberti's color models may be transformed into color
maps used for molecular rendering.
Schakal’s images were compared with images created by
Accelrys' Discovery Studio (DS) Visualizer [12], the
Mercury Crystal Structure Visualization System from the
Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre [13], and the
POVRAY raytracer [14]. DS Visualizer is a commercially
available OpenGL-based molecular graphics program
representative of a class of standard interactive molecular
graphics systems [10]. The OpenGL API implements the
Blinn-Phong lighting model with ambient, diffuse, and
specular components and adds an emissive term [15]. DS
Visualizer allows these terms to be adjusted to create shaded
molecular models and has preset parameters that create the
look of chalk, metal, and plastic. Mercury’s capabilities are
similar to DS Visualizer with extended ability to build
crystal structures. The POVRAY raytracer can employ a
wide range of illumination models, including radiosity, but
for the comparisons here, it generated Phong-shaded
geometric primitives with point light sources and material
properties that are consistent with DS Visualizer. POVRAY

488
478

was selected because of its availability and ability to render
molecular graphic scenes. Many molecular visualization
programs export POVRAY input files, as do the former two
software packages.
III.

mixed with another paint color the intensity or purity of the
color is reduced. Therefore some painters resort to using as
many pure pigments as possible. Paul Cezanne used a palette
with up to thirteen different colors, plus white. This larger
palette of colors allowed him to apply more colors purely
from the tube without reducing the intensity of the relatively
pure pigments [17].
In addition to hue, its purity, and the relationship between
different hues, there is also the value of a hue. Value is a
means of measuring a hue’s lightness or darkness. Yellow
has a high key or light value; blue has a low key or dark
value. White can be added to a color to increase its value.
Ultramarine blue is a very dark blue with reddish qualities.
When white is added to ultramarine it is increased in value
and will actually appear to become bluer. As the amount of
white is added the color will eventually become very light,
chalky looking, until its original color is impossible to
discern. The addition of white to pure colors creates tints.
Adding black to hues has the effect of decreasing their
values, producing what is known as shades.
Artists frequently manipulate closely valued tones by
using colors to create warm or cool darks and lights. This is a
relative process. Although a pure red is generally thought of
as warm and a pure blue, cool, other colors like yellow,
green, and purple vary depending on the component colors
used to make those colors. While color on its own may be
warm or cool, colors are usually judged in relation to each
other. A yellow might be warm in relationship to gray and
cool in relationship to some reds. Warmer colors usually
appear to advance toward the viewer, while cool colors
recede from view. Hence, painters will use increased
amounts of blue to indicate distance in a painting to create
atmospheric perspective.
In sum, the diversity of techniques developed to create
paintings was communicated by practitioners and scholars in
treatises that codified these methods by the beginning of the
fifteenth century. Such treatises were used for both educating
artists and creating theoretical foundations of artistic
practice. In the following section we will address two such
methods and employ them in the computer rendering of
molecular illustrations.

PAINTING AND COLOR

Painters create natural looking scenes by applying colors
that vary in hue, saturation, and lightness (value). The colors
available to painters form a relatively small palette of
naturally occurring or synthesized inorganic and organic
chemical compounds. The colors these substances exhibit are
not only a function of their absorption spectra, but depend on
crystal structure, particle size and shape, state of
agglomeration, and presence of other materials. For example,
cadmium yellow and cadmium orange are two pigments
created with pure cadmium sulfide (CdS). The difference in
color is created by a variation in the particle size of the solid.
Finely ground CdS appears as a light yellow, while coarsely
ground CdS is medium-orange. The color range of CdS may
be extended by controlled substitution of selenium for sulfur.
Selenium substitutes directly for sulfur into the cubic lattice,
changing cadmium’s coordination and hence, spectral
environment. With appropriate proportions of S/Se it is
possible to create an extended range of colors: orange, light
red, bright red, dark red, maroon red and dark maroon [16].
In order for painters to create complex images with subtle
hue differences they must mix paint or pigments. To
rationalize the process they use a color space based on the
primaries red, yellow, and blue arranged at the corners of a
triangle. Secondary colors are created by equal mixing of
adjacent primaries. For example, yellow plus blue makes
green, red plus blue makes violet, and red plus yellow makes
orange. These six colors form the traditional color wheel and
spectral sequence: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet.
A painter’s color wheel begins with this sequence and
adds six additional hues by mixing: orange-red, orangeyellow, yellow-green, blue-green, violet-blue, and red-violet.
These hues are arranged in the wheel to express color
relationships, but not absolute truths. For example, opposite
hues on the wheel are complementary colors. Green is
opposite red, meaning red is pure, totally devoid of green
color. However, as we have noted, many pigments and paints
begin as spectral or chemical mixtures making them impure
colors. This makes color mixing a more complex task. In
theory, yellow and blue combine to make green. But with
paint, some yellows are better for making green and others
are better for making purple. Pthalocyanine (pthalo) blue and
lemon yellow can be combined to make an intense green. An
artist may also use cadmium yellow, a yellow with a hint of
red, and pthalo blue to make a more muted green. As a result
an artist will usually have at least two different reds, blues,
and yellows. All of those colors have the possibility of being
combined with each other.
Mixing paints, even colors like pthalo blue and lemon
yellow, mutes the intensity or purity of each color. For a
more intense green a painter could use viridian green straight
from the tube. For variety, an artist might mix viridian with
lemon yellow or with pthalo blue. Each time a paint color is

IV.

COLOR SYSTEMS

In 1390 Cennino Cennini composed The Craftsman’s
Handbook, one of the earliest compendia of artists’ methods
[5]. One section of his text describes the painting of drapery.
Well trained artists were expected to be able to simulate the
bending and folding of cloth as it draped over tables, chairs,
and of course, on and over people as clothing. Cennini
attempted to systematize the procedure by recommending a
series of steps, beginning with the creation of colors to be
used. He recommended taking three bowls and mixing a tiny
bit of white with the pure color in the first bowl. The second
bowl should contain a large amount of white with the pure
color. The third bowl would combine an equal mixture of the
first two bowls, resulting in a medium tint. He suggested that
the artist use the color with the least amount of white to paint
the folds of the drapery that were darkest. Then paint in the

489
479

intermediate tone for the upper layers of the folds of drapery,
saving the lightest tint for the topmost part of the folds. He
suggested using pure white for the portions of drapery most
intensely lit. Cennini prescribed pure color for the part of the
form in greatest shadow. By this simple blending of tints
Cennini created a color map where white is used for
rendering the brightest surface highlights that directly face
the light source, to blends of color and white for medium
brightness regions, to pure color for surfaces that are
obscured from the light source.

particular, the ultramarine blue, used in a nearly pure color,
looks appropriately dark in the self-shadowed regions of the
spheres lying distal to the light source. This works as well for
the green hue, but red is problematic. The contrast between
light and dark areas for the red sphere is less than that for
blue or green. Contrast between shadowed and highlighted
areas of spheres may be enhanced by blending in more white
but at the cost of dilution of the red hue. The situation the
painter is faced with here is similar to the one found in a Fra
Angelico painting.
The Annunciation by Fra Angelico is a painting of a New
Testament text where God sends an angel to announce to
Mary that she will bear a child named Jesus, who is the Son
of God (Fig. 3). Fra Angelico uses Cennini’s three bowl
method to paint Mary’s and the angel’s red robes. The
angel’s drapery is red and gold, modulated with white tints
of the colors in the highlights and pure color in the folds. It
appears that the red used on the angel is mixed with more
white than that coloring Mary’s robe. The gold stripes are
close in value to the red stripes, and the gold tends to blend
in with the surrounding color of the portico. The angel’s
clothing causes it to meld with the predominantly gold
portico.

Figure 1. Artist rendering of methanol molecule using Cennini’s color
model

Cennini’s three bowl color mixing rule has been applied
to two watercolor renderings of the methanol molecule (Figs.
1 and 2). The artist painted directly from a traditional
wooden ball-and-stick model illuminated with natural
northern light from the upper left portion of the frame. In the
first image (Fig. 1) the original color scheme is replicated:
yellow for hydrogen, red for oxygen, and light blue for
carbon. In the left-hand image of Fig. 2 the color scheme has
changed to blue for hydrogen, red for oxygen, and green for
carbon. This change was made because yellow is a problem.
Bright yellow rendered against a white background provides
little luminance contrast, thereby making it difficult to see
the yellow spheres against the white background. By
replacing yellow with ultramarine blue the luminance
contrast between sphere and background is maximized.
The right-hand image of Fig. 2 shows the result of
adapting Cennini’s three bowl method to the color maps in
the Schakal molecular rendering program. In both watercolor
and computer graphics the edges of all forms contrast
sharply with the pale background enhancing viewability. In

Figure 3. The Annunciation by Fra Angelico, Cortona, 1433 -1434.

In contrast, Mary’s dark drapery isolates her from the
surrounding colors. Mary’s red robe thrusts out from her
surrounding blue drapery, the folds of Mary’s blue drapery
have more depth than the folds of her red robe. This is
because darker tones of blue recede from the viewer more
than pure tones of red. Fra Angelico used the colors to create
a colored jewel, with Mary and her red robe highlighted
within the dark surrounding of the blue drapery lined with
black. His method of using pure tones for shadows does not
create deep shadows. Instead, color is used to isolate Mary
from the surrounding scene. These pure colors create a
richness that was prized in the early fifteenth century.
Cennini described another method for modeling color.
This method was used by many artists, including

Figure 2. Artist rendering of methanol molecule (left) and computer
image (right) using Cennini’s color model

490
480

Michelangelo, who employed this technique on parts of the
Sistine Chapel ceiling. The method involved using various
hues to model drapery instead of using the three bowl
method of pure hues modified by white. For example, in a
drapery of gray, Cennini prescribed using white or yellow
for highlighted areas. Violet, black, or dark green were
suggested for shadowed areas of gray drapery. One
important aspect of this scheme of modeling is that it relies
upon colors of lighter value than the main color for the
highlights, while colors darker than the main color are
suggested for the shadows. Table 1 shows some of the color
relationships that were suggested by Cennini.
TABLE I.

contained within the spandrels and lunettes of the Sistine
Chapel ceiling. Raphael used this method to depict people
bathed by the light of heaven, while he reserved less highly
colored methods for modeling other parts of a painting.
Another compendium, On Painting, was written by Leon
Battista Alberti in 1435 [2]. In it he stated that white and
black are at the extremes of light. The artist should use black
to indicate the absence of light and white to indicate the
brightest light. Fig. 5 shows the methanol molecule modeled
using Alberti's suggestion. It is easier to achieve a good
three-dimensional model using black and white for modeling
than using either of the methods suggested by Cennini.
Using pure hues for shadows means that in many instances
there is no capability for creating a dark value. When the
hues are varied, for example using yellow to indicate light on
a gray object, then it is difficult to maintain a unified sense
of form. But using black and white to modulate a color is in
keeping with our eyes’ ability to best determine form in
black and white. Given this and the fact that his observations
concerning light's interaction with matter are consistent with
optics-based illumination models, Alberti's theory will be
used in the following comparisons of visualizations
generated by three programs.

CENNINI’S COLOR RELATIONSHIPS

Main Color
Gray

Lights
Yellow or White

Red Purple
Ocher
(dull yellow)

Pink Flesh or Yellow
White or Green

Shadows
Violet or Black or Dark
Green
Pure Red Purple or Violet
Black with either Sinoper or
Hematite (brown reds)

Fig. 4 is an example of a methanol molecule modeled
using this method. Each atom of the molecule is modeled
using three colors: the main color, the highlight color and the
shadow color. For the hydrogen atoms, the main color is
gray with yellow and violet used to indicate highlights and
shadows. The violet color being darker than the gray
provides convincing shadows. Also the violet color blends
more easily with the gray providing a smooth transition from
gray to violet. The yellow highlights are more discordant in
relationship to the gray and tend to look more like specular
highlights rather than merely lit areas. Using blue in the
shadows or violet on a gray, blue or red shape is a
harmonious way to indicate shadows. Blue is a better way to
indicate shadows than using pure red on a red molecule for
shadows. These atoms do have a rich appearance. If the
colors are blended sensitively than the effect is one of
liveliness. On the other hand, if this method is used too
broadly or crudely it results in chaos and discordance that
detracts from the goal of modeling lights and shadows.

Figure 5. Artist rendering of methanol molecule (left) and computer
image (right) using Alberti’s color model.

V.

COMPARISONS

Three images were created to compare the color map
representing Alberti’s color theory with the three
contemporary rendering programs specified in Section 2.
Alberti’s color map expressed within Schakal begins with
white for highlights, blends with an increasing percentage of
hue until a pure hue is attained, and then blends hue with
black until 100% black is reached (c.f. Fig. 5).
Fig. 6 shows a space-filling model of a crown ether
molecule drawn by Schakal employing Alberti’s color map
(left) adjacent to the same molecule rendered using OpenGL
by DS Visualizer (right). A single point light source
illuminates the models from the upper left. Overall, both
Schakal and DS Visualizer create comparable images. The
greatest variance comes in the differences found in the size
and color of specular highlights. With some work it would
have been possible to make these highlights coincide, but the
similarities in overall shading are sufficient to demonstrate
the close approximation Alberti's model makes to the
OpenGL rendering.

Figure 4. Cennini’s alternative color model applied to artist’s rendering
of methanol.

Artists in the time of the Renaissance used this method to
model angels or parts of paintings. Michelangelo used this
method to model the drapery of the sibyls and seers

491
481

VI. DISCUSSION
We have considered the application of Medieval and
Renaissance color theory to the computer graphic rendering
of molecular models. In particular, Alberti’s and Cennini’s
color theories were employed to render shaded geometric
primitives such as cylinders and spheres that are the
components of traditional ball-and-stick, and space filling
molecular models. The three comparisons given in Section 5
demonstrate that Alberti’s paint model, implemented as a
color map, can generate visualization imagery comparable to
the optics-based Phong shading model for these fundamental
geometric primitives. What we have done here is to automate
the perceptual process so that the painter’s practice of
determining a light source’s orientation relative to a surface
in a scene is transformed into a computation of the angle
between a surface normal and the light source vectors; and
the artist’s color selection is converted into a color look-up
from a table. In so doing we have made a connection
between the artist’s empirical model of illumination and the
perception-based illumination model of computer graphics
that is founded on geometric optics [17]. The fact that this
translation can be accomplished so easily and that it
produces images of comparable quality to the formal theory
is a validation of these Medieval and Renaissance methods.
We have also compared Alberti's and the Cennini's color
systems as they relate to the rendering of molecular structure.
In general, both methods deal with the three properties of
color - hue, value, and saturation. Each focuses on the
modeling of value. For Cennini, only one way exists for
changing value, which is the addition of white to the pure
color. For Alberti there are two – value is increased by
adding white and decreased by adding black, so as to create a
complete range of colors with white highlights as needed. As
such, Alberti’s model creates an image consistent with
optics-based methods for rendering of the effects of
illumination. Yet, Cennini’s shading method does provide
sufficient visual cues for perception of structural attributes of
surfaces as is clearly seen in Fra Angelico’s painting (Fig. 3),
and in both the artist and Schakal rendering of methanol
(Fig. 2). The strength of Cennini’s method is that it relies
heavily on the use of pure saturated colors to create imagery
that possess an eye-popping vibrancy. This effect, as we
have noted above, was not lost on the Impressionist painters
who employed it to transform the way we view light and
color in paintings. This is a point worth further investigation.
Finally, much of our discussion has focused on a
painter’s selection and use of colors in concert or in
opposition to create images that exhibit a coherent
integration of parts. Color selection and integration into an
artwork is part of an artist's training, and is an important
component of how any color model is implemented (see
again the discussion of Fig. 1 as an example). Thus,
regardless of the color theory employed, a competent
visualization must be made with color selection as a primary
consideration.

Figure 6. Schakal (left) and DS Visualizer (right) space-filling renderings
of crown ether molecule.

Fig. 7 displays a ball-and-stick model of the caffeine
molecule rendered by Schakal (left) and POVRAY (right).
As with Fig. 6, Schakal and the raytraced image and are in
accord. The major difference between these images resides
in Schakal’s darkening function. Here the caffeine molecule
rendered by Schakal appears as if it is nearer to the light
source than that created by POVRAY. However, the shapes
the cylinders and spheres are well represented by Alberti’s
model.

Figure 7. Schakal (left) and POVRAY (right) ball-and-stick renderings of
caffeine molecule.

A view of the cubic zirconium crystal lattice rendered by
Schakal (left) and Mercury (right) is shown in Fig. 8. In
contrast to the previous two images, the flatness of the visual
field has been replaced by an enhanced depth accentuated
through a single point perspective projection. Both images
were created from comparable viewpoints, but Mercury’s
OpenGL rendering presents a slightly larger angle of view
than that rendered by Schakal, thus increasing the images
sense of depth. Mercury’s control over OpenGL’s lighting
model is less flexible than DS Visualizer’s, reducing the
viewer’s ability to manipulate the oxygen atoms’ (red
spheres) highlights so as to make them comparable to
Schakal’s. Despite these differences, Alberti’s illumination
model generates a comparable image to OpenGL’s.

Figure 8.Schakal (left) and Mercury (right) ball-and-stick

492
482

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[9]

The watercolor images of molecular models were painted
by Suzanne M. Marchese.

[10]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[11]

M. Kemp, The Science of Art: Optical Themes in Western Art from
Brunelleschi to Seurat. New Haven, CT:Yale University Press, 1990.
L.B. Alberti, On Painting (Della pittura), Translated with introduction
and notes by J.R. Spencer. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
[1435] 1967.
D.C. Lindberg, The Beginnings of Western Science: The European
Scientific Tradition in Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional
Context, Prehistory to A.D. 1450, 2nd Ed. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 2008.
J. Ackerman, “The involvement of artists in renaissance sciences,” In
J.W. Shirley & F.D. Hoeniger, Eds. Washington, DC: Folger Books,
1985.
C. Cennini, The Craftsman's Handbook, Translated by D.V.
Thompson, Jr. New York, NY: Dover Publications, Inc., [1390] 1954.
B. Gooch, B. and A. Gooch,, Non-Photorealistic Rendering. Natick,
MA: A. K. Peters, Ltd., 2001.
T. Strothotte and S. Schlechtweg, Non-Photorealistic Computer
Graphics: Modeling, Rendering, and Animation. San Francisco, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2002.
M. Kirby, D. Keefe, and D.H. Laidlaw, “Painting and visualization,”
In The Visualization Handbook, C.D. Hansen & C.R. Johnson, eds.
Elsevier Inc, 2005, pp. 873-891.

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

493
483

D.H. Laidlaw, “Loose, artistic ‘textures’ for visualization,” IEEE CG
& A , vol. 21, 2, 2001, pp. 6-9.
F.T. Marchese, “Molecular visualization at the interface,” In Trends
in Interactive Visualisation / Advanced Information and Knowledge
Processing Series, E. Zudilova-Seinstra, T. Adriaasen, and R.van
Liere, Eds. London, UK: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 251-268.
E. Keller, “Some computer drawings of molecular and solid-state
structures,” J. Appl. Cryst. Vol. 22, 1989, pp. 19-22.
Accelrys' DS Visualizer, http://accelrys.com/products/discoverystudio/, accessed March 17, 2010.
C.F. Macrae, P.R. Edgington, P. McCabe, E. Pidcock, G.P. Shields,
R. Taylor, M. Towler, and J. van de Streek, “Mercury: visualization
and analysis of Crystal structures,” J. Appl. Cryst. Vol. 39, 2006, pp.
453-457.
POVRAY, http://www.povray.org, accessed March 7, 2010.
OpenGL Architecture Review Board, D. Shreiner, M. Woo, J. Neider,
and T. Davis, Opengl(R) Programming Guide: the Official Guide to
Learning Opengl(R), Version 2.1, 6th ed. Addison-Wesley
Professional, 2007.
R.L.Feller, Ed.. Artists’ Pigments: A Handbook of their History and
Characteristics, Vol. 1. Cambridge Univ. Press and The National
Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, 1986, pp. 65-108.
D.A. Anfam, et al. Techniques of the Great Masters of Art. Secaucus,
NJ: Chartwell Books, Inc., 1993, p. 222.
D.F. Rogers, Procedural Elements for Computer Graphics. McGrawHill, Inc., 1985, pp. 311-317.

