2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Dynamic Visualizations for Soccer Statistical Analysis
Adrian Rusu1, Doru Stoica2, Edward Burns1, Benjamin Hample1, Kevin McGarry1, Robert Russell1
1
Department of Computer Science, Rowan University
2
Department of Physical Education, University of Craiova, Romania
rusu@rowan.edu, doru_stoica_2005@yahoo.com,
{burnse15, hample04, mcgarr92, russel42}@students.rowan.edu
Abstract

field and with various entities on it. The second
visualization is called the Player Viewer. The user is able
to compare two players with this visualization, as each
player is color coded to show the player’s effectiveness
in a given category.
From a team manager’s perspective, in order to
improve their roster, he or she wants to be able to
generate practice exercises for a particular player based
on their weaknesses, compare two players on different
teams, evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of a player
before signing them to a contract, determine if a player
plays better on the road or at home, or determine what
the best position is for a particular player. Providing
effective visualizations, such as the ones included in
Soccer Scoop, will lead to team managers making more
informed decisions.
For data integration with our visualization, the user
is required to create and load a CSV (Comma Separate
Values) file based on a XLS field data template that is
provided into the program before viewing either
visualization.
Both the Field Viewer and Player viewer
visualizations can be easily toggled, allowing for distinct
player analysis of a specific team, however the Player
viewer adds player-to-player comparison between teams.
Such will empower a team manager to make comparative
analysis regarding fine grained player characteristics at
which may also assist with the coaching in the
development of a tactical set play or other globally team
centric decisions crucial for overall team success.
Our application possesses an intuitive design which
uniquely presents all key player elements to the user.
This allows for a system that can be easily adopted by
even the most technically challenged team manager.

The analysis of large sums of soccer statistics
can be extremely difficult if the data is not presented
graphically. As a result, we developed an application,
titled Soccer Scoop, which provides two separate
visualizations that can aid a soccer team manager. With
our application, a team manager can compare two
players on different teams, analyze a particular player
before signing them to a contract, measure the
performance of a particular player at different positions,
generate practice exercises, and determine if a
particular player plays better on the road or at home.
The visualizations used in our application apply
information visualization techniques, such as glyphs,
modified star plots, details on demand, color, and gestalt
principles.

1. Introduction
In athletics, it is difficult for a team manager to
determine the effectiveness of his or her players,
especially when considering team specific pregame
objectives such as the creation of drills and collaborative,
tactical set plays. A team manager can maintain
spreadsheets of useful data values, such as goals, team’s
average running time per game, and/or a player’s speed
at a given distance, however establishing a way to
analyze each aspect of data as a distinct entity related to
the overall team structure is one that may pose
challenges. This information is vital to the success of a
team, but unfortunately most team managers fail to
utilize this information at its full extent.
Our application, called Soccer Scoop, attempts to
solve this dilemma and to fulfill the need for player-toplayer comparisons as related to team dynamics. Soccer
Scoop presents two separate and very unique
visualizations for soccer; all visualized by a quick
observation technique that is made possible by
establishing a soccer field metaphor [1] and using all the
nature objects of the field to represent various data
categories cross referenced with specific, key player
elements. The goal is to create a visualization that
minimizes the amount of cognitive effort required to
understand it. By using metaphors, the visualization
becomes appealing to the team manager [13], [14]. The
first visualization, called Field Viewer, shows the user
vital information about one player. This visualization
represents the player’s attributes in the form of a soccer
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.39

2. Background
There are many visualization applications
available for the simulation of soccer games for play-byplay analysis that assist in pregame initiatives. One
example of such visualization is entitled “Grass Roots
Coaching” which is essentially a drill viewer
visualization that encompasses the overall sequences of
plays related to both offensive and defensive specific
drills [11]. Other examples include “TactFOOT: Soccer
Coaching Tactical Software” which allows for the
creation of drills, set plays, and other training exercises
that can be visualized through animations [12]. The need
for coaching within the realm of tactical field dynamics
207

between plays is surely met with all that is currently
available, however analysis tools for player-to-player
comparisons is almost nonexistent and hard to find.
In this paper we present a solution for soccer
player analysis; both for distinct player dynamics and
player-to-player comparisons. The overall dynamics of a
specific player are represented by a specific structure of
data elements that were provided and used to model the
requested visualization. It was hoped that three main data
aspects with their respective data attributes could be used
to observe the overall offensive and defensive
characteristics, enabling a determination of the current
skill level, and thus allowing for an overall focus onto
any variables that may otherwise remain transparent;
hindering any growth for player or team growth.
The following classifies the provided data
structure into three main categories: execution
mechanics, tactical utility, and frequent mistakes in
execution. Each category is crossed by the following
player elements: kick, head ball, throw-in, trap, tackling,
dribbling, footwork, and ball protection. Execution
mechanics for a player is comprised of precision,
fluency, coordination, easiness, and rapidity. The
precision attribute for all player elements are denoted by
a percentage value; percentage of kick accuracy, head
ball directed accuracy, throw-in accuracy to teammate,
success of trap absorption, tackle success, ball position
50cm from foot while dribbling, success of feign for
footwork, and success of ball protection. Fluency,
coordination, easiness, and rapidity are all Likert values
utilizing a scale of: unsatisfactory, satisfactory, good,
and very good. Tactical utility of a distinct player is
specific to all elements and each are denoted by the
number of times aggregate. The value for each element
denotes the following aggregate totals: number of times
surprising the opposing team, head ball is used to remove
ball from danger, throw-in ensures continuity of
offensive attack, trapped toward the opposing goal,
tackles in defending half, distance traveled in possession
of ball while dribbling, ability to create a man advantage,
and, number of times created advantage for opponent due
to poor ball protection. For the frequency of mistakes in
execution, the category comprises the player data for
foot, torso, and the slow execution of movement
attributes. All attributes are denoted by the Likert values
as described above, however both the foot and torso
denote a more fined grained characteristic as they are
related to player elements. Foot attribute is broken down
into the following element representations: plant foot
during kick is too far from ball, pauses to jump off both
legs while running during a kickball, does not keep both
feet planted on throw-in, plant leg is not flexible during
trap, hit opponent prior to hitting the ball during tackling,
repeated use of large steps on dribbling, shifts center of
gravity from one leg to another too slowly on footwork,
and ball is not kept on opposite side of opponent’s tackle
attempt during ball protection. The torso attribute of a
player represents the following element values: leaning
backwards during kick and trap, moved back and forth
too slowly during head ball and throw-in, does not

unbalance opponent when tackling, is stiff and not
leaning forward during dribbling, center of gravity too
high during footwork, and not able to keep balance when
physical contact made by opponent during the act of ball
protection.
Conceptually, our application was designed to
encompass all three categories with their respective
element values all within a single viewing instance. This
is visualized implementing a soccer field metaphor
which utilizes a variety of unique field objects; goal and
net, center field marker, ball locations, opposing team
player icons, and other visual metaphors. A glyph system
[8] was implemented to represent any obscure data
points which could be represented naturally by field
objects such as the foot and torso attributes of the
mistakes in execution frequency values.
Technically, the application was developed and
implemented utilizing the Java language framework. For
the graphics engine, the JOGL Framework was leveraged
for generating the visualizations for data representations.

3. Visualizations
3.1. Field Viewer
The Field Viewer visualization (see Figure 1)
allows the manager of a soccer team to review a given
player on a given team. This visualization can be toggled
to show different categories. The categories are kick,
head ball, throw-in, trap, tackle, dribbling, footwork, and
ball protection.
The overall visualization contains smaller
visualizations [9] to relay information about execution
mechanics, tactical utility, frequent mistakes in
execution, and slow execution of movement of a
respective category.
Before explaining each visualization in detail, it
is important to recognize that the entire visualization is
placed on a soccer field. The key aspect to this
visualization is familiarity [2]. The user needs to feel at
home and must recognize the abstractions used to display
the information. If the display is foreign, information
might be misinterpreted.
The soccer goal represents the precision of the
player for a respective category. It is appropriate that this
attribute is represented with a soccer goal, as most
people would associate precision with kicking a soccer
ball into a goal when discussing soccer. The goal is filled
up horizontally based on the precision value for the given
category. The higher the value, the more filled in the
goal is. The filled in portion of the goal will change color
depending on the precision value. When dealing with
human precognition, color is one of the first qualities of a
visualization that stands out [5]. The goal is filled in red
if precision percentage value is 0-25%, orange if it is 2550%, yellow if it 50-75%, and green if it is 75-100%. It
was important to fill the goal in from right to left, as a
soccer team manager associates the right side of the goal
in our visualization as ground level.

208

The center circle in the middle of the field
represents the remaining attributes that make up
execution mechanics, which are fluency, coordination,
easiness, and rapidity. Initially, a star plot [3] was going
to be used, but intersecting lines would have been
confusing to the user. A similar technique was employed,
as each ring represents a different attribute. The rings,
from inside to out, represent rapidity, easiness,
coordination, and fluency. These attributes follow a
Likert scale. If a player is marked as unsatisfactory, that
particular ring is red. Satisfactory means the ring will be
colored orange, good means the ring will be colored
yellow and very good means the ring will be colored
green. Once again, color plays an important role in this
visualization, as a team manager will be able to clearly
identify areas of deficiency within the player’s execution
mechanics.
To the left of the center of the field, there is a
wire-frame model of a soccer player. On this player, two
regions are colored in, which are the torso and the feet.
These colored regions represent the frequent mistakes in
execution for the feet and torso. These attributes follow a
Likert scale as well, as they determine how many times a
player fails with either their feet or torso for a respective
category. The coloring scheme used is the same as
previously described.
The line graph with four tick marks represents
the slow execution of movement attribute. A colored
circle will be placed on a tick mark depending on the
Likert value for a given category. Further to the right
means the player is fast in execution, where as being to
the far left means the player is very slow in execution.
Coloring techniques mentioned previously are used here
again on the circle. Coloring was added to emphasize the
Likert value. If coloring was not included, labels would
have been implemented beneath each tick mark to
indicate to the user exactly what the value is.
Tactical utility is represented on the right side
of the field with soccer balls. Tactical utility is a sum,
which means the more soccer balls placed on the field,
the better it is for the opponent. Choosing a soccer ball as
the glyph was important [7] for a couple reasons. Firstly,
using a player would have been confusing, as a player
already exists on the field. Secondly, a user associates
success with scoring. The user seeing a lot of balls on the
right side of the field leads to the user believing that this
player is outstanding despite not fully understanding the
information being visualized.
The Field Viewer is a dynamic visualization, as
the user can toggle between different categories (from
the right side of the screen) and change players quickly
(from the bottom of the screen). This will allow a team
manager to quickly pinpoint deficiencies in his or her
starting lineup or determine what the best pairings are for
the team.

Figure 1. Field Viewer allows a team manager to
view various attributes of a player dynamically.
3.2. Player Viewer
The Player Viewer visualization (see Figure 2)
allows the manager of a soccer team to compare two
players simultaneously. This portion of the application
contains two instances of the same visualization. The
visualization is a wireframe of a soccer player with a
soccer ball. Each region of the player is partitioned and
color coded to represent a different category. The head
represents head ball, the upper legs represent kick, the
arms represent throw-in, the feet represent footwork, the
torso represents tackling, and the square in the torso
represents trap. The color of ball represents the ability of
the player to protect the ball (ball protection) and the
height of the ball represents dribbling. Unlike the Field
Viewer the categories that can be toggled are fluency,
coordination, easiness, rapidity, foot, torso, and
movement.
The same coloring techniques are used for this
visualization. The Likert scale is assigned appropriate
colors to each value as well as each range from 0-100 for
concrete values. For the height of the ball, a similar
technique was used for the visualization to represent
slow execution of movement in the Field Viewer. Each
tick mark is color coded so the team manager
understands the meaning of the height of the ball. Labels
next to each tick mark would have cluttered the
visualization, so color was used instead.
The user is able to toggle their focus between
the two player instances in this visualization. The user is
then able to choose a different player from the selection
menu at the bottom. Dynamically, the player will be
updated to reflect the new player chosen. Making this
visualization dynamic and the utilization of details on
demand [10] allows a team manager to quickly compare
players and toggle quickly between different attributes.
When developing this visualization, a key
component was making it intuitive. When the user sees
that the soccer player’s head is red, the user should be
able to deduce that they need practice at head ball.
Making the right correlations between the player’s

209

anatomy and the data is what makes this visualization
effective.

the screen. Another glance will show the torso of the
player highlighted in yellow while the feet are red. This
indicates the level of frequent mistakes that this player
has made in torso field skills and footwork. A final
glance at the visualization will show the specific areas
that this player excels in. The goal is filled and green,
thus showing this player’s precision advantage. Each
ring in the center of the field is highlighted green to show
that this player has strengths in fluency, coordination,
easiness, and rapidity. According to the visualization,
this player possesses more strengths than weaknesses,
thus representing the quality that this player brings to the
team.

Figure 2. Player Viewer allows a team manager
to compare two players dynamically and
determine who is the better player based on
various categories.

4. Results
The analysis of field data is critical to
understanding the usefulness of Soccer Scoop system.
This section explores the functionality of Soccer Scoop
by outlining three specific case studies. These cases were
developed and observed with the use of captured field
data. Specifically, ten players of U Craiova soccer team
from the Romanian soccer championship were observed
over a period of five games (three home and two away).
The data matrix was composed of specific fields that
provided a well-rounded and very detailed synopsis of a
single player in a single game. Fields such as execution
mechanics, tactical utility, and frequency of mistakes
were included in the data matrix.

Figure 3. Field Viewer for a player ranking above
average in the Trap category.
4.2 Comparison of two players using Player Viewer
The ability to compare players during a game or
during practice sessions can be a challenge. Team
managers from various sports can observe individual
performances and take notes, but the focus tends to be on
a single player and does not allow a team manager to
quickly identify the differences between players. For the
best player-to-player comparisons, Player Viewer will be
observed for this case. Once the visualization is launched
and the two players are selected, the user is presented
with a color coded comparison of the players. This color
coding of the players makes their abilities immediately
apparent to the user. The user can chose between
different categories (fluency, easiness, rapidity, etc.).
When a category is selected the visualization will be
redrawn to display the data from the corresponding
column in the data matrix.
As an example, looking at Figure 4, the user has
selected the easiness category in Player Viewer. When
the visualization is drawn it can easily be inferred that
the player on the left performs throw-ins with greater
ease than the player on the right. This is determined by
the color of the player's arms. The player on the right has
arms that are highlighted as red while the player on the
left has arms that are highlighted as yellow. As

4.1 Single player analysis using Field Viewer
Field Viewer highlights an individual player's
skills and abilities. This unique visualization quickly
provides all data for a single player on the screen at the
same time. Through the use of familiar soccer objects
(player outline, soccer ball, field, goal, etc), the data is
displayed in an aesthetically pleasing manner [4]. A
quick observation of the visualization can effectively
point an evaluator to specific player data while still
providing an overall reference point for all of the
player’s information. The Field Viewer provides the
ability to toggle the display between each of the
categories found in the data matrix (kick, footwork,
dribbling, etc.).
In this analysis, as seen in Figure 3, a player
was observed to have highly rated skills. Specifically, in
the selected Trap category (right side of the screen), the
player's information was easily displayed for quick
evaluation. At first glance, a user can see that this player
has a limited score of Tactical Utility by observing the
small number of soccer balls in the upper right corner of

210

visualization. Similarly, a single player visualization was
used to represent the overall team average for away
games. This separation of home and away game data
allowed Soccer Scoop to treat each data set each as a
single player, thus being able to display these player
visualizations side by side for evaluation. The
visualization generated from this data can be seen in
Figure 5. At first glance, this particular comparison
shows that the team generally performs similarly in
rapidity regardless of playing at a home or away game.
Careful evaluation further reveals that the rapidity of the
team's trapping and dribbling is better in away games. It
can also be seen that the team is better at protecting the
ball at home. These discoveries can assist the coach in
developing exercises and practice sessions for the areas
that need improvement.

mentioned above, the soccer ball next to each player
encodes two pieces of information: ball protection and
dribbling. This visualization reveals to the user that
although the player on the left performs dribbling with
more ease than the player on the right (represented by
height of the ball), the player on the right can more easily
protect the ball as shown by the green color of the ball.

Figure 4. Player Viewer after real data has been
entered for two different players. The Easiness
category has been selected.
4.3 Comparison of the entire team analysis (average)
between home and away games
Team managers seem to be limited to only
evaluating a player in the setting/location at hand since
the player cannot be in two places (home and away) at
the same time. This complication forces the team
manager to rely on visual or statistical memory of the
player’s performance in a different setting. Even with the
separate captured data from home field and an away
field, accurate estimates of a team's performance may be
unclear due to the fact that comparing data matrices sideby-side is not easy to evaluate at a glance [6]. Soccer
Scoop provides a better way to give team managers
insight into how their team performs at home and on the
road. Since sport teams have demanding schedules
during a single season, the overall team performance at
various locations deserve careful evaluation. Critical data
captured over a period of games performed at a team’s
home field and during away games could determine key
strengths and/or weaknesses of a team. This particular
case attempts to show a glimpse into what Soccer Scoop
can be used for in determining the performance of the
team as a whole during home games and away games.
Captured field data was consolidated into two categories.
The first category grouped all player data for home
games. The second brought together all data for away
games. In each of these two categories, all player data
was averaged together for all home games and all away
games. In essence, this case sought to display the entire
team average for home games in a single player

Figure 5. Comparison between a team's average
performance at home versus average
performance at away games.
4.4 Results Summary
The case studies described above represent a small
subset of possibilities that Soccer Scoop can be used to
evaluate. The focus of the cases was on the performance
of a single player using the Field Viewer, the comparison
of different players using the Player Viewer, and the
evaluation of the data averaged from the entire team
performance during home games versus away games.
The intent of the Soccer Scoop tool is to empower
coaches with the ability to analyze and evaluate the team
efficiently and effectively. With an intuitive
representation of the player’s skills highlighted by a
basic color scheme, decisions can be made and practice
exercises can be determined for the team and individual
players. Soccer Scoop quickly displays not only the best
skills of each player, but also shows the areas that need
improvement. Ultimately, Soccer Scoop can be used by
coaches to strengthen the overall performance of their
team.

211

5. Future Enhancements

design of aesthetic interactions. Proceedings of the
2007 conference on Designing pleasurable products
and interfaces, pages 239-254, 2007.

In this section, future enhancements to Soccer
Scoop are considered. These changes would increase the
flexibility and control of the program as well as provide
additional analysis control to the program. Firstly, a
possible future improvement of Soccer Scoop will
ultimately include a more streamlined interface with
more emphasis on data control than is currently
implemented. For example, a feature may be included
that would allow for additional data imports that would
append addition data to the currently available data.
Additionally, more customization and personalization
options may be implemented and made available to users
that would allow for a quick launch of previous
application sessions; allowing for convenient analysis
and to avoid re-import frustrations as posed by the relaunch of a new session.

[5] P. K. Robertson and M. A. Hutchins. An
Approach to Intelligent Design of Color
Visualizations. Scientific Visualization, Overviews,
Methodologies, and Techniques, pp. 179-190, 1994.
[6] A. Telea, P. de Hillerin, and V. Valeanu.
Visualization of multivariate athlete performance
data. The Seventh IASTED International Conference
on Visualization, Imaging and Image Processing,
pages 123-128, 2007.
[7] B. Yost and C. North. Single complex glyphs
versus multiple simple glyphs. Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1889-1892, 2005.

6. Conclusion

[8] Matthew O. Ward. A taxonomy of glyph placement
strategies for multidimensional data visualization.
Information Visualization, Volume 1, Issue 3-4, pages
194-210, 2002.

We present Soccer Scoop, a visualization
application that is comprised of two main soccer player
visualizations.
Both
represent
distinct
player
characteristics as related to specific player dynamics,
however it is also possible to establish an analysis of
player-to-player comparisons in the same team or
between two teams, thus fulfilling the need for coaching
analysis related to player specific skill-set data. Our
quick-glance observation technique is made possible by
leveraging a soccer field metaphor that encapsulates a
complete set of skill-set categories with associated
attributes and cross references each element of a player
represented by natural objects located on the field.
Ultimately, through quick observation and analysis as
implemented by our application, coaches will benefit
from the use of Soccer Scoop. Specifically, coaches will
achieve the ability to categorize players, focus in on a
skill quality or deficiency, and perhaps establish better
strategies in terms of overall team development and
success.

[9] Eliane R.A. Valiati, Marcelo S. Pimenta, and Carla
M.D.S. Freitas. A taxonomy of tasks for guiding the
evaluation of multidimensional visualizations.
Proceedings of the 2006 AVI workshop on Beyond
time and errors: novel evaluation methods for
information visualization, pages 1-6, 2006.
[10] Darius Pfitzner, Vaughan Hobbs, and David
Powers. A unified taxonomic framework for
information visualization. Proceedings of the AsiaPacific symposium on Information visualization,
Volume 24, pages 57-66, 2003.
[11] Soccer & Football Coaching, Drills, & Training in
the UK, Europe, & America. Retrieved from
http://www.grassrootscoaching.com, 2005.
[12] TactFoot: Soccer Coaching Tactical Software.
Retrieved from http://www.tactfoot.com, 2010.

References
[1] Jack Ox. Visualization and the art of metaphor.
Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on
Creativity & cognition, pages 307-308, 2007.

[13] Miller, Todd and Stasko, John, "The InfoCanvas:
Information Conveyance through Personalized,
Expressive Art", Short Paper, CHI 2001 Extended
Abstracts, Seattle, WA, April 2001, pp. 305-306.

[2] Phil Turner. Being-with: A study of familiarity.
Interacting with Computer, Volume 20, Issue 4-5,
pages 447-454, 2008.

[14] Niklas Elmqvist, John Stasko and Philippas Tsigas,
"DataMeadow: A Visual Canvas for Analysis of
Large-Scale Multivariate Data", Information
Visualization, Vol. 7, No. 1, Spring 2008, pp. 1833.

[3] Michael Friendly and Ernest Kwan. Effect ordering
for data displays. Computational Statistics & Data
Analysis, Volume 43, Issue 4, pages 509-539, 2003.
[4] Youn-kyung Lim, Erik Stolterman, Heekyoung Jung,
and Justin Donaldson. Interaction gestalt and the

212

