2011 Eighth International Conference Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Fast Simplification of Scanned 3D Human Body for Animation
Xiao-dong Sun1,2

Hong-bin Zhang

1 College of Computer Science
Beijing University of Technology
2 Computer Information Center
Beijing Institute of clothing Technology
Beijing, China
sun_xiaodon@yahoo.com

College of Computer Science
Beijing University of Technology
Beijing, China
zhb@public.bta.net.cn

based animation, it may fail because of the missing skeleton
semantics. This paper is to solve this problem, i.e. preserve
the potential skeleton semantic of HBS data even in sharp
decreased of point’s size. And when reconstructed from
simplification data it contains less tense triangle or can
reconstructed quadrilateral uniformed mesh from
simplification data set for succeed animation.
This paper is organized as follows. Literature reviews on
the methods of simplification present in section 2, following
with introduce of skeleton semantic preserved simplification
algorithm. In section 3 describes the pre-process of HBS.
Section 4 introduces the identification of boundary points of
each slices, feature points and assigned weights of points of
HBS on the rule of distance attenuation. Simplification
strategy is described in section 5 and the result of the
algorithm is offered. Finally, the conclusion is proposed.

Abstract—3D scanned technology has found its increasing
application in computer animated movie and game. Due to the
over density of scanned data, simplification becomes a crucial
process. Many researches have been done in mesh-based (i.e.
triangulated faces) simplifications. However, few are focused
on preserving the completeness of skeleton semantic. And in
sharply simplification case, the losing of skeleton semantic can
cause failure of skeleton based animation. Due to those
problem and the time consuming of mesh reconstruction,
algorithms directly based on point cloud has gained
increasingly concentrations. This paper presents a simple and
effective algorithm directly based on point cloud which could
satisfy the succeed animation requirement when reconstructed
from simplification data. It can preserve completeness of the
potential skeleton semantic even in sharp decrease of points set
without introducing new cracks or holes to the model when
reconstructed.
Keywords- points cloud; skeleton preserved; simplification

I.

II.

According to the presentation form of the operated 3D
object, the simplification algorithms are cataloged into two
types: one is mesh-based simplification [3-20] and the other
is points cloud based simplification [21-23].
Yu et al. [24] presented a method to simplify 3D human
body model by searching a centroid of sections and
employing a sign function to sample the point of each
section. It is simple to operate with less time consume
however it may omit the points which maintain the shape
information.
For the original model with narrow fissures (i.e. 2
manifold with a deep crack) the decimation algorithm will
enlarge and even introduce new cracks and in some case
even holes and normal error in the large decimated edge
area. Fig.1 (a) is the original model with tinny cracks; the
cracks could be seen clearly in Fig.1 (b). After decimation
the tinny cracks of the original model were amplified and in
Fig2. Several areas with the introduced new holes and cracks
could be observed.
Sheffer [18] proposed a method of employing clustering
procedure as the local analysis for simplification the CAD
model. The algorithm is efficient and robust for the nonmanifold models, free-form and linear faces. When sharply
decreasing the number of the surfaces, the algorithm might
cause holes and topological discontinuity.

INTRODUCTION

3D scan technology can obtain the 3D model quick and
easily, and it finds its application in Medical orthotics,
manufacture, anthropometry, computer aided garment
design, virtual reality and 3D animation. However the
application of 3D scanned data is challenged for its large
scale number of points. In the last decade many researches
have been witnessed. In simplification the principles adopted
are various for different application purposes. For rendering
different level-of-detail model (i.e. multi-solution model) the
main principle is “visually similar” [1]. The principle
adopted in simplification process of CAD model for physicsbased simulation application is to maintain the feature and
keep the completeness of every part of the complicated
model and with less geometric error [2]. For 3D skeleton
animation besides the skeleton semantic preservation (i.e. the
two extracted skeletons of a same model before and after
simplification are geometrically similarity), the normal
correctness and constraint of introducing cracks and holes in
simplification process is also in consideration, due to its
sensitive to the cracks, holes and normal error in some parts.
The potential skeleton which is embedded in Human Body
Scanned (HBS) data is likely to fade away in sharply
simplification case, which leads to the un-completeness of
potential skeleton embedded in HBS data. In 3D skeleton
978-0-7695-4484-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2011.12

RELATED WORKS

70

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

Figure 2. (a) is the result of MeshLab original model after
twice quadric edge collapse decimation with quality threshold of
0.3 (b) is zoomed abdominal part taken from(a)

Figure 1. Original model (a) Original model with tinny
cracks in some areas (b) the zoomed abdominal part taken
from (a)

of each slice. Each slice obtains the boundary line points and
identifies the feature points between the boundary points.
Stage 3 is weight assign step. Assign the HBS points with
weight according to their contribution to HBS shape. Stage 4
simplified the data according the weight. There are two kind
of strategy in this phase. a) Interval sampling between
feature points simplification strategy was used for more
smooth face result and b) the global threshold of weight
strategy was employed for easily control of simplification
result.

To generate LOD human model from scanned human
body Yu et al. [25] obtain the simplification data by
sampling the slice data according to the angle from the
centroid point to arbitrary two points of each slice. It is quit
easy to control the output set of LOD model. However, when
the curvature of the slice is various the sampling processes
might decimate the feature points especially in the curvature
changed area. And the feature points usually carry the shape
information.
In contrast to the general triangulated mesh based
simplifications Joel Daniels et al. [5] proposed a novel
quadrilateral mesh simplification (QMS) which balances
poly-chord and quad-based simplification operators to
generate quality meshes independent of the underlying mesh
structure. The algorithm could preserve sharp features of
various models and can generate high quality results while
keeping quadrilateral connectivity during level-of-detail
creation. The algorithm throws light on the quadrilateral
mesh simplification.
Mao et al. [21] introduced an adaptive re-sampling
method for moderate non-uniformly point-sampled geometry
simplification. The improved mean-shift clustering algorithm
was adopted in the re-sampling of underlay model process.
This method can automatically determine the clusters during
the mean-shift process in contrast to other parametric
clustering. Despite the difficulty in employing an intuitive
specified parameter for user to adjust the result directly, it
can control the density of sampling easily by choosing
different threshold and weights. The algorithm presented in
this paper is quite similar to the algorithm of [21] in this
aspect.
The method described in this paper is 4-stage algorithm.
Stage 1 is preprocessing of HBS data. I.e. after preprocess of
filling holes and eliminating the noise of the scanned HBS,
cut the HBS into ordered slices by using the scanned line.
Stage 2 is to identify the boundary points and feature points

III.

PREPROCESS OF HBS

Due to the specular reflectance property, occlusions and
accessibility limitations of surface the HBS data often have
holes. It should be preprocessed to eliminate the noise points
and fill the large holes and gaps (e.g. top of head, side of
body part) and to get the point cloud slice ordered. The
algorithm based on hybrid silhouette and NURBS curve
fitting was employed to fill holes. Paper [26] has described
the algorithm in details.
IV.

BOUNDARY POINTS IDENTIFICATION AND WEIGHTS
ASSIGNMENT

A. Get the boundary points
A scanned line is used to cut the HBS body data into
slices. For each slice the

L1 = max( Pix ), L2 = min( Pix )

L3 = max(Piy ), L4 = min( Piy )

,
form the boundary box. Keep the
four points which both on the boundary line and slice data
set as boundary points and marked as{B | B = PB } .
Start the first page in a one-column format. Center your
title about 3 lines down from the normal top of the print area.
Follow the title with two blank lines. The author name(s) and

71

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

Figure 3. (a) is the result of MeshLab original model after
twice quadric edge collapse decimation with quality threshold of
0.3 (b) is zoomed abdominal part taken from(a)

Figure 4. Original model (a) Original model with tinny
cracks in some areas (b) the zoomed abdominal part taken
from (a)

projection on plane XOY (S is the parametric curve). The
explicit equation of the curve needs not to be calculated
because we know exactly the value of the points on the
curve. The next step is to calculate the curvature of each
discrete point on the curve.
Let T be the unit tangent vector, S is parametric curve,
the curvature of ΓXY : r ( s) k, could be calculated differential

affiliation(s) are next, centered beneath the title and followed
by two blank lines.
B. Identify the feature points and set the weight of points
To identify the feature points between boundary points of
each slice of the HBS, the orthographic of the slice needed to

Figure 3: results of interval simplification: I, t are interval variable of horizontal and vertical, (a) I=4, t=2, (b) I=10, t=2 (c)
I=21, t=3

of dt and ds.

be obtained initially.
Orthographic matrix [27] could be used to get the
orthographic projection of each slice. By let different
columns of orthographic matrix to be zero will get the
different projection of coordinate plane. Let ΓXY : r ( s)

xi +1 − xi is approach the
Δxi = xi +1 − xi and Replace ds with
arc length of ds . Let
When

ds gets

small enough

Δxi then get the following equation.

represent curve of given slices of HBS data set’s orthogonal

72

k ≈ d 2 y (dx ⋅ dx)
Let

marked as

(1)

K (k ) = ki − ki −1

pi is the

i th points of the slice), it is the points that maintain the
shape information of the model (i.e. the feature points). And
where T ( Si ) * T ( Si +1 ) < 0 ( T ( S i ) , T ( S i + 1 ) is the tangent
vector of point i and i+1 ) the point is also the feature point.
Suppose pk i be the identified feature points of the slice.
pk i

C. Sampling the point between the feature points
Since all the points on HBS have weighted according to
their contribution to the shape of HBS model, the
simplification could be easily operated based on their weight.
Two kinds of simplification strategy can be employed for
different purpose. For the one sensitive to the smoothness of
surface, the interval sampling between feature points is
suitable, and the one needs sharply decreased in point cloud
or feasible control of the results, the global threshold of
weight strategy is fit for that situation.
1) Interval sampling between feature points
For each slice on the HBS search the points for the

pk i

Set the weight of
to be 1 and the points near
(marked
p
p
n
n
as ) have attenuated weight, the weight of
inversely to

the distance between point pk i and p n . The farer p n is to pk i
the less influence of weight it is on p n .If p n is between two

feature points (marked as pk i and pk i +1 ) the weight of p n will
be affected by both of them. The weight of p n can be
obtained by following equations.
ki +1

wpn = ∑ wki (1 − pki pn D)
ki

weight are 1 and form the data set marked as

(3)

points

D= p p

p j −1 , p j + n +1 ∈ S f

(b)

Sf

are between the points

p j −1 , p j + n +1

(c)

Figure4: results of global weigh threshold δ = 1 (a) side view of the result, (b)zoomed front view of the result, (c)zoomed
side view of the result

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure.5 reconstructed HBS from the simplified results of (a) zoomed abdominal part patch from, (b) zoomed abdominal part patch from
reconstructed model I=4, t=2, (c) is zoomed abdominal part patch from reconstruct model from I=10, t=2

73

, let

, for the arbitrary points serial

p j , p j +1 , p j + 2 ... p j +l ... p j + n ∉ S f

ki ki +1 (4)
Where
And all the feature points of the HBS are in the data set

(a)

j is the number of slices. Besides the

data set s points in the boundary points set {B | B = PB } are
also assigned weight 1. And the weight of other points can
be calculated with the equation (8). Once all the points of
HBS being assigned with weights, the simplified process
samples the points according to their weight.
The feature points with greater weight have more
contribution to the shape of the model than others. The
simplification process is on this rule.

(2)

Where K (k ) gets local extreme value pi (

{s | s = pk i j }

.

p ∈S

contours and feature points of the model have preserved quit
good from the moderate simplified (5%) rate to the sharply
decreased one (1.5%, I=21, 4). So the completeness of
skeleton semantics is kept.

If j+I=j+l, then j+l S
Where I is a small integer (i.e. 1, 2…). The original HBS
marked as S O . After simplification the data set marked as
Ss. If I=1, nearly half of the original points between the
feature points will be simplified. And applied the interval
sampling algorithm again to the simplification data set Ss, it
will sample another half of the points on Ss, which is almost
the quarter of the original data set So.
In some cases we need only the feature points to be kept.
However the interval sampling strategy couldn’t fulfill it. For
a convince control the number of the result dataset, a global
weight threshold could set up to decided which point to be
simplified. For each point of HBS assigned a weight. If

{

}

2

pi ∈ max( ∂ 2 f ( x, y, zi ) ∂z ), max( ∂f ( x, y, zi ) ∂z )

B. Results of global threshold weight simplification
Fig.5 is the results of global threshold weight
simplification. It can obtain the simplification results that
interval can’t achieve. If δ = 1 the points of HBS were
sharply decreased, only the feature points of each slice would
be kept. The contour of the HBS is similar to the original
one. So the completeness of skeleton semantic is preserved.
C. Result evaluation and error analysis
To evaluate the point set quality of the simplification and
the affection of holes on original model that to the
simplification process, And we applied algorithms of [29] to
extraction skeleton of the point clouds before and after
simplification. We projected skeleton into plane and use
geometry shape similarity equation [30] to identify the
similarity of two skeletons. We define the semantic
preserved if two skeleton similarity. And the skeletons
before and after simplification is similarity, i.e. skeleton
semantic preserved.
The degree of uniform and the quantity of intense
triangle of the mesh reconstructed from the simplified data
was taken as the criterions to evaluate whether the
simplification process is fulfilling the aim for succeed
animation. We reconstructed the simplified dataset of each
stage. Fig.5 is the zoomed mesh patches from reconstructed
model. The reconstructed mesh after simplification is welldistributed with less intense and skewed angle triangles.
Table 1 is reconstructed mesh error analysis of Famle-1
model of different simplification rate. If the original model
with holes, the simplification process will not amplified the
holes in moderate decrease rate.
To identify effectiveness of the feature points (FP), we
put the extreme simplification case which is only minimum
FP set (Fig 4). The points carry the shape information of
HBS are kept, and it also kept the contour. And the shape
information of curvature various such as the abdominal part
and the beast part can reserved. However, the identification
process will take the boundary points of large holes and gaps
of original HBS data as feature points. It can be observed
clearly, from the inner side arm with holes in original model.

or

pi ∈ {max( ∂f ( x, y, zi ) ∂z ), min( ∂f ( x, y, zi ) ∂z )}

; If pi ∈ {Pk } , wi = 1 , otherwise wi = 0 .
After assign the weight we can decide the result points
set by set up a threshold δ . For arbitrary point pi ∈ SO ,
if wi ≥ δ , then pi ∈ S S . Where 0 < δ ≤ 1 , wi is the weight of
wi = 0.5

p i and S represents the original HBS and S is the dataset
o
o
of HBS after simplification. The simplification result varies

according to the change of δ , to keep the curvature changed
area more density i.e. preserve more detail of the shape
aware area. If in the extreme situation δ = 1 , simplification
process would only keep the feature points.
TABLE I.

RECONSTRUCTED MESH ERROR COMPARE
Mesh error

Reconstruct
condition

non-manifold
faces

vertices
redundant faces

crossing faces

original

5

2

6

I=4,t=2

5

1

5

I=8,t=2

6

1

0

I=8,t=3

0

0

3

I=10,t=2

3

0

16

V.

EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS

The datasets are from HBS dataset of Fashion Art and
Engineering School of Beijing Institute of clothing
Technology which had almost 2,000 female sample data.
And the extra 10 males and females HBS data of volunteers
is obtained by voxelan-lpw-2000 scanner [28].

VI.

CONCLUSIONS

The algorithm proposed in this paper is a simple and
easily implement points cloud based simplification strategy
of HBS data. With constraint to HBS simplification, the
algorithm can keep the completeness of the skeleton line
semantic even in sharp simplification rate. And the model
can be reconstructed from the simplification result points set
avoiding amplify or introduce new cracks and with less
normal error in moderate simplification. But in this
algorithm the point cloud of HBS has to be semi-organized.
And the points cloud should be noises removed firstly [29].

A. Results of interval sampling
When adopted different intervals (I=4, 10, 21, I is the
interval variable) using interval sampling between feature
points, the results are showing in Fig.3. Feature points are
marked out at each stage for clearly observation. Table 1
shows the points quantity of the original HBS and the
simplified ones at various intervals (I=4, 10, 21the result
HBS is about 12.5%, 5%, 3% of the original one.). The

74

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[13] P. Cignoni, et al., "External memory management and simplification
of huge meshes," Ieee Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 9, pp. 525-537, Oct-Dec 2003.
[14] L. Balmelli, et al., "Computational analysis of mesh simplification
using global error," Computational Geometry-Theory and
Applications, vol. 25, pp. 171-196, Jul 2003.
[15] I. D. Yun, et al., "Mesh simplification using the edge attributes,"
Eurasip Journal on Applied Signal Processing, vol. 2002, pp. 11021115, Oct 2002.
[16] S. J. Kim, et al., "Surface simplification using a discrete curvature
norm," Computers & Graphics-Uk, vol. 26, pp. 657-663, Oct 2002.
[17] C. Andujar, et al., "Topology-reducing surface simplification using a
discrete solid representation," Acm Transactions on Graphics, vol.
21, pp. 88-105, Apr 2002.
[18] A. Sheffer, "Model simplification for meshing using face clustering,"
Computer-Aided Design, vol. 33, pp. 925-934, Nov 2001.
[19] P. S. Heckbert and M. Garland, "Optimal triangulation and quadricbased surface simplification," Computational Geometry-Theory and
Applications, vol. 14, pp. 49-65, Nov 1999.
[20] P. Cignoni, et al., "A comparison of mesh simplification algorithm,"
Computers & Graphics-Uk, vol. 22, pp. 37-54, Jan-Feb 1998.
[21] Y. W. Miao, et al., "Curvature-aware adaptive re-sampling for pointsampled geometry," Computer-Aided Design, vol. 41, pp. 395-403,
Jun 2009.
[22] H. Yu, et al., "Automatic Segmentation of Scanned Human Bodies
for Building LOD Models," in 2008 6th Ieee International
Conference on Industrial Informatics, Vols 1-3, ed, 2008, pp. 13561361.
[23] Z. W. Yu and H. S. Wong, "An efficient local clustering approach for
simplification of 3D point-based computer graphics models," in IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME 2006),
Toronto, CANADA, 2006, pp. 2065-2068.
[24] H. Yu, et al., "Generation of 3D human models with different levels
of detail through point-based simplification," in International
Conference on Computer as a Tool (EUROCON 2007), Warsaw,
POLAND, 2007, pp. 1915-1919.
[25] H. Yu, et al., "Automatic Segmentation of Scanned Human Bodies
for Building LOD Models," in 2008 6th Ieee International
Conference on Industrial Informatics, Vols 1-3, ed, 2008, pp. 13561361.
[26] X. D. Sun and H. B. Zhang, "A Fast hole-filling strategy of 3D
Scanned Human Body," in Proceedings of the 2009 Sixth
International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and
Visualization, E. Banissi, et al., Eds., ed, 2009, pp. 270-275.
[27] M. Lipschutz, Schaum's Outline of Differential Geometry: McGrawHill 1969.
[28] T. jianrong, et al., "Basic Principle, Method of Graphic Similarity and
Its Application to Structure Pattern Recognition " CHINESE
JOURNAL OF COMPUTERS, vol. 25, p. 9, 2002
[29] Yu Yong, et al., "Pose-Independent Joint Extraction from Scanned
Human Body " JOURNAL OF COMPUTER RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT, vol. 45, p. 10, 2008.
[30] T. K. Dey, J. Giesen, S. Goswami, J. Hudson, R. Wenger, W. Zhao.
“Undersampling and oversampling in sample based shape modeling”.
Proc. IEEE Visualization, (2001), 83--90

The project is supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC Grant No. 60775011 ).
The authors thank Professor Rong Zheng of fashion art
and engineering school of her kindly offering some data and
given the details of 3D scanner. All the HBS data is obtained
by the voxelan-lpw-2000 scanner which is from the key
project of Beijing Municipal Commission of Education
foundation, under grant number AJ2009-11.
The authors thank Jing Yu for his endeavor to test
algorithm on the dataset.
The authors also appreciate the anonymous reviews of
Computer Aided Design for their advices.
REFERENCES
[1]

P. Lindstrom and G. Turk, "Image-driven simplification," Acm
Transactions on Graphics, vol. 19, pp. 204-241, Jul 2000.
[2] A. Thakur, et al., "A survey of CAD model simplification techniques
for physics-based simulation applications," Computer-Aided Design,
vol. 41, pp. 65-80, Feb 2009.
[3] D. Luo and G. X. Tan, "An Improved 3D Model Simplification Based
on Edge Collapse," in 3rd International Conference on Computer
Science and Education, Kaifeng, PEOPLES R CHINA, 2008, pp.
851-854.
[4] H. S. Kim, et al., "Mesh simplification with vertex color," in 5th
International Conference on Geometric Modeling and Processing
(GMP 2008), Hangzhou, PEOPLES R CHINA, 2008, pp. 258-271.
[5] J. Daniels, et al., "Quadrilateral Mesh Simplification," Acm
Transactions on Graphics, vol. 27, p. 9, Dec 2008.
[6] H. Y. Chen, et al., "A Real Time Mesh Simplification Algorithm
Based on Half-edge Collapse," in 20th Chinese Control and Decision
Conference, Yantai, PEOPLES R CHINA, 2008, pp. 1896-1899.
[7] B. T. Pivec and V. Domiter, "A general algorithm for triangular
meshes simplification," in 11th WSEAS International Conference on
Computers, Crete, GREECE, 2007, pp. 611-615.
[8] H. H. Chen, et al., Surface simplification using multi-edge mesh
collapse, 2007.
[9] O. M. van Kaick and H. Pedrini, "A comparative evaluation of
metrics for fast mesh simplification," Computer Graphics Forum, vol.
25, pp. 197-210, 2006.
[10] J. P. Ma, et al., "Meshes simplification based on reverse subdivision,"
in 16th International Conference on Artificial Reality and
Telexistence, Hangzhou, PEOPLES R CHINA, 2006, pp. 849-860.
[11] J. Q. Yan, et al., "Mesh simplification with hierarchical shape
analysis and iterative edge contraction," Ieee Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 10, pp. 142-151, Mar-Apr
2004.
[12] M. C. Ko and Y. C. Choy, "Mesh simplification for QoS control in
3D web environment," in 2nd International Conference on Human(dot)-Society-(at)-Internet, Seoul, South Korea, 2003, pp. 1-11.

75

