Visual Analytics with Jigsaw
¨ ∗
Carsten Gorg

Zhicheng Liu†

Neel Parekh‡

Kanupriya Singhal§

John Stasko¶

School of Interactive Computing & GVU Center
Georgia Institute of Technology

A BSTRACT
This article briefly introduces the Jigsaw system and describes
how we used it in analysis activities for the VAST ’07 Contest.
Jigsaw is a visual analytic system that provides multiple coordinated views to show connections between entities that are extracted
from a collection of documents.
Keywords: Visual analytics, investigative analysis, intelligence
analysis, information visualization, multiple views
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces
1 I NTRODUCTION
The Jigsaw system provides multiple views that show connections between entities across documents. We designed Jigsaw
with usability and simplicity as key design features – its operations
should be intuitive and easy to use. For a detailed description of the
system, we refer the reader to a regular paper [3] about Jigsaw in
the VAST ’07 proceedings and to a video on the project website [2]
that shows interaction with the system. Further details about the
analytic process we used to work on the VAST ’07 contest are described in [1].
2 J IGSAW S YSTEM
Jigsaw presents information about documents and their entities
through six different types of views. Therefore, the availability of
significant screen space is very beneficial – we used a computer
with four monitors while exploring the contest data set.
Jigsaw’s views do not show the entire dataset at once but use an
incremental query-based approach to show a subset of the dataset.
At start-up the views are first empty and the analyst can populate
them either by querying for entities or later by expanding entities
(showing other entities they are connected to) that are already visible in one of the views. This approach allows Jigsaw to handle larger datasets. The following views, which can be instantiated
multiple times, are part of the system:
The List View draws links and uses colors to show connections
between entities. It allows users to specify the number of lists
that are displayed, the type of entity shown in each list, and it
offers multiple sorting options.
The Graph View displays connections between entities and reports in a node-link diagram. It provides the possibility to
explore the network step-by-step by expanding and collapsing nodes to show or hide their connected entities or reports,
respectively.
∗ e-mail:

goerg@cc.gatech.edu
zcliu@cc.gatech.edu
‡ e-mail: justneel@gmail.com
§ e-mail: ksinghal@cc.gatech.edu
¶ e-mail: stasko@cc.gatech.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

The Scatter Plot View highlights pairwise relationships between
any two entity types. It supports focusing on a specific subset
of entities by range sliders.
The Text View displays the actual reports, highlights the entities
within them, and shows how often a report already has been
displayed.
The Time Line View shows entities that are connected to a date
on a time line. It supports zooming in on a specific time range.
The Calendar View provides an overview of the reports and the
entities within them according to the publication date of the
reports.
The views are coordinated using an event mechanism: interactions with one view (selecting, adding, removing, or expanding entities) are transformed into events that are then broadcast to all other
views. Thus, the views of the system stay consistent and provide
different perspectives on the same data. Jigsaw also has an option to turn event listening off in case a specific view shows an
interesting data subset that should not be changed.
Figure 1 shows four different views that display data from the
VAST ’07 contest dataset. The List View shows the organizations
to which Luella Vedric is connected (the lines from the person to
the organization column) and also with whom else she has connections (the orange colored entities in the person column). The Text
View shows the four reports in which Vedric is mentioned. The
Graph View displays Vedric’s connection network: the reports she
is mentioned in as well as the entities within those reports. Finally,
the Calendar View gives an overview of reports published in June,
July, August, and September 2003 and shows the entities of one
selected report on the side.
3 A NALYTIC P ROCESS WITH J IGSAW
We used Jigsaw to explore the VAST ’07 contest data set and
identify an underlying plot. Since Jigsaw does not present themes
within a report collection, it did not remove the need for us to read
the reports. Instead, Jigsaw acted as a visual index onto the report
collection and helped us find the most important reports to read.
While working on the contest dataset we realized that repeatedly
reading reports is important to incrementally expand knowledge
about the dataset and to understand details in the underlying plot.
The possibility of having multiple instances of one view was one
feature of Jigsaw that helped us during the analysis. We could follow different threads in parallel during our investigation and when
two threads seemed to merge or at least seemed to be related, we
could create a new view containing the entities of both threads and
investigate further with this combined and extended set of entities.
Having multiple instances of one view was also useful in another
context: we used multiple instances of the Text View to group reports (e.g. we had multiple Text Views open where each showed
the reports about a key person in the plot). A missing feature in this
approach was to be able to easily see the reports that are present in
more than one of the Text Views.
The Graph View helped in finding highly connected entities.
This view provides a layout algorithm that arranges the reports on

201

Figure 1: The List View, Text View, Graph View, and Calendar View showing data from the VAST ’07 dataset.

a circle, puts all entities that are connected to only one report in
the outer area of the circle, and all entities that are connected to
multiple reports in the inner area of the circle. This representation
allows analysts to quickly find and focus on entities of a subset of
the document collection that are highly connected.
Another useful approach we applied was to increase the context
of an entity collection step-by-step. We began by putting a small
entity collection in the Graph View, expanded all these entities to
get the reports in which they occur, and then expanded all those
reports to get their entities. Next, we explored this new entity and
report set in more detail in one of the other views and by reading
the reports in order to decide which of the new entities would be
relevant. We removed the ones that were not of interest and then
we continued to expand the context again.
One drawback of Jigsaw found during our investigation was
the missing functionality of being able to change the extracted entities on the fly. Since the system uses the co-occurence of entities to build the connection network, it is crucial that the entities
are properly identified. Missing or unidentified entities result in a
knowledge gap: connections that are not there cannot be visualized.
To overcome this shortcoming we will extend Jigsaw’s function-

202

ality to allow the user to add, remove, or change extracted entities
dynamically.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation via Award IIS-0414667 and the National Visualization and
Analytics Center (NVACTM ), a U.S. Department of Homeland Security Program, under the auspices of the Southeast Regional Visualization and Analytics Center. Carsten Go¨ rg was supported by
a fellowship within the Postdoc-Program of the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD).
R EFERENCES
[1] C. G¨org, Z. Liu, N. Parekh, K. Singhal, and J. Stasko. Jigsaw meets
Blue Iguanodon - The VAST 2007 Contest. In IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2007.
[2] Jigsaw project. http://www.gvu.gatech.edu/ii/jigsaw/.
[3] J. Stasko, C. G¨org, Z. Liu, and K. Singhal. Supporting Investigative
Analysis through Interactive Visualization. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2007.

