University of British Columbia & Simon Fraser University ± The Bricolage
William Chao, Daniel Ha, Kevin Ho, Linda Kaastra, Minjung Kim, Andrew Wade*, Faculty Sponsor: Brian Fisher
Simon Fraser University, SIAT and University of British Columbia, MAGIC

ABSTRACT
This abstract presents a bricolage approach to the 2007 VAST
contest. The analytical process we used is presented across four
stages of sensemaking. Several tools were used throughout our
approach, and we present their strengths and weaknesses for
specific aspects of the analytical process. In addition, we review
the details of both individual and collaborative techniques for
solving visual analytics problems.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information
Search and Retrieval]: Information filtering, Relevance feedback,
Selection process; H.4.1 [Office Automation]: Groupware; H.5.3
[Group and Organization Interfaces]: Collaborative computing,
Computer-supported cooperative work
Additional Keywords: bricolage, collaboration, theory building,
meta-analysis, evaluation
1

INTRODUCTION

Our group solved the VAST 2007 contest problem with a
bricolage approach, using a variety of pre-existing tools in
combination with one another throughout the different stages of
the analytic process. These tools were not pre-selected for their
features, but rather were found and used as needed. Much of the
initial analysis was performed individually; however collaboration
between analysts was crucial to later stages of analysis and
ultimately to the generation of a unified hypothesis.
2

SOLUTION TO THE VAST 2007 CONTEST PROBLEM

From the dataset, we determined the key players involved in
illegal and terrorist activities, a timeline of events and locations
important to the plot. Cesar Gil, a biologist and animal rights
activist, was believed to be the main culprit. In order to thwart a
new fad of chinchillas as pets, Gil orchestrated a monkeypox
outbreak that spread to humans in the LA area from infected
chinchillas. Gil¶s hope was that people would begin to fear
chinchillas as disease-carriers and the fad would quickly end. The
distribution of infected chinchillas can be traced to a company
called Global Ways. Global Ways is an import/export company
that is also involved in the illegal smuggling of drugs and animals
from South America and Africa. Abu Hassan, owner of a circus in
Africa, was implicated in animal smuggling and has exclusive ties
to Global Ways. Navarro Mercurio, operations manager for the
Miami office of Global Ways is involved in illegal smuggling of
cocaine and animals. The infected chinchillas are brought into the
country by a known chinchilla poacher, Rosalind Baptista.
Baptista met with Mercurio in New Orleans to arrange for the
*e-mail: andrewwade@ubcviscog.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

chinchillas to enter the country. Global Ways CEO Madhi Kim is
also involved with illegal smuggling activities. U¶%HDU D UDSSHU
who owns the Shravaana ranch outside the LA Area, uses Madhi
Kim and Global Ways to import animals. $V D UHVXOW U¶%HDU
receives some of the infected chinchillas brought into the country
by Baptista and Mercurio. U¶%HDU EHFRPHV LQIHFWHG ZLWK
monkeypox and is hospitalized shortly before the outbreak in the
LA area. The rest of the infected chinchillas are delivered to Gil in
LA, who distributes them through his chinchilla farm, Gil
Breeders. Another person of interest is Luella Vedric, a New York
socialite. Due to her associations with both Madhi Kim and
organizations like SPOMA, we recommended she be investigated.
3

DESCRIPTION OF ANALYTICAL PROCESS

Our analytical process can be described in terms of four distinct
but overlapping stages: information generation, schematization,
argumentation and schema shifting, and decision-making [1]. Our
problem solving approach gradually shifted from independent to
collaborative work as we progressed through the stages. The shift
was deliberate and the tools chosen along the way reflect this
change.
3.1

Information Generation

3.1.1
Information Discovery and Foraging
This part of the Information Generation stage was characterized
by finding categories for the information and coding for them in
the data, including names, places and events. Initially, analysts
were encouraged to work independently in order to mitigate the
potential for groupthink: a faulty, conforming style of group
analysis that can lead to poor decision making [2]. The goal was
for analysts to form independent categorizations and hypotheses.
The tools used in this initial stage were largely entity extraction
and search tools, including Windows Explorer, TextSTAT and
Search Utility. An additional technique used by some analysts was
automatic labeling of word forms. This was accomplished using
the Stanford POSTagger, which parses a text file and appends a
tag to every word present, thereby identifying its part-of-speech
(e.g., noun, verb). This allowed for easier isolation of proper
nouns and terms of interest. Another tool used for early coding
and extraction of entities was the commercial tool ATLAS.ti.
In order to move towards a collaborative answer, analysts
began to share their findings. ATLAS.ti provided a useful network
diagram view of relations between entities that facilitated
communication of ideas between analysts. Other visual
representations of individual findings were created with
FreeMind, which allowed for an intuitive depiction of many ideas
branching from a single lead as a divergent node.
3.1.2

Information Pooling, Data Transformations and
Integration
Tools used in this part of Information Generation represented the
need to create a collective understanding of the nature of the
problem. Pooling of data and analytic work took place in both
physical and virtual space. Sticky notes as well as a paper timeline
were used to display findings. $OWKRXJK WKH\ ZHUH ³ORZ WHFK´

207

these representations were powerful in facilitating communication
between different analysts, providing a space where information
was exchanged through speech, pointing, gestures, and even body
language. In addition, an online wiki and a shared Google
Spreadsheet served as the virtual space used for pooling
information and hypotheses. Using Google Spreadsheet, we could
see the evolution of our analytical process: viewing group entries
to the database in real time, responding to them and having
spontaneous discussions emerge over particular findings.
A final tool used for communicating findings in this stage was
Excel. One of the most useful data representations was a simple
visualization showing the geographical locations of important
characters over time.

tools combined with one another and used intelligently by
analysts proved to be more than sufficient for solving the
problem. Furthermore, we found that none of the tools were useful
at every stage of the group sensemaking activity, which was
characterized by overlapping phases of independent and
collaborative work. The bricolage approach is powerful because
WRROV DUH VHOHFWHG IRU IHDWXUHV WKDW FRPSOHPHQW DQDO\VWV¶
requirements over time. This exercise highlights the need to better
understand the human side of visual analytics: tools do not carry
out the analytical process, but rather serve to facilitate it. Problem
solving is a task ultimately left for human analysts and their
collaborative thinking.
REFERENCES

3.2
Schematization
This stage consisted of converting pooled information into
diagrams, placing emphasis on patterns and connections of
interest. The majority of visualizations created in this stage were
network diagrams, with links indicating a relationship between
two entities. We used a tool called GraphViz to automatically
generate network diagrams based on our pooled data in the
Google Spreadsheet. With these diagrams, the strength of the
connection was represented through color, based on our own
subjective ratings.
Another tool used for generation of network diagrams was
Cmap Tools. We used Cmap Tools to create a diagram of
motivations for both people and organizations. These were based
on facts from the data, and were used to make inferences about
the probability of certain characters being involved in illegal
activities.
The final tool used in this stage was a trial version of Timeline
Maker. This tool allowed for the creation of an easily changeable
visual representation of the temporal order of events. It also
allowed for coding events in different categories, representing
categories by color. This was useful when following a timeline of
events for a single character, for example.
3.3
Argumentation and Schema Shifting
Agreeing upon and forming a coherent and unified hypothesis was
not a simple process. In order to eliminate incorrect hypotheses,
we engaged Richard J. Heuer's model for analyzing competing
hypotheses [3]. We used Google Spreadsheets as a template,
enabling simultaneous collaboration. We found that framing
K\SRWKHVHV LQ D PDQQHU VXLWDEOH IRU +HXHU¶V PRGel was
challenging given the dataset. Evidence from the data often
supported multiple hypotheses, making the process of elimination
very difficult. +RZHYHUXVHRI+HXHU¶VPRGHOSURYHG successful
in eliminating speculative evidence and formulating more specific
hypotheses.
3.4
Decision-Making
The final stage involved a creating a ³VNHOHWRQ K\SRWKHVLV´ WKDW
included only facts and inferences we were very confident about.
This served as a template for the final submission. Many of the
previous visualizations were used in deciding on the final
hypothesis. Much of the decision-making near the end of the
analysis happened face-to-face, and previously computer-based
visualizations facilitated the consensus-making process that
ultimately led to our proposed solution.
4

CONCLUSION

Rather than create a single tool to solve the VAST 2007 contest
problem, we chose to use a diverse set of pre-existing tools
addressing specific needs that arose throughout the analytical
process. Though not particularly powerful when used alone, these

208

[1]

[2]
[3]

D.M. Russell, M.J. Stefik, P. Pirolli, and S. K. Card. The Cost
Structure of Sensemaking. Paper presented at the INTERCHI '93
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, pp. 269-276, April 24-29, 1993.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink : psychological studies of policy
decisions and fiascoes (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
R. J. Heuer, Psychology of Intelligence Analysis. Washington, D.C.:
Central Intelligence Agency Center for the Study of Intelligence,
1999. [Online]. Available: https://www.cia.gov/library/center-forthe-study-of-intelligence/csi-publications/books-andmonographs/psychology-of-intelligence-analysis/index.html

