Visual Analytics Approach to User-Controlled Evacuation Scheduling
Gennady Andrienko, Natalia Andrienko, Ulrich Bartling
Fraunhofer Institute IAIS (Intelligent Analysis and Information Systems), Germany

ABSTRACT
Application of the ideas of visual analytics is a promising
approach to supporting decision making, in particular, where the
problems have geographic (or spatial) and temporal aspects.
Visual analytics may be especially helpful in time-critical
applications, which pose hard challenges to decision support. We
have designed a suite of tools to support transportation-planning
tasks such as emergency evacuation of people from a disasteraffected area. The suite combines a tool for automated scheduling
based on a genetic algorithm with visual analytics techniques
allowing the user to evaluate tool results and direct its work. A
transportation schedule, which is generated by the tool, is a
complex construct involving geographical space, time, and
heterogeneous objects (people and vehicles) with states and
positions varying in time. We apply task-analytical approach to
design techniques that could effectively support a human planner
in the analysis of this complex information.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.1.2
[User/Machine Systems]: Human information processing – Visual
Analytics; I.6.9 [Visualization]: information visualization.
Additional Keywords: Geovisualization, transportation
planning, vehicle scheduling, task-centered design, coordinated
multiple views.
1

INTRODUCTION

Real-world problems involving spatial and temporal data and
information are often ill-defined and cannot be fully converted
into a form suitable for automatic processing. However, the sizes
and complexity of the problems call for computational methods,
which are especially needed in time-critical applications. A sound
approach is complementing the power and efficiency of
computational methods with human’s background knowledge,
flexible thinking, and experience, which often involves intangible
preferences and intuition. An effective way to provide material for
human’s analysis and reasoning and to enable human’s guidance
of the operation of computational tools is by means of
visualization and interactive visual interfaces [1].
In this paper, we consider the problem of planning the
evacuation of people from a disaster-affected area, which often
needs to be solved in time-critical conditions. An efficient tool
capable of automated generation of evacuation plans can save
precious time and, as a consequence, people’s lives and health.
Algorithms for transportation scheduling are devised in the area of
Operations Research (generic methods need to be adapted to the
specifics of the evacuation problem). However, such an algorithm
cannot account for all relevant information and criteria, especially
for what is specific to the geographic area of the disaster and its
neighborhood. One reason is that some types of information, such
Schloss Birlinghoven; 53754 Sankt Augustin; Germany
http://www.ais.fraunhofer.de/and
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

as spatial and spatio-temporal relationships and semantics of
spatial objects and locations, cannot be adequately encoded (yet)
in a computer-interpretable form. Besides, an attempt to encode
all relevant local information would take too much time, which
would nullify the value of the automated tool.
A solution is to involve a human expert in the process of
planning. The idea is that the automated tool produces a “draft”
schedule. The expert (henceforth called “planner”) evaluates this
schedule, identifies parts needing improvement, and directs the
further work of the automatic tool for revising the schedule.
Our goal has been to design and implement a tool or a
combination of tools that would allow a planner to efficiently
assess the acceptability of a schedule, detect possible problems,
understand their reasons, and find appropriate ways to solve or
alleviate them. The complex structure of the information to be
analyzed necessitates the use of several coordinated displays. The
size of the data (hundreds of transportation orders) demands
computational analysis and summarization of information.
The objective of this paper is to demonstrate a problem-oriented
design of visual analytics tools for schedule examination and
improvement. The discussion of the schedule generation
algorithm requires a dedicated paper, which we plan to write soon.
Here, we only describe the inputs and outputs (section 3). In
section 4, we present our analysis of the problem and the design
considerations derived from it. Thereby, we substantiate our
choice of visual and computational tools. It should be noted that
inventing highly innovative and original visualization and
interaction techniques has not been our goal. On the opposite, we
intentionally strived to apply common techniques, expectedly
familiar to the user. The rationale is to decrease the time required
for the planner to recognize the meaning of a display and learn
how to use it.
Section 5 is intended to demonstrate that the choice of the
techniques is adequate to the purpose. We do not describe any of
the techniques in detail since the techniques per se are not the
focus of the paper. Instead, we show how they may help the user
to detect problems in a schedule and investigate into possible
reasons.
Prior to the presentation of our work, we briefly review the
related literature.
2

RELATED

WORK

The research agenda of Geovisual Analytics for Spatial
Decision Support [1] sets the support to time-critical decision
making as one of the priority directions. It also points to the need
to find appropriate ways to visualize and analyze complex spatiotemporal constructs, such as scenarios and action plans.
The problem of transportation scheduling is considered in the
area of Operations Research, where it is ascribed to a generic class
of Vehicle Routing Problems [2]. For this class of optimization
problems, deterministic mathematical techniques do not work
sufficiently well while heuristic methods, such as Genetic
Algorithms [3], offer a powerful alternative [4,5,6]. As we have
noted, the problem usually cannot be solved fully automatically
and requires the involvement of a human analyst with his/her
domain expertise and knowledge of the geographic area. Existing
software systems for automated transportation planning typically

43

include visualizations to presents the results of schedule
computation and optimization to the user and allow the user to
modify the schedule [7,8,9,10]. Commonly used types of display
are table and Gantt chart (a horizontal bar chart representing the
duration of tasks against the progression of time). As these
displays do not contain geographic information, they are often
combined with maps showing the geographic locations involved
[7]. Sometimes, planned shipments and vehicle moves are also
represented on a map as directed lines (vectors) connecting source
and destination locations [9]. A disadvantage is that the spatial
and temporal aspects of a schedule are shown separately, and it is
not easy for the user to establish links between them. To alleviate
this problem, the user is offered a chart where the horizontal
dimension represents time and the vertical dimension provides
positions for the names of the locations [8,10]. In this chart,
diagonal lines represent movements of vehicles from place to
place and horizontal lines or bars indicate their staying in a
location. Movements of several vehicles are shown by lines
differing in color.
A shortcoming of these approaches to schedule visualization is
their lack of scalability. Thus, a table or Gantt chart representing
hundreds of orders can hardly facilitate schedule analysis, and a
map with hundreds of overlapping and intersecting vectors is
completely unreadable.
In [11], the authors present a solution based on the micro/macro
display concept advocated by E.Tufte [12]: the macro features
(overall shape) of a graph capture dispersion and trend
information about the entire data set while micro encoding
represents individual data items. This idea has been used for the
visualization of data concerning planned transportation of injured
and sick people to medical treatment facilities. Tiny symbols
representing individual patients are positioned according to the
planned departure times or readiness times while the color and
shape of a symbol can encode attributes of the patient. The
symbols for scheduled and unscheduled patients are stacked on
two sides of the time axis. In the result, the macro features of the
display show the total number of the patients and the distribution
of the planned vs. unplanned patients over time. This
visualization, however, does not present information about the
transportation means (vehicles), source and destination locations,
and durations of the trips. It does not seem that the micro/macro
display concept can be straightforwardly applied also to these
types of information. Another approach is representing data in an
aggregated way. In [13], temporal, geographic and categorical
aggregations are used to visualize data about multiple events
distributed in space and time. These ideas can be adapted to the
visualization of transportation orders taking into account the
differences in the data structure.
3

SCHEDULER OUTPUT AND RELEVANT SOURCE DATA

An evacuation (or, more generally, transportation) schedule is a
collection of transportation orders assigned to available vehicles,
where a transportation order specifies one trip of a vehicle: source
and destination locations, start and end times, and people (more
generally, items) to be delivered. In an emergency evacuation, it is
typically necessary to schedule the transportation of people from
multiple sources (original locations) to multiple destinations. The
number of people to evacuate may be quite large. An evacuation
planner does not deal with each person individually and even does
not have data at the level of individuals but only data about the
(estimated) number of people in each location. The task is to
assign groups of people to suitable destinations, find appropriate
vehicles to deliver them, and set the times for the trips of the
vehicles. There may be diverse categories of people such as
general public, disabled people, and critically sick or injured
persons. These categories need to be handled differently, which

44

includes the selection of proper destinations and proper types of
vehicles as well as proper timing of the transportation.
The problem of evacuation planning differs from standard
vehicle scheduling problems solved in business applications,
where an input for a scheduling algorithm usually consists of
transportation requests (incomplete transportation orders)
specifying the types and numbers of items to be delivered and
their sources and destinations. The task of an algorithm is to
associate each request with an appropriate vehicle and a time
interval when this vehicle will fulfill the delivery.
In evacuation planning, the input information includes (1) the
places where there are people to evacuate, (2) the numbers and
categories of these people, (3) the latest allowed departure times
per place and category; (4) possible destinations, i.e. safe places to
which people can be moved, and their capacities, by people
categories. The user has no time for the formulation of
transportation requests. According to the specifics of the problem,
we have devised a specialized scheduling algorithm (by adapting
the Breeder Genetic Algorithm described in [5]), which, in
addition to the standard functionality, is able to divide the total
number of people in a location into groups fitting in available
vehicles and choose an appropriate destination for each group.
Similarly to other scheduling algorithms, our algorithm also
requires the following data:
− Fleet description, which defines the types of vehicles and the
initial distribution of available vehicles over the various
locations. For each vehicle type, the capacity is specified,
separately for each category of people it can be used for.
− Distance (time) matrix, which contains the estimated travel
times between each pair of locations.
It should be noted that defining the routes of the vehicles is not
the task of the scheduler but can be done by one of the existing
routing tools, which can also provide the estimated travel times
for the time matrix.
An important property of the algorithm is that a valid solution
exists at any moment while the quality is progressively improved
as the algorithm continues its work. In a case of emergency, the
user does not need to wait until the algorithm finishes its work but
can get a reasonably good (although not necessarily optimal)
solution within affordable time limits. Thus, for our example data
with 14 source locations containing in total 4692 people of 6
different categories, 105 vehicles of 7 different types, and 25
destinations, we could have quite good schedules already after one
minute of running the tool. The tool stops either when further
optimization does not significantly improve the solution or the
specified time limit is reached, whatever comes first. Generally,
genetic algorithms, like any other heuristic methods, do not
guarantee arriving at an optimal solution. They do, however,
produce near-optimum solutions when properly designed.
4

PROBLEM ANALYSIS AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

The visualizations discussed in Section 2 are designed to
represent detailed information about individual transportation
orders so that the user could review the orders and, if needed,
modify some of them. However, a schedule for the transportation
of a large number of people from multiple source locations to
multiple destinations is inevitably large. Thus, in our experiments,
the number of orders in the automatically produced schedules
varied around 400 (the variation results from the nondeterministic character of the algorithm). An evacuation planner
usually has no time for a detailed inspection of all orders; hence, a
different approach is required.
Besides being more time-critical, the emergency evacuation
problem is also more complex than typical business transportation
problems. The additional complexities, which have been noted in
the previous section, do not only affect the scheduling algorithm

but also complicate the planner’s work on schedule evaluation and
increase the amount and diversity of information to be analyzed
(thus, the planner additionally needs to assess the choice of the
destinations and vehicles).
Essentially, evaluation of a schedule means finding answers to
three questions:
1. Does it achieve the goal, i.e. are all people timely delivered to
appropriate destination places by appropriate vehicles?
2. Is it feasible?
3. Is it rational?
In case of detecting problems such as undelivered people or late
deliveries, they need to be explored in order to understand the
reasons (e.g. deficient transportation resources) and find suitable
corrective measures. Here is a list of possible problems:
1. Problems in attaining the goal (effectiveness problems):
− Undelivered people;
− Late deliveries with respect to the time constraints;
− Use of improper vehicles;
− Delivery to improper places.
2. Feasibility problems:
− Use of more resources than available, i.e. exceeding the
capacities of the vehicles or destinations;
− Multiple vehicles loading or unloading simultaneously in the
same place (there may be not enough space or not enough
personnel for this).
3. Rationality problems:
− Time gaps between transportation orders when vehicles are
idle;
− Distant trips that can be avoided by choosing other
destinations;
− Low use of vehicle capacities;
− Unjustified use of very expensive vehicles.
These problems clearly differ in importance. Thus, under timecritical conditions, the planner would not spend time for building
a perfectly rational plan but rather use any feasible plan that
attains the goal. The tool(s) need to be designed so that the
presence or absence of effectiveness and feasibility problems
could be immediately visible and, in case of presence of such
problems, the reasons were also immediately seen or easy to find
out. The planner should also be able to spot and explore
rationality problems when time permits but immediate detection is
not so much required.
According to the design of the scheduling algorithm,
effectiveness problems can only arise due to resource deficiency.
Hence, it is reasonable to construct the visualization so that it
simultaneously exposes the presence or absence of effectiveness
problems and shows the availability and use of resources,
specifically, vehicles and destination locations. The display of
resource use can also demonstrate the absence of overuse of
resources (it is guaranteed by the algorithm but nevertheless needs
to be shown to the planner).
The potential feasibility problems with multiple vehicles
coming to the same place at the same time are place-dependent.
Thus, there will be no problem in such a place as a shopping
centre or industrial enterprise having a big parking lot. In such a
place, simultaneous arrival of multiple vehicles may be
advantageous rather than problematic. Therefore, it is
unreasonable to preclude such situations completely through
algorithm design. On the other hand, it is hardly possible to
supply all relevant location-related knowledge to the automatic
scheduler in advance for taking it into account in schedule
building; besides, there is no time for this in an emergency
situation. It is therefore necessary to design the visualization so
that the human planner could easily detect potentially problematic
situations and involve his/her domain knowledge to decide
whether the problems really exist.

Because of the time pressure and the size of the data, the
planner needs summarized information. However, highly
summarized information such as the total number of undelivered
people and total delay with respect to the time constraints may
indicate the existence of problems but is insufficient for the
exploration into their reasons. A degree of summarization
adequate for both purposes is highly desirable. In this respect, it is
productive to show the temporal progress of the transportation
according to the schedule using data aggregated by small time
intervals. This will allow the planner not only to note the
existence of a problem (e.g. late delivery) but also the time when
it occurs and immediately explore the status of the transportation
resources and destinations around this time. A useful general
guideline is given in the Visual Analytics Mantra put forward by
D.Keim [14]: the data are computationally processed (‘Analyze
First’) to provide an overview and expose problems (‘Show the
Important’), which may be examined through querying and
further computations and visualizations (‘Zoom, Filter and
Analyze Further’) while the original data are always accessible
(‘Details on Demand’). As may be seen from Fig.1, our approach
corresponds to this principle.
Input
data

Scheduling
algorithm

Schedule

User’s
evaluation
feedback

Computational
analysis module

Secondary
data

Queries

Interactive
visual
interfaces

Figure 1. The architecture and information flows of the evacuation
planning support system.

Another design consideration is that the planner should be able
to focus on the parts of the schedule relevant to different people
categories. One reason is simplification of the display and the
information to be perceived from it. Another reason is that the
planner can apply some priority order in reviewing the parts of the
schedule, for instance, start with critically sick and injured people
who need urgent help. Then, if the planner is satisfied with the
scheduling for this category, he/she can launch the execution of
this part even before the rest of the schedule is reviewed.
What should be done when the planner is not satisfied with
some part of the schedule? Manual correction of individual
transportation orders is time-consuming and therefore not
appropriate in emergency situations. A good approach is to utilize
the scheduling algorithm not only for the generation of schedules
but also for improving them. It should be borne in mind that a
specially designed objective function directs the algorithm
towards generating effective, feasible, and rational schedules. If
the algorithm has been stopped early in the optimization process,
allowing additional computation time may in some cases be
sufficient for making the schedule acceptable. It is reasonable to

45

apply additional optimization only to the part of the schedule that
requires improvement. For this purpose, the algorithm is devised
in such a way that some transportation orders may be marked as
fixed (non-modifiable); the further optimization is then applied
only to the remaining orders. The corresponding user interface
should enable the planner to divide the set of orders into fixed and
modifiable without the need to view and mark individual orders.
The following division criteria are appropriate:
− people category: the user selects one or more categories, and
the system fixes the respective orders including the empty trips
of vehicles to the source locations of these people;
− time: the user selects a time moment, and the system fixes the
orders that will have been fulfilled before it or will be under
execution at this time moment;
− source location: the user selects a subset of source locations,
and the system fixes the orders for in- and outgoing trips.
However, the helpfulness of additional optimization is quite
limited: it can eliminate or decrease delays in a schedule (when
the transportation resources permit) and improve its rationality.
As noted earlier, effectiveness problems mostly arise in case of
insufficient resources. Thus, the only possible reason for some
people being not evacuated is the lack of suitable destinations
and/or vehicles or insufficient capacity of the destinations. The
same applies to the use of improper places and/or vehicles (there
is a parameter determining whether the algorithm is allowed to
use unsuitable destinations and vehicles when suitable ones are
lacking). Insufficient transportation resources cause delays that
cannot be eliminated through optimization. Such problems require
the planner to undertake certain actions or make decisions such as:
− seek additional resources (meanwhile, the acceptable subset of
the schedule may be taken for execution);
− set priorities between people groups according to their
categories and/or source locations and permit delays for less
prioritized groups;
− conclude that the problems (in particular, delays) are not critical
and the schedule may be accepted.
As we have discussed, simultaneous presence of multiple
vehicles in the same place may or may not be a problem. If the
planner detects an undesirable coincidence in a particular place,
he/she should be able to shift some of the transportation orders
forward in time, mark them as fixed and let the scheduling
algorithm appropriately modify the further orders assigned to the
same vehicles. If these modifications introduce delays, the planner
may require the algorithm to optimize the subset of the schedule
comprising the orders that start after the latest shifted order.
Besides the possibility of correction, it is also necessary that the
scheduling algorithm could adjust the schedule to changes in the
situation such as appearance of additional people to be evacuated,
deviations of the real travel times from the estimated ones, some
resources becoming unavailable or new resources being added.
For this purpose, the planner can apply the time-based division for
marking the past and currently executed orders as fixed. Then,
after appropriate changes of the input data, the planner re-runs the
algorithm to obtain an adapted version of the schedule.
In the next section, we present the visual and computational
techniques we have chosen on the basis of the task analysis and
demonstrate their use for schedule assessment.
5

VISUALLY SUPPORTED SCHEDULE ASSESSMENT

5.1
Overview of the schedule progress
When the scheduling algorithm stops its work, the resulting
schedule and the corresponding input data are immediately loaded
in the system for schedule exploration and assessment, which
comprises computational and visualization modules. The initial
computational analysis and subsequent visualization of its results

46

(Fig.2) are designed so as to reveal major problems, specifically,
undelivered people, delays, and use of unsuitable vehicles and
destinations, or to demonstrate the absence of these problems.
The visualization consists of four sections. The horizontal
dimension in each section represents the time of the schedule
execution. The sections are aligned so that the same horizontal
positions correspond to one and the same time moment. The
whole schedule execution time is divided into unequal intervals
where the breaks are the moments when changes occur, i.e. some
transportation orders are started or finished. For these intervals,
each display section contains segmented bars of corresponding
widths, which encode various aggregated data.

Figure 2. The summary display of the transportation progress
presents the part of the schedule relevant to the evacuation of
the critically sick and injured people.

The upper section shows for each time interval how many
people are in the following states:
− stay in their source locations while the time limits (latest
allowed departure times) are not yet exceeded;
− stay in the source locations after the time limits have been
exceeded;
− are on the way to designated destinations in suitable vehicles;
− are transported in unsuitable vehicles;
− are in suitable destinations;
− are in unsuitable destinations.
The bars corresponding to the time intervals are divided into
colored segments proportionally to these numbers. The full height
of the bars represents the total number of people, which is shown
in the legend on the right. The remaining panels are constructed in
a similar way. The second section shows the dynamics of using
the capacities in the destinations. The bar segments represent fully
used capacities, used capacities in partly filled destinations,
remaining free capacities in these destinations, and free capacities
in the destinations that are not used at all. Potentially, the chart
can also show overloads, i.e. destinations receiving more people
than their capacities permit, and used capacities in unsuitable
destinations. The full height of the bars shows the total capacity of
all destinations, i.e. how many people they can accommodate. It is
shown in the legend and can be easily compared with the total
number of people to be evacuated. The third section shows the
used and unused capacities in the vehicles, similarly to the
capacities in the destinations. Grey-colored segments correspond

to the capacities in the vehicles moving without load from their
home locations or from destinations to the sources. The full height
of the bars corresponds to the total capacity of all vehicles. The
fourth (bottom) section shows how many vehicles are idle,
moving without load, and moving with load. The full height of the
bars corresponds to the number of available vehicles.
The display is able to present the transportation progress either
for all people or for any single category selected by the user. In
the latter case, the display shows only the information relevant to
the selected category: the people status chart represents only
people of this category, the destination use chart includes only
capacities in the destinations suitable for this category plus,
possibly, used capacities in unsuitable destinations, and the other
two sections contain information about the vehicles suitable for
this category or used for it. Thus, Fig.2 shows the transportation
progress for the category ‘critically sick or injured people’.
The colors for the display have been chosen in such a way that
more prominent colors signify problems. Thus, dark red segments
in the upper panel represent groups of people staying in their
source locations after the time limits having been exceeded. The
schedule presented in Figure 2 is quite good; there is only a small
delay (1 minute long). Figure 3 demonstrates how longer delays
and undelivered people are exposed on the display.

be free after 50 minutes of the schedule execution and some of
them even a few minutes earlier. Could the delay be eliminated or
reduced by utilizing some of these vehicles? This depends on
where they will be located after completing their orders. To find
this out, the planner clicks on the corresponding bar segment in
the vehicle activities chart (bottom). This operation highlights the
locations on a map.

Figure 4. The progress summary display with the category
‘prisoners’ being currently selected.

Figure 3. Top: long delays appear as red segments occurring in
multiple consecutive bars. Bottom: when some people are not
delivered, the display contains a red stripe stretching to its
right margin.

When the schedule progress summary display exposes a
problem, the reasons are often clear from the same display. Thus,
some people may be undelivered or delivered to unsuitable
destinations because of the lack of capacity in suitable
destinations. This will be easily detectable on the destination use
display: either it will be empty, which means that no suitable
destinations exist at all, or it will show that all suitable
destinations are full at the end. The investigation into the reasons
for delays or the use of unsuitable vehicles is, however, less
straightforward and requires involving additional displays.
5.2
Finding reasons for delays
In our example scenario of schedule assessment, the planner
looks first of all at the planned transportation of the critically sick
or injured people (Fig.2). The planner detects the one-minute
delay but decides that it is not very critical and accepts this part of
the schedule for implementation. Then the planner focuses on the
other people categories one by one. The display demonstrates the
absence of delays, undelivered people, and improper use of
resources for all categories except “prisoners”, for which a long
delay is exposed (Fig.4). Through mouse-over querying, the user
learns that the delay involves 10 persons whose transportation will
begin in 1 hour 34 minutes after the evacuation start whereas the
time limit is 1 hour. With the vehicle use charts, the planner finds
that 5 suitable vehicles with the total capacity of 50 persons will

Figure 5. The map highlights the location of the vehicles suitable
for transporting prisoners at the moment when these vehicles
become free.

The resulting map (Fig. 5) shows that all 5 vehicles will be in
one and the same location called “Jailhouse”. Note that the
information on the map has been automatically filtered to show
only the information relevant to the selected category ‘prisoners’.
The locations are marked by colored circles where red is used for
people sources, green for destinations, and yellow for other

47

locations involved, such as home locations of the vehicles. The
moves of the vehicles are shown as directed lines (vectors).
From the map, the planner notices that there is only one suitable
destination for the prisoners, which is very distant from the source
location. All free vehicles will be situated at the destination.
Would they be able to get to the source location before the time
limit is exceeded? To check this, the planner looks at a Gantt chart
display (this type of display is commonly used in planning). As all
other displays, the Gantt chart (Fig.6) has been filtered according
to the currently selected people category. The light blue bars
represent the trips where prisoners are transported and the
greenish bars represent trips without load. The chart shows that a
trip from the source to destination or back takes about 47 minutes.
Hence, there is no way to avoid or reduce the delay: no vehicle
can get from the destination to the source earlier than the vehicle
that finally takes the remaining prisoners (the corresponding
transportation order is highlighted in white color).

display illegible. A three-dimensional display (perspective view)
where the third dimension represents time is unlikely to eliminate
the problem since there are many trips occurring simultaneously.
Besides, such a display may be hard to understand and use.
After considering these and other options, we finally chose to
use the permutable matrix display (Fig.7) technique introduced by
Bertin [15]. As demonstrated in [16], this is an effective tool for
the exploration of interactions and movements between spatial
locations. The rows and columns of the matrix correspond to the
sources and destinations, respectively. In Fig.7, they are ordered
according to the numbers of trips from/to the corresponding
locations. The user can choose another ordering method from
several predefined variants. The symbols in the cells and the
shading of the captions of the rows and columns can encode
different aggregated characteristics, depending on the user’s
choice. In Fig.7, the sizes (areas) of the rectangular symbols are
proportional to the numbers of trips between the respective
locations, and the sizes of the dark grey segments in the captions
represent the total numbers of trips from/to the corresponding
locations. Other possibilities are: number of empty trips, number
of non-empty trips, number of people, number of different
vehicles, and special symbols encoding simultaneously the
number of transported people and the distance between the
locations, as will be demonstrated later. These different modes
enable multi-purpose use of the display. One of the purposes is
detection of potential feasibility problems due to simultaneous
arrival of multiple vehicles to the same place.

Figure 6. The Gantt chart display shows how the transportation of
the prisoners is scheduled.

To solve the problem, the planner needs to find an additional
suitable vehicle located not far from the prison or an additional
(temporary) destination out of the danger zone. The planner may
also decide that the delay is not very dangerous and may be
accepted.
5.3
Checking the feasibility
Although the overuse of resources is normally excluded by the
scheduling algorithm, the computational module of the schedule
assessment support system and the transportation progress
summary display are nevertheless designed so as to detect and
expose the cases of overuse (which may potentially occur if there
are errors in the scheduler). The legends of the destination and
vehicle use charts (the second and third panels in Figs.2 and 4)
include items for overload of destination places and vehicles,
respectively. The absence of the corresponding colors in the charts
indicates that overloads do not occur.
As discussed in section 4, situations when multiple vehicles
come to the same place at the same time are not always
problematic but may be also beneficial. Therefore, each situation
needs to be examined separately by a human expert with the
involvement of local knowledge or information from external
sources. To detect potentially problematic situations, the expert
needs a display presenting the numbers of vehicles in individual
locations or the numbers of trips to individual locations. One
possibility is to show this information on a map. Thus, the
numbers of vehicles may be represented by bar charts with the
bars corresponding to time intervals. The numbers of trips may be
represented by proportional widths of vectors connecting pairs of
locations. A serious drawback of both approaches is that the
diagrams or vector symbols greatly overlap, which makes the

48

Figure 7. The permutable matrix shows the numbers of trips
between pairs of locations.

For this purpose, the planner looks at the shading of the column
captions and notices that very many trips end at the place ‘Braun
and Co’, which corresponds to the first column. To locate these
trips in time, the planner uses the Gantt chart display. For
convenience of the analysis, the lines in the Gantt chart may be
grouped according to the trip destinations. Destination-based
filtering makes the lines representing the trips to user-selected
location(s) more prominent on the display than the other lines.
Fig.8 (left) shows a fragment of the Gantt chart display presenting
all trips to ‘Braun and Co’. The lines are colored according to the
types of the vehicles: blue represents ordinary ambulance cars,
pink is used for ambulance cars with life support facilities, and
yellow corresponds to buses. It is easily seen that many vehicles
are supposed to come to the place simultaneously. Through
mouse-over querying, the planner may see the exact times of the
orders (Fig.8 right).

Figure 8. A fragment of the Gantt chart represents all trips with the
destination ‘Braun and Co’.

In this situation, the planner should involve his/her background
knowledge and/or additional information to assess the feasibility
of this plan. In our scenario, ‘Braun and Co’ is a big chemical
enterprise, which has a big parking lot. The planner may know
this or call to ‘Braun and Co’ to find this out. The size of the
parking place is sufficient for the 23 buses that are supposed to
come in 11 minutes after the evacuation start. The quick arrival of
many buses is an advantage: according to the scenario, the
evacuation is caused by a fire and release of a toxic substance at
‘Braun and Co’, and the workers of this plant need to be
evacuated among the first. While the buses are on the way to the
plant, the workers can leave the buildings and come to the parking
place. However, it may be a problem that the buses come shortly
after the arrival of the ambulance cars, which are supposed to take
injured people. The mass movement of people to the buses may
hinder the loading of the injured people in the ambulance cars and
departure of the cars. Therefore, it may be reasonable to move the
orders for the buses by a few minutes forward in time (while
regarding the time limit of 20 minutes). This may be done by
interacting with the Gantt chart display.
The planner also examines the other locations with many
incoming trips and concludes that they do not pose feasibility
problems: either the trips are spread over time or there is enough
space for the vehicles.
5.4
Assessing the rationality
From the possible rationality problems, the under-use of vehicle
capacities, if occurs, will be indicated in the fleet use chart (the
third section of the display in Figs.2 and 4) by the presence of
orange-colored bar segments. The fleet activities chart (bottom of
Figs.2 and 4) is suitable for detecting time gaps in vehicle use. In
a rational plan, the number of idle vehicles is minimal at the
beginning and then monotonously increases as the number of
undelivered people decreases. Hence, the height of the yellow bar
segments representing idle vehicles should increase from left to
right. An occasional decrease in height indicates that some
vehicles will be idle for some time and then used again. Such
cases may be noticed in Figs.2 and 4. However, the widths of the
bars preceding the shorter segments show that the time gaps in
vehicle use are very short. By means of mouse-over querying, the
planner can learn the exact duration, which is 1-2 minutes.
In our example data, there is no information about the costs of
using different types of vehicles. In case of availability of this
information, it could be visualized on a segmented bar chart with
the bars divided according to the numbers of vehicles of different
types and the segments colored according to the costs of these
types. This would allow the user to see whether expensive
vehicles are used without a real need for this.

The planner should also be able to detect unreasonable choice
of distant destinations. When the number of source and
destination locations is small, a map display can provide an
adequate support for this. Thus, the map in Figure 9 presents
summarized transportation orders relevant to the evacuation of
critically sick and injured people. People from two source
locations, which are marked by red circles, are transported to five
destinations out of seven suitable locations marked by green
circles. The total number of people delivered from a source to a
destination is encoded in the thickness of the arrow symbol drawn
between these locations. Thin lines correspond to empty trips.
Figure 9 demonstrates a good choice of the destinations: people
are transported to the nearest suitable places while two more
distant locations remain unused. However, with increasing the
number of locations and trips between them, the map display loses
its effectiveness due to symbol overlapping. In such cases, the
movement matrix (Fig.7) may be a better alternative.

Figure 9. The map view shows aggregated transportations of
critically sick and injured people.

Fig.10 shows the movement matrix in the mode of portraying
the numbers of transported people and the distances to the
destinations (the category ‘general people’ has been selected). The
numbers of people are represented by the heights of the vertical
lines and the distances by the lengths of the horizontal lines. The
lines make T-like shapes, which are present only in the cells
corresponding to trips with people. For additional convenience of
analysis, the columns can be ordered according to distances from
a selected source location. The symbols with long horizontal lines
representing distant trips are easily detectable in the matrix. It is
especially undesirable if they also have long vertical lines.

Figure 10. The matrix shows how many people and how far have
been transported from each source.

In our case, the planner notes that some people from ‘Braun and
Co’ are moved at rather long distances and relatively few people
are moved to closer sites like ‘Neighborhood House’. To have the
geographic context, the planner clicks on ‘Braun and Co’ in the
matrix. In response, the map display (Figure 11) represents
aggregated data about the transportation of the general people

49

from ‘Braun and Co’ by arrows with the widths proportional to
the numbers of transported people, and their destinations are
marked by black circles. The map also shows other destinations
that are suitable for general people and have unused capacities.
The capacities may be portrayed on the map, e.g. by means of
graduated symbols.

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]
Figure 11. The map display portrays the geographic information
corresponding to the second row of the matrix in Figure 10.

The planner concludes that the capacities in the destination
places are not optimally used. If the time permits, the planner may
require the algorithm to optimize the part of the schedule dealing
with the transportation of general people either from all sources or
only from ‘Braun and Co’. Since it is clear that there are more
capacities in the destination places than really needed, the planner
may safely remove the most distant places from the input of the
algorithm.
6

REFERENCES

50

[8]

[9]

[10]

CONCLUSION

This paper demonstrates a task-oriented design of visual
analytics tools for assessment and improvement of evacuation
schedules. The design bases on a detailed examination of the
schedule assessment task taking into account the time-critical
character of the situation in which it is accomplished. The size and
complexity of the information to be reviewed and the need to
analyze it in the shortest possible time call for a synergy of visual
and computational methods as stated in the ‘Visual Analytics
Mantra’ [14], which we have adhered in our design.
By an example scenario of schedule inspection, the paper shows
how the tools we have designed help the user to detect various
types of problems in a schedule, understand their reasons, and find
appropriate corrective measures. Since the tools allow the user to
detect all possible types of problems, which are listed in section 4,
we may conclude that the design is adequate to the task; however,
user studies are required for testing tool effectiveness. For this
purpose, real professionals are needed rather than students or
colleagues playing the role of emergency evacuation planners.
Unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to find professionals that
can participate in such experiments.
This research is conducted within the integrated EU-funded
project OASIS – Open Advanced System for Improved Crisis
Management (IST-2003-004677, 2004-2008). The project as a
whole aims at defining a generic crisis management system to
support the response and rescue operations in case of large-scale
disasters; more information is available at http://www.oasisfp6.org/. Trials of the overall OASIS system with representative
users from civil protection services (fire, police, and ambulance)
will be conducted next year. These trials will give us a possibility
to get feedback from relevant professionals concerning our work.

[1]

[7]

Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N., Jankowski, P., Keim, D., Kraak, M.J., MacEachren, A., and Wrobel, S.: Geovisual Analytics for Spatial
Decision Support: Setting the Research Agenda, International

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

Journal Geographical Information Science, Vol. 21, No.8, 2007,
pp.839-857.
Golden, B.L., and Assad, A.A. (editors): Vehicle Routing: Methods
and Studies (Studies in Management Science and Systems, Volume
16), Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1988
Reeves, C.R., and Rowe, J.E.: Genetic Algorithms - Principles and
Perspectives: A Guide to GA Theory, Operations Research /
Computer Science Interfaces Series, Vol. 20, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg New York, 2002
Goldberg, D.E.: Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and
Machine Learning, Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., Reading, MA, 1989
Bartling, U., and Mühlenbein, H.: Optimization of large scale parcel
distribution systems by the Breeder Genetic Algorithm (BGA). In T.
Bäck (Ed.), Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Genetic Algorithms, 1997, pp. 473-480. San Francisco: Morgan
Kaufman.
Pankratz, G.: Dynamic Vehicle Routing by Means of a Genetic
Algorithm. International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management (IJPDLM), Vol. 35 No.5, pp. 362-383.
Fagerholt, K.: A computer-based decision support system for vessel
fleet scheduling - experience and future research, Decision Support
Systems, Vol. 37, Issue 1, 2004, pp. 35– 47
Smith, S.F., Hildum, D.W., and Crimm, D.R: Comirem: An
Intelligent Form for Resource Management, IEEE Intelligent
Systems, Vol. 20, No.2, March-April 2005, pp. 16-24
ILOG
Transport
PowerOps,
available
at
URL:
http://www.ilog.com/products/transportpowerops/, last accessed: 20
March 2007
TurboRouter software. Schedule visualization, available at URL:
http://www.marintek.sintef.no/TurboRouter/visualisations.htm, last
accessed: 20 March 2007
Potter, S.S., Ball, R.W., and Elm, W.C.: Supporting aeromedical
evacuation planning through information visualization, Proceedings
of the 3rd Symposium on Human Interaction with Complex Systems
(HICS '96), August 25 - 27, 1996, Dayton, Ohio, USA, publisher:
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 1996
Tufte, E.R.: Envisioning information, Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT,
USA, 1990
Fredrikson, A., North C., Plaisant, C., and Shneiderman, B.:
Temporal, geographic and categorical aggregations viewed through
coordinated displays: a case study with highway incident data,
Proceedings of Workshop on New Paradigms in Information
Visualization and Manipulation (NPIVM’99), New York: ACM
Press, 1999, pp.26-34.
Keim, D. A.: Scaling visual analytics to very large data sets,
presentation at the Workshop on Visual Analytics, June 4th, 2005,
Darmstadt, Germany, http://infovis.uni-konstanz.de/index.php?
region=events&event=VisAnalyticsWs05
Bertin, J.: Semiology of Graphics. Diagrams, Networks, Maps. The
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1967/1983
Guo, D.: Visual Analytics of Spatial Interaction Patterns for
Pandemic Decision Support, International Journal Geographical
Information Science, Vol. 21, No.8, 2007, pp.859-877.

