VAST 2007 Contest
TexPlorer
Chi-Chun Pan∗

Anuj R. Jaiswal†
Junyan Luo‡
Alan M. MacEachren

Anthony Robinson§
Ian Turton∗∗

Prasenjit Mitra¶

The Pennsylvania State University

4. CLUTO is a family of computationally efficient and highquality data clustering and cluster analysis programs developed by the Digital Technology Center (DTC) at the University of Minnesota. We use CLUTO to compute content-based
document clustering. More information about CLUTO can be
found at http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/views/cluto.

A BSTRACT
TexPlorer is an integrated system for exploring and analyzing vast
amount of text documents. The data processing modules of TexPlorer consist of named entity extraction, entity relation extraction,
hierarchical clustering, and text summarization tools. Using timeline tool, tree-view, table-view, and concept maps, TexPlorer provides visualizations from different aspects and allows analysts to
explore vast amount of text documents efficiently.

5. SIMILE Timeline is a DHTML-based AJAXy widget for visualizing time-based events developed as part of the SIMILE
project at MIT. More information about the SIMILE Timeline
can be found at http://simile.mit.edu/timeline/.

Keywords: Text, Visualization, VAST contest
Index Terms: H.4.2 [INFORMATION SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS]: Types of Systems—Decision support;
1 I NTRODUCTION
We designed TexPlorer, an integrated data analysis system the
VAST 2007 contest. TexPlorer consists of a backend data processing module and a frontend data visualization module. The data processing modules of TexPlorer consists of named entity extraction,
entity relation extraction, hierarchical clustering, and text summarization tools. Processed data then can be visualized using the TexPlorer web portal and ConceptVISTA, an ontology visualization
tool.
TexPlorer uses the following tools to process and visualize the
VAST 2007 contest dataset:
1. FactXtractor[1] is a named entity and entity relationship extractor developed by the North-East Visualization and Analytics Center at the Pennsylvania State University. FactXtractor
processes text documents using GATE and indentifies entity
relations with both syntactical and semantic analysis.
2. ConceptVISTA is an ontology creation and visualization tool developed by researchers at the GeoVISTA
Center at the Pennsylvania University.
We use ConceptVISTA to visualize concept maps extracted by FactXtractor. More information about ConceptVISTA can be found at
http://www.geovista.psu.edu/ConceptVISTA/.
3. MEAD[2] is a public domain portable multi-document summarization system original developed at the University of
Michigan. We use MEAD to create summary for text documents and document clusters. More information about
MEAD can be found http://tangra.si.umich.edu/clair/mead/.
∗ e-mail:

julianpan@psu.edu

† e-mail:arj135@psu.edu
‡ e-mail:jluo@psu.edu
§ e-mail:acr181@psu.edu
¶ e-mail:pmitra@ist.psu.edu

e-mail:maceachren@psu.edu

∗∗ e-mail:ijt1@psu.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

6. WordNET is large lexical database of English developed
at Princeton University. We use WordNET to perform semantic expansions of keywords within our document filtering tools. More information on WordNET can be found at
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/.
2

DATA P ROCESSING

Since we were working on the RAW dataset, our first step involved
preprocessing the data. First, we used FactXtractor to perform
name entity and entity relationship extraction. This process allows
us to identify people, location, organization, date/time entities, and
the relationship among them in the dataset. The results were stored
into a database for easy retrieving. Second, we applied document
filtering with semantic hyponym expansion on all text documents
(including news text, support documents, and blogs) where we input a set of keywords related to our problem and expanded them
using the WordNET dictionary. The keywords we used including
terror, police, police, bomb, drug, chemical, weapon, arson, and
activist. Then we performed content-based hierarchical clustering
using Cluto on the filtered text documents. Finally, we used MEAD
to produce short summary for each clusters in the hierarchical clustering tree.
3

V ISUALIZATION AND U SER I NTERACTION

Processed data can be visualized with different components in TexPlorer. The main interface of TexPlorer is a web portal shown in
Figure 1. The top panel is a timeline tool where events are arranged
in chronological order. Each envent is represent with three keywords picked with the TF-IDF algorithm[3]. On clicking the event
icons on the timeline tool, an automatically generated summary of
that document is shown in a pop-up window.
The bottom left panel is a tree-view of the hierarchical clustering.
Each number represents a cluster of documents that contain similar
keywords. The parent clusters contain child clusters with similar
contents.
The bottom right panel is a table-view for important people, location, and organization. By default, each table shows five entities
within a selected cluster ordered by important. The default importance is defined by counting the appearance of each entity. However, users can override the importance by clicking the “+” and “-”
links next to the entities. On clicking a “+” link, the corresponding entity is marked as “very important” and highlighted with red.

243

Figure 3: Visualization of concept maps with ConceptVISTA

Figure 1: The web interface of TexPlorer: the top panel is a timeline
tool where events are arranged in chronological order, the bottom left
panel is a tree-view of the hierarchical clustering, and the bottom right
panel is a table-view for important people, location, and organization

4 C ONCLUSION
We design TexPlorer for the VAST 2007 contest. We integrate some
existing text processing tools with creative visualizations allowing
analysts to explore vast amount of text documents. We have used
TexPlorer in analysis of the VAST 2007 contest dataset and discovered suspicious people and events within the dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed with support from the National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC), a U.S. Department of Homeland
Security Program, under the auspices of the Northeast Regional Visualization and Analytics Center (NEVAC). NVAC is operated by
the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory.
R EFERENCES

Figure 2: Map visualization showing the 10 most relevant/important
locations for cluster 25.

On the other hand, on clicking a “-” link, the corresponding entity
is marked as “unimportant” and removed from the table-view. By
moving mouse over a document name, user can get a brief preview
of the document. By clicking on a document name, the document
will be shown with all types of entities highlighted and color coded.
Visualization components on the web interface are coordinated.
For example, on clicking an event on the timeline tool, the tableview will be replaced with the corresponding document with color
coding for entity types. On clicking a document on the table-view,
the timeline tool will be centered to the date when the document is
dated. In both case, the leaf cluster that contain the corresponding
document will be highlighted and selected in the tree-view.
In addition to the web interface, TexPlorer can export processed
data to external applications. For the location entities in the tableview, clicking the show map opens a map displaying utility where
all the important locations in this cluster are plotted. For the people and organization entities, users can then view a concept map for
selected cluster in the ConceptVISTA (Figure 3). Concept maps in
ConceptVISTA are based on the Ontology Web Language (OWL)
which has significantly greater advantages over traditional data representations such as tables since greater semantics are captured. In
addition, we believe the underlying reasoning that could be performed by using concept maps in OWL have immense potential for
finding information.

244

[1] C.-C. Pan and P. Mitra. Femarepviz: Automatic extraction and geotemporal visualization of fema national situation updates. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007, 2007.
[2] D. Radev, T. Allison, S. Blair-Goldensohn, J. Blitzer, A. C¸elebi,
S. Dimitrov, E. Drabek, A. Hakim, W. Lam, D. Liu, J. Otterbacher,
H. Qi, H. Saggion, S. Teufel, M. Topper, A. Winkel, and Z. Zhang.
MEAD - a platform for multidocument multilingual text summarization. In LREC 2004, Lisbon, Portugal, May 2004.
[3] G. Salton and C. Buckley. Term weighting approaches in automatic text
retrieval. Technical report, Ithaca, NY, USA, 1987.

