Us vs. Them: Understanding Social Dynamics in Wikipedia with Revert
Graph Visualizations
Bongwon Suh, Ed H. Chi, Bryan A. Pendleton, Aniket Kittur
Palo Alto Research Center
ABSTRACT
Wikipedia is a wiki-based encyclopedia that has become one of
the most popular collaborative on-line knowledge systems. As in
any large collaborative system, as Wikipedia has grown, conflicts
and coordination costs have increased dramatically. Visual
analytic tools provide a mechanism for addressing these issues by
enabling users to more quickly and effectively make sense of the
status of a collaborative environment. In this paper we describe a
model for identifying patterns of conflicts in Wikipedia articles.
The model relies on users’ editing history and the relationships
between user edits, especially revisions that void previous edits,
known as “reverts”. Based on this model, we constructed Revert
Graph, a tool that visualizes the overall conflict patterns between
groups of users. It enables visual analysis of opinion groups and
rapid interactive exploration of those relationships via detail drilldowns. We present user patterns and case studies that show the
effectiveness of these techniques, and discuss how they could
generalize to other systems.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.3 [Information
Interfaces]: Group and Organization Interfaces – Collaborative
computing, Computer-supported cooperative work, Web-based
interaction
Additional Keywords: Wikipedia, wiki, revert, graph,
collaboration, user model, visualization
1

repositories on the Internet. A recent study comparing it against
the Encyclopedia Britannica reports that much of the Wikipedia
content is of high quality in spite of issues such as vandalism and
factual inconsistencies [14].
Since its inception, Wikipedia has been growing at an
exponential rate [5, 6, 18, 32, 47]. Over two million articles have
been collaboratively edited by more than four million users in the
English Wikipedia alone. However, the high level of participation
comes with corresponding costs, including conflict between user
factions, vandalism, spam, and expression of political ideologies.
Keeping any social structure or organization growing often
requires overhead costs, such as coordination and maintenance
work [24, p.160]. Wikipedia is not an exception and our earlier
work showed that the overhead cost in Wikipedia has increased
significantly as Wikipedia evolves over time [18]. We showed
that some of these coordination costs result from user
disagreements about article content, procedures, and
administrative issues.
Visual analytics may provide a mechanism for users to reduce
the costs of making sense of the state of collaboration and
engaging in the above activities. The result of the visual analysis
could help users find major opinion groups and subjects of
controversy, identify mediators and abusive editors, and
understand the user conflicts within these systems.

INTRODUCTION

Human existence depends on collaborative problem solving.
Nations and companies depend on collaboration to solve vexing
problems such as rules of conduct, investment decisions, and
resource allocation. It is therefore not surprising that visual
analytics must work effectively in collaborative environments.
Indeed, diverse fields that utilize visual analytics such as scientific
inquiries into climate change and foreign intelligence analysis on
Iraq insurgents rely on collaborative problem solving to finally
reach actionable conclusions. These conclusions depend on
groups of people forming a coherent picture of the problems at
hand, and then developing a consensus amidst conflicting user
opinions and political pressures. Recently, new collaborative
knowledge systems such as Wikis are being used for collaborative
problem solving and knowledge gathering [2]. As conflict and
coordination costs increase in such environments, visual analytic
tools may be increasingly useful for users to make sense of the
status of the collaborative environment.
The largest experiment of this kind is probably Wikipedia,
which has become one of the most popular knowledge
Address: 3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304
Email: {suh, echi, bp}@parc.com, nkittur@ucla.edu
Figure 1. Revert Graph visualizes social structures in Wikipedia
articles. Revert Graph for the Charles Darwin page [37]. For a
discussion, see Section 6.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

163

In this paper, we develop a user conflict model based on users’
editing histories, specifically revisions that void previous edits,
known as “reverts”. Our model extracts reverts from Wikipedia
editing history and composes a node-link graph where a user is
denoted as a node and a revert relationship as a link. Based on this
model, we developed a tool called Revert Graph that visualizes
the revert relationships between opinion groups. It utilizes a
force-directed layout to cluster user groups, and provides detailed
drill-down to help identify specific user opinions.
We shall show that the tool can help discover and pinpoint user
patterns such as the: (a) formation of opinion groups; (b) patterns
of mediation; (c) fighting of vandalism; (d) identification of major
controversial users and topics. The tool can be used to identify
the severity and nature of a disagreement and the number and
composition of the user groups involved. Figure 1 shows some
example social structures discovered and characterized using
Revert Graph. We believe the tool can form the basis for conflict
resolution tools in the future.
The contributions of this paper include:
• the development of a user conflict model for wiki-style online
knowledge repositories;
• the creation of a visualization tool that enable analysts to
understand and explore user conflicts and opinion groups;
• the presentation of user patterns and case studies that show the
effectiveness of these techniques.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: First, we present
related work on Wikipedia social dynamics, collaborative problem
solving, conflict resolution, and visualization of social
environments. Second, we introduce Wikipedia and its particular
structure and statistics. Next, we introduce the user conflict
model as well as the particular visualization method we used. We
then demonstrate the tool by presenting interesting user patterns
and case studies we have found in Wikipedia. We conclude by
discussing how the tool can generalize to other systems, future
directions, and final remarks.
2

RELATED WORK

Collaborative knowledge spaces and collaborative problem
solving are big research areas with many researchers working on
different aspects of the problem. In order for these collaboration
spaces to be effective, we need to understand how conflicts arise
and how conflicts are resolved in these systems. Here we
summarize some past works in social dynamics and conflict
resolution.
There appears to be a number of intuitions about why
collaboration might improve analytics [24, Chapter 8]. First, an
individual receiving information cues from a group of other
analysts is more likely to be more efficient in exploring a domain
area. Second, since the work covering a large domain area can be
divided up into the light work of many, one can ensure important
pieces of evidence are not missed.
Third, knowledge
specialization ensures that years of skilled training in one
particular area might enable one to build up better ability to spot
patterns. Fourth, the diversity of viewpoints can potentially
overcome cognitive biases toward one single interpretation of the
data.
Researchers have studied this area in the field of Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) and tried to understand
distributed problem solving and cognition. Documents and
spreadsheets often are focuses of collaboration. For example,
various researchers have studied collaborative writing and
commenting [21, 22]. Nardi and Miller found that spreadsheets
are used as collaborative tools for problem solving in
organizations [20]. Flor and Hutchins described how distributed
cognition occurs in a team during software development [12].
Changes in social computing spaces have caused psychologists

164

such as McGrath to examine theories of how groups collaborate
over time, and how they resolve conflicts [19].
Indeed, communities of practice have changed greatly since the
introduction of the Web and online communities [3, 7, 9].
Arguello et al. studied how individuals must act in order to
receive a reply in a discussion forum [3]. Cosley et al. studied
how intelligent task routing can help with individuals wishing to
collaborate and create useful value to social groups [7]. Dibbell
described how conflicts, vandalism, and anti-social behavior
manifest itself in virtual worlds such as MUDs and MOOs [9].
Dourish and Bellotti studied how awareness is required for
coordination in shared workspaces [10].
Viewed from this CSCW perspective, the rise of conflict and
the costs of coordination are unavoidable in a distributed
collaboration system [13] such as Wikipedia, and manifest in
scenarios such as conflicts between users, communication costs
between users, and the development of procedures and rules for
coordination and resolution. Researchers have seen similar costs
in other computer mediated communication (CMC) systems [8,
9]. Even though researchers have documented the growth of
Wikipedia [5, 32], the impact of coordination costs for adding
content and users has not been well studied, though Buriol et al.
[5] discussed maintenance cost such as reverts and vandalism.
Perhaps the most relevant study to coordination and conflict
cost is our previous study [18]. In the study, we discovered that
the number of article edits is decreasing while the overhead (i.e.,
the number of edit intended for communication and policy
making) is increasing. The study also introduced a model for the
degree of conflict based on simple metrics. According to the
study, the increased number of revisions made on article
discussion pages is the most significant predictor for the degree of
conflict in an article. This finding strongly hints that the degree of
conflict and disagreement between users has a close relationship
with the amount of total overhead. Motivated by earlier results,
here we focus on developing a user conflict model for Wikipedia.
Visual analytics [29] offers a potential solution for
understanding conflicts and coordination costs in collaborative
social spaces. For example, researchers have visualized conflicts
between political blogs [1] and entities in political news [4].
Researchers have also used visualization to understand social
spaces by visualizing relationships amongst people in chat rooms
[30], friends [17], and other social networks [23].
Visualization also offers a potential way to understand the
dynamics of content creation between users of a collaborative
space. Viegas et al. showed how visualization can be used to
understand the editing history of a single article in Wikipedia
[31]. The tool was able to reveal some social patterns such as
vandalism, negotiations, edit wars, and anonymous edits.
Visual analytic tools not only can help us characterize the
collaboration space such as Wikipedia, but they also potentially
could offer benefits to end-users who need to understand how
others in their social groups are performing, what they are paying
attention to, and what conflict patterns might exist during
collaboration. In other words, visual analytics applied to these
social spaces will enable a kind of situation awareness [11] of the
analytical topic area. These tools reveal social structures and user
behavior that shed light on how we can characterize conflicts and
coordination costs.
In this paper, we employ a novel method for constructing the
conflict model between users in Wikipedia, and apply visual
analytic techniques to understand the social relationships between
these users. We show how the tool is able to find interesting
patterns such as the formation of opinion groups and mediation
patterns, and controversial editors.

3

INTRODUCING WIKIPEDIA

Before we explain how we have identified conflict between users
in Wikipedia, we first introduce relevant Wikipedia structures and
policies, and describe the data that we used in the analysis.

Our recent study [18] found that work going into editing article
pages has been steadily decreasing from 95% to 65% (see Figure
2). Meanwhile, work going into communication purposes has
been increasing to about 15–20% of total edits. Vandalism has
also been increasing but still accounts for less than 1% of edits.
100%

3.2
WIKIPEDIA ORGANIZATION
Here we briefly introduce the internal organization of Wikipedia:
Pages: To manage the work on the encyclopedia while still
presenting a usable encyclopedia interface to non-participants,
Wikipedia organizes its editable pages into several categories. The
encyclopedia content itself is kept on article pages, while
discussion of ongoing changes and other disputes to a specific
article are kept on an associated discussion, or “talk” page.
Similarly, individual contributors have a unique user page, and an
associated user “talk” page to enable discussion with or about a
user. There is also a revision comment field, which is a free-form
text field supplied by each user when submitting an edit, intended
to describe what kind of changes were made.
Policies: Most activities on Wikipedia are governed by various
policies. Users are encouraged to follow a general policy to Be
Bold [36], i.e., take action themselves when there is an apparent
reason. Another policy is to refrain from altering content so that it
presents a non-neutral point of view [41]. A further policy asserts
that material should be attributed to a reliable published source
[35]. Together, these and other policies are also subject to the
same editing and review process that governs the encyclopedia
content, but play an intrinsic character in determining the social
norms that the communities is expected to adopt.
Users: Users of Wikipedia fall into distinct categories. Since it
is not required for a user to register to edit most pages, many users
are anonymous. Users may establish a user account, which allows
them to maintain a consistent identity across different sessions
and network addresses. Additional permissions can be granted to
such users. The most significant of which is the role of
Administrator, who has the ability to change many settings, such
as locking a page for editing, banning abusive users, and the
ability to access content which has been otherwise deleted from
the encyclopedia.
3.3
COORDINATION AND MAINTENANCE COST IN WIKIPEDIA
Users interacting with each other create conflicts and incur
coordination costs. These interactions take place on user and
discussion pages, which constitute a category of work we label
“overhead”. Overhead work represents the coordination costs of
working in such collaboration spaces. One form of overhead
consists of edits made to non-article pages. These overhead
activities can be roughly divided into three categories: (1)
maintenance work such as formatting and fighting vandalism, (2)
developing administrative procedures and policies for Wikipedia,
and (3) communication cost between users such as edits on article
talk, user talk pages.

Maintenance

95%
Percentage of total edits

3.1
WIKIPEDIA DATA ANALYZED
In this paper, we used a complete history dump of the English
Wikipedia that was generated on July 2, 2006. The dump included
over 58 million revisions, of which 2.4 million are article entries
in the encyclopedia, totaling approximately 800 gigabytes of data.
To process this data, we imported the raw text into the Hadoop
[15] distributing computing environment running on a cluster of
commodity machines. The Hadoop infrastructure allowed us to
explore new full-scale content analysis techniques quickly. We
also cloned Wikipedia’s own metadata databases for direct
analysis. This database allowed us to inspect Wikipedia statistics
in their native format.

90%
Other

85%
80%

User Talk

75%

User

70%
Article Talk
65%
60%
2001

Article
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Figure 2. Changing number of edits over time made on various
types of pages in Wikipedia

Recent research shows that Wikipedians spend a significant
amount of their effort on coordination and conflict resolution [18].
This strongly indicates that there exist underlying social processes
that govern coordination. In this paper, we focus on exploring the
social dynamics, which is crucial to understanding the
coordination and conflict resolution process in Wikipedia.
4

CONFLICT USER MODEL

To understand disagreement between users, we need to build a
model of how users engage in disputes. One way to discover
disagreements is to look in the revision log and analyze the
substance of each user’s edits. However, we found this approach
rather impractical for large data sets such as Wikipedia, because it
requires accurate identification of the intention of each edit, which
is not viable for machine-only processing. Many edits may have
non-obvious intentions based on the context in which it was made.
Instead, we use users’ editing history to approximate
disagreements between users. Specifically, we use revert revisions
as a way of identifying disagreement and conflicts between users.
The user survey from the previous study enabled us to collect
insight that Wikipedians often treat being reverted as an indication
that another user strongly disagrees with an edit [18]. We employ
revert as a proxy for dispute and develop a user model based on
revert activity, described in the next section.
4.1
REVERTS IN WIKIPEDIA
A revert is defined as undoing the actions of another editor in
whole or in part [44]. Reverts are often used to fight vandalism to
bring articles back to their original state. However, users also use
reverts to block other users’ contributions. Edit wars [40] are a
typical example, where disagreeing users repeatedly revert each
others’ edits. Revert is a very reliable sign that one user clearly
opposes other’s edit, and, therefore, is a reasonable proxy for
underlying conflict and disagreement.
We identify reverts in Wikipedia by two different methods. In
the data driven method, we computed a unique identifier of every
revision made to every article using the MD5 hashing scheme
[25], which is commonly used to check that data objects are
identical. We use the hashing function to generate a small
fingerprint of each revision, which is suitable for rapidly
comparing all revisions of an article. Using MD5 values for all
revisions of an article, we can identify when a later revision

165

exactly matched the hash of a previous article, indicating a revert.
The advantage of this method is that it does not depend on users
to label reverts, which is not always done consistently.
However, the disadvantage of this method is that it does not
pick up partial reverts, in which only some of the text in an article
is reverted. To capture partial reverts we used a user-labeled
metric, counting revisions whose revision comments included the
text “revert” or “rv” (a commonly used abbreviation of revert).
The combination of both the data-driven and user-labeled methods
provides converging evidence on the true change in reverts over
time.
Table 1 shows that the statistics for reverts calculated by the
two methods have slightly different characteristics. The MD5
identity revert discovery technique captures more revisions than
user-labeled (comment) reverts (3.7M vs. 2.4M), suggesting that a
substantial number of reverts are not labeled by users as such.
The union of the two methods provides the most accurate view of
reverts, resulting in 3,917,008 reverts marked by either comments
or MD5 hashes. In other words, approximately 6.7% of all
changes in Wikipedia goes to restoring articles to previous
versions.
Vandalism in Table 1 is calculated by a similar method to the
comment method for reverts. We looked through the revision
comments of each article for any form of the word “vandal” or
“rvv” (“revert due to vandalism”), which are put there by users
when removing vandalism. We showed that vandalism appears to
be increasing as a proportion of all edits, though it remains at a
fairly low level (1-2% of all edits) [18].
Users Total
Users who made at least one revert
Revisions Total
Reverts (MD5 hash method)
Self-reverts
Pages with at least one revert
Pages with 50 reverts or more
Reverts (Comment method)
Vandalism (Comment with vandal, rvv, etc)
Reverts (Union of both methods)

3,769,347
402,454

5

REVERT GRAPH – VISUALIZING USER CONFLICT

Revert Graph is designed to visualize social relationships between
Wikipedians as a node-link graph. The tool not only visualizes the
conflict model generated from editing history, it also provides
useful functions to investigate interactions between users.
5.1
LAYOUT PRINCIPLES
Revert Graph is a tool that enables an analyst to quickly
understand the relationships and patterns of activity that embody
the conflict between users. Our layout algorithm simulates the
social dynamics that result from the user conflict model. We
accomplish this by visually gathering users with similar or
compatible opinions together, while separating disagreeing users.
We implemented this approach using a force-directed graph
layout algorithm [16] that assigns forces such that the edges
(representing revert relationships) act as springs, while the
individual users are represented as particles with gravitational
fields (as shown in Figure 3).

58,545,791
3,711,638
582,373
721,866
9,973
2,422,482
577,643
3,917,008

Table 1. User, Revision, Revert and Vandalism Statistics

4.2
REVERT-BASED USER CONFLICT MODEL
Our user model is based on the revert history between users
assuming reverts are proxies for dispute and disagreement.
However, we found a number of issues when applying reverts to
build a conflict model.
Using reverts to identify conflicts is hard because 1) multiple
users are often involved in chains of reverts; 2) edit history is
typically long and tedious to browse; and 3) there exist various
types of reverts such as the “revert duel” (repeated reverts
between two users), self-reverts, reverts by multiple-account users
(or sock puppets), and so on. To address these challenges, we
made a number of design choices for our conflict model:
• Disregard Self Revert: Self-reverts are disregarded.
• Degree of Conflict: the amount of dispute between two users is
measured by the number of reverts between them.
• Conflict Group: When two users make reverts on edits made by
another user, but not against each other, the two users are
presumed to have similar opinions. We will discuss this
principle in more detail in the following section.

166

• Identity Based Revert: the MD5 method is used to identify
reverts. When two revisions have the same textual content, we
define the later edit as revert.
• Immediate Revert Only: When an article page is reverted to an
older version other than its immediate last version, the intention
of the revert is ambiguous because it is not clear whether the
revert is exclusively toward the last edit. We only count the
revert relationship between the reverter and the editor who
made the immediate last edit regardless of this ambiguity.
We employ these principles to build our visual analytics tool
called Revert Graph.

Figure 3. Force directed layout structure employed in Revert Graph.
Users (represented as nodes) attract each other unless they have a
revert relationship. A revert relationship is represented as an edge,
thus pushing such users apart. Left figure: Nodes are evenly
distributed as an initial layout. Right figure: When forces are
deployed, nodes are rearranged in two user groups.

Initially, the tool loads a group of users participating in editing
an article as a uniformly distributed node-link graph. As the
simulation runs, forces in the graph stabilize, and social structures
between users begin to emerge, as shown in Figure 4.
Node size is proportional to the log of the number of reverts or
revisions. Nodes are color-coded based on users’ registration
status. An administrator is drawn as a green node, a normal
registered user as a grey node, and an unregistered anonymous
user as a white node, respectively.

Group D
Users having revert
relationship with the
selected editor

Group A

Group B

Group C

Individual
revert
history between the
two selected editors

Figure 4. Revert Graph for the Wikipedia page on Dokdo [39]
Revert Graph uses force directed layout to simulate social
structures between users. The tool also allows users to drill down
into an individual revert revision enabling detailed investigation
about the nature of the conflicts. Group A: mostly users with
Korean point of view, Group B: mostly users with Japanese point
of view, Group C: mixed point of view, Group D: primarily nonregistered users.

5.2
USER INTERFACE
The majority of the screen is devoted to three windows: Revert
Graph itself is in the center; a list of revert relationships for the
selected user is on the upper right; and the selected individual
revert history is on the bottom right (Figure 4). Revert Graph also
provides ways to change zooming level, node size, and other
visual options. Revert Graph is designed to help identify user
groups representing opinion groups, the specific motivation of
revisions, and the conflict detail.
Suppose a user wants to investigate conflicts and disagreements
inside a Wikipedia article. The tool allows the user to specify an
article she wants to explore by typing the name of the article.
Then the revert history of the article is retrieved from our database
and a node-link graph is formed and displayed on the screen. A
force-directed layout module then clusters user nodes based on
revert relationships. Figure 4 shows an example.

(b) Drill down to list of revert
relationships Alienus is involved in

(a) A user node, Alienus is
selected in Revert Graph

(c) Drill down to revert history
between two users

Figure 5. Enlarged view of the Terri Shiavo page [43] in Revert
Graph. (a) User first clicks on a specific user node; (b) Revert
Graph shows a list of revert relationships that Alienus is involved in;
(c) Clicking on a specific relationship in the list shows only the
revert history between those two users.

As social structures emerge from the force-directed layout, the
tool provides users to drill down the graph allowing investigation
to the level of an individual revert (Figure 5). When a user node
is chosen in the graph, the upper right window displays the list of
users that have revert relationships with the selected user, sorted
by the number of reverts between them (Figure 5 (b)). When a
revert relationship is selected in this list, the bottom right panel is
updated to show individual revert records between the two users
involved in the revert revision, as shown in Figure 5 (c). Also, the
nodes representing the users are highlighted in Revert Graph to
provide visual feedback. Allowing further drill down, clicking an
item in the bottom right window launches a web browser showing
the specific individual revert record.
Using these capabilities, we were able to identify a number of
interesting user conflict patterns using this tool. In the next
section, we will describe these conflict patterns in several case
studies.
6

USER CONFLICT PATTERNS AND CASE STUDIES

Based on the revert-based user conflict model, we investigated
conflicts and disagreements in Wikipedia using Revert Graph and
explored to discover social patterns in them. This section presents
interesting conflict patterns we have found in Wikipedia.
6.1
METHODOLOGY
We used Revert Graph to examine conflict patterns in Wikipedia
articles. We selected 901 high conflict articles with more than 250
reverts for analysis. These articles contain a large amount of
discussion with extensive editing history, which present a
challenge for analysts in making sense of conflict dynamics [18].
Based on the user model, Revert Graph generates a node-link
diagram to visualize users and their revert relationships. We then
analyzed the graph for any interesting pattern that might emerge.
To examine a potential user conflict pattern in an article, the
analysis involved detail investigation of the article revision
history. However, we often found it hard to determine users’ point
of view by browsing only the revisions. To get more clear insight
on users’ position on the issues of an article, we browsed through
information such as revert comments, article talk pages, user
pages, and users’ edits on other pages.
We now describe user conflict patterns we found in this study.
6.2
PATTERN ONE – NODE CLUSTERS AND OPINION GROUPS
Revert Graph rearranges its user nodes based on revert
relationships between them. The force-directed layout simulation
evolves the graph to gather user nodes together based on
underlying social dynamics. We analyzed node clusters to
understand cohesiveness in node groups.
The Wikipedia page on Dokdo is one example where we were
able to find interesting user groups. Dokdo is a disputed islet in
the Sea of Japan (East Sea) currently controlled by South Korea,
but also claimed by Japan as “Takeshima” [39]. Figure 4 shows
opinion groups discovered on the Dokdo article. We manually
labeled users based on their points of view as exhibited by their
editing history. To obtain users’ points of view on the topic, we
browsed their user pages, user talk pages, revision histories,
revision comments, as well as specific reverts. For example, users
in group A in Figure 4 exhibit the following patterns: (1) claiming
Korean heritage on their user pages, (2) supporting the Korean
claims in discussions on the users’ talk pages, (3) preferring the
term “East Sea” over “Sea of Japan”, (4) preferring “Dokdo” over
the alternate “Takeshima” or the more neutral “Liancourt Rocks”.
We observed users in Group C disputing the points of view of
Group A. This group includes users who (1) dispute the official
U.S. position (which supports the Korean occupation), (2) openly

167

refute the Korean point-of-view on their talk pages, as well as 3)
directly claim Japanese heritage or affiliation on their user pages.
Unlike Group A and C, users in Group B showed mixed
opinion on the issue. Group D, depicted only in the figure but not
tallied in the table, is not considered in this analysis because they
primarily have very short edit histories and 31 out of these 34
users are non-registered users.
Our analysis is summarized in Table 2, which shows that the
identified user groups indeed represent distinct opinion groups.
Number of users in user group
Users with Korean point of view
Users with Japanese point of view
Neutral or Unidentified

A
10
1
7

B
6
8
3

C
0
7
6

6.4
PATTERN THREE – FIGHTING VANDALISM
Fighting vandalism is an issue in Wikipedia. As shown in Table 1,
about 24% of total reverts are made due to vandalism. Revert
Graph uncovers clear patterns of vandalism and anti-vandalism
efforts. As shown in Figure 7, two user groups emerge in each of
these examples, where users in one group reverts revisions from
the other group. This first group usually includes many
administrators (green nodes) while the second group often
contains mostly anonymous users (white nodes).

Total
16
16
17

Table 2. User Groups on the Dokdo article.

As shown in this conflict pattern, node clusters identified in
Revert Graph correspond to opinion groups that are not only
cohesive but also represent major points of view in these topic
areas.
6.3
PATTERN TWO – MEDIATION
Another common pattern revealed by Revert Graph is a group of
users attempting to mediate between user groups with divergent
points of view. These users are not active in expressing a
particular view, but rather trying to moderate the discussion
towards a neutral version of the article. Users in these mediator
roles usually revert edits from many other user groups. This group
rejects revisions that do not satisfy Wikipedia content policies
such as neutral point of view [41] and attribution [35]. For
example, in the Terri Shiavo controversy depicted in Figure 6,
users in the center group, which is marked by a dotted circle,
revert edits made by other user groups. Their comments revealed
that they believe those edits did not satisfy Wikipedia policies.

Figure 7. Examples of the vandalism pattern in Revert Graph. The
left is Revert Graph applied on Acid rain page [33] and the right is
on Uranus page [45]. Two types of user groups are clearly
identifiable in each graph. The majority of the upper groups are
anonymous users and vandalized articles. The bottom group, which
mostly consists of administrators, are fighting vandalism.

In addition, we found that an anti-vandalism robot Tawkerbot2
[34] is often actively engaged in this pattern. The left image of
Figure 7 shows that the robot (indicted by a dotted circle) does a
decent job of fighting vandalism.
6.5
PATTERN FOUR – CONTROVERSIAL EDITOR
In Revert Graph, the size of a user node can be mapped to the
number of reverts or revisions. In addition, the thickness of the
edges represent the degree of revert relationships between users.
Together, these features increase the visual saliency of editors
who engaged in many reverts, providing an intuitive way to
quickly identify users who may be involved in high degrees of
conflict. For example, Figure 8 shows how certain controversial
editors are easily identifiable in the Revert Graph. They are
usually self-appointed experts, or have strong points of view. In
the left side example, a few editors appointed themselves as the
ultimate source of knowledge relating to Darth Vader. In the right
side example, several editors expressed strong personal opinions
on Windows Vista.

Figure 6. A mediator pattern in Revert Graph applied on Terri
Shiavo page [43]. Users in the center group (marked by a dotted
circled) revert edits by users in other user groups.

User nodes in Revert Graph are color-coded based on their
roles, such as whether they are administrators. Therefore, it is
easy to identify that mediators are often administrators as in
Figure 6.

168

Figure 8. Controversial editors are visually identifiable in both
Revert Graphs. Left: Darth Vader page [38]. Right: Windows Vista
page [46]

As another example, editors in Figure 1 are involved in debates
on Charles Darwin. These editors with heavy revert relationships
are visually salient and easily identifiable.
7

DISCUSSION

The Revert Graph visualization helps identify important social
patterns in Wikipedia such as groups with differing viewpoints,
mediation, vandal fighting, and user conflicts. The above
scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of the revert-based
conflict model, which is based on simple revert relationships
between users. These results show how surfacing information
about user behaviour built up through natural system usage can
lead to valuable insights that can help make sense of the evolution
of pages and the motives of users.
We believe this paper may help shape the development of
conflict resolution tools, which are expected to play an important
role in online collaborative systems. These results are most
directly applicable to other wiki-based systems in which reverts
are tracked as part of system usage. Wiki systems are being
deployed in a wide variety of domains, including intelligence
analysis [27], corporate memory [28], and scholarly research [26].
Tools such as Revert Graph could be useful in quickly identifying
differing opinion groups and promoting situational awareness.
The user conflict model and Revert Graph techniques described
here may be applicable to other online communities where
conflict relationships between users can be identified. We
demonstrated that it may be possible to identify conflicts and
viewpoints by using negatively-valenced relationship data
collected automatically through normal usage of a system. We
believe that the principles behind Revert Graph may be applicable
to other, non-wiki based systems where identifying conflict, user
factions, and shared viewpoints is important. Some examples
include detecting and visualizing collusion and user factions in
social collaborative systems where content or users are rated (e.g.,
digg.com, Slashdot.org).
In addition to the four social patterns described above, we also
offer some interesting observations that might be useful in
designing these tools. First, we found that there were unexpected
controversial sub-topics in Wikipedia articles. For example, in the
Charles Darwin page [37], we observed that several users were in
dispute over a trivial detail relating to the fact that Abraham
Lincoln and Darwin share the same birthday. To our surprise,
“September 2005” was a controversial article. We found that high
degrees of conflict in that article were caused by news articles
reporting disputes in Middle East countries. Discovering these
types of unexpected conflicts would be a hard task without the aid
of Revert Graph.
Second, disagreements between groups of users often spill over
to other related articles. For example, during our investigation of
the Dokdo article, users who made reverts on the Dokdo page
were also found to have made reverts on other Korean-Japanese
pages such as the “Sea of Japan” page. Some users involved in
conflicts in the “Anarchism” page also joined the disputes in the
“Anarcho-capitalism” page. This observation strongly implies the
usefulness of a topic-based conflict model.
Third, we observed various social processes for reaching
consensus. As well as using article talk pages and user talk pages,
Wikipedians also 1) discuss with third parties, 2) conduct surveys,
3) request mediation, and 4) call for arbitration [42]. Among
them, we found that user talk pages were very useful in
understanding disagreements and conflicts between users. We
believe further effort in modeling user talk pages would provide a
deeper insight into the social dynamics of Wikipedia.
Fourth, editors often get confused between “neutral point of
view” and “vandalism”. For example, introducing a new point of

view to an article can be controversial because it can be hard to
determine whether it improves the neutral point of view of the
article or if it is just vandalism. Sometimes we found it hard to
determine this difference ourselves. Improved tools for situation
awareness, such as Revert Graph, should enable editors to quickly
get a gist of these kinds of conflict patterns.
8

LIMITATIONS

As shown in the case studies, there are various types of
disagreements and conflicts in Wikipedia. One limitation of our
tool is that, while some conflict patterns are discovered (i.e.,
vandalism, mediation, etc), not every aspect of social dynamics in
online collaboration systems was fully addressed. For example,
sources of disagreements, types of conflicts, and motivation for
editing are deeper questions that require further research. The
answer for those questions would provide useful guidelines for
designers of online collaborative communities.
Another limitation is that the force-directed layout does not
always produce optimal user groups, because it requires sufficient
revert relationships in the data set. Since Revert Graph relies
solely on revert relationships, the tool cannot detect conflicts
between users who were not involved in reverts.
9

CONCLUSION

Visual analytics can provide useful tools for users to make sense
of the state of complex collaborative environments. Wikipedia
and wiki-style spaces serve as important examples of how
complex collaborative environments develop and evolve over
time. The rapid growth of Wikipedia presents a challenge for
analysts to understand conflicts and other social dynamics.
To address this challenge, we have been building a model of
how conflicts occur in Wikipedia and how conflicts are resolved.
We used this model to develop a visualization tool called Revert
Graph to facilitate analysts to understand user conflicts and
explore opinion groups revealed in the visualization. We also
demonstrate the effectiveness of the tool by presenting interesting
user patterns and case studies that we found in Wikipedia.
The tool can answer questions such as the severity and form of
the disagreement as well as the shape and size of opinion groups.
The case study revealed conflict patterns such as the identification
of (a) the formation of opinion groups, (b) patterns of mediation,
(c) vandalism, and (d) major controversial users and topics.
Further research is needed to understand how visual analytics
can help analysts to understand a wide variety of problems in
collaborative spaces. We believe that the approach taken here
may inform the development of other conflict resolution and
situation awareness tools for collaborative environments.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Peter Pirolli, Stuart Card, and Mark Stefik
for valuable advice, and to James Forrester who helped facilitate
this research.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

Adamic, L.A., Glance, N. (2005) The political blogosphere and the
2004 U.S. election: divided they blog, Conference on Knowledge
Discovery in Data, Proc. 3rd International workshop on Link
discovery, 36-43
Ahrens, F., A Wikipedia for Secrets, Washington Post, November
5th 2006.
Arguello, J., Butler, B. S., Joyce, L., Kraut, R., Ling, K. S., Rosé, C.
P., et al. (2006). Talk to me: Foundations for successful individualgroup interactions in online communities. In CHI 2006: Proceedings

169

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]

170

of the ACM conference on human-factors in computing systems (pp.
959 - 968). New York: ACM Press.
Brands, U., Fleischer, D., Lerner, J. (2006) Summarizing Dynamic
Bipolar Conflict Structures, IEEE Trans. On Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 12(6), 1486-1499.
Buriol, L., Castillo, C., Donato, D., Leonardi, S., and Millozzi, S.:
"Temporal Evolution of the Wikigraph", Proc. Web Intelligence
Conference 2006. IEEE CS Press (2006), 45-51.
Capocci, A. Servedio, V.D.P., Colaiori, F., Buriol, L.S., Donato, D.
Leonardi, S., and Caldarelli, G., Preferential attachment in the
growth of social networks: the case of Wikipedia,
arXiv.org:physics/0602026 (2006).
Cosley, D., Frankowski, D., Terveen, L., Riedl, J. Using Intelligent
Task Routing and Contribution Review to Help Communities Build
Artifacts of Lasting Value. Proc. CHI 2006, ACM Press (2006), 2227.
Curtis, P. Mudding: Social phenomena in text-based virtual realities.
Palo Alto Research Center, 1992.
Dibbell, Julian. A Rape in Cyberspace. Village Voice, 21 (1993), 2632.
Dourish, P., & Bellotti, V. Awareness and coordination in shared
workspaces. Proc. ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW ‘92), ACM Press (1992), 107-114.
Endsley, M. (2003). Designing for Situation Awareness. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC.Press.
Flor, N. V., Hutchins, E. (1991): Analyzing distributed cognition in
software teams: A case study of team programming during perfective
software maintenance. In: Proc. of the 4th Annual Workshop on
Empirical Studies of Programmers. 1991, Norwood, New Jersey,
USA. p.36-59.
Franco, V., Piirto, R., Hu, H. Y., Lewenstein, B. V., Underwood, R.,
and Vidal, N. K. Anatomy of a flame: conflict and community
building on the Internet. Tech. and Society Magazine, IEEE, 14
(1995) 12-21.
Giles, G. Internet encyclopaedias go head to head. Nature, 438, 7070
(2005), 900-901.
Hadoop Project. http://lucene.apache.org/hadoop/.
Heer, J., Card, S. K. and Landlay, J. Prefuse: A toolkit for
interactive information visualization, Proc. CHI 2005, ACM Press
(2005), 421-430.
Heer, J., Boyd, D., "Vizster: Visualizing Online Social Networks,"
infovis, p. 5, Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (INFOVIS'05), (2005)
Kittur, A., Suh, B., Chi, E. H., Pendleton, B. A. He says, she says:
Conflict and coordination in Wikipedia. CHI 2007; 2007 April 28 May 3; San Jose; CA.
McGrath, J.E., 1991. Time, interaction, and performance (TIP). A
theory of groups. Small Group Research 22 (2), 147-174.
Nardi, B. A. and Miller, J. R. 1991. Twinkling lights and nested
loops: distributed problem solving and spreadsheet development. Int.
J. Man-Mach. Stud. 34, 2 (Feb. 1991), 161-184.
Neuwirth, C. M., Kaufer, D. S., Chandhok, R., and Morris, J. H.
Issues in the design of computer support for co-authoring and
commenting. Proc. CSCW 1990, ACM Press (1990), 183-195.

[22] Noel, S., and Robert, J. M. How the Web is used to support
collaborative writing. Behaviour & Information Technology, 22
(2003) 245-262.
[23] Perer, A. and Shneiderman, B. Balancing Systematic and Flexible
Exploration of Social Networks, IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (Infovis 2006)
[24] Pirolli, P. Information Foraging Theory: Adaptive Interaction with
Information. 2007. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
[25] Rivest, R., The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm, RFC 1321, MIT
and RSA Data Security, Inc., April 1992.
[26] Scholarpedia, http://www.scholarpedia.org
[27] Shrader, K., Over 3,600 intelliegence professionals tapping into
“intellepedia”, USA Today, November 2nd 2006.
[28] Socialtext, http://www.socialtext.com
[29] Thomas, J. J. and Cook, K. A. (2005) Illuminating the Path: The
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE CS
Press.
[30] Viégas, F. B., Donath, J. S. (1999) Chat Circles, Proc. CHI 99, ACM
Press, 9-16.
[31] Viégas, F. B., Wattenberg M., Dave K., Studying cooperation and
conflict between authors with history flow visualizations, Proc. CHI
2004, ACM Press (2004), 575-582.
[32] Voss, J. Measuring Wikipedia. Proc. 10th Intl. Conf. Intl. Soc. for
Scientometrics and Informetrics (2005).
[33] Wikipedia.org, Acid ran, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acid_rain
[34] Wikipedia.org,
AntiVandalBot,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Tawkerbot2
[35] Wikipedia.org, Attribution, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:A
[36] Wikipedia.org,
Be
bold
in
updating
pages,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:BB
[37] Wikipedia.org,
Charles
Darwin.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Darwin
[38] Wikipedia.org,
Darth
Vader,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Darth_Vader
[39] Wikipedia.org, Dokdo. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dokdo
[40] Wikipedia.org,
Edit
war,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Edit_war
[41] Wikipedia.org,
Neutral
point
of
view,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:NPOV
[42] Wikipedia.org,
Resolving
Disputes,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Resolving_disputes.
[43] Wikipedia.org,
Terri
Schiavo.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terri_Schiavo
[44] Wikipedia.org,
Three-revert-rule.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Three-revert_rule
[45] Wikipedia.org, Uranus, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uranus
[46] Wikipedia.org,
Windows
Vista,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Vista
[47] Zlatic, V., Bozicevic, M., Stefancic, H., Domazet, M. Wikipedias:
Collaborative web-based encylopedias as complex networks.
Physical Review E 74 (2006).

