Visual Analysis of Dynamic Networks with Geological Clustering
Adel Ahmed∗

Xiaoyan Fu†

Seok-Hee Hong‡

School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney, Australia
National ICT Australia, Australia

National ICT Australia, Australia

School of Information Technologies
University of Sydney, Australia
National ICT Australia, Australia

Quan Hoang Nguyen§

Kai Xu¶

School of Computer Sciences and Engineering
University of NSW, Australia

National ICT Australia, Australia

A BSTRACT
Many dynamic networks have associated geological information.
Here we present two complementing visual analysis methods for
such networks. The first one provides an overview with summerized information while the second one presents a more detailed
view. The geological information is encoded in the network layout, which is designed to help maintain user’s mental map. We also
combined visualization with social network analysis to facilitate
knowledge discovery, especially to understand network changes in
the context overall evolution. Both methods are applied to the “History of the FIFA World Cup Competition” data set.
Keywords: Network Visualization, Visual Analytics, Dynamic
Network, Temporal Network, Hierarchy, Clustering, Centrality
Index Terms: H.5.2 [INFORMATION INTERFACES AND PRESENTATION]: User Interfaces—Theory and methods; I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques—Interaction Techniques
1

I NTRODUCTION

Many dynamic networks have geological information. One example is the email communication networks between people, in which
emails can be sent from different locations such as home or office. Another example is the world trading network where nodes
are countries and edges are the trading between them. Inherently
each country has its geological location. It is important to consider
the geological information when analyzing such dynamic networks.
There are several existing methods for visualization of dynamic
networks [1, 3], but none of them considers the geological information. A recent relevant work by Shneiderman and Aris [6] addresses
the geographical information in network visualization, but it is for
static networks. Also, there are several work on combining network visualization with social network analysis [4, 5], but they do
not consider dynamic networks and geological information.
Here we propose two visual analysis methods for dynamic networks with geological information by combining visualization with
social network analysis. These two methods complement each
other: The first one presents the overview of a dynamic network by
showing only the summerized information, and the second one includes the details of every network change. In both methods, nodes
are clustered according to their geological location (i.e., the graph
∗ e-mail:

adel.ahmed@nicta.com.au
xiaoyan.fu@nicta.com.au
‡ e-mail: shhong@it.usyd.edu.au
§ e-mail: quanhn@cse.unsw.edu.au
¶ e-mail: kai.xu@nicta.com.au
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

layout considers the geological information), and the results of social network analysis are mapped visually to facilitate its analysis,
especially for network changes in the context of overall evolution.
The two methods are applied to a real-world data set: the History
of the FIFA World Cup Competition.
2

T HE DATA S ET AND S OCIAL N ETWORK A NALYSIS

The FIFA World Cup Competition History data set contains the results of all the matches played in the final rounds since its founding in 1930. The World Cup is organized every four years, but
due to the World War II, only 18 tournaments have been held so
far. There are in total 79 countries that have ever joined the final
rounds, and can be clustered based on their geographic locations
into six football federations: AFC (Asia), CAF (Africa), CONCACAF (North America), CONMEBOL (South America), OFC
(Oceania), and UEFA (Europe). The data set can be represented
as a dynamic network that consists of a series of directed graphs
(one for each world cup) whose nodes are countries and edges are
the matches with winning team pointing to the losing one. It is easy
to see that: First, the network is dynamic, as the nodes and edges
of a world cup graph changes from one year to another; second, the
network is temporal, as each world cup graph has a time stamp, and
thus their ordering is fixed by the time series; finally, the network
has a geological clustering structure according to country location
or football federation membership.
Centrality index is an important concept in social network analysis for analyzing the importance of actors embedded in a social
network [2, 7]. In our methods, we used centrality analysis to show
the strong performers over the years and their performance change
over the time. We computed the centralities for each world cup and
the whole data set. First, we construct a series of directed graph
Gi , i = 1, . . . , 18, one for each World Cup. Then, we construct a
union graph G = G1 ∪ G2 ∪ . . . ∪ G18 for analyzing the global performance. Among the many centrality measurements available, we
chose to include the results of degree centrality—defined by the
number of edges incident to a node—because it is a clear indicator
of team performance. Note that our methods can be easily applied
to other centralities.
3

W HEEL L AYOUT

In this first method, we place each country that ever joined world
cup in the outermost circle of a wheel and represent each world cup
as a concentric inner circle. The radius increases with the World
Cup year: The circle corresponding to the first ever world cup (year
1930) is the inner most circle near the center, and the circle corresponding to the latest world cup (year 2006) is placed just inside the
outermost circle. The performance of a country at a specific year
is shown as the size of the node located at the intersection of the
inner circle for that year and the radius pointed to the country node
in the outermost circle. The node size is decided by its degree centrality value and nodes on the same World Cup circle have the same

221

color. To show the geological clustering, the wheel is divided into
6 wedges based on the football federations, and then each country
is placed in its federation wedge. Figure 1 shows the result of applying this method to the world cup history data set. An animation
is included in the accompanied video to illustrate the evolution of
team performance 1 .

Figure 2: Radial layout.

Figure 1: Wheel layout.

It can been seen clearly from the wheel layout the evolution of
country performance over the years. For example, it is clear that
Brazil, Germany and Italy are among the strongest teams in the
world cup history, as they have many large circles along their radius. Moreover, one can compare the performance between countries of a specific year, by inspecting the node size along the inner
circle representing that world cup. Similarly, one can easily compare the performance between the continents and inside each continent. For example, in general the European countries performed
better than other continents. Among the Asian countries, South
Korea performed relatively well. The wheel layout only presents
an overview and hide the information such the network topology.
A radial layout is designed to complement it.
4 R ADIAL L AYOUT
This layout displays the network topology and team performance at
every world cup. We followed the radial drawing convention from
the social network analysis for displaying centrality: We place the
node with the highest centrality value at the center, and then place
the nodes with the next highest centrality values using concentric
circles. However, we made the following important modifications.
First, instead of using the exact centrality value to define concentric
circle—which may end up with too many circles—we discretized
all the countries into four groups: one overall winner plus 3 groups
(i.e. strong, medium and weak) based on their centrality values.
Then we place the strong group in the innermost circle, medium
group in the middle circle, and the weak group in the outermost
circle. Second, to help maintain user’s mental map, we layout the
union graph first, then use its node location to layout the graph of
every world cup, so every country appears at the same location in
different world cup graphs. Finally, the nodes in the union graph
layout are partitioned according to their federation regions to show
the geological clustering. Similar to the wheel layout method, the
size of each node is based on its degree centrality. The graph of
each world cup is shown on a 2D plane, and these planes are stacked
together in the third dimension to show the entire history (Figure 2).
The accompanied video provides views of the radial layout from
different angles.
In the radial layout, we can analyze each team’s performance of
a specific year in the context of its overall performance by looking
1 The video can be downloaded from http://www.cs.usyd.edu.
au/˜visual/kaixu/worldcup_video.zip

222

at both the embedding position and the node size. For example, in
year 2002 (Figure 3) South Korea performed unexpectedly well: it
has one of the largest node size, although it is placed in the middle
circle. For team performance evolution, we can see from the video
that Brazil actually did not perform very well in the early years of
World Cup history, although it is undoubtedly the best performer
now.

Figure 3: World Cup 2002.

R EFERENCES
[1] U. Brandes and S. R. Corman. Visual unrolling of network evolution and the analysis of dynamic discourse. Information Visualization,
2(1):40–50, 2003.
[2] U. Brandes and T. Erlebach. Network Analysis: methodological foundations. Springer, 2005.
[3] U. Brandes, M. Hoefer, and C. Pich. Affiliation dynamics with an application to movie-actor biographies. In Proc. Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC
Symp. Visualization (EuroVis ’06), pages 179–186, 2006.
[4] C. Chen. The centrality of pivotal points in the evolution of scientific
networks. In IUI ’05: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pages 98–105, New York, NY, USA,
2005. ACM Press.
[5] A. Perer and B. Shneiderman. Balancing systematic and flexible exploration of social networks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 12(5):693–700, 2006.
[6] B. Shneiderman and A. Aris. Network visualization by semantic substrates. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
12(5):733–740, 2006.
[7] S. Wasserman and K. Faust. Social Network Analysis: Methods and
Applicaitons. Cambridge University Press, 40 West 20th Street, New
York, NY 10011-4211, USA, 1st. edition, 1995.

