Something’s “Fishy” at Global Ways and Gill Breeders – Analysis with
nSpace and GeoTime
Lynn Chien

Annie Tat

William Wright

Oculus Info Inc.
ABSTRACT
GeoTime and nSpace are two interactive visual analytics tools
that support the process of analyzing massive and complex
datasets. The two tools were used to examine and interpret the
2007 VAST contest dataset. This poster paper describes how the
capabilities of the tools were used to facilitate and expedite every
stage of an analyst workflow.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.2 [Information
Interfaces & Presentations]: User Interfaces – Graphical User
Interfaces (GUI); I.3.6 [Methodology and Techniques]:
Interaction Techniques.
Additional Keywords: visual analytics, human information
interaction, sense making, geo-spatial information systems,
temporal analysis.
1

OVERVIEW OF THE ANALYTIC TOOLS

GeoTime and nSpace are two analytical visualization
applications that facilitate the process of massive data analysis
through supporting different facets of knowledge discovery,
knowledge cultivation and analytical reasoning. Both applications
were developed in collaboration with analysts and are being used
and evaluated by analysts on a day-to-day basis.
1.1

nSpace – Unifying Automatic and User-driven
Visual Analysis
nSpace combines TRIST (The Rapid Information Scanning
Tool) and the Sandbox, while integrating advanced computational
linguistic functions using a Web Services interface and protocol
[3]. Analysts alternate between TRIST and the Sandbox to
continually develop and refine their analyses.
TRIST is a massive data triaging tool with capabilities such as
planned query execution, automatic information extraction, and
customizable multi-linked dimensions, which help provide rapid
scanning, result characterization and correlation [1]. Information
gained from TRIST can be transferred to the Sandbox for
evidence marshalling and further analysis.
The Sandbox is a flexible and expressive thinking environment
that allows analysts to visualize their cognitive mechanisms. It
supports both ad-hoc and more formal analytical sense-making
through capabilities such as “put-this-there” cognition, automatic
organization of evidence, assertions and evidence assembly, and
analysis of competing hypotheses [3].
1.2

GeoTime – Unifying Temporal and Spatial Visual
Analysis compete
GeoTime focuses on interactions between entity movements,
events and relationships over time within a geospatial (or any
conceptual) context to amplify the concurrent cognition of time
and space. Entity behaviors and relationships, along with their
patterns, in both space and time are easily identified. Entities and
events are charted in a single interactive three-dimensional view
[2]. The ground plane is the geographic space represented by the
X and Y axes, the vertical T-axis represents time. Events can be
animated in time.

2

WORKFLOW OF ANALYTICAL PROCESS

2.1
Query - Setting the Stage with Proficiency
Before executing the analysis, the analysts used the expressive
thinking environment provided by the Sandbox to plan out the
process. Contest instructions were gathered and organized;
questions and keywords for querying were generated; notes,
thoughts, and prior knowledge were annotated. Since TRIST is
able to show thousands of results in one display, the entire data
corpus of 1600 documents was indexed and loaded into nSpace
and a general framework of the dataset was quickly observed
without any work from the user. Icon rows representing results
showed the number and the different types of documents; the date
published dimension provided a time range of the dataset;
automatic dimensions showed the topics. User-tailored
dimensions evolved to contain key issues and entities.
2.2
Scan – Triaging Data at a Glance
Relationships between key issues, players, organizations, and
locations that were pertinent to answering the contest challenges
were tracked by comparing dimensions side by side. A new Links
and Nodes visualization in TRIST allowed associations to become
more apparent (see middle of Figure 1). The Animal Import
database was transferred into GeoTime to further investigate
connections between suspicious players and organizations. Using
GeoTime’s link analysis tools, the history of any individual
importer was quickly reviewed.

Figure 1. Triaging key topics and relationships in TRIST

2.3
Read – Exploring Relevant Issues in Depth
When pertinent players, organizations, and locations were
identified, the analysts began to read relevant documents. As soon
as a document was opened, entities and search terms were
automatically extracted and then highlighted to facilitate quick
identification of key contents.
Once important events had been discovered, a timeline created
by the analyst was transferred into GeoTime and events were

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

203

plotted in the three-dimensional view and were examined for
pattern interpretation (Figure 2).

2.5
Collaborate – Verifying Conclusions
Multiple analysts were working on the dataset simultaneously
and often needed to get together to share their work at different
times. Various elements of content in nSpace were exported from
one workspace and imported into another. User-defined
dimensions, such as Key Players and Key Locations, and
templates were exported and shared between analysts and were
modified to help uncover unexpected patterns.
Analysts were able to corroborate answers quickly because
findings were presented easily using nSpace. When in
presentation mode, nSpace menu items became hidden and both
TRIST and Sandbox showed findings in a single display. Tools
such as the Powerful Finger temporarily enlarged items when the
Sandbox was at low zoom and bookmarks allowed desired views
to be set and located quickly. Final reports were generated easily
by dragging and dropping objects from TRIST and the Sandbox
and sources for documents and fragments were automatically
added.
3

Figure 2. Plotting important events with GeoTime timeline

2.4
Assemble – Organizing and Interpreting Findings
Throughout each step of the analysis, discovered insights and
supporting evidence were saved and annotated in the Sandbox.
Tools in the Sandbox, such as links, entities, and groups, helped
organize the gathered pieces of data. The analysts created assorted
layouts that corresponded with their mental models, such as
various social networks and hierarchies (Figure 3a).
The Sandbox supported the analysts in the development and
assessment of meaningful hypotheses, which were captured as
assertions [3]. Evidence for assertions were marshaled through
evidence gates by simply dragging and dropping supporting or
refuting evidence from the left and right side of an assertion
(Figure 3b). Conflicting evidence and competing assertions were
analyzed using the new Analysis of Competing Hypotheses tool,
which helped clarify and diagnose the strength of each evidence
and hypothesis.

(a)

(b)

LESSONS LEARNED

nSpace is a system for supporting analytical work-in-progress.
It can be tailored to adapt to both the task at hand, as well as
cognitive mechanisms of the analysts. Every step of an analyst's
workflow is assisted with automated and user-driven analytical
visualizations. Judges from the contest found the automatic cluster
dimension a great place to start. nSpace easily suited various types
of data provided by the contest and the new ACH tool added
utility.
GeoTime enabled the analysis of information connectedness
over time and geography within a single, highly interactive 3D
view. [2]. Expected relationships were observed and investigated
from various view points and unexpected patterns were
discovered with the elimination of multiple spread-sheets, tables,
maps, and other cross-referenced data that are often
simultaneously needed when doing analyses.
Records in CSV files, when imported in nSpace, were
processed as a single field rather than separate records with
multiple fields. This is a feature that may be implemented in the
near future. nSpace is a rich tool with many capabilities. For a
novice user, a simpler version would be less overwhelming.
The connection between nSpace and GeoTime included some
manual steps and required multiple analysts to work
independently. Future goals include linking the two applications
for more efficient collaboration.
4

CONCLUSION

nSpace and GeoTime proved to be powerful systems that
enabled novice analysts to perform more proficiently full analysis
of real-world problems. The VAST 2007 contest allowed the
systems to work together and the tools proved to work well both
independently and collectively.
REFERENCES
Figure 3. (a) Creating a social network using overlapping colour
coded sets (b) Analyzing hypotheses using Assertions

Normally, evidence is organized in a specific way to support
each analyst's put-this-there cognition and may be susceptible to
pre-dispositions. To ensure all perspectives are considered,
different models of organization were applied to existing
evidence. The evidence automatically re-organized to conform to
a new analytical framework, which helped the analyst exercise a
different point-of-view.

204

[1]

[2]
[3]

Jonker, D., W. Wright, D. Schroh, P. Proulx and B. Cort,
Information Triage with TRIST, In Proc. International Conference
on Intelligence Analysis, 2005.
Kapler, Thomas, and William Wright, 2004. GeoTime Information
Visualization, IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization.
Wright, William, D. Schroh, P. Proulx, A. Skaburskis and B. Cort,
The Sandbox for Analysis – Concepts and Methods, paper accepted
for ACM CHI 2006.

