LAHVA: Linked Animal-Human Health Visual Analytics
Ross Maciejewski∗
David S. Ebert∗

Benjamin Tyner∗
Yun Jang∗
Cheng Zheng∗
Rimma V. Nehme∗
∗
∗
William S. Cleveland
Mourad Ouzzani
Shaun J. Grannis‡
†
Lawrence T. Glickman

∗ Purdue

University Regional Visualization and Analytics Center (PURVAC)
University School of Veterinary Medicine Clinical Epidemiology Group
‡ Regenstrief Institute and Indiana University School of Medicine

† Purdue

A BSTRACT
Coordinated animal-human health monitoring can provide an early
warning system with fewer false alarms for naturally occurring disease outbreaks, as well as biological, chemical and environmental incidents. This monitoring requires the integration and analysis of multi-field, multi-scale and multi-source data sets. In order
to better understand these data sets, models and measurements at
different resolutions must be analyzed. To facilitate these investigations, we have created an application to provide a visual analytics framework for analyzing both human emergency room data
and veterinary hospital data. Our integrated visual analytic tool
links temporally varying geospatial visualization of animal and human patient health information with advanced statistical analysis of
these multi-source data. Various statistical analysis techniques have
been applied in conjunction with a spatio-temporal viewing window. Such an application provides researchers with the ability to
visually search the data for clusters in both a statistical model view
and a spatio-temporal view. Our interface provides a factor specification/filtering component to allow exploration of causal factors
and spread patterns. In this paper, we will discuss the application
of our linked animal-human visual analytics (LAHVA) tool to two
specific case studies. The first case study is the effect of seasonal
influenza and its correlation with different companion animals (e.g.,
cats, dogs) syndromes. Here we use data from the Indiana Network
for Patient Care (INPC) and Banfield Pet Hospitals in an attempt to
determine if there are correlations between respiratory syndromes
representing the onset of seasonal influenza in humans and general respiratory syndromes in cats and dogs. Our second case study
examines the effect of the release of industrial wastewater in a community through companion animal surveillance.
1

I NTRODUCTION

The role of public health surveillance is to collect, analyze and interpret data about biological agents, diseases, risk factors and other
health events in order to provide timely dissemination of collected
information to decision makers. Surveillance activities share several common practices in the way data are collected, managed,
transmitted, analyzed, accessed and disseminated. Surveillance
methods that can detect disease at a pre-diagnostic stage are generally referred to as syndromic because they have the ability to recognize outbreaks based on the symptoms and human behavior, sometimes prior to first contact with the healthcare system. As such,
syndromic surveillance can be defined as the systematic and ongoing collection, analysis and interpretation of data that precedes
diagnosis.
In order to create better surveillance systems, it is important to
know that an estimated 73% of emerging infectious diseases are

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

zoonotic in origin[19, 26]. Thus, monitoring the companion animal population of a society (e.g. dogs, cats) can provide early
warning signs for emerging diseases. In conjunction, exposures to
many substances, such as pollutants, chemicals, allergens and natural toxins, originate from the environment and can have a detrimental effect on health. Companion animals are exposed to the same
substances as humans and monitoring their health can function as a
“canary in a coal mine” [27]. It has long been the goal of healthcare
officials to identify and prevent hazardous exposures; however, lack
of infrastructure and reportability in human health monitoring has
hindered progress in this area. As such, we present a visual analytics environment that uses companion animal data in conjunction
with human emergency room data as a detection system for emerging disease outbreaks and public health incidents.
Our application provides a framework for analyzing both human
emergency room data and veterinary hospital data. Various statistical analysis techniques have been applied in conjunction with a
spatio-temporal visualization system. Such an application provides
researchers with the ability to visually search the data for clusters
in both a statistical model view and a spatio-temporal view. By providing linked graphical and statistical analysis views for health care
researchers and public health officials, we hope to improve event
detection and response, while reducing false positives.
Our system uses emergency room data from the Indiana Network
for Patient Care (INPC) and all general visits to the Banfield Pet
Hospitals. The Indiana Network for Patient Care consists of five
major hospital systems that serve more than 390,000 emergency
room visits per year [1]. The Banfield Pet Hospitals provide nationwide coverage with demographics distributed according to human
population density. Coverage of Banfield Pet Hospitals is one location for every 5-mile radius containing 100,000 pet owners, and
currently has greater than 600 veterinary hospitals located in 42
states that service approximately 70,000 pets per week. Hence, our
system has nationwide syndromic coverage by using companion animals as sentinel surveillance, as well as a strong localized coverage
in a major metropolitan area.
Currently, our work has focused on two case studies: 1) seasonal
influenza and its correlation to general companion animal health,
and 2) the effects of an industrial wastewater release on companion
animals and the correlation to potential human health issues. In the
case of seasonal influenza, early findings indicate that there may
be a correlation between general dog respiratory symptoms and the
onset of human influenza. In the case of the industrial wastewater
release, several syndromes for both cats and dogs were analyzed
and preliminary results indicated that the industrial wastewater release negatively influenced the health of companion animals in this
region. Ongoing analysis is being performed in both cases before
any definitive confirmations can be made.
Section 2 describes the motivation and necessity of improved
syndromic surveillance while Section 3 discusses previous work in
this area. Section 4 provides the details of the individual components of LAHVA. Section 5 outlines the details of the particular

27

case studies we use to showcase our system , and Section 6 shows
the application of our system to these case studies. Finally, we discuss conclusions and plans for future work in Section 7.
2

M OTIVATION

Timely and accurate detection of unusual population health trends
is a challenging problem requiring the analysis of data collected
from disparate sources over time. These data sources vary widely in
accuracy and reliability, and it is often the case that unusual health
trends, such as outbreaks or poisonings, often have an incidence
profile (signal) that is obscured by the statistical noise. For instance, the Indiana Public Health Emergency Surveillance System
(PHESS) [9, 10] generates several daily potential outbreak alerts.
However, only a handful of these alerts have proven to be significant events. Current systems, including those described in Section
3, are not capable of both high true positive rates (precision) and
low false positive rates (recall).
In addition to suboptimal accuracy, current population monitoring systems face other challenges. Many existing systems do
not leverage existing messaging and vocabulary standards such as
Health Level 7 (HL7) and LOINC. Further, many systems require
manual data input which further encumbers already overburdened
public health and health care workers, and is infeasible as a long
term solution. Other challenges include the lack of timely data acquisition, data quality concerns (e.g., duplicate records, typographical errors), and accurate data linkage.
Our system attempts to overcome many of these problems
through the use of the Banfield Pet Hospital database. Banfield
is a nationwide system with a geographical coverage similar to the
human population. It captures veterinary visits in real-time for all
Banfield practices, and this data can augment existing human syndromic surveillance efforts. Furthermore, we link to the Indiana
Network for Patient Care (INPC) [1] database and monitor human
health events in the Indianapolis metropolitan region.
3

P REVIOUS W ORK

Data from public health surveillance systems has long been recognized as providing meaningful measures for disease risks in populations [16, 21, 22]. In light of this, many systems have been developed to analyze this data and provide syndromic surveillance
to epidemiologists. Some of the most popular of these systems are
the Early Aberration Reporting System (EARS) [14], the Electronic
Surveillance System for the Early Notification of Communitybased Epidemics (ESSENCE) [17], and Biosense [18].
EARS was developed through the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) and provides epidemiologists with several
aberration detection methods. This system has been implemented
in multiple state and local health departments throughout the United
States and in several other countries. ESSENCE relies on both
syndromic and nontraditional health information to provide early
warnings of abnormal health conditions. This system is implemented in the national capital area, as well as many state health
departments, and utilizes military and civilian healthcare information as the means of identifying abnormal outbreaks. Biosense is
part of a national initiative to detect bio-terrorism. BioSense’s main
goal is to facilitate the sharing of automated detection and visualization algorithms through the creation of national standards. This
implementation will include an internet-based software-system that
includes both spatio-temporal and temporal analysis and currently
operates in more than 20 cities.
Work has also been done in applying interactive visualization
techniques to analyzing human health data. Schulze-Wollgast et al.
[23] developed a system for visualizing health data for the German
state Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. This system allowed users to interactively select diseases and their parameters and view the data

28

over a specific time interval at different temporal resolutions. Further work in this system [24] employed the use of intuitive 3D pencil and helix icons for visualizing multiple dependent data attributes
and emphasizing the type of underlying temporal dependency.
These systems focus specifically on data collected on human
health; however, this data is often encumbered by privacy concerns.
Furthermore, many emergency rooms are not yet collecting electronic records, and those that do collect records often only do data
analysis on the zip code level. In contrast, data collected at the Banfield Pet Hospitals is entered into a national database in real-time,
allowing instant access for analysis. There are no privacy concerns
for pets, so the exact location may be used for analysis instead of
aggregation to the zip code level. As such, our work focuses on
syndromic surveillance by using companion animals as predictors
to increase sensitivity and specificity.
The need for such companion animal monitoring has been outlined in presidential panels [7]; however, little work has been done
in this area. Our system addresses this need by combining data from
Banfield Pet Hospitals with INPC data. Unfortunately, though, not
all methods used for syndromic surveillance in human data are appropriate for syndromic surveillance in companion animals. Due
to the sparsity of pet visits with comparable syndromes, these data
sources exhibit statistically different signal characteristics.
For human data, syndromic surveillance is done through means
of aberration detection. Aberration detection is the change in the
distribution or frequency of important health-related events when
compared with historical data, and can be divided into two broad
categories: case definition methods and pattern recognition methods. Case definition methods employ epidemiological experience
to define syndromes of interest that would indicate an event. For
pattern recognition methods, we employ the use of SatScan [15]
which employs spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal scan statistics to identify unusual disease clusters in a given population.
For aberration detection, most surveillance systems use long
term data, three or more years, to calculate the expected historical value. However, historical data is not always available. As an
approach for short term aberration detection, many systems employ the use of the CUSUM model (cumulative sum) [14, 13, 12].
CUSUM can be used for a short term (approximately 21 days)
surveillance method and due to the short length, seasonality factors
are less important in the assessment of daily aberrations.
For companion animal data, we have tested several different
aberration detection methods and report on both their benefits and
shortcomings in the following sections.
4

L INKED A NIMAL -H UMAN V ISUAL A NALYTICS S YSTEM

We have developed a system (LAHVA) that combines both human
and animal health data for syndromic surveillance and aberration
detection. Our system consists of three components: a data management component, a statistical analysis component and a visual
analytics component as seen in Figure 1. Our system directly accesses data from INPC and Banfield Pet Hospitals. The INPC data
is updated daily in our database and the Banfield data is updated at
regular intervals of 1 - 3 weeks. Currently, statistical models are
pre-computed in R [20] and S-plus in order to evaluate their potential use. Future versions of the system will directly analyze the data
through direct implementations of these methods.
4.1 Data Management
To support efficient and effective visualization analysis, we have
built a data integration system that supports the transformation,
management, and integration of raw human and animal health data.
In the process, several data management issues were required: (1)
cleaning and transformation of the data arriving from different data
sources, (2) integration and correlation of data (e.g., hospitals and

Figure 1: System infrastructure.

veterinary clinics), and (3) assurance that the data is used in a secure
and privacy preserving way.
4.1.1 Data Preparation
Raw data arriving from emergency departments and Banfield Pet
Hospitals is not directly usable. As such, several data preparation
steps are applied, including data cleaning and transformation. Data
cleaning is used for detecting and removing errors and inconsistencies from the raw data in order to improve the quality of data, and
all data transformations are tracked and recorded. This preparation
also allows us to provide feedback to our data providers in terms of
how well their systems are being managed. Through this, several
previously undetected data management issues have been resolved
in their systems.
4.1.2 Data and Information Integration
Since the data comes from disparate sources stored in different formats, seamless and uniform querying and manipulating of this data
is required. A critical challenge is matching and correlating the human and animal data coming from disparate sources using different
naming conventions, relational schemas, and values that semantically may represent the same symptoms. While at this stage of the
project, most of these issues are resolved in an ad hoc fashion, we
are currently conducting research into different directions to solve
these issues. Possible solutions include using the query logs from
these different databases to automatically match their schemas.
4.1.3 Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing and Analysis
Once the data is processed and stored, data privacy and sharing
concerns needed to be addressed. Since we are dealing with sensitive medical data, we may not make the assumption that access
to this data can be granted without restrictions. In order to ensure
that this data is protected from actions that violate the privacy of
individuals, restrictions have been put into place. However, these
restrictions need to also allow data extracted to be useful for our
visual analytics system. We have to strike a balance between the
need to preserve privacy and our capacity to enable rapid, accurate,
comprehensible, and communicable analyses. Our current system
uses traditional de-identification techniques to address this issue.
We also are working on visual abstractions of the data where the
information being visualized is transformed in such a way that it
does not reveal any private information. This will complement our
privacy preservation techniques applied at lower levels to the raw
data.

4.2 Statistical Modeling
Once the data management system was created, it was necessary to
address the statistical modeling problems of both human and companion animal data. As explained in Section 3, much work has
been done on aberration detection in emergency room data. Unfortunately, many of these techniques are not easily applied to veterinary hospital data. In emergency room data, there are typically
9 to 11 chief complaints, most commonly consisting of: respiratory, gastro-intestinal, hemorrhagic, rash, fever, neurological, botulinic, shock/coma, and other. Multiple cases of these syndromes
are present in emergency room data every day.
In contrast, the Banfield Pet Hospital data is more robust in that
it contains detailed examination records of each pet that visited the
hospital. These records may be searched for syndromes that are
equivalent to emergency room chief complaints; however, the number of cases per day will often be zero. As such, common EARS
analysis methods are not always applicable. In the following sections, we will discuss the statistical methods applied to the companion animal data and potential problems within.
4.2.1 Power Transformation
One method we applied to simplify our analysis was the application
of a logarithm or power transformation to bring the data more in line
with model assumptions [6]. In time series analysis, the logarithm
transformation is widely applied when the mean is proportional to
the standard deviation [3], and in cases where the data consists of
counts following a Poisson distribution a square root transformation
will approximately make the mean independent of the standard deviation. In each case, the transformations are necessary to simplify
the modeling procedure.
Due to the zeros in the animal hospital data, a logarithm is not directly applicable. Naturally, log(x + 1) was tried, but failed to eliminate the skewness on the right tail of the distribution for the number
of observations. A square root transformation did not work either
due to the skewness on the√left tail caused by the zeros. Our experimental results suggest x + 1 gives good performance in terms
of stabilizing the variability and yielding a skew-free distribution in
most cases.
4.2.2 Data Normalization
While a power transformation is useful for some analysis, others
require data normalization to pull out the underlying trend. In the
INPC and Pet Hospital data, daily counts are stored in our database
and the daily counts can vary according to seasonal effects and increases in data collection capacity. Regular daily count plots tend

29

to be very noisy and it is hard to identify abnormal characteristics.
In order to analyze patterns of data over time, we apply a normalization to capture the aberrations in the data. To reduce the noisy
patterns and to compensate for the different scaling in counts over
time we typically use counts per week. For the denominator of our
normalization, we use the sum of the daily counts for the past six
months. This six month sliding window then allows us to observe
the seasonal effects and larger trends while removing day of the
week effects and smaller aberrations. As such, data normalization
of this manner will not be applied when looking for short-term effects.
4.2.3 Aberration Detection for Sparse, Dependent Data
For short term abberation detection, one statistical approach we applied was the use of CUSUM [14, 13, 12]. CUSUM is defined as
the following.
St = max 0, St−1 +

Xt − (µ0 + kσxt )
σxt

(1)

where St is the current CUSUM, St−1 is the previous CUSUM,
Xt is the count at the current time, µ0 is the expected value, σxt
is the standard deviation, and k is the detectable shift from the
mean. µ0 and σxt are computed according to the degree of sensitivity. We use three different models (C1, C2, C3) and each model
uses different time period for the µ0 and σxt computations. For
C1, the baseline period is Day−7 , . . . , Day−1 and a flag is noted on
Day0 . For C2, Day−9 , . . . , Day−3 are used as the baseline and similarly, C3 uses Day−9 , . . . , Day−3 as the baseline but an average of
Day−2 , . . . , Day0 is used to detect the aberration. However, our Pet
Hospital data has a relatively small number of counts and we use
doubled baselines in order to avoid zero count for the baseline period. Here, we see the problems in analyzing our veterinary data
using common human syndromic surveillance methods. The sparsity of the data requires a modification of the CUSUM, and may
produce undesirable false positives.
As previously mentioned, zeros are common among daily counts
of clinical signs among the Banfield pets within a given area (a
radius of a few miles). Consequently, detection of aberrations must
proceed over a large distance, or over longer time periods than a
single day.
While it is common for this kind of data to exhibit both spatial
and temporal variation, some variations may be uninteresting. For
example, there may be temporal dynamics associated with a changing population that are not associated with a particular syndrome.
To achieve reasonable sensitivity and specificity on important signals, it is necessary to first adequately model the unimportant effects. The problem is compounded by the fact that only local estimates of animal population are available.
Bootstrapping is a general-purpose robust alternative to parametric inference used when the analyst does not wish to make strong
parametric assumptions about the data. In the words of its inventor
[8], it “can by applied to complicated situations where parametric
modeling and/or theoretical analysis is hopeless.” The idea is to
sample the data with replacement in order to simulate the distribution of the data and functions thereof. When bootstrapping dependent data, care must be taken to preserve as much of the dependence
structure as possible when doing the resampling. Typically this is
done via a blocked approach; for a univariate time series the sampling units are then contiguous subseries drawn from the original
data. Such a scheme is described by Carlstein et al.[4], with Hanna
et al.[11] among the first applications.
For detection of unusually high levels of symptomatic cases, one
statistic whose distribution can be bootstrapped is the quantile. For
all pets within a radius of incidence, we identify all symptomatic
encounters over a time window of tw days after the alleged release at

30

time t. Over the window [t,t +tw ), there is a distance to the epicenter associated with each symptomatic encounter, and our detection
statistic St⋆ is the radius inside which x% of the window’s symptomatic cases occur. One imagines that an adverse event near the
epicenter will cause the distribution of these distances to be shifted
downward, and our approach seeks to detect such shifts over time.
Our reasons for using the quantile as a measure of location are
severalfold. First, it seems important to choose a statistic not dominated by animals far from the epicenter; a small quantile is likely to
be more sensitive to aberrations close to the epicenter than would an
arithmetic average, for example. Moreover, the distribution of the
average distance is highly influenced by the choice of the radius,
whereas the quantile should be less so. Of course, it is important
not to choose a quantile so small that the bootstrap no longer applies; as an extreme case, the minimum is an example of a quantile
whose distribution cannot be bootstrapped.
Though computationally intensive, the actual bootstrapping
technique is rather straightforward: to obtain R null replicates of
the statistic, one may resample R windows of length tw days corresponding to null data and compute the statistic there, resulting
(1) (2)
(R)
in bootstrap replicates St , St , . . . , St . In prospective mode, the
null data occurs prior to the window under investigation; in retrospective mode, one may opt to include data from after the window
as well. In any case the bootstrap significance associated with S⋆ is
then
(i)

pt = 1 + number of {St } exceeding St⋆ / (1 + R)

(2)

If the mild assumptions underlying the bootstrap hold, the
null distribution of pt is approximately discrete uniform over
{1/R, 2/R, . . . , R/R}. Consequently, if there is no signal in the window under investigation, rejecting the null hypothesis when pt⋆ ≤ α
will result in a false alarm rate of α × 100%. For prospective mode,
one will need to update pt⋆ with the passage of time, and in this
case a plot of pt⋆ versus t is appropriate. In this case the {pt }
are themselves correlated; moreover, the probability of at least one
false alarm grows with t for fixed α . If the number of null windows is less than R (common for our analyses), then bootstrapping
is unnecessary when only a p-value is required, since the bootstrap
p-value will have expectation equal to the fraction of null windows
with statistic at least as extreme as the observed value. However,
statistics such as standard deviation can still benefit from the bootstrap in this situation.
The resampling of different null windows within the same radius
assumes a stationary distribution across time. Of course this cannot
be literally true due to effects such as a changing at-risk population;
nevertheless, by not going too far back in time one may be able to
minimize such temporal effects without needing to incorporate estimates of the population itself. If one is willing to assume the null
distribution does not vary much with local geography, another strategy is to use a second epicenter as a control denominator, though
this introduces another source of variability. For example, for a 20mile radius, one may choose the second epicenter at least 40 miles
away so that there is no overlap.
4.2.4 Seasonal-Trend Decomposition Based on Loess
The previous method discusses the identification of small signals;
however, we are also interested in signal correlation. Our time series signals can be viewed as the sum of multiple trend components: a seasonal component and remainders. For each data signal,
“trend components” are extracted to represent the long term trend
and yearly seasonality using a seasonal decomposition of time series by loess (STL) [5]. Here, the “seasonal component” would
represent the day-of-the-week effect.
Yit = Tit + Sit + Dit + rit

(3)

Figure 2: LAHVA screen shots. (Left) Geospatial temporal view. (Right) Statistical view.

where for the ith series, Yit is the original series, Tit is the long term
trend, Sit is the yearly seasonality, Dit is the day-of-the-week effect,
and rit is the remainder. We can then look at the correlation between
the extracted components to see if they have any potential effects on
each other.

versions of this system will include more robust mapping features
and interactive statistical analysis components.
5

C ASE S TUDIES

4.3 Visual Analytics
Our visual analytics system, LAHVA, takes advantage of both the
data-management and statistical modeling components presented
above. An initial direct access query to the database is done, and
human hospitals, veterinary hospitals and individual animal locations are displayed on an interactive map. Statistical plots are precomputed and linked to the factor specification and filtering components in the system.
In Figure 2, we see the typical LAHVA viewing windows. Emergency rooms are represented by crosses, veterinary hospitals are
represented by the large V’s, cats are triangles, and dogs are circles. For the emergency rooms and veterinary hospitals, the size
and color are determined by the number of cases seen on that given
time period, normalized by either the six-month sliding window
previously discussed, or modified by a power transformation. As
more cases of a particular syndrome are encountered on the specified time period, the colors change from green to red and the glyph
area increases proportionally to the number of cases. Glyph scaling
in the images is also enlarged to help preserve privacy and the scaling during use can be set smaller for higher specificity or larger to
help signal alerts. The time period can be specified as daily, weekly
or monthly using the controls on the bottom right near the slider,
and the slider allows users to move forward and backwards in time.
The case selection and factors are determined by the check boxes
in the upper left corner and more factors are in the process of being
added. Further information can be obtained by left clicking on a
human or animal hospital glyph. This opens an information screen
that details the patient records for the specified time period, see
Figure 2 (Left).
For the cats and dogs, red represents respiratory syndromes, blue
would represent gastro-intestinal syndromes and green would represent eye-inflammation syndromes. For prototyping purposes, the
lower left window contains pre-computed plots of the data for varying factors. The main window contains the time-varying geo-spatial
interface. Time is controlled by the slider on the lower portion of
the window. By clicking on the statistical window plot, the main
window and lower-left window of the system will switch allowing
for different types of analysis as seen in Figure 2 (Right). Future

Figure 3: Banfield Pet Hospital visits in the release area.

In order to evaluate our system and test different aberration detection methods, two case studies were chosen. The first case study
uses both the human and companion animal data for enhanced syndromic surveillance, while the second case uses only the companion animal data to demonstrate the benefits of this population in
syndromic surveillance.
5.1 The Effects of Seasonal Influenza
Our first case study focuses on correlations between companion
animal and human illnesses. Particularly, we analyze seasonal
influenza through emergency room department chief complaints.
Much work has already been done on identifying seasonal influenza
via chief complaint (e.g., [25, 2]). However, little has been done
in comparing equivalent flu-like syndromes in companion animals.
For our work, we are using eighteen emergency rooms based in
the Indianapolis metropolitan region. Trends of cat and dog illnesses in Indiana and bordering metropolitan areas were analyzed.
For comparison, we focused on cats and dogs reporting respiratory
syndromes and compare how these would correlate to emergency
room chief complaints of respiratory syndromes.

31

Figure 4: Using LAHVA to identify seasonal influenza.

5.2 Assessing Effects of a Chemical Release
Our second case study focuses on using pets as sentinels to detect
unusual events. Here, we focus on the release of industrial wastewater. The site in question has been anonymized and is shown in
Figure 3. The release center is denoted as a red diamond.
In order to examine the effects of this release, the local Department of Health led an investigation in the region. This region
has a human population of approximately 8,500; and the combined human population of the nearby communities is approximately 28,000. Unfortunately, lack of human health data sources
led the local Department of Health to assess these effects through
a self-reported survey. In contrast, our study focuses on pets in
a twenty-mile radius surrounding the site using data from Banfield,
the pet hospital. We have patient records for 74,660 dog and 21,202
cat visitations in this area spanning the time period prior to and following the release dates. Distributions of these patients can be seen
in Figure 3.
6

R ESULTS

In order to test the functionality of our system, LAHVA was applied to the case studies described in Section 5. Various statistical
methods were used to test their functionality in conjunction with
the geospatial temporal viewing window.
6.1 Seasonal Influenza Analysis
Our first case study was an analysis of seasonal influenza using
LAHVA. In Figure 4 we show the temporally varying window centered over the Indianapolis metropolitan area. The factor specification is showing cases of human and companion animals showing
signs of respiratory illnesses. From LAHVA, one can easily identify the onset of seasonal influenza as the hospitals begin showing
signs of increased respiratory cases. Viewing the statistical plot
coupled with this allows us to see the overlying trend of respiratory syndromes in this area over a multi-year period. The blue line

32

Figure 5: Yearly pattern for human and dog respiratory syndromes.

in the plot represents the INPC hospitals, the magenta line represents dogs with respiratory syndromes and the yellow represents
cats with respiratory syndromes.
We also applied the STL analysis to see if there were correlations between dog respiratory syndromes and human respiratory
syndromes. The yearly seasonal components for these two series
are overlaid in Figure 5. Here, we can see the similarity between
the two. The data are standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by standard deviation for visualization and comparison purposes. The grey bars are used to roughly illustrate the local maximum values over time providing evidence that respiratory symptoms in dogs occur approximately 10 days earlier than that of the

Figure 6: Dogs (circles) and cats (triangles) showing eye-inflammation (green), respiratory (red), and gastro-intestinal (blue) syndromes near the
release. (Left) June 22 - 28. (Right) June 29 - July 5.

Dog Eye Inflammation

Cat Eye Inflammation

15

60

50

12

40
9
30
6
20
3

10

9/22/2006

11/22/2006

7/22/2006

5/22/2006

3/22/2006

1/22/2006

9/22/2005

11/22/2005

7/22/2005

5/22/2005

3/22/2005

1/22/2005

9/22/2004

11/22/2004

7/22/2004

5/22/2004

3/22/2004

1/22/2004

9/22/2006

11/22/2006

7/22/2006

5/22/2006

3/22/2006

1/22/2006

9/22/2005

11/22/2005

7/22/2005

5/22/2005

3/22/2005

1/22/2005

9/22/2004

11/22/2004

7/22/2004

5/22/2004

3/22/2004

0
1/22/2004

0

Figure 7: CUSUM for pets Showing Eye-inflammation Syndromes.(Left) Dogs , (Right) Cats

humans in regular years.
6.2 Industrial Wastewater Release Analysis
Our second case study analyzes the effects of an industrial wastewater release through companion animal surveillance. Three syndromes were identified as being potential indicators of adverse effects due to a release: eye inflammation, respiratory, and gastrointestinal. In Figure 6 we see an area within a 20 mile radius of the
spill. Cats are triangles and dogs are circles. In the week following
the spill, what seems to be an unusual amount of eye-inflammation
cases appear near the source. Figure 6 (Left) is one week prior to
the spill (June 22 - 28). Figure 6 (Right) is the week starting the day
of the spill (June 29 - July 5). The green glyphs represent animals
with eye-inflammation.
Once a problem is visually identified in our system, different statistical analyses can be run to confirm or deny problems in that area.
CUSUM was applied to the data to determine if any alerts would be
generated for eye-inflammation in this area. Figure 7 shows the resultant CUSUM plots using CUSUM2. Due to the small number
of eye-inflammation cases seen over the course of a year, it is difficult to determine any direct information from applying CUSUM
directly to the pet syndrome data. Current work is being done to
find ways to potentially better apply CUSUM to the data.
Due to the data sparsity, the application of CUSUM was not ef-

fective in this case. In order to further verify that problems with
eye-inflammation occurred, the bootstrapping method discussed in
Section 5.2.3 was applied. To illustrate the procedure and effect
size Figure 8 shows a plot of distance to the alleged release point
versus time, with horizontal bars indicating the 10% quantiles for
each 21-day window. This results are shown in Table 1, and indicate that eye-inflammation in dogs was significant near the release
in our time period of interest.
species
canine
feline

statistic
mean 10% quantile before
10% quantile during
1-sided bootstrap p-value
mean 10% quantile before
10% quantile during
1-sided bootstrap p-value

eye inflammation
8.035
2.365
0.006
11.195
17.531
0.909

Table 1: Summary of the bootstrap analysis findings.

7 C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
Our work has demonstrated the benefits of creating a linked visualstatistical analysis system for health surveillance, and our methodologies are currently being applied to other case studies. It is clear

33

symptom = eye inflammation, p = 0.006
20

15

10

5

07
n
Ja

N

ov

20

20

06

06
20
Se

Ju

p

l2

00

6

06
ay
M

ar
M

n
Ja

20

20

06

06

0

20

miles from location of alleged release

canine

date

Figure 8: Visualization of the bootstrap analysis for eye inflammation
in dogs.

that using companion animals for syndromic surveillance has great
potential for early aberration detection; however, more work is
needed to determine appropriate methodologies for using companion animals as sentinels. Our system has demonstrated the use of
applied visual analytics through two different case studies. In both
cases, the visuals allow users to easily locate potential problems in
a region and then apply further statistical analyses to confirm their
suspicions.
In the case of the effects of human influenza on general dog respiratory symptoms, we were able to find early signs indicating that
there may be correlations between these events. In the case of the
industrial wastewater spill, we were able do identify problem areas.
From these problem areas, statistical tests were generated and we
were able to verify what was seen visually.
While our current work has been retrospective, we intend to
modify the system and integrate our statistical models for better
interactivity. By doing this, we can provide health care officials and
epidemiologists with tools to monitor varying regions of the country and provide better detection for potential disease outbreaks and
health incidents.
Future work will focus on verification of these case study results, as well as others, and system enhancements to LAHVA. Current plans include adding the statistical analysis features directly to
LAHVA and allowing users to interactively select areas of the map
to analyze for potential health issues. Also, given the discreteness
of illness data, i.e., records only exist on the day pets visit, we also
plan to add time ghosting for an approximated contagious period.
This period will be based on syndrome and interactively modifiable.
8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the Department of Homeland Security and
the Lily Endowment Fund for funding this work as well as our partners at Banfield the Pet Hospital and the Indiana Network for Patient Care for providing the datasets.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. G. Biondich and S. J. Grannis. The Indiana network for patient care:
An integrated clinical information system informed by over thirty
years of experience. Public Health Management Practices, pages 81
– 86, Nov 2004.
[2] F. Bourgeois, K. Olson, J. Brownsten, A. McAdam, and K. Mandl.
Validation of syndromic surveillance for respiratory infections. Annals
of Emergency Medicine, 47:265 – 271, 2006.
[3] P. J. Brockwell and R. A. Davis. Introduction to Time Series and
Forecasting (2nd edition). Springer, 2003.
[4] E. Carlstein. The use of subseries values for estimating the variance
of a general statistic from a stationary sequence. Annals of Statistics,
14:1171–1179, 1986.

34

[5] R. B. Cleveland, W. S. Cleveland, J. McRae, and I. Terpenning. Stl:
A seasonal-trend decomposition procedure based on loess. Journal of
Official Statistics, 6:3–73, 1990.
[6] W. S. Cleveland. Visualizing Data. Hobart Press, 1993.
[7] N. R. Council. Animals as Sentinels of Environmental Health Hazards.
National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1991. Library of Congress
Catalog NO.91-61734.
[8] B. Efron. The Jackknife, the Bootstrap and Other Resampling Plans.
SIAM, Philadelphia, 1982.
[9] S. J. Grannis, P. G. Biondich, B. W. Mamlin, G. Wilson, L. Jones,
and J. M. Overhage. How disease surveillance systems can serve as
practical building blocks for a health information infrastructure: the
Indiana experience. In AMIA Annual Symposium, pages 286 – 290,
2005.
[10] S. J. Grannis, M. Wade, J. Gibson, and J. M. Overhage. The Indiana public health emergency surveillance system: Ongoing progress,
early findings, and future directions. In American Medical Informatics
Association, 2006.
[11] S. R. Hanna. Confidence limits for air quality model evaluations, as estimated by bootstrap and jackknife resampling methods. Atmospheric
Environment, 23:1385–1398, 1989.
[12] L. Hutwagner, T. Browne, G. M. Seeman, and A. T. Fleischauer. Comparing aberration detection methods with simulated data. Emerging
Infectious Diseases, 11(2):314 – 316, February 2005.
[13] L. C. Hutwagner, W. W. Thompsom, G. M. Seeman, and T. Treadwell.
A simulation model for assessing aberration detection methods used in
public health surveillance for systems with limited baselines. Statistics
in Medicine, 24(4):543 – 550, February 2005.
[14] L. C. Hutwagner, W. W. Thompson, and G. M. Seeman. The bioterrorism preparedness and response early aberration reporting system
(ears). Journal of Urban Health, 80(2):i89 – i96, 2003.
[15] M. Kulldorff. A spatial scan statistic. Communications in Statistics:
Theory and Methods, 26, 1997.
[16] A. D. Langmuir. The surveillance of communicable diseases of national importance. New England Journal of Medicine, 268:182 – 192,
1963.
[17] J. S. Lombardo. A systems overview of the electronic surveillance system for the early notification of community based epidemics
(ESSENCE II). Journal of Urban Health, 80:32 – 42, 2003.
[18] J. W. Loonsk. Biosense - a national initiative for early detection and
quantification of public health emergencies. MMWR, 53:53 – 55,
2004.
[19] M. Pappaioanou, T. Gomez, and C. Drenzek. New and emerging
zoonoses. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 10(11), Nov 2004.
[20] R Development Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna,
Austria, 2007. ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
[21] S. B. Thacker and R. L. Berkelman. Public health surveillance in the
united states. Epidemiology Review, 10:164 – 190, 1988.
[22] S. B. Thacker, R. L. Berkelman, and D. F. Stroup. The science of
public health surveillance. Journal of Public Health Policy, 10:187 –
203, 1989.
[23] C. Tominski, P. Schulze-Wollgast, and H. Schumann. Visual analysis
of health data. In 2003 IRMA International Conference, 2003.
[24] C. Tominski, P. Schulze-Wollgast, and H. Schumann. 3d information visualization for time dependent data on maps. In International
Conference on Infomation Visualization (IV), 2005.
[25] F.-C. Tsui, M. M. Wagner, V. Dato, and C.-C. H. Chang. Value of
ICD-9-Coded Chief Complaints for Detection of Epidemics. J Am
Med Inform Assoc, 9(90061):S41–47, 2002.
[26] M. E. J. Woolhouse and S. Gowtage-Sequeria. Host range and
emerging and reemerging pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
11(0997), Nov 2005.
[27] R. D. Zane. Syndromic surveillance: A canary in the coal mine? Journal Watch Emergency Medicine, pages 265 – 271, April 2006.

