Supporting Exploration Awareness for Visual Analytics
Yedendra B. Shrinivasan ∗

Jarke J. van Wijk†

Eindhoven University of Technology

Eindhoven University of Technology.

A BSTRACT
While exploring data using information visualization, analysts try
to make sense of the data, build cases, and present them to others.
However, if the exploration is long or done in multiple sessions, it
can be hard for analysts to remember all interesting visualizations
and the relationships among them they have seen. Often, they will
see the same or similar visualizations, and are unable to recall when,
why and how they have seen something similar.
Recalling and retrieving interesting visualizations are important
tasks for the analysis processes such as problem solving, reasoning,
and conceptualization. In this paper, we argue that offering support for thinking based on past analysis processes is important, and
present a solution for this.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces—Graphical User Interfaces (GUI);
1

I NTRODUCTION

Information foraging of large and complex datasets using information visualization is an unsystematic process. Often, the exploration
process is done in multiple sessions lasting for a few minutes to
days. Hence, the analyst has to be aware of the history of his exploration process for building cases, validating those cases and presenting them to others.
Analysts rely on their memory to remember interesting aspects
of past exploration sessions. As sessions may prolong, the interesting aspects of the exploration process can become ephemeral.
There is a chance that analysts will pass by the same or similar visualizations, without being aware of this. If they are aware, it will
often be hard to recall when, why and how these visualizations occurred.
Recalling and retrieving interesting visualizations are important
tasks for processes that involve thinking based on the past analysis,
such as problem solving, case-based reasoning, and conceptualization. In this paper, we present how to support the user reasoning
process that involves thinking based on the past analysis processes.

the content of their working memory. Hence, they cannot harness
their experience from their past analysis effectively. Therefore, during visual analysis, support for creating and maintaining epistemic
awareness would be highly useful for analysts for a more effective
decision making process.
Current visualization systems provide history mechanisms that
offer support for recovering from mistakes, archiving interesting
visualizations and reusing archived visualizations. It is not possible to recall an interesting visualization with current visualization
systems except if it is explicitly archived by the analyst. Hence,
current visualization systems do not offer support for creating and
maintaining epistemic awareness during the visual exploration process.
3

E PISTEMIC AWARENESS

IN I NFOV IS

During the interactive visual exploration process, the analyst provides specifications for visualizing data. Subsequently, the analyst
assimilates knowledge by perceiving the images and updates the
specifications. The changes in the specifications are based on the
assimilation of the images of the previous visualization state and
represent the analyst’s exploration process. Hence, we argue that
the specifications of the visualization states as well as the visual
pattern of the images of the visualization states are the key cues
for creating and maintaining epistemic awareness in interactive information visualization. These cues can be used for recalling and
retrieving a visualization state.
To support epistemic awareness in information visualization, and
recalling and retrieving tasks, we argue that the following facilities
are required:
1. A history mechanism that archives the cues: both the specifications and the visual pattern of the images of a visualization
state;
2. Direct search on the archived cues;
3. Associative search on the archived cues.

2

O UT

OF

S IGHT, O UT

OF

M IND

Human working memory (short-term memory) is capable of holding about seven items or chunks of information [2]. It is important
to mentally repeat the chunks of information to hold them for recalling later [3]. The awareness of what knowledge is stored in
the long-term memory is called epistemic awareness. Epistemic
awareness is the outcome of encoding chunks of information into
long-term memory. Epistemic awareness is required for remember, recall and retrieve tasks that support thinking based on the past
analysis [1].
Analysts use their visual system to perceive the visualization.
It is difficult for them to rehearse all the visualizations and store
them persistently in their long-term memory. Analysts can ascertain whether the current visualization is interesting only based on
∗ e-mail:

y.b.shrinivasan@tue.nl

† e-mail:vanwijk@tue.nl

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

The specifications of a visualization state can be described in
terms of view settings, dataset settings, query settings, query results, user selection through direct manipulation, degree of interest
of the objects, and mapping function settings such as clustering,
multi-dimension scaling. The visual patterns exhibited by the images of a visualization state can be described and compared in various ways. Some options are to use object density in a grid or segmentation, and to use spatial auto-correlation or the Earth mover’s
distance for comparison. The choice for encoding the visual pattern
has to be based on the characteristics of the visualizations such as
scatterplot, parallel coordinate plot and tree map.
Direct search is a keyword-based search on the archived cues
— specifications of the visualization states. The analyst can recall visualization states based on one or more keywords that are
parts of the specifications to the visualization states. Associative
search looks for similar visualization states to a specified visualization state. The specifications of the current visualization state are
compared part-wise to the specifications of the rest of the visualization states in terms of view, query, query results, user selection
through direct manipulation and visual pattern of the images. This

185

Figure 1: The exploration of a weblog data using the Aruvi prototype. (a) associative search results; (c) detailed view of the similar visualizations
that can be accessed via the ‘similar visualization’ button (b); (d) dynamic query interface for defining the similarity criteria; (e) analysis searcher
interface for the direct search on the archived cues.

comparison gives the local similarity distances for the parts of the
specifications. Finally, these local similarity distances can be combined to form a global similarity distance for all the visualization
states given the current visualization state.
4 P ROTOTYPE
Aruvi is an information visualization framework that supports the
analytical reasoning process [4]. It consists of three views — data
view, navigation view and knowledge view. The analyst can externalize findings along with a link to the visualization state, organize
the findings to built cases, review and revise the analysis process
and present the cases to others. It has a history mechanism that
archives the specifications and details about the visual pattern exhibited by the images of a visualization state. It supports working
with multiple datasets during an analysis.
Currently, Aruvi has a scatterplot visualization attached to a dynamic query interface. We calculate similarity between different
scatterplot visualizations as follows. First, the view settings of the
scatterplot visualizations are compared based on the x-axis, y- axis
and size attribute names. The query of the current state is decomposed as a list of attribute criteria. The list of attribute criteria is
then compared with the list of attribute criteria of the other visualization states. The comparison results in a value ranging from 0 to
1; 1 represents a similar query; 0 represents a dissimilar query; a
value in-between represents a partial match. Similarly, the lists of
query results and user selection of the current state are compared
with the other visualization states and a local similarity distance is
computed. We chose object densities in a grid approach to model
the visual pattern exhibited by a scatterplot. The correlation values
of the grid of the current visualization state with the other visualization states is computed, and used as a similarity distance.
When a new visualization state is captured by the history mechanism, the associative search for the new visualization state is triggered. We implemented a similarity mechanism that performs the
associative search as a background process without hindering the
analysis process. The similarity mechanism reports the result of the
associative search as the number of the local similarity matches in
terms of view, query, query results, selection and visual pattern (see
figure 1a).
The analyst can explore the result of the associative search via
the “similar visualizations” interface (see figure 1b). A table view
is used to visualize the results of the associative search (see figure

186

1c). The first column of the table represents the global similarity
distance, which is an average of the local similarity distances represented by subsequent columns of the table. Each row represents
a similar visualization state. The analyst can sort and rearrange the
columns of the table to explore these similar visualizations. The
row highlighted in yellow color represents the current visualization
state. To revisit a similar visualization state, the analyst can click
on the corresponding row. Analysts can either choose to revise a
similar visualization state or continue the exploration process, according to their reasoning process. They can redefine the criteria
for computing similar visualizations at anytime during the analysis
process via the “similarity settings” interface (see figure 1d).
The analysis searcher (see figure 1e) enables the analyst to search
the archived cues based on keywords. A table view is used to visualize the search results. Each row represents a matched visualization
state. A magenta colored circle represents the local match in terms
of view, query, query results and selection. The analyst can click on
the row to revisit the corresponding visualization state.
The combination of the associative search and direct search
methods helps the analyst to create and maintain the epistemic
awareness during the exploration process. Thus, the analyst can recall and retrieve a visualization state for an effective decision making process that involves thinking based on the past analysis.
5

F UTURE W ORK

Currently, we are working with few analysts to understand and evaluate the support offered by the Aruvi for the epistemic awareness in
information visualization. The analysts are working with their own
datasets and doing their analysis in multiple sessions.
R EFERENCES
[1] R. L. Klatzky. Memory and Awareness: An Information-Processing
Perspective. W.H. Freeman, 1984.
[2] G. A. Miller. The magical number seven plus or minus two: some limits
on our capacity for processing information. The Psychological Review,
63(2):81–97, March 1956.
[3] P. Muter. Very rapid forgetting. Memory & Cognition, 8(2):174–179,
1980.
[4] Y. B. Shrinivasan and J. J. van Wijk. Supporting the analytical reasoning process in information visualization. In CHI ’08: Proceeding of the
twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages 1237–1246, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.

