Configurable Spaces:
Temporal Analysis in Diagrammatic Contexts
Thomas Kapler

Ryan Eccles

Robert Harper

William Wright

tkapler@oculusinfo.com

reccles@oculusinfo.com

rharper@oculusinfo.com

wwright@oculusinfo.com

Oculus Info Inc.
ABSTRACT
Social network graphs, concept maps, and process charts are
examples of diagrammatic representations employed by
intelligence analysts to understand complex systems.
Unfortunately, these 2D representations currently do not easily
convey the flow, sequence, tempo and other important dynamic
behaviors within these systems. In this paper we present
Configurable Spaces, a novel analytical method for visualizing
patterns of activity over time in complex diagrammaticallyrepresented systems. Configurable Spaces extends GeoTime’s X,
Y, T coordinate workspace space for temporal analysis to any
arbitrary diagrammatic work space by replacing a geographic map
with a diagram.
This paper traces progress from concept to prototype, and
discusses how diagrams can be created, transformed and
leveraged for analysis, including generating diagrams from
knowledge bases, visualizing temporal concept maps, and the use
of linked diagrams for exploring complex, multi-dimensional,
sequences of events.
An evaluation of the prototype by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology showed intelligence analysts believed
they were able to attain an increased level of insight, were able to
explore data more efficiently, and that Configurable Spaces would
help them work faster.
CR Categories:
H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human
Information Processing – Visual Analytics; H.5.2 [Information
Interfaces & Presentations]: User Interfaces – Graphical User
Interfaces (GUI)
Keywords: human information interaction, visual analytics, graph
visualization, geo-temporal analysis, concept maps
1

evidence to help understand underlying temporal dynamics.
For example, while a static social network diagram may
summarize the connections between people in an organization, it
fails to visually express the rich temporal sequences of
interactions that enable an analyst to understand the evolution of
the network, along with the flow of information within the
network.
In this paper we present Configurable Spaces, a visual analytic
method for temporal analysis of evidence within diagrammatic
contexts such as processes and social networks. Configurable
Spaces is built on a modified version of the GeoTime geotemporal visualization software. Temporal analysis of events in
diagrammatic contexts is accomplished by replacing the
geographic spatial dimension of GeoTime with a diagrammatic
coordinate system.
In addition, we have explored new ways to create and use
diagrams in analysis. For example, diagrams may be generated
automatically by transforming information in the GeoTime event
knowledge base. Diagrams may also be directly created by the
analyst to represent hypotheses and then attached to event data.
Multiple diagrams, of multiple perspectives, may then be used as
linked views to control and filter a temporal view of events.
The end result is a prototype of a temporally-enabled
diagrammatic workspace for intelligence analysis. In coordination
with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
this prototype was evaluated with intelligence analysts.
1.1
GeoTime Unified Geo-Temporal Analysis
Configurable Spaces is built on the GeoTime time-space
concept and visualization framework which is designed to
improve the perception and understanding of entity movement
patterns, events, relationships, and interactions over time within a
geospatial context [14].

INTRODUCTION

The process of intelligence analysis requires building
understanding based on a body of evidence. As an analyst
examines data from a multitude of perspectives, they gather
evidence to support or refute hypotheses. Visualizations of
collected evidence are created to support exploration and
explanation of these perspectives; organization charts or process
diagrams provide an intuitive snapshot of a situation, based on
available evidence. In reality however, organizations or processes
are rarely static – they change over time; or our understanding of
them changes as additional information is gathered or vetted for
accuracy. In this context, these snapshot views are limited because
they only show an aggregation of collected evidence. They do not
show a continuous time range or provide visibility of raw
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 1: GeoTime system for analysis of events and transactions in time
and space. Time is in the vertical dimension.

43

Events are represented within an X, Y, T coordinate space, in
which the X and Y plane represents geographic space, and the Z
axis represents time. This method allows activity to be seen across
a range of time in a single view.
A slider control allows animated navigation through time. A
previous evaluation of GeoTime found that this unified geotemporal representation increased analysts’ understanding of
behaviors and relationships [14]. GeoTime has transitioned to
being a commercial product and is deployed and used by
intelligence analysts.
2

COGNITIVE TASK ANALYSIS

Prior to the Configurable Spaces investigations, a brief
cognitive task analysis (CTA) study was completed including
structured interviews with fourteen analysts and examination of
work location artifacts. This study yielded examples of how
analysts think and work through problems. In the following
illustrative interview excerpts, “process” and network diagrams
and their application to analysis is described:
• “I use link analysis to establish patterns in communication
and travel. Entities may be together, then split apart and
then get back together. There is a lot of change.”
• “I’m always redrawing link diagrams with new hypotheses
and new data.”
• “Programs are very organized, multi-dimensional
processes or structures with flows. They are large,
complex processes that take place over a significant time.”
• “I use a diagram to describe a process and organize my
thoughts and observations by the process steps in the
diagram.
• “Within a social network or process, you determine what
is critical. You look for clusters and density. This helps
you think of changes in the process.”
• “You can compare processes. See where matches occur or
not. Partial matches point to things for which to look.
Processes can be compared over time e.g. quarter to
quarter to see changes.”
• “It would be good to have a large digital map, and then be
able to draw on it, and annotate it. I’d use date time on the
drawing so I could filter by date time.”
• “You can show one type of information or the other but
not both. Difficult to display a node with all its’
characteristics. Icons are useful but you can not display
details. Current tools can’t hold as much data as I have.”

RELATED WORK

A wide variety of tools and techniques currently exist for
analyzing various dimensions of intelligence related data in a
graphical way. The following tools excel at displaying specific
dimensions of a problem space.
For example, Geographic Information System (GIS) tools, such
as ESRI ArcView [10] and Microsoft MapPoint [15] display the
spatial properties or distributions of data.
Other systems, such as LifeLines [22] and Microsoft Project
[17], visualize events over time in a graphical schedule. LifeLines
provides overview, zooming, filtering, and detail on demand to
unveil relationships between events. Microsoft Project, allows you
to track, analyze and control project work, schedules, and finances
through the use of interactive charts.
Diagrammatic representation is a rich area for research and
discussion, from physiological principles to the use of diagrams
for mathematical proofs and argumentation [12]. Analysis tools,
such as NetMap [19], Analyst’s Notebook [1], CrimeLink [7] and
Visual Links [26], display evidence as networks, and provide
tools to import data tables and generate visualizations. These tools
help to organize fragments of evidence in support of sense
making, however, they tend to be limited in their capacity to
represent the many dimensions of the evidence over time.
Much research has been done in the area of visualizing change
in graphs and social networks, such as PARC’s animating Time
Trees [4] and [9]. Visualization techniques are limited to the use
of animation or temporal snapshots [11] or displaying connected
sub-aggregations of a graph over time [3]. These last examples
express time by showing multiple time buckets side-by-side
(small multiples) or in sequence (animation). Chen [6] has also
produced examples of how trends in relationships can be
represented with graphs. In some cases, the symbology of the
nodes or links is altered to show age of activity, however they
cannot visualize a continuous temporal picture of activity.
Other tools such as Tom Sawyer [24] provide layout algorithms
for 2D node-link diagrams. Some work has been done on three
dimensional graphs [25] and hierarchical three dimensional
graphs [21]. These displays do not provide a way to express
continuous temporal activity.
A common tool used by analysts for creating and presenting
diagrammatic information is Microsoft PowerPoint [16]. It
provides the means to rapidly draw any diagram from scratch, but
is not data driven, nor does it provide any analytical functions.
Concept maps support the diagramming of ideas and arguments
[20]. Mind map software, such as MindManager [18] or nSpace
[23] provide tools to create concept maps that are useful in
analysis.
Many examples of “linked” visualization methods exist [2] [8]
[27] that use multiple charts to enable analysis across several
categorical or continuous dimensions. Our work uses this
technique to connect secondary diagrammatic views to the main
temporal workspace.

44

3

A recently completed ethnographic study of the intelligence
community [13] made similar observations during structured
interviews:
• “I have a model of the situation in my head. Whenever
something new comes in, I see if it fits with the model. If
it does, I add it to the model; if it doesn’t, I try to figure
out why.”
• “I’m looking for links and patterns. Once I figure out the
pattern, I can figure out where to look next.”
In analysis, a process description or network diagram provides
a context and a logical framework for reasoning about a subject. It
can help explain observations and suggest how elements in the
process can be influenced. A diagram provides a template against
which to compare evidence, and show where further investigation
is required.
Analysts have also indicated a need to visualize problems from
multiple perspectives at the same time and enable connections to
be made across them. The PMESII dimensions (Political,
Military, Economic, Social, Infrastructure, and Information) are
an example of a set of perspectives to be considered together
during analysis and decision making. Each of these can be
represented as a diagrammatic or geospatial visualization.
4

APPROACH

The objective of Configurable Spaces is to enable temporal
analysis within familiar diagrammatic contexts used in analysis.
The approach was to modify GeoTime’s existing X,Y,T
coordinate view of events by replacing the ground plane map with

a diagrammatic representation (Figure 2). Our assumption was
that this would provide the same ability to see behaviors, tempo,
movements and relationships that GeoTime provides in geospatial
contexts, but in new problem domains. One would expect to see
for example, how a social network evolves by observing
interactions between its members over time, follow the
restructuring of an organization, or see the history of the flow of a
process.
Chen [5] describes the difference between micro and macro
perspectives in sense-making: “macroscopic view refers to a
representation of global and system-wide patterns, …microscopic
refers to a local and detailed view of an individual component or
part of an underlying phenomenon.” In this sense, our efforts are
clearly in the microscopic range. In our experience, significant
analytical effort is required at a micro scale when constructing
arguments and reports for intelligence problems. This involves
comprehending details about fragments of evidence collected over
time.

This essentially de-emphasized the spatial aspects of the data,
allowing locations to be organized by the activities that occur
there, making it possible to group related events together (Fig 3)
A temporal diagram was also created during the 2006 IEEE
VAST [23] contest using an early Configurable Spaces extension
to GeoTime and contributed to the submissions’s first place
showing. The view in Figure 4 was created by repurposing
location usage to create a diagram. However in this case, there
was no geospatial information to begin with. Phone call event
data was imported with unique location values associated with the
source or recipient of the call. The analyst then simply arranged
these “nodes” using the mouse to create diagrams of the
organizations to which they belonged. GeoTime ink sketching
tools were used to help de-mark and label the diagrams.

Figure 2: Illustration of a process in an X, Y, T coordinate space.
Instances of process events are shown above the labeled process diagram.
Time is in the vertical dimension. Repetition of some steps is visible. A
persons involvement throughout the process is shown as a trail in red.

Figure 4: Analysis of phone calls in the 2006 VAST fictitious contest
scenario reveals the sequence of communications, financial transactions,
and other relationships, including interactions that cross boundaries
between commercial, government and personal realms.

Figure 3: A temporal view of the authors’ travel and calls over 8 months,
arranged geospatially (left) and by theme (right)

4.1
Initial Explorations
Initial explorations focused on creating temporally-enabled
diagrams by rearranging existing spatially-defined datasets
according to different criteria. Data sets containing movement and
transaction data were rearranged to reflect user preference or
priority to provide a view that was de-cluttered and expressive of
different aspects of the data.

4.2
Sources of Diagrams
After these initial exercises, the focus turned to address how to
obtain, generate or import diagrams and associated events into
GeoTime without analyst effort. Specifically our goal was to
display a process in time by displaying the steps of a process as
locations and the flow of events through it using transaction
events in time, as in figure 5. Considerable effort was put into
finding sources of process data that included a diagrammatic
representation and captured event data that might be relevant to
analysts. Eventually, artificial test data sets were built to better
understand what would be required to support the intended
display. We eventually realized that the required data was unlikely
to be found in a typical analyst’s environment. In fact, it began to
seem that only a carefully configured and highly instrumented
process could provide both a structured diagrammatic view and an
event stream that could be linked to it. An RFID tracking system,
or a manufacturing process might be able to provide this level of
data richness.
Instead, discussions with analysts reinforced that in the
intelligence domain, it is more typical that the processes in
question are abstract or incomplete, and that they do not have data
that can be programmatically correlated to a reference diagram. In
other words, intelligence data is messy. What analysts need is a
system to help them discover, develop and track complex
processes based on incomplete evidence, not a system to help
monitor a highly instrumented process. Our focus evolved to
supporting two different sources of diagrammatic representations;

45

Generated Diagrams in which existing spatial or non-spatial
data is computationally transformed and laid out to express
analytically valuable properties.
User-driven diagrams which the analyst creates to model
dimensions of an existing spatial or non-spatial dataset.
4.3
Generated Diagrams
A social network graph is an example of a diagram that is
generated algorithmically from a table of to-from event records
and a layout algorithm. In the resulting diagram, nodes represent
people, and edges represent relationships. A GeoTime knowledge
base contains many similar types of relationships that are used to
generate a graph. A diagram layout and display system was
integrated into the prototype to provide the ability to
programmatically generate node-link diagrams based on data in
GeoTime. The intent was to use this to form the base diagram
over which events are arranged in time. In fact, these diagrams
also proved to be useful as linked analytical perspectives.
Diagrams are generated by transforming the GeoTime internal
knowledge representation. A GeoTime database consists of data
objects representing;
Locations: an x, y coordinate or location name
Entities: tracked objects or people involved in events (also
known as “Targets”)
Events: a generic occurrence at a certain time or span of time,
connected to a single location.

knowledge base pulls out relationships between the objects
selected in the first pass, and instantiates them as edges between
nodes. The resulting nodes and edges are then passed into the
diagram engine and an 2D graph window is created.
The content that is extracted during these processes can be
controlled and filtered. For example, in the phone call example
above (figure 5), the first pass extracts the entities (“Tom” and
“Bob”). The second pass creates a single edge where a
communication event structure (“Dial event”, “Connect Event”,
and Pickup event”) connects the entities (figure 5(b)). This results
in a diagram shown in figure 5(c). The native GeoTime renderer
goes through a similar process to convert its knowledge base to
render events in the geo-temporal viewer, as in figure 5(a).
The diagram engine provides UI affordances to filter out certain
types of objects (entities or locations) and event types (financial
transactions, communications, relationships). It also allows the
user to generate diagrams for any subset of events. Thus a high
degree of flexibility is possible. For example, in a suitably
complete data set, an analyst can create diagrams of financial
transactions, phone calls or organizational relationships by
adjusting the filter settings, and then apply this to any subset or
time range of data.
Alternatively, a very detailed diagram can be created that
includes every element and association in the knowledge base.
Such a diagram is able to reveal relationships in the data that may
otherwise be difficult to detect. The example, Figure 6 shows a
diagram based on the GeoTime knowledge base of a complex
analytic training scenario. Locations, events and entities are
represented as blue circles, triangles, and pink diamonds
respectively, and edges represent associations. The space-time
view of this dataset is quite complex and challenging to interpret,
however when this dataset is processed into a graph via the
diagram engine, a clearer organizational picture results. The force
directed layout arranges objects in proximity to each other based
on how closely they are associated, resulting in a surprising sideeffect; the graph layout of the scenario knowledge base reveals
regions that strongly correspond to important plots in the scenario.

Figure 5: Schematic representation of (a) phone call in GeoTime, (b)
knowledge representation diagram equivalent, and (c) entities-only
generated view.

These objects are linked together to form semantic structures
such as phone calls, relationships or transactions. For example, if
Bob phones Tom, the resulting set of data objects and associations
in the database are shown in figure 5(b). This structure forms the
root graph from which new diagrammatic perspectives can be
automatically generated.
4.3.1
Diagram Generation Engine
The configurable diagram engine is predicated on the principle
that relationships between elements in a knowledge base can be
transformed into diagrams in various ways. The diagram engine
rearranges the GeoTime knowledge graph into diagrams by
filtering and aggregating the objects and their relationships. For
example, the phone call represented in figure 5 is composed of a
number of concepts that are linked together through associations.
Figure 5(b) is a representation of the actual data objects stored in
the internal data representation of GeoTime for a phone call. The
diagram engine first parses through the list of objects in the
knowledge base to generate a list of graph nodes, and assigns
simple symbology and labeling. Another pass through the

46

Figure 6: A graph of the GeoTime knowledge base reveals plots in this
complex scenario. Plot outlines and labels added by the authors.

This occurs because the people, locations and events within
plots are interconnected, thus they form clusters within the forcedirected diagram. These plot clusters are then naturally arranged
around the larger plot coordinators and meeting locations. The
resulting structure is similar to what might be seen in a social
network graph between several tightly connected groups nodes.
Seeing plots in this way is possible because the graph contains a

richer set of objects (locations and events, in addition to just
people) and relationships (calls, financial transactions etc).
The original author of this scenario remarked that this diagram
revealed the critical aspects of the problem, including his attempts
to confuse and add noise. Plots and incidents inserted to distract
readers were rendered as separate networks disconnected from the
graph in figure 6, and are not shown here.
4.4
User Driven Diagrams as Organizing Devices
We have described generated diagrams that are representations
of relationships internal to a given data set; that is, they are
extracted from within the data itself. Another important class of
diagrams are representations that we will describe as external to
the data. These diagrams describe hypotheses or knowledge that is
not intrinsic in the data. For example, an analyst may wish to
hypothesize a high-level process to explain an observed activity
by sketching it out. Further, it may be beneficial to be able to
associate observational data (evidence) with elements of the
diagram in order to quickly access or validate that hypothesis.
The Configurable Spaces prototype incorporates tools for
interactively creating node-link diagrams from scratch to support
this type of workflow. For example, an analyst may choose to
create a diagrammatic view of a specific organizational hierarchy
as in Figure 7(f). The affordance for creating diagrams is
straightforward; a new diagram window is opened and the analyst
draws and arranges boxes and links directly in the window. A
property of these diagrams is that the nodes are buckets into
which Locations, Events and Entities can be dragged-and-dropped
from the geo-temporal view. In a sense, the nodes act like folders
for organizing information, and the diagram in which they reside
becomes a secondary visualization of relationships that the user
imposes on the data - a flexible, visual organizing device, like a
“mind map” that is tightly linked to geo-temporal and
diagrammatic evidence. Linked interactions (described later)

allow the user to click on these nodes to highlight evidence in all
the other views.
5

TEMPORAL ANALYSIS OF DIAGRAMS

The previous sections discussed ways in which non-temporal
diagrams can be generated and utilized as supporting views to
assist in geo-temporal analysis. The following section describes
how these diagrams are leveraged to show temporal activity
within processes, concept maps, and network activity.
Temporal analysis of diagrams in Configurable Spaces is
achieved by overlaying event data in time above an image
generated by the Diagram Engine (section 4.3). Several steps are
required to accomplish this. First, a 2D image of the diagram is
created, scaled and applied as a map on the ground plane in
GeoTime. Then a temporary GeoTime knowledge base of events,
entities and locations is generated based on data created for the
diagram, and then overlaid above the diagram image. (Note that
this data is now two-steps removed from the original source data;
references back to the original source data are passed down during
each transformation so that linked selection back to the source
data can occur.) Finally, the time-space view is updated with the
newly generated diagram map image and its corresponding
events. The resulting view is a temporal presentation of events in
a diagrammatic context (see Figure 8).
All of the interactive analytic capabilities of GeoTime,
including temporal and spatial navigation, charting tools, and link
analysis can be applied to this view. Typically analysts begin
reviewing data in GeoTime by looking at the overall distribution
in time and space, and then drilldown through time and space to
find points of interest. Then they filter the view to examine
individual tracks and relationships in detail. This same workflow
is possible in a temporally-enabled diagram. For example, focus
can be adjusted to “zoom-in” on certain parts of the network and
certain time ranges or hours of the day. Interactions, such as
phone calls and other transactions can be played as an animation,
Figure
7:
Application

Configurable

Spaces

(a) Geo-temporal view of events.
Selected objects are pink
(b) The Diagram tab with tools for
creating, editing and saving multiple
diagrams
(c) A generated knowledge base
diagram showing entities (diamonds),
events (triangles) and locations (circles)
(d) A generated diagram of relationship
between entities (i.e. social network).
Selected objects have resize handles.
(e) “Thematic Filter” dialog for
creating new diagrams. It provides
filters for choosing subsets and data
types.
(f) A user-driven concept diagram
created by the user. Selected nodes are
highlighted pink.
(g) Property box for concept diagram
nodes. Text can be added and data from
other views can be attached by drag
and drop.

47

and charts can be used to filter certain entities or types of events.
A single entities’ activity over time can be singled out and the
chain analysis tool used to display only those events and entities
with which they interact.

Temporal analysis of events in a GeoTime diagrammatic
context can reveal important behaviors. In the case of a social
network diagram or process diagram, the analyst is able to explore
the dynamics of a system by visualizing the sequence of
individual transactions. Hubs of activity, bottlenecks, recurring
events, changes in tempo, outliers, sequence and direction of
interaction, direction of flow of information, response time, gaps,
response to stimuli and many other patterns can be discerned
within a temporal view of events within diagrams. Figure 9 shows
the GeoTime’s chain analysis tool being used in a temporal
diagram to show the sequence of interactions for a single
character in a fictional scenario over time. (The link analysis tool
allows one to display nodes within an adjustable distance from an
object of interest.) Configurable Spaces can scale to support
detailed temporal analysis of diagrams on the order of tens of
thousands of individual events.
6

Figure 8: Temporal view of activity in a computer network in GeoTime.
Note the summary network image on the groundplane, with constituent
network activity as events above in the Z-axis.

Early interviews and reviews with analysts indicated a need to
visualize problems from many perspectives at the same time. To
address this, the diagram workspace was built to support multiple
diagrammatic views simultaneously. Each diagram can be created
and used independently, and linked selection across all diagrams,
views and charts is provided. Selecting entity or event objects in
one view also highlights those same objects in the other views.
These diagrams are displayed within a scrolling window, or as
separate, resizable windows as illustrated in Figure 7.
This multi-diagram capacity allows an analyst to see and
connect across several dimensions and views of an intelligence
problem space. For example, selecting a step in a user generated
process diagram in one window may show that this activity occurs
at particular times of the day in a linked time-space view, and that
it coincides with communications between key people within an
organizational graph.
7

Figure 9: Interaction events between characters in Romeo and Juliet over
time, filtered to only show those connected to the Nurse.

In a temporal diagram, the diagram on the ground-plane is
static. Early on we considered building a capability to update the
base diagram layout to reflect intermediate states of the diagram
as filter conditions and time ranges are adjusted by the user. This
approach was rejected for two reasons. One, it would require an
expensive (i.e. slow) recalculation of the diagram layout on each
change, and two, we believe it would cause cognitive confusion to
significantly change the consistent spatial layout of the diagram
context. In informal tests, it was desirable to have the full data
context in view as a substrate over which to display and interpret
the details of activity over time.
A full investigation of how to display intermediate diagram
states was deferred, but would likely be added as a user option or
as an additional 3rd view. Note that in Configurable Spaces, it is
still possible to generate intermediate network states for any time
range or subset of data by applying the Diagram Engine only to a
selected portion of the data.

48

MULTIPLE CONCURRENT DIAGRAMS

LINKED INTERACTIONS FOR ANALYSIS

Linked interaction between information views is a common
visual analysis technique [27]. In Configurable Spaces, linked
interactions between the geo-temporal view, generated diagrams,
user-driven diagrams and temporally-enabled diagrams are made
possible by maintaining references back to the original knowledge
base through each transformation. When an event, location or
entity is selected in any view, it becomes highlighted everywhere
it is referenced. This allows potentially valuable analytical
connections to be made across high-level views. For example, in a
generated network diagram showing hi-level relationships
between entities, clicking an edge between nodes will highlight
where and when all the transactions between any two nodes
actually occurred in a linked geo-temporal view. Or conversely,
entities selected in close proximity in the geo-temporal view could
be highlighted in a concept map of an organization. Figure 7
shows linked selection and highlighting across several diagrams
and the geo-temporal view.
In addition, a rapid linked-navigation mode was implemented
to enable exploration of the geo-temporal view using a diagram.
In this mode, when a diagram node is clicked, all the data
referenced by, and immediately connected to that node become
the focus in the geo-temporal view. This is envisioned as an
extremely fast way to explore new datasets across many
dimensions at once. This exploratory activity could be further
supported by automatically generating pre-filtered diagrams when
new data is loaded. Built-in GeoTime charts provide a similar
linked-view capability.

8

TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE

The Configurable Spaces prototype is written in Java and
integrated with GeoTime via a dynamic Plug-in system. A
commercial graph display and layout toolkit, yWorks [28], is
utilized to generate 2D diagram views based on transformed
GeoTime knowledge base objects (locations, events, entities and
Associations). This also allows a variety of industry standard
diagrams and networks to be imported to provide the
diagrammatic context for Configurable Spaces.
To generate thematic diagrams, the model transformer handles
the knowledge graph trimming to generate diagrams and also
performs subsequent translation of diagrams into the GeoTime
temporal-diagram view. Within the diagram system, multiple
views can exist simultaneously in different windows. The
interaction manager tracks context between all the components to
support linked selection, navigation and drag-&-drop associations.

Figure 10: Configurable Spaces technical architecture

9

EVALUATION AND FEEDBACK

In coordination with the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), we conducted a formative evaluation of the
Configurable Spaces prototype software. The main purpose was to
capture comments and metrics about the usability and potential
utility of Configurable Spaces to enhance the analysis of geotemporal events over time. The results would then be fed back
into the design and development of the system. Our hypothesis
was that Configurable Spaces would improve efficiency and
effectiveness of analysis when exploring communications and
transactions between networks of moving entities. Quantitative
metrics of benefit were based on interviews and a questionnaire,
and no baseline tool was used as a reference to compare analytic
utility.
9.1
Task and Dataset
We developed a set of simple analytic test scenarios. These
scenarios were developed to engage the analysts in a challenging
problem to exercise the features of the prototype. The scenarios
consisted of 25 entities constantly moving within a geospatial
region over the course of a few days. Each dataset consisted of
300-400 events, including a total of 40 financial transactions,
phone calls and known relationships between the entities.
Analysts were asked to identify the key players, networks, and
characterize their behaviors.
Three analysts participated in the evaluation. Each analyst rated
their own experience: one was an expert with more than 20 years
in intelligence analysis, one was intermediate with less than 5
years, and one was a novice. All three rated their computer
expertise as “medium”, and none had previously used GeoTime.
9.2
Procedure
The evaluation spanned two days. The first day consisted of
training and instruction on both GeoTime and the Configurable

Spaces prototype, including interactive sessions and exercises
which encouraged analysts to openly explore features of the
application. Analysts were trained to generate and manipulate
automatic and user-defined diagrams, and to view diagrams in the
temporal display. On the second day, the analysts completed the
analytic scenarios using the software, and developed a short report
in the allotted time. Three expert observers from NIST were
present throughout the process. After the evaluation, subjects
completed a questionnaire to collect information about
demographics and experience. Then, short interviews were
conducted to encourage analysts to elaborate on their responses.
Some performance measures were based on logged data,
including navigation actions (such as pan and zoom), and task
completion times. Self-reported measures were collected in the
questionnaire.
9.3
Results
Most of the feedback generated by the evaluation was directed
towards the usability design of the interface and the system
behaviors. Analysts also provided valuable feedback about
functionality they felt was missing, such as control over labeling
and display in the diagrams, the inability to add annotations to
views during analysis, and a lack of report authoring tools. Aside
from some expected minor usability glitches and bugs, software
logging indicates that analysts were able to successfully use the
range of features supported by the prototype.
In terms of workflow, analysts generated diagrams of
interactions between entities; essentially sub-graphs of
interactions between people. They would then view these as
temporal diagrams to show the sequence of interactions over time.
Results from the questionnaire show that analysts were able to
successfully identify key entities and which networks entities
belonged to. The scenarios and questions were not sophisticated
enough to deeply test the analytic potential of seeing larger
behaviors and patterns in networks over time. From our
perspective, the most important products of the evaluations were
the analysts comments about how they felt the tools could help
them based on their analytic experience. Analyst comments and
survey results from the NIST report indicate that analysts felt the
system did enable them to attain an increased level of insight. On
a 5 point dual-ended scale of strongly disagree (1) to strongly
agree (5), subject said that Configurable Spaces “helps them to
explore data more quickly” (average rating 3.7/5), and “elucidate
relationships between entities more quickly than with their current
tools” (average rating 3.7/5). Additional observations from the
NIST report executive summary state:
•
•
•
•
•

“Analysts stated that Configurable Spaces empowered them to
identify major players quickly.”
“Observers noted that Configurable Spaces empowered analysts to
quickly uncover the fact that there were two networks.
Analysts stated that Configurable Spaces will help them to work
more quickly.”
“Analysts stated that Configurable Spaces empowered them to see
entities in meaningful clusters to support analytical thinking easily
and quickly.”
“Analysts all felt that, when it is fully operational, the Configurable
Spaces functionality will be of great value to them.”

Analysts noted that linked views were helpful for tying events
together from different contexts, and selecting objects of interest
in the geo-temporal view;
•

•

“It showed the underlying infrastructure to the networks which
were not apparent in GeoTime. …I liked the way it could be used
as a selection tool for GeoTime data.”
“It gives you a total operational picture of what they’re doing…
You can prioritize targets – ID most active players and anticipate
movements”.

49

This last comment summarizes the objective of this research.
Although the results of the evaluation are not compellingly
conclusive in terms of measured benefit, such a comment suggests
that analysts see significant value in combined spatial, temporal
and diagrammatic approaches in their analyses.

[4]

[5]
[6]

10

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The work described here has explored and prototyped methods
for generating, applying, and combining different types of
diagrams to support analysis of complex, multi-dimensional sets
of events. An innovative visualization method has been developed
for temporal analysis of events over diagrammatic contexts. It is
flexible and many different types of diagram and network views
can be created. A prototype workflow has also been established
that supports multiple concurrent, linked diagrammatic
perspectives of a situation, so that analysts can simultaneously see
and work with processes, organizations, networks, geo-temporal
and other dimensions of a problem at the same time.
It is important to note that the linked multi-perspective
workspace of Configurable Spaces is made possible because of
the existence of the ontological and semantic relationships
between the elements in its knowledge base (i.e. locations, entities
and events). GeoTime provides a sophisticated data import system
which generates the transformable knowledge graph structures
necessary to support the range of visualization and interaction
possibilities described in this paper. The trade-off for this
additional flexibility is, to some extent, scalability. Contrast this
with common GIS and network graphing packages that aggregate
events to create high-level, low-dimensional graphs or maps of
large data sets. These may provide nice summary pictures, but the
analyst is often left searching for alternative ways to form a clear
picture of a thread of events.
Formative evaluations performed at NIST show that analysts
found Configurable Spaces could help to accomplish analysis
tasks more efficiently, and with more insight. Additional work is
required to test temporally enabled diagrams and multiperspective workspaces under real conditions in collaboration
with analysts. We would like to see analysts build and use
Configurable Spaces against temporally-active scenarios that
include fused data about organizations, processes and social
networks. Ultimately, better data quality and representation is
required to support such diagrammatically-rich, high-dimensional
event analysis in time. Fusion across data sources into a common
knowledge representation seems necessary to support potent new
capabilities.
11

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This study was supported and monitored by the National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) under Contract Number
HM1582-05-C-0022.
The views, opinions, and findings
contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should not
be construed as an official Department of Defense position,
policy, or decision, unless so designated by other official
documentation. The authors wish to thank IARPA, NIST, NGA
and all IARPA, NIST and NGA staff for their support and
encouragement.

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

50

Analyst’s Notebook. Retrieved February 19, 2007, from
http://www.visualanalysis.com/products/anb.php
Becker, R., Cleveland, W. and Wilks, A., Dynamic Graphics For
Data Analysis, Statistical Science, pg 355-395, 1987.
U. Brandes, S. R. Corman, Visual Unrolling of a Network Evolution
and the Analysis of Dynamic Discourse, Information Visualization
Journal, Palgrave Macmillan, 2003

[28]

S.K. Card, Bongwon Suh, B. A. Pendleton, J. Heer, J. W. Bodnar,
“Time Tree: Exploring Time Changing Hierarchies”, IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science & Technology, 2006, 3-10
Chen, C., Holistic sense making: Conflicting opinions, creative
ideas, and collective intelligence. Library Hi Tech, 25(3), 2007
C Chen, Il-Yeol Song, W. Zhu. Trends in conceptual modeling:
Citation analysis of the ER conference papers Proc. of ISSI, Madrid,
2007. 189-200.
CrimeLink.
Retrieved
February
19,
2007,
from
http://www.crimelink.com/
Eick, S. and G. Wills, High Interaction Graphics, European Journal
of Operational Research, 81:445-459, 1995.
C. Erten, P. J. Harding, S. G. Kobourov, K. Wampler, G. Yee,
Exploring the Computing Literature Using Temporal Graph
Visualization, Department of Computer Science University of
Arizona
ESRI ArcView. Retrieved February 19, 2007, from
http://www.esri.com/software/arcview/
P. A. Gloor, Yan Zhao, TeCFlow – A Temporal Communication
Flow Visualizer for Social Network Analysis, ACM CSCW
Conference, Chicago, Nov, 2004
Jamnik, M., Automated Diagrammatic Proofs of Arithmetic
Arguments, PhD, University of Edinburgh, 1999
Johnston, R., Analytic Culture in the U.S. Intelligence Community,
Center for the Study of Intelligence, Government Printing Office,
Pittsburgh, PA.
Kapler, T. and W. Wright, GeoTime Information Visualization,
Information Visualization Journal, Palgrave Macmillan, 4,(2),
Summer 2005, 136-146.
Microsoft MapPoint. Retrieved February 19, 2007, from
http://www.microsoft.com/mappoint/
Microsoft PowerPoint. Retrieved February 19, 2007, from
http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/powerpoint
Microsoft Project. Retrieved February 19, 2007, from
http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/project/
Mind Manager. Retrieved March 31, 2008 from www.mindjet.com
NetMap Analytics. Retrieved February 19, 2007, from
http://www.netmapanalytics.com/
Novak, J.D., Learning, Creating, and Using Knowledge: Concept
Maps as Facilitative Tools in Schools and Corporations, Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, (Mahwah), 1998.
Parker, G. G. Franck and C. Ware, Visualization of Large Nested
Graphs in 3D: Navigation and Interaction, Journal of Visual Lang.
Comput. 9(3), 1998.
Plaisant, C., Milash, B., Rose, A., Widoff, S., Shneiderman, B.,
LifeLines: Visualizing Personal Histories. in Proc. of CHI 96, ACM,
New York.
P. Proulx, L. Chien, R. Harper, D. Schroh, T. Kapler, D. Jonker and
W. Wright, “nSpace and GeoTime: A VAST 2006 Case Study”,
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, Sept/Oct 2007, 46-55
Tom Sawyer. Retrieved March 21, 2007, from www.tomsawyer.com
F. Van Ham, H. van de Wetering, J. van Wijk, Visualization of State
Transition Graphs, IEEE Information Visualization Conference,
2001, 59-66
Visual
Links.
Retrieved
February
19,
2007,
from
http://www.visualanalytics.com/
Wang Baldonado, M. Q., Woodruff, A., and Kuchinsky, A.,
Guidelines for Using Multiple Views in Information Visualization,
in Proc. Of CHI 98, ACM, Italy, 110-119.
yWorks. Retrieved March 21, 2007 from www.yworks.com

