A 3D Treemap Approach for Analyzing the
Classificatory Distribution in Patent Portfolios
Mark Giereth

Harald Bosch

Thomas Ertl

Visualization and Interactive Systems Institute (VIS), University of Stuttgart, Germany

ABSTRACT
Due to the complexity of the patent domain and the huge amount
of data, advanced interactive visual techniques are needed to
support the analysis of large patent collections and portfolios. In
this paper we present a new approach for visualizing the
classificatory distribution of patent collections among the
International Patent Classification (IPC) - today's most important
internationally agreed patent classification system with about
70.000 categories. Our approach is based on an interactive threedimensional treemap overlaid with adjacency edge bundles.

Keywords: Patent Co-Classification Analysis, 3D-Treemaps,
3D Edge-Bundling
1

INTRODUCTION

Patent classification systems intellectually organize the huge
number of patents into pre-defined technology classes. Patent
classification is based on the outcomes of investments of the
patent offices. Due to the diversity of today's technological fields,
a patent may be classified with several classes. Technology
classes could therefore be an appropriate unit of co-classification
analysis to show linkages between technical fields.
The aim of our approach is to improve analysis of large patent
collections and portfolios by visualizing their classificatory
distributions amongst the International Patent Classification (IPC)
[1 ], today's most important internationally agreed patent
classification system with more then 70.000 categories. The
original purpose of the IPC was to be an effective search tool for
the retrieval of patent documents [2].
But the IPC also became an important source for investigating
the state of the art in given fields of technology and the
assessment of technological development in these fields. The IPC
further serves as taxonomy when comparing the patent portfolios
of different applicants. This latter aspect is the focus of this poster.

100
~

IPCCode

Figure 1.IPC code structure

We refer to elements of the TPC independently of their hierarchy
level as categories to distinguish from classes as 2nd level
elements. Each IPC category has a code, a label, and further
attributes, such as version, 'see-also'-references to other
categories, or associated keywords.

2.1
Co-Classification
A patent can be classified with more then one TPC category. There
are two basic types of classification: a) ,classified as inventioninformation and b) classified as additional-information.
The classification begins at main group level. Top-level
categories are never classified directly. This is the reason why we
need a mechanism that allows top-level categories to 'inherit'
from deeper categories by summing up their patents. As a further
requirement it should be possible to compare the IP portfolio of
two or more applicants. As a consequence, each category has as
two associated patent sets for each applicant: directly classified
patents and inherited ones.
Figure 2 shows a simple co-classification example, where a
patent (EP0095852A 1) is classified as G 11 B7/08, G 11 B7/085 and
GIl B7/09. This results in the three co-classification relations
between these categories.

_ _ II

2

IPC STRUCTURE

The IPC is divided into a core and an advanced level. The core
level is intended for general information purposes and for smaller,
national patent collections, whereas the advanced level is intended
for searching larger, international patent collections. The more
detailed subdivisions of the advanced level are compatible with
the core level.
The IPC is hierarchically organized into currently 8 sections,
129 classes, 633/639 subclasses (core/advanced), 7,066/7,315
main-groups (core/advanced), and 10,047/61,403 subgroups (core/
advanced).
{gierethlboschlertl }@vis.uni-stuttgart.de

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

...... Co-Classification Relation
•••••••• Classified-as Relation

Figure 2.Example for patent co-classification

3

VISUALIZATION METHOD

To visualize the classificatory distribution of one or more patent
portfolios, we generated an interactive 3D treemap, in which the
third dimension represents the number of patents associated with a
category. In contrast to other approaches [3,4] we synchronized a
2D and 3D treemap layout, where the 2D layout is used for
generating the textures for the 3D items. This approach is briefly
described in the following section.

189

3.1

3D Treemaps with 2D Textures

+

3.3
3D Edge Bundling
The co-classification relations are visualized as 3D edge bundles,
which use the hierarchic edge bundling algorithm presented in [6]
in an extended version for 3D. The direct implementation of the
bundling algorithm has the consequence that the resulting bundles
go through the category cubes. Therefore they are rendered
transparently. Tn figure 5 the co-classification relations of a single
patent set are shown, where the right upper category has been
selected. The selected edge bundles are shown in red, the others in
blue.

Figure 3.Composition of 3D treemap with 2D treemap textures

The 3D treemap visualization is based on the ordered treemap
algorithm described in [5], which creates a sorted 2D layout for
patents associated with each
the IPC hierarchy. The number of
rd
category is then mapped to the 3 dimension forming 'category
cubes'. To allow a more efficient rendering, categories that do not
have associated patents are represented by a 2D texture. Fig. 3
shows the composition for the 3D treemap for the IPC hierarchy
nd
up to the 2 level. Each leaf category has a uniform area of 1.

3.2
Stacked 3D Treemaps
Multiple patent sets per category are stacked upon each other like
in a stacked-bar-chart. The result is shown in figure 4. The texture
on top of the stack is colored according to the larger stack (either
blue or red in the example).

Figure 5.Co-classification relations shown as 3D edge bundles

4

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

For implementing the prototype we extended the prefuse
framework [7] with a new 3D treemap layout, a 3D edge bundling
algorithm, and new OpenGL rendering components using the Java
Binding for the OpenGL APT (JOGL). We attached the
visualization frontend to a patent retrieval backend, that both have
been developed within the PatExpert project [8] funded by the
European Commission.
The proposed visualization technique combines a 3D treemap
layout with 2D treemap textures. The visualization aims in
supporting the co-classification analysis of large patent sets typically as the result of a previous patent query - by visualizing
co-classification relations as 3D edge bundles. It also allows the
comparison of patent portfolios of different applicants by utilizing
'stacked category cubes'. Stacked cubes could also be used for
analyzing the temporal development of categories. Here, each
stack would represent a time period (e.g., a year) indicated by a
specific color. This latter aspect is subject to future work.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

Figure 4.Stacked 3D treemap for classification analysis of two
patent sets of different applicants (shown in red and blue)

[7]

[8]

190

IPC homepage at the World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO), http'l!www wipo int/classifications/ipc/en/
A Bruun: Development of the IPC as a Search Tool, In World Patent
Information (WPI), 21 (2): 97-100, 1999
T. Bladh, D. Carr and J. Scholl: Extending tree-maps to three
dimensions: a comparative study, In proc. of 6th Asia-Pacific
Conference on Computer-Human Interaction, pages 50-59, 2004
H.-1. Schulz, M. Luboschik, H. Schumann: Exploration of the 3D
Treemap Design Space, Poster at the IEEE Information Visualization
Conference, 2007
B. Shneiderman, M. Wattenberg: Ordered Treemap Layouts, In proc
of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2001
D. Holten: Hierarchic Edge Bundles: Visualization of Adjacency
Relations in Hierarchical Data, IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 12(5), 2005
1. Heer, S. Card, and 1. Landay: Prefuse: A Toolkit for Interactive
Information Visualization, In proc. of ACM Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI), 2005
PatExpert project homepage: http://www.patexpert.or~

