Evacuation Traces Mini Challenge: User Testing to Obtain Consensus
Discovering the terrorist
Adalberto L. Simeone1

Buono Paolo1

University of Bari

University of Bari

ABSTRACT
The adoption of Visual Analytics methodologies in security
applications is an approach that could lead to interesting results.
Usually, the data that has to be analyzed finds in a graphical
representation its preferred nature, such as spatial or temporal
relationships. Due to the nature of these applications, it is very
important that key-details are made easy to identify. In the context
of the VAST 2008 Challenge, we developed a visualization tool
that graphically displays the movement of 82 employees of the
Miami Department of Health (USA). We also asked 13 users to
identify potential suspects and observe what happened during an
evacuation of the building caused by an explosion. In this paper
we explain the results of the user testing we conducted and how
the users interpreted the event taken into account.
KEYWORDS: user testing, evacuation, visual analytics, casualties
detection.
INDEX TERMS: H.1.2 [Models and principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human information processing; H.1.2 [Models and
principles]: User/Machine Systems—Software psychology
1

INTRODUCTION

The VAST2008 Challenge consisted of four mini-challenges.
Teams could either choose to participate in all of them, or in a
single one (a detailed description is available at [1]). All
challenges were related to the fictional religious movement called
“Paraiso”. We focused only in one challenge, the one set in the
Department of Health (DoH) building in Miami, where a small
device was set off causing some damage and casualties. In order
to participate to this challenge the team was asked to identify
potential suspects, witnesses, casualties and the estimated location
of where the device was set off.
2

DATA

The DoH building was the site of an experiment where each
employee wore a badge equipped with an RFID that enabled the
tracking of his/her movements. Data about the employees
movements during the time of the incident was available in a text
file that, for each “tick” (time instant) linked the RFID tag to their
actual X and Y coordinate on the map. The actual map was
provided with another text file and another file linked each RFID
tag number to their “real” name.
The leading idea for our experiment was that by observing the
movements of the employees, the observer could have some
1: Via Orabona 4, Bari, Italy. {simeone | buono}@di.uniba.it

insights on whether or not they would be implied in the bombing.
3

RELATED WORK

The simulation of natural or human-made disaster is a topic that
has gained attention, especially after the 9/11 events. Johnson
argues that the CHI communities should try to gain valuable
insights from those events and try to address the unexpected
challenges in hope of improving the effectiveness of emergency
personnel and escape plans [2]. The study of escape plans is also
an interesting direction for research: Andrienko et al [3] describes
an automatic scheduling algorithm generator able to generate
evacuation plans, subsequently analyzed by human operator in
order to judge their feasibility. Kim et al [4], developed a tool
dedicated to first responders, for the analysis and representation of
sensor network data. Their system displays on a mobile device,
both in 2D and in 3D, a graphical representation of the situation of
people in a building, complete with their supposed health level.
4

SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT

The application has been developed using Windows Presentation
Foundation (WPF) under C# 3.5. We specifically chose WPF
among other solutions because it easily and rapidly allowed us to
implement the necessary code to handle the animations and the
drawing of the building map and office workers.
The application works by parsing the original files provided by
the contest organizers and uses the extracted information to create
the related keyframes to use in the animation.
5

USER TESTING

We let a group of 13 users of Computer Science background, test
our system by experimenting with the interface. Each users was
briefly instructed on how to work with the two visualization
modes we provided with the tool and what the purpose of the
experiment was. We then left each user alone and free to interact
with the interface.
5.1
Visualization modes
In the first visualization mode, an animation of each employee’s
movement during the time recorded is displayed. An employee is
represented as a green dot that moves across the map. Users can
interact with the animation by pausing and resuming it, advancing
or rewind it, frame by frame.
In the second visualization mode, instead of showing the actual
animation, we use the movement data to trace a line that
represents the employees path during the course of the animation.
Users can customize this visualization by choosing the starting
and ending point (in terms of keyframes) of their path. In this way
users can, for example, show which persons moved prior to the
detonation of the bomb, or which person actually passes through
the area of the explosion.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

209

5.2
Test observations
From our observations, the majority of users relied on the
visualization mode that let them see the animation of the
movement of the employees. From our observations, only 2 of 13
users used the “tracking” visualization mode allowed by the
application while the others simply relied on the animation mode.
All of the users repeatedly watched the animation and quickly
concluded that the place of the detonation probably occurred in
the northeastern quadrant (except one), due to the fact that most of
the employees that were present in that area, after the supposed
explosion of the bomb, “stopped moving” (as most of the
interviewed said). This observation made them more interested in
the events that occurred in the area marked in Figure 1. By
looking more closely at that part of the animation they were able
to identify a number of potential suspects and witnesses to the
detonation.
A feature that was used often was the ability to “highlight” a
person and follow his/her movement through the animation (since
each person is rendered as a green dot, it would have been easy to
lose sight of them otherwise).
Each test usually lasted between 10 and 15 minutes. After this
time span (which was not enforced), the users usually reported to
us that they had “concluded their observations”, so that we could
begin the interview.
Every one of them, (except one) agreed that the explosion must
have occurred after frame 370, which probably marks the time of
detonation or the time when the alarm is activated. In fact soon
after that frame, everyone starts fleeing towards their nearest exit,
leaving some of the employees of the northeastern quadrant fixed
on the spot (identified as probable casualties by the interviewees).
We then proceeded to ask them the same questions that are
reported on the answer form. The results of this testing shows that
76,92% of the interviewed agree that Number 21, Mr. Ramon
Katalanow is the most probable suspect of having detonated the
bomb. It is interesting that so high a percentage of the interviewed
agrees on his guiltiness. As a side note, it also has to be observed
that his last name is dangerously similar to that of the Catalano
family, the clan whose leader, Fernando, is “responsible” of the
Paraiso Manifesto. All the interviewed users agree that his
behavior is certainly suspect and it can be described in the
following way: “he moves from his room to a room with two
occupants where he either throws the device inside the room or
activates it before exiting his room; subsequently, he flees and
hides on a corner wall before escaping the facility”. Some of the
other users expressed their concern towards the behavior of
Number 13 and 59. In fact, they suspected that number 59 tries to
escape the building, then changes direction and returns inside
towards another exit (perhaps?). Number 13 follows 59 and at
some point 59 “stops moving”. Those users that noticed this
suspicious behavior thought that 59 must have been a witness to
the event and that she was killed by 13. They were not able to
explain why because 59 does not seem to be very close to the
zone of detonation, but since more than one person noticed it, it
could become relevant. Detailed results are shown in Table 1.
Category

RFID Nr.

Suspect Terrorist
Other suspects

21
76,92%
28
30,77%
29
30,77%
1
60,00%
18
50,00%
All interviewees correctly concluded whether
his/her suspect or witnesses escaped
18, 19, 36, 39, 47, 50, 56, 60, 65, 69, 76, 78
identified by 53,84%

Witnesses
Escapees
Casualties

Table 1. Main results

210

Value

When asked to determine which ones amongst the employees
could be witnesses to the event, the interviewed assumed that
those who could be connected by an uninterrupted straight line to
the suspect could have seen something. In fact data about each
person’s orientation was not available. Therefore, by assuming
that Nr. 21 is the most probable suspect, then a witnesses is
everyone that has him in his/her “line of sight”, at some point
during the animation. We observed, though, that the persons that
we interviewed did not manage to identify all the potential
witnesses (all those that “see” Nr. 21). We think that this is
probably due to the fact that they spent more time on finding
persons with a suspect behavior, rather than checking which of the
other persons could have seen him. As a future improvement, this
process of finding all persons that have a designated one in their
line of sight at a certain moment could be automated, therefore
easing the burden for the interviewees.
Finally we asked where, according to their findings so far, the
bomb had detonated. We developed a feature that allows the user
to place a red transparent circle to mark the location of the bomb.
After each user was satisfied with the location and radius of their
“bomb” we annotated the coordinates down. The final location
that we reported on the answer form was the room chosen by the
majority of the interviewees.

Figure 1. The second visualization modes, showing the tracked
path of three suspect and a possible bomb placement

6

CONCLUSION

The user testing conducted in our experiment shows that there is a
very strong suspicion about Nr. 21’s implication in the bombing.
The fact that most users agreed on this, cannot certainly be
dismissed as a random occurrence.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

VAST 2008 Challenges:
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/VASTchallenge08/tasks.html (Last
Retrieved on July the 9th, 2008)
C.W. Johnson, “Applying the lessons of the attack on the world trade
center, 11th September 2001, to the design and use of interactive
evacuation simulations,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems, Portland, Oregon, USA:
ACM, 2005, 651-660;
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, U. Bartling, “Visual analytics
approach to user-controlled evacuation scheduling,” Information
Visualization, vol. 7, 2008, 89-103.
S. Y. Kim, Y. Jang, A. Mellema, D. S. Ebert, T. Collinss, “Visual
Analytics on Mobile Devices for Emergency Response”, Visual
Analytics Science and Technology, VAST 2007, 35-42.

