Keynote Address
Advanced Interaction for Information Visualization
Jean-Daniel Fekete
INRIA

Abstract

Bio

Information Visualization (InfoVis) is a research field
dedicated to the design and evaluation of visual representations and interactions to explore and understand large
data set. Until recently, the focus of InfoVis has been more
on the graphical representation and less on the interaction.
However, several new interactive techniques have been published in the past few years, opening perspectives for InfoVis
and HCI practitioners. I describe the work conducted at our
group, AVIZ, linking traditional HCI interaction research
with InfoVis interaction research. I present our latest techniques for navigating large information spaces with varying
dimensionalities and topologies. I outline their applicability
in HCI problems that are not traditionally viewed as InfoVis
in the hope that they will be experimented and adopted in
standard interfaces and, more importantly, to emphasize the
fact that interaction design for large information spaces is
required for our complex specialized applications as well as
our everyday working environment.

Jean-Daniel Fekete is a Senior Research Scientist (DR2) at
INRIA Saclay - Île-de-France, one of the leading French
national research centers, located in Orsay in the University
Paris-Sud. He leads the AVIZ team (www.aviz.fr) since
2007, which focuses on Visual Analytics. AVIZ studies
the analysis and visualization of large datasets, combining
machine learning approaches with information visualization and multiscale interaction techniques to help analysts
explore and understand massive data. Jean-Daniel’s research
topics include network visualization, evaluation of information visualization systems, and toolkits for user interfaces
and information visualization. His research is applied in
several fields such as biology, business intelligence and social
network analysis. Jean-Daniel Fekete is also President of the
French-Speaking HCI Association, serves on several international journal editorial boards and conference program
committees.

xi

