Visual Mashup of Text and Media Search Results
Anselm Spoerri
Department of Library and Information Science
SCILS, Rutgers University
4 Huntington Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA
aspoerri@scils.rutgers.edu
Abstract
There is a growing trend of enabling users to view
diverse sources of data in an integrated manner, called
visual mashups. This paper addresses the problem of how
to visualize diverse data sources in a single integrated
display when geographical meta-data is not available or
advisable to use to combine the data sources. A visual
mashup of web, image, video, news, blog and tagging
search results is introduced. The presented solution
makes it possible to visualize relationships between the
different data sources, which would be difficult to show in
a series of mini-displays arranged in a grid layout.

1. Introduction
According to Wikipedia [15], a “mashup” is a website
or application that combines content from more than one
source into an integrated experience. The data used in a
mashup is usually accessed via an Application
Programming Interface (API) or RSS / Atom feeds. The
goal of a mashup is bring together in a single place data
sources that tend live in their own data silos. Thus, data
mashups can be understood as breaking down the “silo”
structure of diverse information and integrating them into
a new useful form. Major companies, such as Google,
eBay, Amazon, AOL, Windows Live, and Yahoo, provide
APIs to encourage “creative uses” of their data assets.
There at least two distinct ways for visually combining
diverse data sources in a mashup visualization: a) multiple
mini-displays for each data source can be created that are
then shown and “combined” in the same holding page; b)
a single display can be created that combines the multiple
data sources. On the one hand, the former solution is
simple to create by placing the mini-displays next to each
other in a two-dimensional grid. A key limitation of such
an approach is that is difficult to visualize relationships
between the different data sources. On the other hand, the
“single display” solution requires meta-data that can be
used to integrate the different data sources. A common

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

type of meta-data used is geographic location information
(geo-tagging), which makes it easy to combine and
superimpose diverse data sources on a map. Thus, mapbased mashups, such as the combination of Google Map
data with real estate listings [4], are the most common
form of mashup visualizations [7].
This paper addresses the problem of how to create a
visual mashup of web, image, video, news, blog and
tagging search results, where geo-tagging data is not
available or advisable to use. Specifically, a visual display
will be presented for combining abstract data types that
do not have an obvious spatial mapping, which is a key
challenge in the field of Information Visualization [1].
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 reviews
related work. Section 3 describes searchCrystal, a toolset
for visually comparing diverse sets of data. In section 4, a
visual mashup of web, image, video, news, blog and
social tagging search results is presented. Section 5
discusses how searchCrystal makes it possible to compare
different human “knowledge production” processes.

2. Related work
Related work can be distinguished based on how the
diverse data sources are visually integrated. As noted, the
first common option is to use a grid layout to combine
multiple small displays for each data source; the second
one is create a map-based mashup if geographical data is
available to relate the different data sources.
Grid Layout: It is common for mashups that display
web, image, video, news, blog and social tagging search
results or data feeds to place each data type in a separate
display on the same holding page (netvibes.com [5],
pageflakes.com [6], searchMash.com [8]). This makes it
possible to view the different result sets in a single web
page, instead of having to visit multiple web sites or
formulate multiple search queries. As noted, the grid
layout do not support the visualization of relationships
between the different data types, without requiring users
to actively interact with the different data displays and
“brushing” interactions to be supported.

Map-based: As mentioned, map-based mashups are
the most common form of mashup visualizations where
diverse data sources are combined in the same display.
Examples are real estate listings (housingmaps.com [4]),
crime data (chicagocrime.org [2]) or images taken at
specific locations (flickrmap.com [3]) that are
superimposed on maps generated by using the Google or
Yahoo Map API. Map-based mashups do not have to
solve the difficult problem of how to map abstract data
into an understandable visual form. The geographical
meta-data dictates how to map the data, resulting in a data
display that is ideally suited to leverage a user’s ability to
rapidly perceive spatial relationships, such as how the
data clusters at specific locations. Thus, it should come as
no surprise that map-based mashup are the largest
category of mashups being created (more than 40% of the
mashups listed at programmableweb.com [7]).

3. Crystal Tools
In this paper, the searchCrystal toolset is used to
visualize web, image, video, news, blog and tagging
search results in a single integrated display. searchCrystal
is an extension of MetaCrystal [10], which was developed
to visualize the overlap between multiple engines
searching for the same data type. MetaCrystal in turn is
based on InfoCrystal [9], which makes it possible to
formulate and visualize Boolean as well as Vector-based
queries in the same visualization. These “Crystal” tools
have in common that they can visualize the overlap
between any fuzzy sets. They have also been developed
based on the same key design principles: a radial layout is
employed to ensure that items found by the same number
of engines are mapped into the same concentric ring and
the greater the number of engines that find an item, the
smaller an item’s distance from the center. Further, shape,
size, color, proximity and orientation coding are used to
indicate how many and which engines retrieved an item
and in which rank positions. The “Crystal” family of tools
are discussed in more detail in [10, 11, 12].

3.1. searchCrystal
searchCrystal has the capability to visualize relationships between the items in the different result sets being
compared as well as the overlap structure of the sets. Its
layout algorithm has been extended so that images and
videos can be shown in a space-efficient way while
preserving the “ordered” nature of their result lists (see
subsection 3.1.2 and Fig. 3). searchCrystal has additional
capabilities, which are outside the scope of this paper.
searchCrystal makes it possible to simultaneously
submit the same query to a web, image, video, news, blog
and social tagging search engine, respectively. Next, the
result sets for the different data types are compared,

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

where the great majority of items will be found by only
one engine since different data types tend to be indexed in
different “database silos.”
3.1.1 Integrating Different Types of Search Results
The question needs to be addressed what information
other than geo-tagging can be used to “synchronize” the
different data sources to create a useful single display.
The Uniform Resource Locator (URL) can be used in the
case of the web, blog and social tagging search results,
since they all use URLs that can appear in each other’s
result sets, whereas image and video URLs are usually not
mixed into web, blog or tagging results. Further, video
results tend to be stored on video hosting services, such as
YouTube or GoogleVideo. Thus, the majority of video
URLs will point to a small number of hosts. However, the
host address can be used to relate and organize the web,
image, blog and social tagging results, since they can all
be stored on the same host. searchCrystal makes it
possible to visualize the “host structure” of the results
being compared by drawing connecting lines between
items that reside on the same host (see Fig. 2). The radial
layout used by searchCrystal facilitates the visualization
of such structural relationships.
As noted, it is possible for web and social tagging (and
to a lesser extent blog and news) search results to have
result items in common, especially if more than the
customary top 10 results are compared. If an item URL
appears in both result lists, then this greatly increases the
probability that the item is relevant, especially if it is
highly ranked in both lists [13]. Thus, searchCrystal can
be used to infer which items are more likely to be
relevant. searchCrystal guides user toward potentially
relevant items, since they tend to cluster toward the center
of the display. At same time, users easily scan the top
items that are only retrieved by a single engine.
3.1.2 Layout of Image & Video Thumbnail
searchCrystal consists of a series of linked views to
help guide the user toward relevant information [10, 11,
12]. One of these views is the Cluster Bulls-Eye view,
which is extended in searchCrystal, because it is best
suited to visualize relationships and the overlap between
search results with diverse data types. Specifically, its
layout algorithm is modified to support the display of
visual thumbnails of images, videos and websites in a
space-efficient way.
The Cluster Bulls-Eye tool uses polar coordinates to
display the found items: the radius value is related to the
number of engines that found the item and the average of
its rank positions in the lists that contain it; the angle
reflects the relative ratio of an item’s rank positions. This
causes items retrieved by the same number of engines to

Low Rank Position

Fan Out

Image Fan Out

Overlapping
11 9

7

5

High Rank Position

3

11
5
1

1

7

9
3

Fig 2: (Left & Middle) items found by a single engine are fanned out in the Cluster Bulls-Eye view so that they do not overlap. (Right)
the fan out direction away from the input line is alternated so that the degree of overlap between images is reduced.
cluster and to be contained in the same concentric
ring (see Fig. 2). The use of size coding helps to guide
users toward the top items found by a specific number of
search engines. In addition, the star-shaped input icons,
which are located at the periphery of a crystal, influence
an item’s position. They act as “magnets” that pull an
item toward them based on its rank position in the input
lists that contain it.
As noted, when comparing sets with diverse data
types, the great majority of items will be found by only
one engine, especially for the image and video search
results. Items found by a single engine represent a
special case in the Cluster Bulls-Eye. Their angle value
would be equal to the angle of the related star-shaped
input icon with respect the display center. Thus, these
items would cluster and overlap on a straight line as
shown in Fig 1 (left). Instead, their angle is incremented
so that items do not overlap and their total angle remains
within a specified range, causing items to fan out in a
compact way away from the line defined by an input
icon, as shown in Fig. 1 (middle). The “fanning out” of
items, which are only contained in a single input list,
does not change an item’s distance from the display
center. For images and videos, the “fanning” solution is
extended so that the direction away from the “input line”
is alternated, as shown Fig. 1 (right).
This “alternate fanning” approach ensures the visual
thumbnails for items, which are in subsequent rank
positions in the result list, are mapped further apart in the
Cluster Bulls-Eye display than if the direction is not
alternated. The visual thumbnails are still tightly packed,
yet they tend to overlap in such a way that users can see
a large enough part of an image. If users place the mouse
over a partially occluded image, then the whole image
becomes visible. By moving the mouse over the partially
occluded images, the full images are coming into and
going out of view, enabling users to quickly to explore a
large number of images. Further, users can adjust the
size of the visual thumbnails to decrease the overlap
between adjacent thumbnails.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

4. Visual Mashup
Fig. 3 shows how searchCrystal can be used to create
a “visual mashup” of the web pages, images, videos,
news and user tagged pages found when searching for
“Tim O’Reilly” on March 9, 2007. First, the labels next
to the input icons, which are located at the periphery of a
crystal, show that the top 10 results for the Google,
Google Images, Google Video, Google News and
Delicious search engines are compared in the interior of
the crystal.
Second, the Google and Delicious results have three
URLs in common. The item closest to the center is
stored on the “oreillynet.com” server and it is the
number one result for both Google and Delicious. This
suggests that this item has a high probability of being
relevant, since Spoerri [13] has shown that the more
engines that recommend the same item, the greater the
probability that the item is relevant (called the
“Authority Effect”). Further, the higher up an item is
placed in the result lists, the greater its likelihood of
being relevant (called the “Ranking Effect”). The other
two items both found by Google and Delicious are
hosted on the “radar.oreilly.com” server.
Third, the fact that all found items are visible in the
Cluster Bulls-Eye view makes it possible to draw
connecting lines between the items that have the same
host address. As noted, web, image, blog and social
tagging results can be stored on the same host. The item
that is closest to the center of the Cluster Bulls-Eye
display is selected to be the “hub” from which the
pinkish lines emanate to connect items with the same
host (see Fig. 2). Now, a connecting line can help to
corroborate the relevance of connected items. For
example, if a web page is found by both a web and social
tagging engine and it has a pinkish connecting line to an
image, than this image is more likely to be relevant and
related to the content of the web page that connects to it.
Fig. 2 (middle) shows that the web page “o’reilly – what
is web 2.0” is connected to the third and fourth results in
the image result list. Both images are relevant and highly
related to the content of the “Web 2.0” page, especially
the “Web 2.0 Meme Map” (see Fig. 3, bottom middle
and where cursor is visible).

Star shaped input icon

Pinkish lines
connect items stored
on the same web host

Item icon found by Google
and tagged on Delicious.

Fig 2: Cluster Bulls-Eye visualizes the overlap between the web, images, video, news and tagging results for the search query “Tim
O’Reilly.” The pinkish lines connect items located on the same server. (Bottom right) shows a magnified portion of the display to make
the connecting lines better visible.
Fourth, images, videos and websites can be
represented by visual thumbnails, which are placed to
minimize the complete occlusion of thumbnails and
maximize the number of images that can be recognized
although they are partially occluded (see Fig. 3). The size
of a visual thumbnail is scaled based on its rank position
in the lists that contain it. The lower the list position, the
smaller the image size. Fig. 3 shows visual thumbnails of
images, videos and websites.
Fifth, searchCrystal supports “focus+context interactions so that users can expand or contract specific
concentric rings in the Cluster Bulls-Eye display. Fig. 3
shows the result of applying a focus+context action so
that the ring, which contains the items found by single
engine, is expanded to spread out the images and make
them better visible. If the user places the cursor over one
of the concentric rings, the shape of the cursor changes to
indicate that a “focus+context” action can be applied. The
user needs to select and drag the ring to achieve the
desired expansion or contraction of a specific portion of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

the display. Once the mouse is released, the size of the
visual thumbnails and the title (fragments) are recomputed to maximize the information density of the display.

5. Discussion & Future Research
searchCrystal enables users to create a “multi-media”
snapshot of a person, company or topic of interest. An
advantage of such an integrated display is that it makes it
possible to see the overlap and relationships between the
different sources of data that reflect different social
processes for organizing information and producing
knowledge. Web search engines analyze the external
hyperlinks included in web pages and use in part the link
structure of the Internet to infer the relevance of web
pages. Similar to citations in academic papers, the number
of incoming links to a web page can be interpreted as a
reflection of the page’s value. Social tagging engines use
the bookmarking and tagging efforts of its community to

Fig. 3: Visual Mashup of the web pages, images, videos, news and user tagged pages found when searching for “Tim O’Reilly”.
Visual thumbnails of images, videos and websites (when available) are shown.
infer the relevance of bookmarked URLs. People
bookmarking web pages and applying personal tags is a
different process of organizing information, and
ultimately producing knowledge, than people including
external hyperlinks on web pages. Further, in a regular
meta search, the result sets of different search engines,
which search for the same data type (i.e., web pages) and
use related information retrieval methods, are being
compared and merged. searchCrystal makes it possible to
compare independent human processes of “knowledge
production” to find and present potentially relevant
information, such as web pages, images or videos, to
address a user’s information need.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In this paper, an example has been presented that
illustrates the “mashup” of the results of single search
engines. However, searchCrystal can easily display the
“meta search results” of multiple engines for a given data
type, instead of just using the output of a single engine.
Future research will investigate if data type specific
visual icons can be used in a searchCrystal display to
make it easier to spot specific data types. For example, it
would be helpful to if the item icons related to images or
videos could reflect the visual nature of their content and
whether the content is static or time-based.
searchCrystal
can
easily accommodate
the
visualization of different types of relationships by using

connecting lines, which can have different colors to
reflect the different relationship types, such as web host
structure or topical relationships. The visual thumbnails of
websites, if they are available, can help users identify
pages that are stored on the same web host. Users can use
simple pattern matching to detect similar website
thumbnails, although the visual thumbnails need to be
sufficiently large to enable to users to gain insights into
the web page content.
A user study [14] has been conducted to determine if
novice users can use the RankSpiral and Cluster BullsEye displays to find the documents that are most likely to
be relevant. Specifically, it was shown that novice users
can use the provided visual cues, such as the icon’s shape
and position, to decide which icons to explore first to find
highly relevant documents. This ability is a prerequisite
for users being able to make effective use of
searchCrystal’s full functionality. The user study also
showed that novice users could identify highly relevant
documents more rapidly and accurately by using the
RankSpiral than the Cluster Bulls-Eye tool. A user study
is currently being prepared to test if users can identify a
sufficient number of known relevant documents and the
Cluster Bulls-Eye tool will be compared with a standard
ranked list display. It will be tested if the searchCrystal
interface will lead to improved search performance, better
user satisfaction and greater confidence in the relevance
of the selected documents.

6. Conclusions
This paper addressed the problem of how to visualize
diverse data sources in a single integrated display when
geographical meta-data is not available or advisable to use
to combine the data sources. It was shown how
searchCrystal can be used to create a visual mashup of
web, image, video, news, blog and tagging search results.
searchCrystal is able to visualize diverse data related to
the same query as well as relationships between the
different data sources, such as which items are stored on
the same web host. This would be difficult to achieve in a
series of mini-displays arranged in a grid layout.

7. Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Alexander Stanton for
his development help with searchCrystal and its data
acquisition and server components in particular. Further,
the author would like thank Marija Dalbello for her
continual support and encouragement as searchCrystal
continues to be developed.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

7. References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

Card S., Mackinlay J. and Shneiderman, B. (Eds.) (1999).
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Chicagocrime at http://www.chicagocrime.org
Flickrmap at http://www.flickrmap.com
Housingmaps at http://www.housingmaps.com
Netvibes at http://netvibes.com
Pageflakes at http://www.pageflakes.com
Progammable Web at http://www.programmableweb.com/
searchMash at http://www.searchMash.com
Spoerri, A. (1999). InfoCrystal: A Visual Tool for
Information Retrieval. In [1], pp. 140 – 147.
Spoerri, A. (2004). Visual Editor for Composing Meta
Searches. Proceedings of the 67th Annual Meeting of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology (ASIST 2004), pp. 373 – 382.
Spoerri, A. (2004). Coordinated Views and Tight
Coupling to Support Meta Searching. Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Coordinated and
Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization (CMV
2004), pp. 39-48.
Spoerri, A. (2004). RankSpiral: Toward Enhancing Search
Result Visualizations. Proceedings IEEE Information
Visualization Symposium (InfoVis 2004), p. 18.
Spoerri, A. (2005). How the Overlap Between the Search
Results of Different Retrieval Systems Correlates with
Document Relevance. Proc. of the 68th Annual Meeting
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology (ASIST 2005).
Spoerri, A. (2006). Visualizing Meta Search Results:
Evaluating the MetaCrystal toolset. Proceedings of the
69th Annual Meeting of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology (ASIST 2006).
Wikipedia Mashup_(web_application_hybrid) page at
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mashup_(web_application_h
ybrid).

