The Dynamic Organization of Space and Place
Author: Yelena Ilkanayev,
Assistant Professor, New York Institute of Technology, School of Architecture
{ilkanayev@optonline.net}

Space assumes a rough coordinate frame centered on
the mobile and purposive self.
Place is a special kind of object, it can not be carried
away: it is an object in which one can dwell
.

Abstract
The rigid rectilinear forms of contemporary
architectural design neither resemble nor relate the
space surrounding us as an extension of the self,
whether physical or mental. By “extending” or
“projecting” space and form outward from the body
and its movements, a new paradigm can be applied to
the structure of place as it relates to the extended space
of the human self.
The following project proposes a method, using motion
capture technology, for the design and organization of
environments that are harmonious with the human self.
The synergistic flow among individuals, and between the
individual and his or her environment, is promoted by
the organization of space around the principle of the
motion of the human body. This extension of the body’s
form into space is informed by the natural features of an
existent site. The synergistically activated space is thus
reinterpreted in relation to factors produced by natural
forces.

“1. Objectives for the project ”
The creation of a naturally harmonious and healthy
environment, one reinforcing the balance within and
between humans themselves, and their connection with
Nature, through the thoughtful disposition of a dynamic
human space in relation to place.

“2. The Project “
This project is divided into two distinct phases. In
the first phase, the motion of the human body in space is
recorded and analyzed, resulting in a vocabulary of
schemata for the forms of the human self and its
extended space. In the second phase, these schemata are
applied to the development of a design for a specific
site. . This involves the postulation of a program for

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

the site, within which specific space-use needs and
preferences are predefined. This program, reduced to its
elemental structural components, is then allowed to
interplay with the model of human motion it most
closely resembles, to generate options for a design, or
form in space. One design is chosen for its elegance and
harmonious qualities. Finally, the place or interior
environment is informed by the surrounding space, with
its natural and locational features such as bodies of
water, geological formations, roadways and man-made
structures. The forces these features generate are
synergistically redounded to the chosen form, which
remains a projection of the human body moving in
space, to produce the model for an architecture that
derives its stability from interrelated rhythmic motion.

Phase #1- Recording of motion data and its analysis.
Using a magnetic motion tracking system created
by Ascension technology, we were able to record and
then modify human motion. The system includes a
receiver, a backpack with sensors that are attached to the
joints of the wearer, and a computer. Sensor-nodes are
placed on various parts of the body and their movement
is registered within a magnetic field. Once that data is
recorded it must be reprogrammed to correspond to a
selected digital body. There are several time-consuming
processes involved in generating a model of human
motion.

Phase #2A. Generate an accurate model of an existing site.
B. Define a program for place and give it three
dimensional form
C. Through comparative analysis, choose a
dynamic form generated by human
motion,
for its further application onto the site
D. Generate space-time model with defined choice
of forces
E. Incorporate the place onto the space
F. Conclude by analyzing the results

Step A: Generate an accurate model of an
existing site
The initial data was an accurate 2-D CAD drawing
of an existent site. The site conditions are as follows: 5
acres buildable lot situated in the village of Lattingtown,
north shore of Long Island. The existent conditions
include a road, a railroad, cluster of trees scattered
throughout the area and a relatively large pond.

This case emphasizes the distinction between
private and semiprivate areas by elevating three
bedrooms and the guest suite above the ground level.
The master bedroom is given hierarchical priority over
the rest of the elements by placing it right above the
living/family room. In turn the fireplace is extended
penetrating both living and master bedroom, which are
stacked one on top of the other. The predominant
feature of this particular parti resolution is the 290
degree panoramic view provided from the family-living
room.

Step C: Through comparative analysis, choose a
dynamic form generated by human motion for
its further application onto the site
A hand sketch was simply traced over the volumes
on the chosen parti. Free floating lines wrapping
volumes, as well as the arrow penetrating two stacked
volumes (master bedroom and living room) indicate
dynamic characteristics and potential motion among the
elements. This sketch was used to trace a transition
between parti model and dynamics of human motion.

Step B: Define a program for place and
translate it into 3 dimensional form
The program is defined by several conditions:
Residential building, four bedrooms, and an additional
two bedroom guest suite isolated from the house. Split
levels preferred. The family room is within the core of
circulation for the building (i.e. most of the rooms are
directly connected with the family room where the latter
becomes a passing-through place.) The family room
must have a fireplace viewable from 360 degrees. A
courtyard with pool. Very guest-friendly house.
Other programmatic elements may include: six full
bathrooms, three offices, gym, sauna, indoor pool area,
kitchen, playroom and personnel room. The following
diagrams portray the primary programmatic elements –
four bedrooms (blue), guest suite (taupe), courtyard
(putty), and family room (orange) with fireplace (red).
Out of several examined variations of possible design
resolutions we chose the case that is more complex and
at the same time more conceptually balanced compare to
the others. It also possesses a stronger spatial resolution
of main programmatic elements.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

A figure below depicts the transition between parti
diagram, and a pose of a human body as a fragment of
its motion. The hand sketch described before is now
color coded. Red is spatial elements or rooms, blue is
the circulation, green and magenta stand for paths of
allowed motion

The hand sketch overlapping the parti was then
translated to overlap the image of a human in motion.
Schematically represented programmatic elements such
as rooms and parts of the circulation align with the parts
of the body such as shoulders, head, spine, etc.
The image chosen as synergistically related to the
programmatic model was derived from a sequence of a
human moving in a sneaky way. (The character is
shown as a female, with no hair or clothes, for better
observation of the motion.) Five poses were chosen
from the sequence, depicting the range of motion. Then
these poses were brought together into a “blob” of
human bodies that is representative of a short fragment
(3-4 seconds) of the motion.

Top view of the modified blob. Slices are indicated as
light grey lines running across its longitudinal axes.

Five poses were chosen from the sequence of sneaky
motion by a single character.

In order to reduce the form to its essential
elements, the “blob” was simplified by the elimination
of certain unimportant parts of the body. These
included hands, legs, feet, arms, and so on, where they
did not express the primary motion of the form. The
remaining portions of the bodies were then treated as
one whole object, and sliced at the points of extremes of
change in the form. This sectioning is indicated by semitransparent gray screens placed along the blob of torsos
twisted in movement.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Perspective view of the modified blob. Now it is clear that
many of the parts of the body are entirely eliminated
from the model. The left thigh remains.

To better define critical planes where slices
penetrate the mesh, a series of wire outlines indicates
the passage of the form through a sequence of planes.
The moments of penetration once registered become
frames of reference for the creation of the skinboundary, within which the programmatic elements will
be set into motion. This skin is synonymous with the
projected form of the body’s motion through space.

Perspective view

Wire outlines indicate the passage of the form through a
series of planes.

Still image from the animation shows the elements of
parti as they travel inside of the skin of the blob.

Top view

Side view
Top, side and perspective views of the skin wrapping the
frames of reference.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The programmatic elements as a schematic unit,
analogous to the human body moving in space, were
allowed to move through the skin and these movements
were mapped. Several variations in spatial distribution
of the main programmatic elements, as shown below,
were taken into consideration. One configuration was
selected as the most suitable for the site in regard to
spatial relationships, potential for further rearrangement
and orientation.

Figure four of these five configurations, shown in side
and top views, was chosen as most suitable to the site

Step D: Generate space-time model with
defined choice of forces. Extension of the body
/ reconnection with nature.
Getting back to the very beginning of the research,
let us remind ourselves of its main objective: the
creation of a naturally harmonious and healthy
environment, one reinforcing the balance within and
between humans themselves, and their connection with
Nature. The method whereby this objective may
achieved through the dynamic organization of space and
place is the subject of this research. Space, defined as ‘a
rough coordinate frame centered on the mobile and
purposive self’, has a limitless extension into the
exterior world. Place, identified as ‘a special kind of
object in which man can dwell’, is by nature a limited,
interior environment.
Here it is important to note that while the design
process to this point has been focused equally on the
development of interior and exterior forms, we have yet
to engage the external forces existent within the space,
and operating on the place. Once we connect the
program with the existent site and apply the inherent
forces of the natural space, we may begin dealing with
the organization of place rather than space. The skin we
ended up with through the analysis of the motion of the
human body is by no means a spatial resolution. Being a
dynamic extension of the human body it is still only a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

boundary for translation of programmatic elements and
should be regarded as such. Resolution of space will
only be possible when the proposed elements are subject
to forces applied from the existent features of the site,
which is the next step in our design.
Our research and analysis in the application of
forces from nature so far is credited to the work of Greg
Lynn. There are several reasons for this. In addition to
the use of innovative 3-D applications, Greg’s definition
of the distinction between stasis and stability, and their
role in architecture, is quite revolutionary. In
substituting for the static view of fixed points in neutral
space, a vision of the stability of vectors that balance
one another in a temporally dynamic space, Lynn opens
endless possibilities in design and analysis. Indeed this
work could be seen as laying a whole new foundation
for architectural design.
The last part of our project, ‘reconnection with the
nature,’ is primarily based on methodology developed
by Greg Lynn. The site is mapped, taking into account a
number of existent and proposed forces, and further
developing the model of the place by engaging it with
those forces. The elements or emitters of existent forces
are as follows: a road, a railroad , cluster of trees, and
pond. Some of the existent trees have been eliminated.
The proposed elements are an outdoor pool and a tennis
court. The shape, position and area of forces depend on
the shape, orientation and area of objects-emitters or
deflectors. For example, Road is assigned a linear siteoriented force distributed along the path of the road. The
railroad is assigned a wave-shaped force extended far
enough to reach the vicinity of the proposed structure.
The pond and a small cluster of trees are both assigned
radial forces differentiated as positive or negative: the
pond is assigned an attracting force, the trees a repelling
one. The remaining large cluster of trees is assigned
wave force as well.
The following series of images express the design
resolution of space and place.

The hand-sketched diagram above represents
mapping of forces based on existent and proposed
objects and conditions.

Linear force applied along the road. To show the force
better we created a particle system and assigned it to
the path of the road.

Wave force assigned to a large cluster of trees. The
wave is oriented along the general axis of the trees.

Radial force assigned to the small cluster of trees. The
force extended far enough to reach the proposed
structures.

A segment of the skin with programmatic elements
detached from other segments in a sequence of dynamic
motion inside of the skin.

A combination of forces is applied to the trees and the
pond.. Side view indicates the force applied to the pond
positioned much lower (by the bottom of the pond) as the
‘body’ of the pond is distributed underground.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Top, left and front views of the segment ( right to left)

A segment of the skin together with programmatic
elements as applied on existent site and modified with
deformation from forces. Top to bottom: 1) model as it is
before application of forces; 2) model after application of
wave force coming from the large cluster of trees; 3)
model as after application of radial forces coming from
the pool.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

animated in space and place, within the fields of
influence of dynamic gravitational forces at an existent
site.

2. Uses and Benefits:

Final model after all deformations from
forces have been applied

The primary goal was, not the creation of a
particular prototype, but rather the development of a
conceptual methodology for the design \process in
architecture; a methodology founded on the principle of
balance, defined as flexibility and a capacity for
transformation, rather than on rigidity or stasis. Thus the
goal of the research was achieved, in that we succeeded
on carrying out to its conclusion a methodology
whereby the dynamics of motion and gravitation were
applied within the conceptual design process. The
benefit of this system is that it enables the architectural
designer to take into consideration factors that have
heretofore been ignored within existing methodologies.
A significant characteristic of the process we
developed is that at each stage it involves the
interpretation of dynamic motion, so that the designer
always makes an intuitive choice among variations in
the data. The active, guiding role of the designer was
seen as a key element in generating better design
solutions. It is important to note that throughout the
process we had precise data, such as existent site
conditions, to be analyzed. Nonetheless, the data, while
determining the options presented, was never
deterministic of the results.

3. Further inquiries.
Final model.

“ 3. Conclusions: “
1. Research Results:
The purpose this research project was that of
exploring an innovative system for generating a variety
of solutions in the conceptual design of residential and
commercial structures. The resulting prototype
expressed a balanced distribution of programmatic
elements in architectural design; this balance having
been achieved through the development and
comparative analysis of various types of human motion,
operating within gravitational fields, as imposed by
traditional
and
nontraditional
sources.
The methodology employed in this project was
geared toward the development of a prototype through
the identification and modification of significant
patterns in dynamic motion. First we studied the
gestures of human motion and visualized a skinboundary for the travel of programmatic elements. We
then analyzed the translation of these programmatic
elements at different phases of their combined motion.
Based on this analysis, we generated a model that was

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The next step in this research will be the translation
of a digital prototype into the physical world, so that the
model is realized as an actual place traversed and
occupied by humans. This will involve the assignment
of appropriate materials to a model, and the calculation
of dynamics based upon the nature of those materials,
and on the shape and size of the model itself. The lifesized model will be constructed within a cavernous, high
ceiling space. At this phase visitors will have the
opportunity to experience the unique spatial solution
that results from an analysis of human motion affected
by varying fields of gravity.

“4. References: “
[1] Yi-Fu Tuan. Space and Place. The Perspective of
Experience. University of Minnesota Press.
Minneapolis, MN, 1977
[2] Lynn, G. Animate Form. Princeton Architectural
Press. New York, NY, 1999
[3] Lefebvre, H. The Production of Space. Blackwell
Publishing. Malden, MA, 2005

