Visualizing endangered indigenous languages of French Polynesia with LEXUS
Gaby Cablitz1, Jacquelijn Ringersma2 and Marc Kemps-Snijders2
1
Seminar für Allgemeine und Vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft der CAU, Kiel, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
{gcablitz@linguistik.uni-kiel.de, jacquelijn.ringersma@mpi.nl, marc.kemps-snijders@mpi.nl}
Abstract
This paper reports on the first results of the DOBES
project ‘Towards a multimedia dictionary of the
Marquesan and Tuamotuan languages of French
Polynesia’. Within the framework of this project we are
building a digital multimedia encyclopedic lexicon of the
endangered Marquesan and Tuamotuan languages using
a new tool, LEXUS. LEXUS is a web-based lexicon tool,
targeted
at
linguists
involved
in
language
documentation. LEXUS offers the possibility to visualize
language. It provides functionalities to include audio,
video and still images to the lexical entries of the
dictionary, as well as relational linking for the creation
of a semantic network knowledge base. Further activities
aim at the development of (1) an improved user interface
in close cooperation with the speech community and (2)
a collaborative workspace functionality which will allow
the speech community to actively participate in the
creation of lexica.
Keywords
--Language
documentation,
multimedia lexicon, endangered languages

1. Introduction
Language documentation is a new field in linguistics
dealing with methods, tools and theoretical backgrounds
for compiling a representative and long lasting,
multipurpose record of natural languages [1]. Currently
there are approximately 6000 languages in use
worldwide. However, by the end of the 21st century,
only one half of these languages will continue to exist
[2]. Documentation work can help to maintain,
consolidate or revitalize endangered languages,
safeguard the full range of uses of a given language and
inform future generations about the language diversity
and the cultural treasures of mankind [3]. Documentation
should be carried out in close cooperation with the
speech community and reflect the particular
characteristics of the respective culture.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The role of data in language documentation differs
from the way data is treated in language description in
that speech communities and future researchers can fully
reconstruct the social and cultural contexts with the help
of the documented material [1]. Projects within the
Volkswagen foundation initiative for the Documentation
of Endangered Languages (DOBES) build up language
archives of primary data: audio recordings present the
languages as they are spoken with all their segmental and
suprasegmental richness; video recordings give
additional information about the socio-cultural
environment and non-verbal communication practices.
The secondary material, derived from these recordings,
are transcriptions, translations, morphosyntactic and
lexical analysis and possibly general comments on
content and linguistic phenomena. Both the recordings
(and in addition photographic material) and the
annotations are stored in digital form.
A number of digital archives exist [4], offering
storage space for data from communities and researchers,
as well as access to (future generations of) speech
communities, researchers and the general public. For the
DOBES projects data is stored in the archive for
linguistic resources housed at the Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands [5].
The digital archive is accessible via the Internet, and is
organized in a structured manner by describing and
contextualizing the data with the IMDI metadata set [6].
The archive takes care of the long-term persistency of the
digital material, which is not evident given the limited
life-time of our state-of-the-art storage media. For
specific media data highly specialized viewers have been
developed to support direct access to the media content.
An example of such a viewer is ANNEX [7] for
visualizing annotated media files. ANNEX provides
different views of the annotations and streams media
through the QuickTime plug-in in the browser.
In 2003 the project 'Documentation of the Marquesan
languages and culture in French Polynesia' started to
document the endangered Marquesan languages in

various different contexts and socio-cultural interactions.
The major aim of this project was to collect a broad
variety of spoken text genres in form of audio- and
video-recordings in order to document the language of
various endangered cultural practices. The Marquesan
archive covers a wide range of topics such as storytelling, song and dance, traditional food preparation,
plant medicine, fishing techniques, aspects of the
material culture and artifacts (fabrication of bark cloth,
traditional tool-making), traditional practices (e.g. life
cycle) and the use of various trick languages [3]. The
documents have been transcribed and translated together
with native speakers. Translations of the transcripts exist
in French as well as English. Comments and notes on
cultural phenomena and linguistic structures are
annotated in English.
For the Marquesan language a trilingual general
dictionary (Marquesan vernacular, French, English) with
thematic glossaries of topics, such as food preparation
and conservation, plant medicine, fishing and breadfruit
varieties, has been created. Since idioms provide a deep
insight into a culture and constitute part of the linguistic
competence of speakers [8] the dictionary and glossaries
are further complemented by a collection of idioms and
collocations which are in danger of disappearing as the
Marquesan vernaculars are undergoing rapid linguistic
change in the younger generations.
Within the framework of the DOBES project
‘Towards a multimedia dictionary of the Marquesan and
Tuamotuan languages of French Polynesia’ we are
building a digital multimedia lexicon of the endangered
Marquesan and Tuamotuan languages with the help of
the new web-based lexicon tool, LEXUS which allows
the integration of multimedia elements into the structural
frame of a conventional dictionary [9]. The multimedia
lexica are created on the basis of the databases developed
in the previous project. By going beyond traditional
practices and theoretical considerations in lexicography,
they can also represent the meaning of words in a new
way. For example, video clips of motion verbals –
designed and acted out by native speakers – shall give
deeper insights into the speakers’ knowledge systems
and representation of meanings. Furthermore, the writing
of vernacular definitions by members of the speech
communities will be an important step towards language
maintenance and revitalization as well as indigenous
knowledge representation of word meaning. While
multimedia enrichments document the meaning of words
more completely in its indigenous context, the creation
of typed relations of various sorts will place words in
their semantic contexts with other words, with examples
in annotations etc. LEXUS is a web-based tool targeted
at field linguists. With LEXUS users are able to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

construct flexible lexicon structures and include
multimedia elements to the lexical entries and it also
allows the creation of semantic networks, which makes
LEXUS the ultimate tool for the creation of encyclopedic
dictionaries.
The project is a cooperation between linguists,
technicians and the speech communities in which the
LEXUS user interface is being developed in such a way
that it is adjusted to the wishes and knowledge of the
speech community. Visualization functionalities are
being improved in order to be able to present the data in
an ethnographic way adopted to the needs of the speech
community. The creation of semantic networks is being
facilitated so that both linguists and members of the
speech community are able to draw functional relations
between the lexical entries and cultural/indigenous
concepts in the lexicon. This paper reports on the
background and philosophy of the project, gives a
description of the lexicon tool and presents the first
results of the project.

2. LEXUS
LEXUS [9] is a web-based lexicon tool developed by
the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics. It is
targeted at linguists doing field research or working with
language corpora. LEXUS is of primary interest for
language documentation projects since it offers the
possibility to not just create a (digital) dictionary or
thesaurus, but additionally it allows to create a
multimedia encyclopedic lexicon. To achieve this
LEXUS supports flexible lexicon structures, Shoebox
[10] compatibility, a flexible scheme of linking with
multimedia documents and the possibility to include
relational links between entries or attributes of entries.
LEXUS is able to interact with ANNEX for the
visualization of annotated media files. The utilization of
electronic multimedia archives offers new ways of
making visualized dictionaries. Furthermore LEXUS is a
new component in archiving, since it has possibilities of
linking and interlinking linguistic as well as cultural
concepts, thus creating a dense network of indigenous
knowledge and concepts which has not been achieved in
conventional electronic language archiving so far.
Being based on the Lexical Markup Framework
(LMF) LEXUS is compliant with the proposed ISO
standard for linguistic resources (ISO TC37/SC4). LMF
is a generic model allowing users to define almost any
type of structure for their lexicon, from simple word lists
to complex multi-lingual lexica. In LMF the default
lexicon structure consists of two components, one for the
general information on the lexicon (lexiconInformation)
and one for the structure of the actual lexical entries.

Lexical entries consist of a Form and a Sense
component. Users may further construct the structure of
the lexicon or lexical entry according to the specific
structure of the documented language or the linguistic
theory used.
LEXUS allows the creation of lexica from scratch as
well as the import of lexica created in Shoebox (or the
newer version of the tool: Toolbox). In addition lexica
formatted in XML can be imported in LEXUS, provided
that the XML schema is available.
Four different types of multimedia fragments can be
linked to the lexical entries: drawings, photos, videos and
audio files. Links can also be created to archived media
files and annotations. Within the MPI archive [5], this
means that LEXUS allows interaction with the
visualization tool ANNEX [7]. In addition, typed
relations are supported to include information such as
examples found in other (multimedia) documents,
structural dependencies as they occur in morpho-syntax,
semantic references, etc. Such typed relations can
amount to networks or taxonomies dependent on the
users’ intentions.
LEXUS allows web-based access and collaboration
of several researchers as well as people from the speech
communities of (endangered) languages. For this purpose
LEXUS offers to create workspace copies for different
people and a merging of different versions. Thus,
researchers may evaluate contributions and modifications
and create master copies at regular intervals.
The tool opens the possibility of actively involving
people from the language communities in adding rich
semantic/encyclopedic information which linguists alone
will not be able to achieve.

3. Design of a multimedia dictionary
3.1 Creating the basics: importing the
Shoebox lexicon into LEXUS
Within the ongoing 'Documentation of the
Marquesan languages and culture in French Polynesia'
project a trilingual lexicon has been created in Shoebox
[10]. The structure of this lexicon is built in the MDF 4.0
Shoebox database type, and includes linguistic field
markers for lexeme, part of speech, definition (E),
definition vernacular, gloss (E), gloss (national language)
etc.
The head marker is the lexeme marker (\lx) and the
other markers are all structured under this head marker.
The structure includes the internal textual organization
and the information structure of the lexical entries.
Besides this linguistic information, non-linguistic

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

markers are included to provide encyclopedic
information, like e.g. the scientific name of objects in the
natural environment. LEXUS supports the import of the
Shoebox structure: the markers are imported as data
categories and the structure is implemented by grouping
the different data categories under a data component. The
values 'attached' to the Shoebox markers are attributed to
the data categories in LEXUS.
The LEXUS main window, consists of an alphabetic
(or otherwise ordered) wordlist (see Figure 1). When
importing a Shoebox lexicon, by default the head marker
will represent the lexical entry in the wordlist. The
creator of the lexicon, however, can add other attributes
(e.g. lexical elements) for this representation. For the
Marquesan lexicon we have selected the ‘lexeme’, 'Part
of Speech', ‘Definition (E)' and 'Definition (n)’ attributes
to represent a lexical entry in the word list.
This selection facilitates a quick scan of, and search
in, the lexicon. Details of the lexical entry can be viewed
by selecting an entry from the word list. This opens a
new window with a full view of the lexical entry. Also
for this view the creator is free to select the attributes to
represent the lexical entry. For our project we initially
selected the same as we selected for the word list, but in
a different format. In a later stage we also added an
image of the object to this view (see Figure 1).

3.2. Including media into the lexicon
To easily identify multimedia content in the lexicon,
LEXUS requires that additional data categories for the
different types of media are included in the structure of
the lexicon.
For the Marquesan lexicon three types of media were
collected and will be linked to the lexical entries: audio
recording, video recording and still images. In LEXUS
we created one data component containing four data
categories: audio, video and photo and drawing. When
selecting one (or more) of these data categories in the
full view of the lexical entry, the lexical entry will be
displayed together with the selected media object (see
Figure 1).
For all headwords denoting an object in the natural
world we have foreseen, minimally, a value for the photo
data category. Some lexical entries will also be
represented with a drawing. For example the breadfruit
variety mei as well as a number of other plants in the
Marquesan culture can be used in various ways. It is
always a specific part of the plant which is used for a
specific purpose.
Photos cannot always show the required detail to
visualize certain characteristics of a plant, which is why
we have chosen to use drawings (see Figure 2).

A

B

Figure 1: Ordered word list (A) showing the lexeme and descritpion for the
lexical entries and the full view (B) of the lexical entry 'i'i
Besides the visual media we linked sound files to the
lexical entries. In the full view of the lexical entry it will
be possible to play the sound file, giving the user a
possible pronunciation of the headword or a sample
sentence.
For headwords denoting complex cultural
phenomena, practices and products there are several
ways to include video files. One possibility is to link the
lexical entry directly to a video file, appearing in the
lexical entry view together with a transcription,
translation and comments (for which we use the ELAN
multimedia annotator [11]). However video files can be
too large to load into PC systems or might be too
lengthy for the user to watch the whole video.
Link to:
kauo’e mei
‘terminal bud (female)’

Link to:
pokauo’e mei
‘male inflorescence’

Figure 2: Image of mei with links to details of
specific parts in order to visualize functional
characteristics.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Therefore we opted to: (1) divide the video into
(timed) sequences of the crucial elements or steps in the
procedure or the practice, (2) link the headword to a
photo gallery depicting the element or step and (3) link
each photo to the respective video sequence.
We can illustrate this second approach with the
headword maa. Maa is the Marquesan name for
fermented breadfruit. The process of breadfruit
fermentation consists of six steps: hakapa'a te mei (ripen
the breadfruit), 'a'aka te po'a (plait coconut leaves),
kanea te tapo'o maa (make a container for maa), kanea
te ve'eve'e mei (making tool for peeling breadfruit),
veve'e te mei (peeling semi-ripe breadfruits) and tata te
mei (remove ripe breadfruit from its heart and put into
maa-container). The lexical entry maa will get six values
for the photo data category, one photo for each step. In
the lexical entry view maa all six photos (plus the
denotations) will be shown. From these photos links to
the videos (together with a transcription, translation and
comments) will be made, so that the user can watch the
whole maa preparation process in a sequence of short
videos. Also each image is linked to the respective
lexical entries, so that the user can jump from the maa
entry to the lexical entries denoting part of the process.
The third type of lexical entries consist of proper
names of locations and historical and contemporary
persons. These occur primarily in narratives. Locations
or sites which play important roles in narratives, and
additional explanations on protagonists and historical
personalities occurring in narratives have been filmed
during the documentation project. This video material
will be linked with the lexical entries.

3.3 Linking to digital (language) archives
The data of the ongoing project 'Documentation of
the Marquesan languages and culture in French
Polynesia' are stored in the DOBES [3] domain of the
MPI archive for linguistic resources [5]. The archive
stores the video and audio files with their ELAN [11] or
Shoebox
annotations
(transcription,
translation,
comments). Each file in the archive is identifiable with a
persistent identifier (URI/handle). LEXUS uses this
handle to link the stored data as values for the audio and
video data categories. Not only is it possible to link the
whole file, linking selections within the video files is
also an option (provided that the required time coding is
known to the creator). The advantage of the archive
linking is that the LEXUS lexicon file remains relatively
small (easy manageable) since a large amount of the data
is stored outside LEXUS. The disadvantage is that the
multimedia extensions in the lexicon are only readable
for those people who have access to the Internet and who
have been granted access rights to the resource files in
the archive (see Figure 3).

4. Further developments

networks, leaving the viewer of the lexicon free to find
his way through the lexicon following the path of his
personal interest only.
The relational links in LEXUS have attributes which
define the type and directionality of the relation. The
creator of a lexicon is free to define his own relation
types, but LEXUS also offers some default paradigmatic
relations: synonymy, antonymy, hyponymy and
meronymy [12]. A synonym set includes word concepts
which all have the same semantic properties but different
forms (war – armed conflict), the relation type synonym
is bi-directional. Antonyms are words in a pair with
opposite meanings (white – black), also this type is bidirectional. Hyponymy is a ‘is a kind of’ relation (horse
– animal). A meronym denotes a constituent part of
something (arm – body).
In the Marquesan multimedia lexicon we envisage
the creation of a semantic network which represents the
natural world of the indigenous speech community.
The intention is to involve the speech community as
much as possible in the creation in order to obtain an
ethno-biological or emic representation of the natural
world, meaningful to the future users of the lexicon.

4.2 Involvement of the speech community

4.1 Visualizing semantic networks

4.2.1 User Interface

LEXUS allows the creation of semantic networks.
Semantic networks can be seen as forms of knowledge
representation in which the relation between the concepts
is visualized in a directed graph. Semantically annotated
words, which are part of relational networks, offer a
natural entry point for users other than linguists, since
words appear as part of the conceptual world
representing part of the indigenous knowledge rather
than just a word in a lexicon. LEXUS allows the user to
create these semantic networks but also to navigate
through the lexicon using these

Due to the involvement of members of the speech
community, a user interface adjusted to the knowledge
and (IT) skills of this community is required. The
creation of such an adjusted interface can be achieved
only in close collaboration between the researchers,
developers and speech community members. Here we
identify
an
interesting
software
engineering
phenomenon. The standard user interface design is
focusing on bridging the built-in functionality of a tool
and general ergonomic principles so that one could speak
about the existence of an 'optimal solution'.
ELAN annotation

authentication

Figure 3: Lexical entry view for maa, with link to the digital archive. The ELAN annotation
(including the video) opens after authentication.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

For an adjusted interface there is no such
convergence towards an optimal solution, since the
concept of 'adjusted' is very much dependent on a
personal selection of functionality and on personal
preferences. An 'adjusted' interface, therefore, is a
unique implementation which takes account of the
wishes of a specific group of persons or even individuals
as long as there are no simple standards established by
broad training and education.

4.2.2 Collaborative workspaces
In LEXUS, lexica are created in, so called,
workspaces. To enter into a workspace the user needs to
authenticate with a username and password. After the
creator of the lexicon is satisfied with his or her product
the lexicon can be published to a central storage. When
publishing the creator needs to set the access rights to the
lexicon, meaning that he needs to specify the user or
group of users which can import the lexicon to their
workspaces and make modifications. Within the
framework of the project we want to realize the concept
of collaborative lexicon creation. Collaborative lexicon
creation can be realized when more than one person can
work on the same lexicon in different workspaces at the
same time, allowing members of the speech community
to freely contribute in the building up of a rich resource
for language maintenance measures and further research
on the language and culture. For the researcher this work
by indigenous writers will expand their research sources
and will give them new tasks in guiding, moderating and
unifying the commentaries and extensions.
Collaborative lexicon creation in multiple and
simultaneous workspaces requires flexibility as well as
mechanisms to merge and consolidate the enriched
lexicon versions. Since the people involved work at
different locations, this collaboration has to be built on a
virtual space that is accessible by all, which is the Web.

Currently, we have arrived at a stage in the
development phase, in which we will concentrate on the
improvement of the LEXUS user interface. For this
activity we have foreseen an important participation of
the speech community. Representatives of the speech
community will visit the Max Planck Institute in the
summer of 2007, in order to facilitate the developers of
the tool to adjust the user interface to the knowledge
level and IT skills of the future users of the lexicon.
The next and last step in the development of LEXUS
consists of the implementation of collaborative
workspaces, allowing multiple users to create a lexicon
simultaneously. This functionality will require flexibility
of the tool, as well as mechanisms to merge the different
lexicon versions.
We plan to deliver LEXUS, with full functionalities
and user interface to the speech community mid 2008.
The current LEXUS version (0.93) is available from:
http://www.mpi.nl/mpi/lexus.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

5. Conclusion
LEXUS is a flexible lexicon tool under development at
the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics. Within
the framework of the project ‘Towards a multimedia
dictionary of the Marquesan and Tuamotuan languages
of French Polynesia’ we have developed several
functionalities in LEXUS which allow the creation of a
digital, multi-lingual, multimedia dictionary. These
functionalities include the import of Shoebox lexica, the
integration of audio and video fragments and the linking
of images to lexical entries. Furthermore, with LEXUS
the user is able to create semantic networks representing
indigenous knowledge bases in which relations between
objects and entities are visualized in directed graphs.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

Gippert J., N.P. Himmelmann and U. Mosel
(eds.),
2006.
Essentials
of
language
documentation. Mouton de Gruyter. Berlin.
UNESCO, 2005. Language preservation.
http://www.unesco.org
DOBES, 2006. Documentation of endangered
languages. http://www.mpi.nl/dobes/
DELAMAN,
2003.
Digital
Endangered
Languages and Musics Archives Network.
http://www.delaman.org/
MPI, 2007. Digital Archive for Linguistic
Resources. http://corpus1.mpi.nl/ds/imdi_browser/
Wittenburg P., W. Peters, and D. Broeder,
2002. Metadata proposals for corpora and
lexica. Proceedings LREC 2002, Las Palmas
pp.1055 – 1059
ANNEX, 2006. Annotation Exploration tool in the
MPI web-based framework for archive exploration
and enrichment. http://www.mpi.nl/annex/
Pawley A.K., 1993. A language which defines
description by ordinary means. In: Foley A.F. (ed.)
The role of Theory in Language Description, 87 129. Mouton de Gruyter. Berlin.
LEXUS, 2006. Lexus, a web-based lexicon tool.
http://www.mpi.nl/lexus/
SIL, 2006. Shoebox, The Linguist’s Shoebox.
http://www.sil.org/computing/catalog/
ELAN, 2006. Extended Linguistic Annotator.
http://www.mpi.nl/tools/elan.html
Murphy, M.L., 2003. Semantic relations and the
lexicon. Antonymy, Synonymy and other paradigms.
Cambridge University Press.

