A Characterisation Model for Visual Interaction Interfaces
Grant Osborne1, G Stewart Von Itzstein2, Rudi Vernik2
1

University of South Australia, 2DSTO Edinburgh Australia
grantus@gmail.com, stewart@vonitzstein.com, rudi.vernik@dsto.defence.gov.au

Abstract
This paper focuses on enhancing the effectiveness of
information visualisation approaches through the use of
Visual Interaction Interfaces (VIIs). We define VIIs as
being graphical components which help users understand
and interact with visual representations of a target
environment (or data space). These types of components
have been effectively used in computer-based games to
enhance user experience. However, few such techniques
are used in visualisation approaches designed to support
decision-makers in real-world domains. A characterisation
model, based on the capture and analysis of some 200 VIIs,
has been developed to help describe and understand these
types of visualisation components and hence support the
transitioning of these techniques into future visualisation
systems.
Keywords: Visualisations, Characterisation Model,
Visual Interaction Interfaces, Imago.

1. Introduction
Decision-makers
are
becoming
increasingly
overwhelmed by the amount of information provided to
them, the complexities of their business environments and
the shorter decision cycles required when operating in
highly networked enterprises. Information visualisation has
the potential for providing information in a form that
allows people to make use of their innate abilities in areas
such as pattern matching. Executive Information Systems
are making increasing use of computer-based visualisation
to enhance these aspects [1].
A significant amount of work has been undertaken in
defining and developing visual representations for
visualising information. For example, graph visualisation
approaches have been useful for visualising the
relationships between various entities, and charts are
commonly used to provide summaries of various attributes
such as cost. There have been other attempts at providing
visualisations that give new insights into a set of data by
providing the information in a form that corresponds to
common frames of reference, such as a city-scape [2]. Less
work has been done on how best to support interaction with
visual representation. Some important contributions in this
area include the work done by Card and Mackinlay [3] on

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

the structure of the information visualisation design space.
Shneiderman & Ahlberg [4] introduced the concept of
direct manipulation to support more interactive
visualisation approaches.
This paper focuses on enhancing the effectiveness of
visualisations through the use of Visual Interaction
Interfaces (VIIs). We define VIIs as being graphical
components which help users understand and interact with
visual representations of a target environment (or data
space) within which users perform a range of cognitive
activities and resulting actions. Computer-based games
provide many examples of systems through which users
interact with visual representations of entities and
environments using a range of VII’s. In these systems,
VII’s are used to provide awareness information, support
navigation, monitor situations and provide visual
mechanisms for control. Decision makers in areas such as
business, government and defence need similar support
capabilities. For example, executive information
visualisation systems need to provide key decision-makers
with interactive computer-based representations that
provide awareness of the status of important characteristics
of the business such as share prices, production results,
sales, and personnel. In military command and control,
these types of systems are important for understanding and
acting on new threats, changes in resources such as fuel and
changes in the environment such as weather. However, few
systems with the interactive capabilities currently seen in
many popular entertainment applications are available for
these purposes.
Computer entertainment applications provide a range of
novel VIIs to support decision-making in complex
simulated worlds, often directly related to the types of
situations faced in the real world of sport, business or
defence. Game designers understand that if these types of
interfaces are lacking, users will not be able to gain
satisfaction through their interactions with the target world
and, since this type of activity is purely discretionary, may
decide not to purchase and play the game. The importance
of developing successful interaction approaches is therefore
often more critical for the gaming industry since they live
or die based on the effectiveness of their software. In many
other areas, users do not have the same level of discretion
when deciding whether or not they use a corporate
application. Entertainment software has to be very good to
survive. The has led to an accelerated pseudo-evolution of

the interactive components found within these applications,
as they live or die based on how easily users can become
immersed in the virtual context. However, the most popular
games are not necessarily the most graphically intense, but
those with an interface easily engaged by the user. This
engagement requires both visual and interactive aspects
that in most cases are fused into the one component –
forming the Visual Interaction Interface. For instance, a
mini-map (radar) component can show the players position
in the world and also allow for quick navigation around the
environment, thus providing visual awareness of the
environment, as well as enabling quick navigation or
interaction. If the user was presented with a static map of
the environment without some form of interaction the user
would soon get frustrated and abandon the game.
This paper argues that gaming systems are a rich and
worthy area of study to help characterises and understand
the types of visual interaction interfaces that could be
employed in other areas such as business and defence.
Computer-based games provide a wealth of novel and
tested approaches that could be employed to support users
in other domains. Moreover, games often provide simulated
scenarios which parallel decision-making in real world
situations. They can therefore also provide evaluation
contexts for VIIs.
This paper describes the approach that has been taken to
understand, characterise and model VIIs. Section 2
provides background information on VIIs and their
importance in interacting with visual representations of
referent environments and data spaces. Section 3 describes
the dataset that we have compiled to support the research.
Two hundred VII’s were extracted from a number of games
across various genres including Role Playing Games, First
Person Shooters, Massively Multiplayer Games, Real Time
Strategy and Simulation Games have been identified and
captured in a database that supports the characterisation and
modelling activities that have been undertaking. Section 4
describes the initial characterisation model that has resulted
from this research. Section 5 then discusses the
implications for and limitations of the work to date. This
research aims to contribute to the scientific base of
knowledge in user interfaces and information visualisation.
The resulting models and taxonomies should also help
support evaluation and transitioning activities in this area.
For example, we argue that the this type of scientific
knowledge could support the development of future
executive information visualisation systems by providing
the basis for identifying, showcasing and evaluating VIIs
for decision-making activities in various application
domains including business, health, and defence command
and control.

2. Visual Interaction Interfaces
Many information visualisation applications provide noninteractive representations of underlying data within the
visual context. However, future applications need to be
designed to support higher levels of interactivity. Given the
complexity and large amounts of information provided to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

users, they need additional support to interact with, control
and understand the information provided to them. We argue
that Visual Interaction Interfaces provide a way of
supporting these needs. VIIs support enhanced awareness,
perception, reasoning and judgment within a virtual context
enabling users to make more informed decisions. Figure 1
shows VIIs within the context of the referent visualisation
and the represented entities. The referent visualisation
represents the background representation of interest to a
user. In this case the referent is a representation of a virtual
world. However, in a business application, the referent
representation might be a visualisation of the stock market.
Entities are situated within the referent. These are the
elements that can be controlled by the user. In this case the
entity shown is a space vehicle. In a business application,
the entities might be stock traders, transport entities, or
simulated customers. Figure 1 also shows examples of
Visual Interaction Interfaces. These are used to support
understanding through enhanced awareness, monitoring
and control. The VIIs in the figure 1 include a mechanism
for controlling the movement of your vehicle and many
interfaces for showing the current status of the entity under
the user’s control. The movement ‘disc’ simultaneously
provides users with spatial knowledge as well as
information regarding the distance to the target destination
of the entity under the users command.
Entities within
visualisation

VIIs

Figure 1: VIIs in context of their referent
visualisation [5]
The research presented in this paper describes an
approach for the characterisation modelling of Visual
Interaction Interfaces. A grounded theory approach was
used to support the modelling activities. The idea was to
draw from a rich domain of interactive visual applications
to establishing an extensive dataset of VIIs and then
analyse the dataset to define a model which would help
characterise and describe this area of interest. To this end
the highly interactive application domain of entertainment
computing was chosen as an initial focus domain. This area
was seen as a prime candidate for a source of inspiring and
novel components to study.
There are literally thousands, if not tens of thousands of
interactive computer applications each offering multiple
components in all of them. This poses the question: how do
we even begin to understand them? This paper describes an
approach we took to study, characterise and model these

interfaces. We argue that the results of these types of
activities can aid our knowledge and understanding and
hence be used to aid the design of future interactive
information visualisation systems in a range of application
domains.
If one were to examine other visualisation environments
such as strategic mechanisms, either military or corporate,
one would see that the VII classification mechanism could
be used to design such systems more effectively. At present
when designing these visualisation systems, developers
build from personal experience and hence do not always
take advantage of a large number of possible VIIs already
designed. Models and related toolsets proposed in this
paper may help developers determining which components
can be used in particular situations and provide showcase
examples to aid in the process of creating future
information visualisation applications.

3. VII Datasets
In this section an overview of the methodology and
results of the analysis of Visual Interaction Interfaces
captured from a number of computer entertainment
applications is provided. In order to capture these interfaces
the real time video and benchmarking tool Fraps [6] was
used. Once the interfaces were captured, the individual
components were extracted (using Photoshop CS2 [7]).
Each game has a different referent visualisation screen
shot, or video clip, setting the context for the visualisation
and the individual components of that visualisation. From
the twenty applications examined approximately two
hundred individual components where extracted and stored
in a database. These components came from a variety of
different types of applications including Role Playing,
Simulation, Massively Multiplayer, First Person Shooters
and Real Time Strategy genres. All of this data was
collated for analysis. The captured data was then analysed
for patterns and anomalies to try to identify defining
characteristics for the components.
A schema evolved though the analysis of the data. For
example, the VII was initially defined by two aspects.
Firstly, the category of component was defined by
providing a description of the components purpose and a
definition of the aspect of the visualisation the component
is portraying. The schema stores the keywords
encompassing both these aspects in a keywords section.
Figure 2 shows the categorisation section from the
database.
The second characteristic which defines the component is
the way in which the component is represented. These
elements form the descriptive aspects of the component.
Descriptive aspects include the basic representation of the
component such as 3D Models, Icons or Text and any
enhancements applied to further reinforce the purpose of
the component, such as blurring or colour overlays.
In addition to the characteristics outlined above the
schema stores attributes such as name, publisher, year, link
to the image of the component, link to the referent
visualisation, and the type of game with a brief description.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Additional meta-information was also stored inside the
database that narratively described the origin of the VII and
the context in which it was used.

Figure 2: VII Database Categorisation Section
Once all of the components had been entered into the
database several aspects of these components were
examined to identify any categories and patterns that
emerge within the category section of the database. This
analysis forms the basis of the model described in the next
section. For example the application Quake 3 Arena [8], a
pattern was found in certain types of components that exist
in the game. It was found that there are many components
that give the status of a certain element within the virtual
world, such as being able to show the user the status of the
entity that they have under their control. The components
from the application represented armour, health, and
ammunition icons with textual information. These sorts of
similar groupings of components where found in the
datasets collected for other applications. It was found that
most components either describe something about an entity
in the game that a player controls, something about the
environment in which you are engaged and or allowed you
to control the dynamics of an element of the virtual
context.

4. Characterisation Model for VIIs
Figure 3, Figure 7, Figure 11 and Figure 12 define the
model that resulted from the analysis of the dataset of VIIs
captured from applications outlined in the previous section.
Figure 3 shows the three main dimensions of a model:
Environment, Entity and Dynamics. These provide the
setting for the classification of VII components. Figure 7
shows various planes within the model which define the
purpose of VIIs. These include situational awareness,
control, and monitoring. Figure 11 defines descriptive
characteristics related to the visual form of a VII such as
how it is visually represented and the enhancement
approaches used to convey information such as the use of
animation. Figure 12 describes a VII classification map
which allows easy classification of VIIs. The following
sections describe these aspects in more detail.

4.1

The Three Main Dimensions

4.1.1
Environment
The Environment defines the context within which a user
operates. This could be a representation of the real world, a
virtual world or a data space. It is generally represented at
referent visualisation. VIIs that describe the environment

would enable the user to gain insight about the world or
data space in which they are engaged. The environment is
not something that the user can directly manipulate. For the
user to be able to affect the environment the user operates
through entities that exist in that environment. An entity
might be ordered to construct a bridge in order to modify
the inaccessibility characteristics of a water crossing. Not
all environmental aspects are mutable. For instance, there is
no entity that can modify the weather. The user can create
certain entities to overcome or utilize these environmental
characteristics. For example, the user could use the
cloaking characteristics of fog to launch a surprise attack or
evade an enemy. In Figure 4 we see an example of an
environmental VII, a radar or mini-map showing the
location of the entity that the user controls within the
environment in which it is immersed. This component
gives the user information about the Environment including
weather (sun icon), time of day (sun icon) and geographical
information. Filters can also be applied to the radar. For
example, the icon on the left of the circle shows that the
user is looking for minerals to mine within the area shown
by the radar. The arrow in the centre of the mini-map
shows the orientation of the user in the virtual environment
and the arrows on the circumference of the map show the
direction to important landmarks within the environment.

Figure 3: High level characterisation model
Non-entertainment examples of an environmental
component include things like stock value tickers, which
enable you to monitor the value of your stocks, but you can
not directly change these values. Through manipulation of
your entities, in this case your stock holdings you can
however change these environmental values.
4.1.2
Entity
An entity is an object within the visualisation that the
user can manipulate towards achieving a goal. This
dimension of the model describes VIIs that provides insight
to a user through information about an entity within the
visualisation.
Figure 5 provides an example of an entity Visual
Interaction Interface. This component provides both
numerical and visual awareness of the entity you control by
showing the level of armour. From this component it is
straight forward to assess the fighting capacities of our
entity. Entities tend to be the focus of the user within the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

interface because they generally are the mechanism in
which they attempt to obtain a goal.

Figure 4: Example of an Environmental VII [9]

Figure 5: Example of an Entity VII [8]
Non entertainment applications of these sorts of
components include the icons used to represent aircraft in
air control monitoring software. These components show
the location of incoming and outgoing aircraft, as well as
attributes such as air speed and altitude.
4.1.3
Dynamics
This dimension of the model defines the dynamic aspects
of the situation. VIIs along this axis help convey dynamics
to the user. These VIIs allow the entity to modify the
environment or control their entities. For example, it may
be a command for an entity to construct a building or
destroy a bridge. In non entertainment computing an
example would be the manipulation functions of a graph
that would allow a business to modify logistical flows to
improve the ‘just in time’ characteristics of a
manufacturing process. Figure 6 shows an example of VIIs
that might lie on the Dynamics axis. These types of buttons
could be used within a virtual environment to change some
attribute over time. In most cases it is not possible to have a
dynamics component that doesn’t intersect with one of the
other two elements of the model, because it does not make
sense to change something if it doesn’t refer to anything
(e.g. an entity).

4.2

Model Concepts

The three elements described in the previous section can
be mapped into a non-scalar geometry in order to represent
all possible combinations of VIIs. Each plane becomes a
concept or type of VII.
The Entity, Environmental plane of the model represents
components that would fit into concept of Situational
Awareness. The components that exist here would enable
us to be more aware of what is happening to the entity and
the importance of the observed information. Components
that exist here help us build a mental model of the situation
in which the entity exists. Figure 8 provides an example of
a situational awareness VII. The entity is the player in this
case and the insight the user is gaining is from a colour
overlay (appears as a grey mist on the figure) pain

indication component which shows us that the entity is
under fire and shows which direction the fire is coming
from in the environment. That is if the player was side on
to the aggressor the grey mist would be concentrated on the
side that the damage was coming from. This VII is
therefore a combination of both entity status and
information coming from the environment – in which other
hostile entities exist, thus it fits into the concept of
Situation Awareness.
Figure 9: Control VII [5]
Figure 6: Example of a Dynamics VII [9]

There are other cross-over-contexts as well, for example,
Tactical Navigation would include elements of all three
planes of the model. The user controls entities, with
awareness of the local situation, as well as monitoring the
entire environment.

Figure 10: Monitoring VII [10]
Figure 7: Contextual characterisation model
The Entity, Dynamics plane of the model represents
components that fit into the concept of Control. These
components aim to directly change the entity in question.
The sorts of things a user can change via one of these
components include the location of the entity, the stance or
behaviour of the entity or the creation and deletion of
entities within the world. An example of this could be pure
navigation from one point to another within the virtual
world, or the changing of a unit’s stance from defensive to
aggressive.
Figure 9 shows a control VII. This VII is showing us the
entities we are have under our control by having it
highlighted using green icon overlays, shows the plane they
exist on using the blue disc and shows where the entity will
be moving to and the distance that will be travelled. This
component is effectively changing the status of the entities
thus it has both a dynamic and entity element to it.

Figure 8: Situational Awareness VII [8]
The Environment, Dynamics plane of the model represents
components that fit into the concept of Monitoring.
Components on this plane exist to keep track of certain
elements of the environment with a view towards collection
of information. For instance a counter of the amount of
units in your army would fit on this plane as shown below
in Figure 10.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

4.3

Descriptive Aspects

Visual Interaction Interfaces also have certain descriptive
aspects associated with them. A lens is used to provide a
context free look at the component within the space of the
model. The lens contains a two degree description of the
VII, based on the basic representation and any
enhancements to that basic representation.

4.4

Classification Map

Once the basic model of representation has been
established in the previous section it is possible to build a
second level abstraction within the model (Figure 12)
which classifies VIIs according to their location within the
3D model presented earlier. Using simple set theory
through the use of a Venn diagram we can see that many of
the VII categories overlap. This view of the model allows
us to easily see the categories of components that exist and
allowed for an easy classification of VIIs.
This classification map shows 7 different types of
components that may exist within our model.
1. Environment: Components which provide
information about the environment in which we
are engaged.
2. Entity: Components which are used to provide
information about the entity the user is focused
on.
3. Dynamics: Components that can be used to
change something in the virtual world over time.
4. Monitoring: Components which allow users to
monitor the environment over time.
5. Situational Awareness: Components which
provide information about an entity with relation
to the environment.

6.
7.

Control: Components that allow an entity to be
changed over time.
Tactical Control: Components that can be used
to control an entity, with knowledge of the
environment.

online interface. This will allow other researchers to add to
the database of components and will allow a richer domain
of results within the model. The main benefit would be that
the model would have a wider range of VIIs in order to
validate the framework.
This project will eventually be integrated into the Imago
environment which aids rapid visualisation systems
development. This adaptive interaction approach will
enable via instrumentation (currently provided on the
Livespace [11]) to dynamically produce visualisations for
the user.

6. Conclusion
Figure 11: Defining Components within VII
Context

1
5

4
7
3

2
6

Figure 12: VII Classification Map
Each of these sectors is represented in the first level
model as planes and intersections of planes. With the map
it is possible to see where VIIs can be represented. By
constructing a model in this way it can then be used to
build a knowledge base of VIIs and where they can be
usefully adopted. For instance, a user may wish to
undertake “monitoring” of a particular target. Consequently
they can look at the VII subset that exists within sector 4 of
the model. This coupled with characterizations being
developed, as part of DSTO’s Imago project will allow a
software engineering style characterisation to be adopted
and utilized for designing new visualisation systems.
The model becomes a valuable modelling tool for Visual
Interaction Interfaces when these classifications are
combined with the descriptive aspects of each component.

5. Future Work
The VII Classification Map raises a number of questions
that will need to be answered in future research. For
example: “What are the defining characteristics that make
a component exist in more that one plane?” Further
research will enable us to identify characteristics, which tie
specific VIIs into certain categories and thus will enable
developers to use the knowledge of these aspects to create
new VIIs for particular classifications.
The current implementation of the model is limited as the
predominate number of applications that where analysed
came from the computer entertainment application domain
(such as computer and console games). This would be
addressed by allowing people to add to the model via an

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

As information visualisation becomes more central to
decision making in domains such as business and defence,
consideration will need to be given to how users can best
interact with and understand visual representations. This
paper discussed the use of Visual Interaction Interfaces for
enhancing user effectiveness and experience. These visual
components allow the user to gain awareness of, control
and monitor those aspects of interest to the user. A
characterisation model developed through the analysis of
some two hundred VIIs identified in a range of computerbased entertainment applications provides a basis for
enhanced description and understanding of these types of
interfaces. Further work will explore how this type of
knowledge can be used to support the rapid development
and evaluation of future information visualisation systems.

7. Reference
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Basu, C., et al. Diffusion of executive information
systems in organisations and the shift to web
technologies. 2000: MCB University Press.
Keskin, C. and V. Vogelman. Effective Visualization of
Hierarchical Graphs with the Cityscape Metaphor in
NPIV '97. 1998. Las Vegas Nevada USA: ACM.
Card, S.K. and J. Mackinlay, The Structure of the
Information Visualization Design Space. IEEE, 1997: p.
8.
Shneiderman, B. and C. Ahlberg, Visual Information
Seeking: Tight Coupling of Dynamic Query Filters with
Starfield Displays. ACM, 1994: p. 7.
Relic, Homeworld 2. 1999.
Beepa. Fraps: Real time video capture &
benchmarking.
2006
[cited; Available from:
http://www.fraps.com/.
Adobe. Photoshop CS2 9.0. 2005 [cited; Available
from:http://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop/main.h
tml.
ID-Software, Quake 3 Arena. 2000.
Blizzard, World of Warcraft. 2005.
Pyro-Studios, Praetorians. 2003, EIDOS Interactive.
Bright, D. and R. Vernik, LiveSpaces: An Interactive
Ubiquitous Workspace Architecture for the Enterprise,
in Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 2004, Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg. p. 982-993.

