What is a diagram?
Kamaran Fathulla
Northampton Business School
The University of Northampton
Northampton
United Kingdom

Andrew Basden
Information Systems Institute
University of Salford
Salford
United Kingdom

Kamaran.fathulla@northampton.ac.uk

a.basden@salford.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper responds to renewed interest in the
centuries old question of what is a diagram. Existing
status of our understanding of diagrams is seen
as unsatisfactory and confusing. This paper responds
to this by proposing a framework for understanding
diagrams based on Symbolic and Spatial Mapping.
The framework deals with some complex problems
any useful definition of diagrams has to deal with.
These problems are the variety of diagrams,
meaningful dynamics of diagramming, handling
change in diagrams in a well formed way, and all of
this in the context of semantically mixed diagrams.
A brief description of the framework is given
discussing how it addresses the problems.
Keywords:
SySpM: Symbolic, Spatial, Mapping. WF: Well
formedness.

1. Introduction

2. The richness of diagrams
The extent of the involvement of diagrams in our
everyday life points to the richness of diagrams in
themselves. This richness manifests itself in some
complex problems. We identified and addressed
three main problems concerning understanding
diagrams:
1.
2.
3.

Variety of diagram types
Handling change in diagrams and
maintaining their well formedness
Semantically mixed diagrams

2.1 Variety of diagram types

Diagrams are a very old form of representing and
making sense of the world around us. Some 2500
years ago people have used clay tablets to express
boundaries, groupings, and routes, Figures 1 and 2.

Figure 1: Clay
Tablet map from
Ga-Sur, Kirkuk,
2,500 B.C.

calls by questioning our existing understanding of
diagrams arguing that centuries held assumption that
“a drawing-is a drawing-is a drawing” is
progressively shown to be invalid

The variety of diagrams is not only attributed to the
variety of applications because when application
constraints are removed differences of another sort
becomes apparent. [31] sees differences “regardless
of implantation” between four “Manifestly” different
diagrams, see Figure 3, these are: objects distribute
on a surface, routes, surfaces, contour maps. He sees
differences between all four types

Figure 2:
Redrawing with
interpretation
of Figure 1

However, despite this close and rich involvement of
diagrams in human history people are now again still
asking centuries old question “What is a diagram?”,
[24]. [29] asks the question “What are arrows?”. [1]
ask “What constitutes a diagram?”. [4] adds to these

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 3: Different types of diagrams
The impact of not properly understanding and taking
account of this variety leads to confusion especially
as new forms of communications arise, [13], [5].

2.2 Handling change and well formedness

where the end items also is connected by a
relationship.

Two types of handling change are identified:
1. Concerns the diagram itself.
This covers
deliberate changes made to the diagram.
2. Concerns the creator or the onlooker of the
diagram rather than the diagram itself. Dynamic
activity of this type, such as doodling, has no
symbolic effect on the diagram itself but has
some meaning as far as the creator or the
onlooker of the diagram is concerned.

The difficulty of achieving WF has characterised
even the most popular types of diagrams namely ER
diagrams, [20]. Drawing software tools do not make
the WF that easy to achieve. The default settings of
many graphical packages do not produce effective
graphs. They often clutter their graphs with extra
dimensions, unnecessary crosshatching, or other
forms of what [28] calls chartjunk.

For the purposes of this paper we will only be
concentrating on the first type. The second type is a
matter of ongoing research. Handling change of the
first type is a common task but often present
significant problems for the person making the
changes. These problems stem from the fact that
people make mistakes which may interfere with or
interrupt their flow of thinking. We identify four
issues that arise when trying to deal with handling
change whilst ensuring well formedness. First is that
WF has rules. A contour map has rules that prohibits
lines from overlapping each other. This is because it
is impossible for heights to overlap in nature. A line
and box diagram has rules one of which prohibits
lines not being connected to a box. This is because it
is not allowed to have a dangling relationship as it
makes no sense. Second is that WF rules may be
relaxed. [22] include numerous examples of the need
to relax the rules in the drawing process in their
observations of how an architect designs the layout
for a kitchen. One of these is that the architect would
sometimes draw only part of the object to represent
the whole; the rectangular outline of a cooker would
be drawn with only two lines, in an L shape. Third, is
that WF rules are not arbitrary. [11] discusses the
issue of how certain materials afford certain
meanings. A line in a line and box diagram affords
the meaning of a relationship. Finally, WF has
variations. This concerns diagrams that are sub types
of a main type of diagram. This is illustrated in the
case of the different types of boxes and arrows
diagrams. Each type representing items and
relationships concepts. Examples of such diagrams
are Network, Trees Lists. These are all examples of a
box and lines type of diagram. The rules of WF in
each one is different from the others:
Networks: any relationship between any two items;
no constraints; relationship type is many-to-many.
Trees (hierarchies): one-to-many relationship types
between item types. Each item can connect to N
others in one direction of the relationship, but to only
one other item in the reverse direction.
Lists: one-to-one relationship types. Each item can
connect to only one item in each direction. (Note
also the other variation which is the circular list,

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.3 Semantically mixed diagrams
Diagrams are rarely composed of a single type of
diagram. Real diagrams often contain a mix of
different types or classes of diagrams, see Figure 4.

Figure 4: show a mixed diagram composed
of surface coverage and bar charts
Marvin Minsky on the notion of mixed diagrams:
In the 1960’s and 1970’s, students frequently asked,
"Which kind of representation is best?" and I usually
replied that we'd need more research. . . But now I
would reply: To solve really hard problems, we'll
have to use several different representations. This is
because each particular kind of data structure has its
own virtues and deficiencies, and none by itself
would seem adequate for all the different functions
involved with what we call common sense. [21], [6],
and [17] all discuss the issue of mixed diagrams.
Mixed diagrams is often considered as an after
thought of the drawing process. [26] reports that
designers often describe their work as a process of
transforming and merging diagrams, "trying to take a
structural diagram, a functional diagram, and a
circulation diagram" and "combining them". This
activity often happens when most of the thinking has
already taken place with or without the aid of
software. [22] call this the compositional approach,
[30] calls it the ‘designer’s-eye-view’. It is suited to
the production of diagrams that express thought that
is already well-structured.
[10], discuss a common problem often encountered
when working with semantically mixed diagrams.

Within the context of cognitive mapping they state
that: "Answers to today's complex questions require
balancing multiple and often conflicting cognitive
maps".

3. Existing answers
Several answers are given to what is a diagram. A
summary of each definition and its corresponding
emphasis is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Definitions of diagrams and their
emphasis

Source

Emphasis

Peirce
(1931)
Gombrich (1966)

What we do with diagrams
Interpretation and new
meanings: “to see the shape
apart from its interpretation
is not possible”.
Structure of diagrams in
graphical terminology
Interpretation and
communicative intent
What we do with diagrams
Cognitive structure of
diagrams

Bertin

(1983)

Ittelson

(1996)

Knoespel (2001)
Engelhardt (2002)

[13] claims that our current ways of understanding
diagrams is one of “confusion”. [23] finds existing
ways of understanding graphical representations to
be unsatisfactory. [4] adds to this by questioning our
existing ways of understanding diagrams arguing
that centuries held assumption that “a drawing-is a
drawing-is a drawing” is progressively shown to be
invalid. [19] argues that there is a need for a serious
study to help us better understand diagrams. Much
of the discussion on the nature of diagrams seems to
be influenced by the internal versus external debate.
Proponents of the external camp see diagrams as a
collection of spatial (Sp) or visual things independent
of humans. Proponents of the internal camp see
diagrams as a collection of symbolic (Sy) things.

4. The importance of the spatial aspect Sp
The spatial aspect is important because it is the
aspect which is considered as providing the raw
material for the creation and transformation of
diagrams. Sp is also important because for it forms a
pre requisite for other aspects, such as the sensory, to
function properly, [15]. There are a number of other
reasons for the importance of the spatial aspect such
as the need to relax the rules, purely spatial editing
operations, and others. However, there are problems
with a purely spatial approach to understanding
diagrams. [18] questions the adequacy of discussing
spatial aspects of diagrams in isolation from other

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

human functioning aspects. [27] say that spatial
arrangements do not have any inherent significance
of their own. Programmers, for example, who use a
simple single colour, fixed pitch font terminal can
get a mental image that aids comprehension form the
appearance of the indenting in their code and the
relative size of blocks of code.
One of the problems of a purely Sp account of
diagrams impacts a diagrams well formedness.
References to ‘label’, ‘name’, ‘number’, etc. would
seem to be symbolic phenomena rather than spatial.
One way of making the necessary distinction would
be to define all symbolic phenomena in purely
spatial terms by the addition of extra rules (e.g. “A
label is a row of character-shapes that is placed near
another shape”) but this solution is too cumbersome
and creates immense difficulties particularly in
mixed diagrams. Numbers are sometimes used to
label items in a list (for example, a bullet list in a
multimedia presentation), in such a way that they
indicate the order in the list. If an item were to be
moved up the list, then we would expect not only
that the numbers accompanying the items would be
moved with the item (a spatial operation), but that
some items would be renumbered (an operation than
cannot be accounted for by spatial rules).
Some diagrams that seem ill formed, spatially, are in
fact well formed to the user. For example, Figure 5
shows a box and arrows diagram produced by the
Istar visual knowledge representation toolkit, [2].
Istar has a facility to hide most of the diagram except
those parts connected to a selected box, directly or
indirectly. The diagram shows some dangling lines.

Figure 5: A typical Istar, [2], Box and arrows
diagram
A fundamental spatial rule of well-formedness in a
box and arrows diagram is that all arrows must
terminate on boxes at both ends, this suggests the
diagram is not well formed from a spatial
perspective. However, such a diagram was well
formed in the user’s eyes, and found to be useful,
because the dangling arrows told them what else the
visible boxes connected to. A useful definition of
well-formedness such as we wish to implement in
software should therefore allow such temporary
breaking of the rules of spatial well-formedness,

within the overall context of a well formed diagram.
However, it does require that the definition of this
fuller notion of well formedness includes knowledge
that would enable spatial well-formedness to be
recovered. Another problem is that a purely spatial
perspective on well formedness cannot account for
what might be called ‘doodling’. [2] call it ‘tentative
action’ and give the following example. The user of
the Istar toolkit, that employs boxes and arrows as a
visual knowledge representation language, would
‘pick up’ a box and wiggle it about for a time before
setting it back in its original position. The spatial
result of such actions is, often, null, so that from the
spatial perspective alone the action itself would be of
zero effect. But, to the user, it was a significant
action because it helped him think about the concept
that was represented by the box.

5. The importance of the symbolic aspect
- Sy
The importance of Sy is that it gives precision and
clear ambiguity to the expression of meaning in
diagrams. This is true because many types of
diagrams make use of similar spatial phenomena but
what distinguishes them from each other is their
(Sy). Sy also allows us to deal with mixed diagrams
where the same Sp aspect of such diagrams could
have more than one meaning depending on their use.
The London Underground Map LUM is one such
case where it is composed of circle and lines but
expresses a range of Sy meaning. Similarly, there are
problems with a purely symbolic approach to
understanding diagrams. There is a temptation to
consider Sy as the aspect which is sufficient to
account for the nature of diagrams. There are a
number of problems with this view. First, from a
general point of view Sy alone would not allow us to
distinguish diagrams from other constructs made by
humans that are used to convey information which is
what Sy is about such as a book, a web page, a letter
and others. Second, guiding our thinking of what Sy
ought to be about would be based on our existing
knowledge of the variety of diagram types in use
and this would inhibit us from developing new types
of diagrams. Yet, in reality we find that people are
very creative and able to always produce new types
of diagrams. This suggests that Sy alone is not
sufficient. Finally, some useful diagramming (Sp)
activities (kinematic) carry no Sy meaning such as
cleaning up and tidying activities people often
deploy in complex messy diagrams.

6. A proposed framework for a good
understanding of diagrams
Full discussion of this framework and its
contributions is beyond the scope of this paper and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

can be found in [9]. Here we briefly introduce the
most important elements of the framework. The
central thrust of this framework is: Separating
Symbolic from Spatial but allowing for their
Mapping. The framework is based on the notion that
Sy is distinct and separate from Sp and is irreducible
to it. From this framework individual SySpM’s
could be constructed. The term “a SySpM” is used
to denote a distinct (particular) collection of Sy and a
distinct collection of Sp and a distinct Mapping
between the two Sy and Sp collection. Synonymous
with this term are drawing styles or types of
diagrams. We grouped the Sy and Sp terms into
primary and secondary lists. The former includes
Sy and Sp terms that are used in the simplest or basic
form of the SySpM. This category of Sy and Sp is
also in all instances of diagrams of the relevant
SySpM. The latter includes terms that are used in
complex diagrams of the relevant SySpM and it also
includes things that have to do with the relationships
or interaction between the various Sy things of the
relevant SySpM. Development of each SySpM also
includes list of Sp things that do not map onto any
Sy known as redundant Sp things. These could then
become available for other SySpM’s to use to give
mixed diagrams, list of constraints and why they
occur, and list of events or changes relevant to the
SySpM under consideration. Special features of a
SySpM use redundant Sp features to bring in
secondary Sp features rather than another SySpM as
mixed diagrams. An example of this in a box and
arrows SySpM is when lines are allowed to cross
other lines. This happens when one line is given a
kink or a gap to indicate clearly that one is passing
over or under the other rather than connecting to it,
e.g. electronic circuits. Sub types are diagrams in
which the original and simple SySpM is constrained/
complicated because of specific needs usually
associated with a type of application. This is
achieved by brining in an extra Sy constraint which,
owing to Mapping, also gives a different Sp feel to
the diagram. There are at least three different ways
of Sy sub types in a Box and Arrows SySpM:
Networks, Lists, and Trees. For each SySpM there
might be special cases that do not 'fit' well. Many
spatial applications involve several of such special
cases such as holes, discontinuities, and other
irregularities. We need to identify these and explain
the problems they give, that is, what constraints they
break, either spatial (as here) or symbolic.
A SySpM could contain features that are outside the
range of its base symbolic types. This recognises that
each SySpM will be able to express only a subset of
the symbol level, not all of it. To express the whole
wide range of things at the Sy level requires several
different SySpM’s. Within this context two types of
mixedness are identified. One is when several
SySpM’s are present in a diagram but none
dominates the overall meaning of the diagram. An

example of this is the Napoleon’s march on Moscow
diagram. This type of mixedness is referred to “True
mixed diagrams”. The other type is referred to as
“Augmented diagrams”. This type of mixedness
has one SySpM occupying a primary importance
whilst other SySpM’s are added in and have
secondary importance. This type of mixedness
occurs when redundant Sp features of a SySpM are
used to bring in Sy from other SySpM’s. For
example, in a Box and Arrows SySpM thickness of
lines could be used to bring in quantitative value
from Bar Chart SySpM.

7. The SySpM framework and the three
problems
The SySpM framework deals with the problem of the
variety of diagram types at the two levels. One is at
the level of individual SySpM’s. In [9] eight such
SySpM’s were developed namely:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Boxes and Arrows
Communicating Similarity
Map of Objects
Set Membership
Bar Charts
Route Maps
Contour Maps
Surface Coverage

These SySpM’s are not seen as a final list but rather
to demonstrate the potential of SySpM as a
framework in accounting for a diverse range of types
of diagrams. The other level is within each individual
SySpM where a wide range of different diagrams can
be accounted for through the notions of sub types,
special features, true and augmented diagrams. The
deliberate, distinct, and rich account of what
constitutes Sy, Sp, and M for each SySpM allows
not only the potential to accounting for a very wide
range of diagrams but also in differentiating them
with precision.
The problem of mixed diagrams is dealt with through
the notions of augmented and true mixed diagrams.
[9] demonstrated the potential of the eight SySpM’s
in accounting for four complex and semantically
mixed real world diagrams:
1.
2.
3.
4.

A Quantified Flow Chart
A Pressure – Volume Graph
Diagram depicting Napoleon’s March on
Moscow
An Ordnance Survey Map

Change in diagrams is give precision and flexibility
at the same time. Precision because each editing
operation is specific to the type of SySpM under
consideration and distinguished from other SySpM’s.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Flexibility is accommodated by the notion of rule
relaxation.

8. Conclusion
This paper responded to renewed interest in our
understanding of diagrams. Whilst existing
definitions are based on a specific perspective the
framework proposed in this paper pursues an
integrated approach. The merits of the framework are
discussed in relation to three main problems
concerning diagrams. This work carried out here is
part of an ongoing research which aims to develop
drawing software based on the framework of SySpM
capable of handling the challenges presented by the
three main problems.

9. References
[1] Anderson M and McCartney R (2003) Diagram
processing: Computing with diagrams. Artificial
Intelligence 145, pp 181-226. ELSEVIER.
[2] Basden A, Brown A J, Tetlow S D A, Hibberd P R
(1996) Design of a user interface for a knowledge
refinement. tool International Journal of Human Computer
Studies, vol.45, pp.157-183.
[3] Bertin J, (1983), “Semiology of graphics”. University
of Wisconsin press.
[4] Bishop I (1994) In: Visualisation in modern
cartography, Ed. A M MacEachren and D R Fraser Taylor.
Pergamon 1994.
[5] Cheng P, Cupit J, (2001), Supporting diagrammatic
knowledge acquisition: an ontological analysis of
Cartesian graphs. Int. J. Human – Computer – Interaction
Studies, 54.
[6] Cheng
P (1996) Diagrammatic Knowledge
Acquisition: Elicitation, Analysis and Issues. In N. R.
Shadbolt, H. O'Hara, & G. Schreiber (Eds.), Advances in
Knowledge Acquisition: 9th European Knowledge
Acquisition Workshop, EKAW'96. (pp. 179-194). Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
[7] Cheng P, Lowe R, Scaife M (2001) Cognitive Science
Approaches
To
Understanding
Diagrammatic
Representations. In Thinking with Diagrams, ed. Alan F.
Blackwell, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht
[8] Engelhardt Yuri (2002), The Language of Graphics,
PhD thesis, 2002, Institute for Logic, Language &
Computation, University of Amsterdam. ISBN 90-5776089-4
[9] Fathulla K (2006), Understanding Diagrams Based on
Symbolic and Spatial Mapping. PhD thesis, University of
Salford, United Kingdom.

[10] Fiol C M, Huff A S (1992) Maps for managers: where
are we? where do we go from here? Journal of
Management Studies, Vol.29, No.3, pp. 267-286.
[11] Gibson J J (1977) The theory of affordances. In: Shaw
R, Bransford J (eds): Perceiving, Acting and Knowing
Erlbaum, Hilsdale, NJ.
[12] Gombrich E H (1966) Norm and Form: Studies in the
art of th erenasisnace. Phaidon Press, Oxford.
[13] Horn R E, (2001) Visual Language and Converging
Technologies in the Next 10-15 Years (and Beyond). The
National Science Foundation Conference on Converging
Technologies (Nano-Bio-Info-Cogno) for Improving
Human Performance.
[14] Ittelson, W.H. (1996). Visual perception of markings.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 3, 171-187.
[15] Jobson J, Rahman Z, and Woodell G A (2001) The
Spatial Aspect of Color and Scientific Implications of
Retinex Image Processing, SPIE International Symposium
on AeroSense, Proceedings of the Conference on Visual
Information Processing X.
[16] Knoespel K J (2001). Diagrams as Piloting Devices in
the Philosophy of Gilles Deleuze. Theorie – Litterature –
Enseignement: Deleuze-chantier 19, 145-165.
[17] Kim J, Hahn J and Hahn H (2000) How Can We
Understand a System with (so) Many Diagrams? Cognitive
Integration Processes in Diagrammatic Reasoning,
Information Systems Research, Vol. 11, No. 3, 284-303.
[18] Kuipers, B, (2000), "Modelling spatial knowledge",
Cognitive Sciences, v.2, pp.129-153.
[19] Kupla Z, (2003) From Picture Processing to
Interval Diagrams. IFTR PAS Reports (ISSN 0208-5658),
4/2003, Warsaw.
[20] Markowitz V and Shoshani A (1998), On the
Correctness of Representing Extended Entity-Relationship
Structures in the Relational Model. SIGMOD Conference
1989: 430-439.
[21] Mitchelle (1990), "Designing with diagrams.", pp.
107-122 in McCulloough M, Mitchell W J and Purcell P
(eds.), The electronic design studio: Architectural
knowledge and Media in the Computer Age, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
[22] Neilson I, Lee J (1994) Conversation with graphics:
implications for the design of natural language/graphics
interfaces. Int J Human-Computer Studies, vol.40 pp.509541.
[23] Norman J (2000) Differentiating Diagrams: A New
Approach. Diagrams 2000. An International Conference on
the Theory and Application of Diagrams. University of
Edinburgh, Scotland.
[24] Osborn J R (2005) Theory Pictures as Trails:
Diagrams and the Navigation of Theoretical Narratives.
Cognitive Science Online, Vol.3.2, pp. 14-44.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[25] Peirce C S (written around 1897, republished in
1932). Elements of Logic. In C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss
(Eds.), The collected papers of C.S. Peirce. Harvard
University Press.
[26] Rowe P (1987) Design Thinking. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
[27] Taylor M M, McCann M M, Tuori M I (1984) The
Interactive Spatial Information System. DCIEM Report No
84-R-22 Defence and Civil Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Ontario.
[28] Tufte E R (1983) The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Graphics Press.
[29] Tversky B (2001) Spatial Schemas in Depictions. In
Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought. Gattis, M. (ed.),
Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.
[30] Winograd T (1995) From programming environments
to environments for designing. Communications of the
ACM, vol.38 pp.65-74.
[31] Wood D (1993) The power of
London.

maps. Routledge,

