Somatic solidarity, Magical Realism and Animating Popular Gods:
Place-Hampi “where intensities are felt”
Sarah Kenderdine
Museum Victoria, Melbourne, Australia 3053
{skenderdine@museum.vic.gov.au}
Abstract
Place-Hampi is an embodied theatre of participation
in the drama of Hindu mythology focused at the most
significant archaeological, historical and sacred
locations of the World Heritage site Vijayanagara
(Hampi), South India. The research described in this
paper examines a history of several scopic regimes
observable in Indian aesthetic traditions (principally
those associated with chromolithography) and their
socio-cultural implications—to articulate the somatic
engagement inherent to encounters with the mythological
deities in image form. Information derived from the
examination of diverse scopic regimes has been used to
guide the decisions in symbolic logic and high level
cognitive programming of computer graphic characters
that help co-evolve the narrative engagement between
intangible heritage of ‘place’ and participants. PlaceHampi investigates experiences of encounter—as
tangible knowledge that has implications for immersive
heritage visualizations for diverse cultural audiences.
Keywords --- virtual heritage, Indian aesthetics,
magical realism, stereoscopic panoramas, augmented
reality, co-evolutionary narrative, chromolithography,
cognitive programming, symbolic logic, intangible
heritage

1. Introduction
In Place-Hampi Hindu mythology focused at the
most significant archaeological, historical and sacred
locations of the World Heritage site Vijayanagara
Hampi, South India, dramatically unfolds. [1] Viewers
explore a virtual landscape of panoramic locations
enlivened by animated mythological events in this
interactive installation. These events reveal the folkoric
imagination of contemporary pilgrims active at the
temple complex. Place-Hampi is an embodied theatre of
participation comprised of high resolution augmented
stereoscopic panoramas and surrounded by a rich aural
field, and permits an unprecedented level of viewer copresence in a narrative-discovery of a cultural landscape.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Interpretive virtual heritage (IVH) has begun to
critically examine the meaning of representations of
space and place in its endeavours to facilitate dynamic
inter-actor participation and cultural learning. IVH
practitioners must resolve a complex mix of HCI issues
to generate for participants the hermeneutic, symbolic
and epistemological meanings found in readings of real
archaeological, historic and cultural landscapes and in
the narratives embedded there. One avenue of academic
research that helps resolve these tensions is related to the
concept of (tele)presence, commonly referred to as a
sense of 'being there' in a virtual environment and more
broadly defined as an illusion of nonmediation in which
users of any technology overlook the technology's role in
their experience.
Presence1 is an established body of inquiry
fundamental to the way in which Place-Hampi is
constructed. Presence flourishes within immersive
environments in which the behavior of virtual characters
can evolve or “co-evolve” interactively by making
intelligent reference to the actions of viewing
participants in real time. [3; 4] When co-evolving
systems of interaction are applied to the relationships
between viewers and computer generated (CG)
characters unique interactive relationships are formed in
dramatic and culturally distinctive ways. Place-Hampi
endeavors to facilitate dynamic inter-actor participation
and cultural learning and, the creation of presence, in
virtual heritage. The research is presented in two stages
as Demonstrator One and Demonstrator Two described
below.
Through the nature of immersion and interactivity,
Place-Hampi also promotes a somatic resonance that
reinstates a level of engagement informed by aspects of
Indian cultural and religious life. Thus the aesthetic
discourse of Indian religious visual arts and inter-ocular

1

Presence research is an established body of inquiry for virtual
environments e.g. The International Society for Presence Research
(ISPR <http://www.temple.edu/ispr/> and Presence and Interaction in
Mixed-Reality Environments (Presence II)
<http://cordis.europa.eu/ist/fet/pr.htm>.

scopic regimes2 of colonial and post colonial India
informs an understanding of what Place-Hampi offers.
To demonstrate this the analysis below extrapolates from
the history of predominantly chromolithography to
validate the use of ‘magical realism’ (for example) as a
formal aesthetic of choice that best represents the
intangible aspects of ‘place’ and the religious
experiences active in the landscape of Vijayanagara in
contemporary times.
Examining Indian interocular scopic regimes also
helps define a lineage for Place-Hampi juxtaposed with
Indian aesthetic traditions. The works’ augmented real
world landscapes overlaid with mythical, animated and
magically real characters recalls the ‘conversation’ that
takes place between the idioms of chromolithography
(exemplified by the Press of Ravi Varma for example),
theatre, photography, film observable in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in India,
followed by television and most recently the animation
industry. Place-Hampi, in this context, provides a unique
level of visitor co-presence in the history of
interpretation and engagement with representations of
the mythological landscape.

of Hindu Gods. The single-user interface allows the
viewers to control their forward, backward and rotational
movements through the virtual scene as well as the
rotation of the image. This mobile exposure of the 360degree sceneries also causes the audience to walk around
the viewing space, thereby synesthetically conjoining
their bodily movements to the stereoscopically perceived
Hampi world to create a heightened sense of presence.
Place-Hampi Demonstrator One premiered at the Opera
house in Lille (October 2006), for a three-month arts and
cultural festival celebrating France-India year. The work
received critical acclaim from diverse audiences
comprised of Bollywood film stars, Indian academics,
artists and art critics and, a mixture of European festival
goers and critics. The popularity of Demonstrator One
across this varied group has resulted in a touring program
to major museums and festivals for the next two years
(2007-2009) in Europe, Asia, and Australia

2. Place-Hampi Demonstrators
A large interdisciplinary team of professionals including
south Indian art historical and archaeological scholars,
Indian classical Carnatic composers and Indian artists
and animators, classical Indian dancers, computer
engineers, and museum and media arts specialists,
contributed to Place-Hampi. The diversity of the team
ensured a sympathetic ‘reading’ of place in iconographic,
historical and contemporary cultural terms.
The field capture techniques included stereoscopic
panoramas and ambisonic sound recordings, augmented
with compositions and stereo animations, building on
earlier works by the author. [5; 6] This locally sourced
and processed high fidelity material gives the audience
the impression that they are physically present at
Vijayanagara, and creates a perceptual continuity
between the real and virtual spaces.
Place-Hampi Demonstrator One (Figure 1) builds on
the interactive cinema paradigm launched by Jeffrey
Shaw in 19953. Its central feature is a motorised platform
that allows the viewer to interactively rotate a projected
image within a 9-meter diameter cylindrical screen and
navigate a three-dimensional environment of panoramic
locations at Hampi. These stereoscopic photographic
panoramas are augmented with pre-rendered animations
2

The term scopic regime follows Martin Jay's (1988) identification of
the “scopic regimes of modernity” (“descriptive”, “baroque” and,
“Cartesian perspectivalism”). Scopic regimes are culturally specific
ways of seeing that replaces the traditional definition of “vision” as a
universal and natural phenomenon. It also supersedes the traditional
discussion between technological determinism and social construction
and allows culture and technology to interact.
3
PLACE url:
http://www.icinema.unsw.edu.au/projects/prj_placeurb.html

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Place-Hampi Demonstrator One
(© Kenderdine & Shaw, 2006)
Place-Hampi Demonstrator Two (Figure 2) [7]
exploits the technological and expressive features of
iCinema’s Advanced Visualisation and Interaction
Environment (AVIE)4. AVIE allows full 360-degree
stereoscopic projection within a 10-meter diameter
cylindrical screen, 24-channel surround sound, and
multi-user interaction via a high-resolution video
tracking system that detects and interprets the
movements and gestures of the audience. With these
facilities, the second Place-Hampi demonstrator will
augment its original stereoscopic panoramic content as
the context to explore the potentialities of coevolutionary narrative whereby audience behavior can
influence and be influenced by the real time behavior of
machine agents (e.g. animated Hindu Gods) that virtually
inhabit the various panoramic Hampi sites.
Place-Hampi is being developed using symbolic
logic and high level cognitive programming of CG
characters in conjunction with intelligent immersive
virtual reality of AVIE.
This combination of
programmed characterisation and space enables dialogue
between participant and place.
Place-Hampi will
ultimately demonstrate that when machine agents are
provided with a modest ability to technically respond and
4

AVIE url: http://www.icinema.unsw.edu.au/projects/infra_avie.html

interpret symbolically the actions of real participants
sharing a mixed reality environment, their interactive
responses will co-evolve with their human participants.
A full description of the research can be found in various
publications. [e.g. 8; 9] Place-Hampi Demonstrator Two
will premier in 2008 at Museum Victoria.

Figure 2 Place-Hampi Demonstrator Two
(© Kenderdine & Shaw, 2006)
The framework advanced in the research addresses a
need articulated by virtual heritage scholars to treat the
heritage object as an evolving experience in which the
story told is not pre-rehearsed but emerging as an
interactive dialogue between viewers and agents. [10]
Following Deleuze and De Landa it is theorized that
narrative is as a reciprocal process in which meaning is
co-generated by intelligent agents and viewers as the
result of a modest narrative of exploration.
For
Baudrillard narrative is a self-reflective perpetual
present, and for Sturken a menu of images recoverable
from the past. Whereas for De Landa and Deleuze
narrative is a process that interweaves viewers and
cinematic images in the production of new multi-layered
events that simultaneously incorporate the past and
present. [11; 12; 13]. Providing autonomy to machine
agents balances the interactive initiative between virtual
characters and viewers within virtual heritage. This
equalising of agent and participant transforms the
encounter into an exciting and unpredictable drama in
which events are co-produced by machine and human.

3. Seeing and being seen
Hampi today continues to be an active pilgrim site,
not simply an historic place. Pilgrims believe that the
physical objects, visually or symbolically representing
particular deities and their events come to be infused
with the presence or life force or power of those deities.
[14] Each day its landscape and temples are activated
through various rituals and tapas specific to time, place
and to discrete locations in the complex. Hindi religious
practice also emphasizes the concept of darshan, of
‘seeing and being seen’ by a deity. Its role is central to
Indian scopic regimes. The act of darshan mobilizes and
activates the human sensorium, and is a physically
transformative contact with the deity. [15] In addition, as
part of a living tradition, the interpretation of the site by

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

pilgrims is in a constant state of re-definition within the
broad tenants of (south Indian, Karnataka tradition)
Hinduism. A conversation takes place between
mythological
characters
and
the
sacred
objects/sites/natural features permeated with the
contemporary “folkloric imagination” of the pilgrims.
[16] For pilgrims to Vijayanagara the most important
aspect of the site is the association with various myths
and legends. Pilgrims experienced the landscape through
ritualized movements enforced by the spatial
configuration of the districts around the temples.
The promotion of dialogues of engagement in PlaceHampi is significant. The dialogues embedded in the
imagery of a cultural landscape activate the knowledge
contained there. A translation of the spatial potential is
enacted in Place-Hampi whereby participants in AVIE
(for example) are able to transform the myths into the
drama of a first-person narrative by their actions within
the virtual landscape and through the creation of a virtual
heritage embodiment5 of the real world dynamic. The
participants operate as protagonists as their presence
allows events to unfold in ways that are sensitive to their
actions, and their responses, in turn, influence the realtime action. This conversation envisaged by pilgrims
between mythological characters and devotional site is
integrated into the system design. The transactional
performance schemata are based on the types of
narratives that are commonplace in Indian mythology
and are utilized in the two Place-Hampi Demonstrators.

4. The aesthetic and the affective
Christopher Pinney’s book Photos of the Gods
provides a seminal history of India’s popular visual
culture. [17] Combining anthropology, political and
cultural history, and the study of aesthetic systems
Pinney traces mass-produced images used in India by
religious and nationalist movements through the
emergence of Indian-run chromolithograph presses in the
late 1870s.
Observations made by Pinney include his analysis of
research from Melanesia society. One of these studies,
by anthropologists Roy Wagner and Marilyn Strathern,
posited that certain cultural practice treat images as
compressed performances. Thus the culturally
determined experience of an image affects both its power
and meaning. Pinney extrapolates this cultural response
to imagery to the Indian context using the concept of
5

Embodiment is the humanistic project of widening interpretation to
include all dimensions of social practice or, better, experience — the
cognitive and intellectual, physical, aesthetic and the affective.
Embodiment is a project of rooting social experience in all the senses
of the body. This of course severely explodes narrative and other
traditional modes of representation. If in fact embodiment is the
experience of the world through all the senses of the body, then
narrative strategies privileging one sense over the other, or emphasizing
certain aspects over others, prove to be unequal to the task of embodied
representation. Archeopedia url:
http://traumwerk.stanford.edu:3455/Archaeopaedia/37

darshan and argues for the notion of ‘corpothetics’6 – as
embodied, corporeal aesthetics – as opposed to
disassociated representation. “The relevant question then
becomes not how images ‘look’ but what they can do”.
This approach to describing the effects of religious
imagery parallels for example that of W.J.T. Mitchell’s
reassessment of pictures to have the power to “speak”.
[18]
The colonial regime in India introduced new
technologies and representational techniques of the
period. For colonizers employing of these technologies
became a means for dismantling the Indian world view.
They turned the aesthetic of pre-colonial so called
“idols” in to “art”; and thereby “transform[ed] the
intimate and interested engagements of the devotee into
the disinterested and rationalized response of colonial
political subjects to the images…” [19]
The exploitation of chromolithography initiated a
vast outpouring that has come to dominate many of
India’s public and domestic spaces. The iconographic
power of these images can be seen to be partly in
response to British colonial forces present in India during
these periods up until mid-twentieth Century.
Increasingly the science of the European perspective
of the world was used and fractured the Hindu
“dreamworld”. [20] Yet, colonial interests argued for a
re-enchantment through allegory at the same time this
dis-enchantment effected by Cartesian perspectivalism
was being promulgated. Incorporating the image into the
space of European representation was informed by
“disinterested” aesthetics. As observed by Susan BuckMorss this amounted to ‘the alienation of corporeal
sensorium’. Pinney’s “corpothetics” which mobilized all
the sense simultaneously was replaced by anaesthetics
(Buck-Morss), ‘numbing and deadening the sensorium’.
Pinney describes how the process of endowing images
with a moral gravity and the attempt then to export this
to India, laid the basis for the emergence of a so-called
Indian Magical Realism. [21]
After a brief period of strategic mimicry and ‘sly’
civility, a form of visual magical realism was developed
by India’s artists that appeared in reaction to the drive by
colonial interests for the displacement of the mythic into
the realist It is generally accepted that the phrase
“magical realism” was coined by German art critic Franz
Roh in the late 1920s to describe painting in which “our
real world re-emerges before our eyes, bathed in the
clarity of a new day”. Also Alejo Carpentier’s
‘marvellous real’ was used to describe a hybrid genre of
anti-positivist post colonial literature in South America.
He also applied a description of the ‘hybridized
baroque’. The baroque in this context here can be read as
a reaction against spatial rationality.

6
In new transdisciplinarian program of material culture and visual
culture studies, arising out of archaeology and anthropology, has most
explicitly addressed the role of affectation (vz. 'corpothetics') as a
component of the 'meaning' or 'action' of archaeological artifacts.
Archeopedia url:
http://traumwerk.stanford.edu:3455/Archaeopaedia/26

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Pertinent to this issue is Parth Chatterjee’s claim that
the nineteenth-century Bengali elite found in the
rediscovery of popular aesthetics an escape from the
‘prisonhouse of colonial reason’. Magical realist
paintings “by contrast assumed an embodied
corpothetics…the sensory embrace of images…” [22]
One of the determining elements of Indian magical
realism was in response to the “horror” encoded in the
visual language of representation in European art. Many
of the household deities were pictures whose surfaces
were adorned with fabric and curtains thereby destroying
the effect of the image as a window. The hybridized
surface of the image permitted the viewer to flee from
the geometrical arrangements, this emulating
Carpentier’s baroque.
Pinney emphasizes that hybridized space opens up
as the powers of European art operate in a wider cultural
field. “The gods were not simply mannequins to be
remodelled within a new representational scheme: the
realignment of deities along a new realist tangent created
a new hybrid space of magical realist mytho-politics”.
[23] This space of separation was systematically denied
by colonialist and nationalists who sought authority in
the authenticity of “origins” while Indian aesthetic
hybridity offered a ‘ruse of recognition’ both signifying
and subverting colonial constructions.
There is a slipperiness and malleability of this form
within the domain, where images becomes signs of
themselves. These images made no attempt to
operate in the three dimensional space of colonized
realism, and they fell between both hieratic and
perspectivalism, frozen halfway between the
demands of intimate eye-contact with the devotee
and the larger dramatic trajectory from which they
had been extracted. [24]
As Pinney points out, these popular images are
difficult to analyze from the viewpoint of conventional
aesthetics. By contrast:
The significance of images is expressed by rural
consumers not through an efflorescence of words
around an object, but a bodily praxis, a poetry of the
body, that helps give the images what they want.
[25]
Pinney’s central concern is to describe how the
numbed sensorium was bought back to life. European art
that cast its shadow over India was characterized by
practices that implied a ‘transcendent point of vision that
has discarded the body’ and a ‘disembodied absorption’.
In direct contrast to the European denial of the
presence of the beholder through the strategies of
absorption, Indian reawakening of the sensorium went
hand in hand with mass-produced images in the spaces of
Hindu worship (both domestic and sacred). Consumers
demanded that these images fundamentally addressed
their presence and invoked a new corpothetics. “…In
these images the beholder is a worshipper, drinking in
the eyes of the deity that gazes directly back at him….”
[26]

A bodily relationship with images has been
described by various authors including Adorno in the
term “somatic solidarity” and Lyotard’s definitions are
pertinent to the discussion of physical responses to
images (and sound) often heightened in large scale
stereoscopic and immersive environments. The image
figure is: “relatively free of the demands of meaning,
indeed it is not the arena of the production of meaning
but a space where ‘intensities are felt’”. [27]
It is with these understanding that Place-Hampi has
been approached utilizing technologies of immersion
(the sensorium) to become an embodying mechanism, of
cultural space. Place-Hampi seeks to recognize the
authority of both the origin and the representational
scheme, and thereby to provide an environment where
the sensorial is active to respond to the representational
scheme the images emerge from.

5. Cross cultural sensorium
Virtual heritage applications, if they are to be culturally
relevant, must anticipate the impact, of the visual and
immersive strategy employed in the system design, on
diverse cultural audiences.
Hindi priests and pilgrims are not the only ones to
potentially enliven the appearance of Hindu images and
temples. A resonance with the intangible qualities of
place through an augmented visual landscape is possible
for others because “Bringing with them different
religious assumptions, political agendas and economic
motivations, others may animate the same objects or
sovereignty as polytheistic “idols”, as “devils”, as
potentially lucrative commodities, as objects of
sculptural art, as archaeological and historical relics, or
attribute to them meanings and associations never
foreseen by the image maker or votary”. [28] Hampi in
the real world also constitutes the object of a veracious
tourist gaze. [29] However as Davis points out “the
location of an object plays a constitutive role in the act of
looking” and “appropriation, relocation and redisplay of
an object will dramatically alter its significance for new
audiences”. [30] The frame of reference or dispensation
designates the historically grounded and socially shared
understandings of “systems”, and they are manifest in
(equally valid) “communities of interpretation”, where
the relocation of the object (even in virtual spaces) is
justified.
Only a few cross-cultural presence studies are
available and one study in particular is relevant to the
development of Place-Hampi because it reinforces that
the effectiveness of strategies of immersion are culturally
specific. The study by Hu and Bartneck investigated the
relationship between the user’s cultural background and
presence. This research found that cultural aspects do
play a role in the design of future technology and the
participants’ cultural background clearly influenced the
measurements of engagement. [31] While for many
socio-cultural researchers (among many others) such
findings would not be unexpected, the techniques for
qualitative evaluation of technologies in cross cultural

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

contexts prove that these systems have a resonant effect
on different users.
What Place-Hampi provides is a landscape for
narrative co-evolution (in machine and participant) and a
place of somatic solidarity for the expression of cultural
space. As described in Demonstrator Two the tracking
systems in Place-Hampi (a contemporary digital
sensorium) enables a situation of corporeal registration
of visitors’ movements and behaviour. The software
driven narrative-interpretation in Place-Hampi (a
digitally reformulated corpothetics) operates in the zone
of co-evolutionary interactions between the, protagonists
(the audience and the Godly characters). In the context of
interpretive virtual heritage practice Place-Hampi
references Indian magical realist iconography,
appropriate to south Indian Carnatic traditions, as the
basis for all stereographic animations that augment the
scenes. The characters are both specific to place, and
generic enough to read by culturally diverse visitors.
This reconstitution is through the form of co-presence
that enables a new mode of interpretation and access for
diverse cultural audiences.
The success of reconstitution of place utilizing coevolving systems and establishing co-presence between
audience and virtual environs as an approach to
providing an immersive cultural space has been affirmed
by the positive response to Demonstrator One of PlaceHampi. In upcoming reports, Place-Hampi research
incorporates an evaluation strategy based on its real
world installations drawing in a wide diversity of cultural
groups. This research examines how levels of
engagement and identification (“affect”) may differ
across both technical infrastructure and the highly
specific cultural content

6. Inter-ocular regimes
The aesthetic and conceptual transformation that
occurred in nineteenth century India can also be
described by the inter-ocular processes of reference
occurring between chromolithography and the early
films, photography and theatre. Films developed by D.
G. Phalke in the early 1910s followed in part a tradition
of lithography and painting of Ravi Varma. The power of
these new films was profound. In 1917 Phalke released
Lanka Dahan at which the audience prostrated
themselves before the screen. At the Bombay opening
B.H. Wadia provides some sense of the huge impact
upon the audience.
‘Lankan Dahan’ was a minor masterpiece of its
time. The spectacle of Hanuman’s figure becoming
progressively diminutive as he flew higher and higher in
the clouds and the burning of the city of Lanka in tabletop photography were simply awe-inspiring….I
remember that devout villagers from nearby Bombay had
come in large number in their bullock carts to have the
darshan of their beloved God, the Lord Rama…[32]
Hem Chander Bhargava’s press displayed similar
penetration in his response the diverse markets of late
colonial India. His press exhibits a lithographic style that

emulated photographic conventions of the day with
heightened corporeality and individuality. Proscenium
theatre also informed the creation of the new imagery in
a “collage” effect through its powerful iconic and
narrative formulation. “The technique of archiving
elements from different visual sources created
ambivalent spaces in which mixed cultural responses
could be evoked”. [33]
Jyotindra Jain describes how this eclecticism of
visuality of both citation and collage facilitated a
“juxtaposition of Indian and Western, traditional and
modern, national and subaltern, sacred and erotic
elements to co-exist on a single receptor surface”. [34] In
all examples we see a resistance to the colonial, and a
move towards post-perspective practice. It is also noted
by Jain that these collages in a way pre-empted the
processes of new media (he refers here to television and
video media) in their collage-like effect7. This uptake of
the technology empowered its users to re-fit Western
technologies to Indian cultural and political forces.
As Pinney points out, recent writings on India
describe how popularist-nationalistic imagery was a
product of time and technology. Television has been
described as a key advent of technology defining the
move to the Hindu political right. Whereas in the
colonial period politics and religion were strictly
separated, these two domains are realigned in a powerful
form. We can see the rise of a new visual culture is
“perhaps the major vehicle for this reconfiguration.”
It may well be that contemporary Indian animation
and digitally born mythological content with mass
distribution operates as this ubiquitous new media today
(and circulates as an international trade in symbolic
images in today’s iconomy [35]. In this instance one
could interpret that the forms of nationalism promoted
are now defused against a backdrop of competition in a
global marketplace while simultaneously being
reinforced as iconic representations of Indian mythology.
An analysis of the current commercial animation
industry offers a point of departure to imagine futures of
Indian mythological imagery.
This year saw the start of production on a new line
of animations of Indian mythology with an agenda for
global saturation. It is worth noticing this new initiative,
in the light of the history of visual representations of the
mythology in India (its resistance to colonising intention
and its mass distribution). Virgin Books forms Virgin
Comics LLC and Virgin Animation have entered
partnership with Deepak Chopra, Shekhar Kapur and
Gotham Comics and Deepak Chopra commented on the
venture “… we will forge new mythologies bringing
together east and west. At the forefront of this movement
7

The power of the inter-ocular is prevalent in the discourse on new
media techniques. Place-Hampi, as a platform for interactive cinema
also references earlier forms. Lev Manovich describes how “Place” by
Jeffrey Shaw “evokes the navigation methods of panorama, cinema,
video and virtual reality. He (Shaw) “‘layers’ them side by side”.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, London,
Boston: MIT Press, 2001: 282.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

will be new minds, new voices, and new talents that will
re-invent the stories that unite us, and that we live by."
Shekhar Kapur described his bold vision by adding,
"I see the future. It is the brave new world of
entertainment. The art of the 2-hour captive, noninteractive product called the "movie" is history. Comic
book characters - traditional and digital - are the new
cult, the new religion. India's 600 million teenagers are
now at the forefront of the creation of these new Gods.
For these new Indian Comic Gods are derived directly
from the vast ocean of Mythology."
Chief Creative Officer, Gotham Chopra, added, “We
are a generation whose identities are cut and pasted from
cultural elements of east and west. Virgin Comics and
Virgin Animation is our home where we get a chance to
tell the new planetary stories that define us.” [36]

Conclusion
Inevitably the Indian iconomy will be transformed in
the digital age. Place-Hampi is a distinctive incident in a
plethora of emerging visual media trading in Indian
religious iconography. The project is also a preliminary
experiment in creating co-evolutionary narrative
experiences
in
virtual
heritage
environments
underwritten by the phenomenology and hermeneutics of
place. As noted above, the Demonstrators utilize
transactional performance schemata based on the types
of narratives that are commonplace in Indian mythology
and pilgrimage. As the machine agents and participants
learn to stimulate these scenarios through their actions,
they co-evolve unique narrative experiences. In this way
Place-Hampi instigates a digital reformulation of the
notions of corpothetics and somatic solidarity. This
reformulation is both convergent with and facilitated by
the new technologies of immersion, presence and hybrid
interaction.
One undertaking of this paper about Place-Hampi
has been to reflect on the histories that underwrite its
placement in cultural traditions of engagement with
Indian religious iconography. Place-Hampi is a powerful
form of media where cultural knowledge has been
embedded to produce a work that is consistent with
Indian aesthetics of engagement. The work is in full
recognition of the historic use and promulgation of
iconography throughout and outside India; and holds an
informed position on the history of tension between
colonial mechanisms and Indian aesthetic traditions. The
charge to the authors has been to create Place-Hampi as
inhabitable cultural heritage visualization and thus
provide the opportunity to reflect upon its potential
affects for diverse cultural audiences. The qualitative and
quantitative analysis from the first Place-Hampi
Demonstrator will be published in upcoming research
reports after the scheduled installations over the next two
years. The concurrent and ongoing research to develop
models for co-evolutionary narrative that address the
complex issues surrounding the creation of autonomous
agency for characters that represent both historical and
intangible aspects of place. The research intends to

provide models that can be applied in different scenarios
of interpretive heritage visualization.

Acknowledgements
Place-Hampi is a collaborative project between
Museum Victoria and iCinema Centre for Interactive
Cinema Research, The University of New South Wales
Sydney in association with principal funding partner
Epidemic, France. The work is also subject of an
Australian Research Council Linkage Grant. Additional
support from ZKM Karlsruhe Germany; Australian
Centre for the Moving Image in Melbourne, with
contributions from Dr L Subramanian of Bangalore,
India; Music and Effects and Gollings Photography,
Melbourne, Australia and; Paprikaas Animation Studio,
India. The author acknowledges Jeffrey Shaw, Dennis
Del Favero and, Neil Brown as co-authors of the ARC
grant from the iCinema Centre. All the individual
contributors to the Place-Hampi project are listed on the
project website (see Reference [1]) and warmly
acknowledged here. Many thanks to Ingrid Mason for
her editorial advise on this article.

References
[1] Place-Hampi: Co-evolutionary narrative & augmented
stereographic
panoramas,
Vijayanagara,
India
url:
http://www.icinema.unsw.edu.au/projects/prj_hampi.html (last
accessed 31 Feb 2007). 2006.
[2] Del Favero, Dennis, Jeffrey Shaw, Steve Benford and
Johannes Goebel. Co-evolutionary narrative as machine
autonomy in the relationship between artificial agents and
human participants in interactive cinema. ARC Discovery
Project, Linkage Application, Canberra. 2004
[3] Gerhard, Michael, David Moore, and Dave J. Hobbs.
Embodiment and Co-presence in Collaborative Interfaces.
International Journal of Human Computer Studies, Vol. 61 (4):
453-480, Elsevier Academic Press. 2004
[4] Gerhard, Michael, David Moore, and Dave J. Hobbs.
Close Encounters of the Virtual Kind: Agents Simulating Copresence. Applied Artificial Intelligence. 19(3-4): 393-412.
Philadelphia: Francis and Taylor Group. 2005
[5] Kenderdine, S., “Stereographic panoramas of Angkor,
Cambodia”, Virtual System and Multimedia, Gifu, Japan,
November 2004, International Society for Virtual Systems and
Multimedia. 2004.
[6] Kenderdine, S and Paul Doornbusch. 2004, Presence and
sound: Identifying Sonic Means to “Be There”. Consciousness
Reframed, Beijing, November 2004. 67-70. Plymouth,
England: Planetary Collegium. 2004.
[7] Advanced Visualisation Interactive Environment
(AVIE): 2006; url:
http://www.icinema.unsw.edu.au/projects/infra_avie.html (last
accessed 31 Feb 2007).
[8] Kenderdine, Sarah, Place-Hampi: Co-Evolutionary
Narrative & Augmented Stereographic Panoramas,
Vijayanagara, India, VR Mag; url:
http://vrm.vrway.com/vartist/spotlight/PLACE_HAMPI_STER
EOGRAPHIC_PANORAMAS_OF_VIJAYANAGARA_INDI
A.html (last accessed 31 Feb 2007). 2006

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[9] Kenderdine, Sarah and Jeffrey Shaw, Dennis Del Favero,
and Neil Brown, “Place-Hampi: Co-Evolutionary Narrative &
Augmented Stereographic Panoramas, Vijayanagara, India,
chapter, New Heritage: New Media And Cultural Heritage, eds.
Yehuda E. Kalay, Thomas Kvan, And Janice Affleck,
Routledge, 2007. In Press
[10] Milekic, Slavko. Towards Tangible Virtualities:
Tangialities. Proceedings of Museums and the Web 2002, Eds.
Bearman, David and Jennifer Trant. Pittsburgh: Archives and
Museum Informatics. 2002
[11] De Landa, Manuel. Virtual Environments and the
Emergence of Synthetic Reason."Virtual Futures: Cyberotics,
Technology and Post-Human Pragmatism. eds. Joan Dixon and
Eric Cassidy. London: Routledge. 1998
[12] Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema 2: The Time Image. Trans.
Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. London: Athlone
Press. 1989
[13] — Negotiations 1972-1990. Trans. Martin Joughin. New
York: Columbia University Press. 1995.
[14] Davis, Richard. H. Lives of Indian Images. Princeton
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 1997: 6-9.
[15] Christopher Pinney, Photos of the Gods: the Printed
Image and Political Struggle in India. Reaktion Books Ltd,
London, UK. 2004.
[16] Adajania, Nancy. 2002. Towards a New Folkloric
Imagination. In Kapital and Karma, ed. Angelika Fitz. 47-58.
Vienna: Kunsthalle Wien, Hatje Cantz 2002: 47.
[17] Pinney op cit.
[18] Ibid, p8
[19] Ibid.
[20] Ibid, p.70
[21] Ibid p.18
[22] Pinney following Hegel, Ibid, p.19.
[23] Ibid p.20.
[24] Ibid
[25] Ibid.p. 21
[26] Ibid p. 23.
[27] Jean-François Lyotard cited by Pinney, op cit p.22
[28] Davis, op cit.
[29] Urry, John. The Tourist Gaze. London, Thousand Oaks,
New Delhi: Sage Publications Ltd, 2001. 2nd edition.
[30] Davis, op cit.
[31] Jun Hu, Christoph Bartneck, Culture Matters - A Study
on Presence in an Interactive Movie, Presence url:
http://www.idemployee.id.tue.nl/j.hu/publications/Presence200
5/TheInterview.html 2005.
[32] Pinney, op cit, p.72
[33] Jain, Jyotindra. Indomania: Indian Popular Culture,
Lille3000, Lille, France, 2006.
[34] Ibid.
[35] Smith, Terry. The Architecture of Aftermath, University
of Chicago Press, 2006.
[36] Gurnani, Anand. Virgin Books forms Virgin Comics
LLC and Virgin Animation, enters partnership with Deepak
Chopra, Shekhar Kapur and Gotham Comics, <
<http://us.animationxpress.com/anex/y2k6/headlines/anex439.h
tm> 2007.

