Mapping Modern Science Using Co-citation Analysis
Ayaka SAKA*, Masatsura IGAMI**
National Institution of Science and Technology Policy (NISTEP)*, OECD**
{saka@nistep.go.jp, Masatsura.IGAMI@oecd.org}
Abstract
Bibliometric analysis is used as a measuring activity
technique for basic research. There are many country
level analyses of trends in scientific publications. These
analyses give us an understanding of the macro-scale
character of scientific activities. However, it is difficult
to capture the qualitative evolution of scientific activities
through them. In this regard, a meso-scale analysis of
science activities, i.e., analysis of “research areas”, is
suitable for grasping qualitative changes in scientific
activities. In this study, we develop a new method for
mapping science at the research area level. Our method
consists of two parts: constructing research areas from
scientific publications and content analysis by experts.
Research areas are explored through a co-citation
analysis, and a map of science was generated to analyze
how research areas relate to each other. This method
contributes to endeavours to understand and track the
changing nature of science.
Keywords --- mapping science, co-citation analysis

1. Introduction
Bibliometric analysis is a generic tool for measuring
international scientific activities. There are many
country-level analyses of trends in scientific
publications. These analyses constitute effective tools for
understanding the macro-scale character of scientific
activities. One limitation of these macro-scale analyses is
that it is difficult to capture the qualitative evolution of
scientific activities through them. A representative case
is the development of quantum physics; understanding
the behaviour of electrons stimulated a wide debate in
the early 20th century, but scientists now try to control
the behaviour of electrons on a nano-scale. These
dynamics within research are difficult to observe via a
macro-scale analysis. In this respect, a meso-scale
analysis of science activities, i.e., an analysis of
“research areas”, is likely to be a candidate for grasping
qualitative changes in scientific activities.
There is a long history of describing the structure
and the evolution of science [1]-[3]. Recent
unprecedented progress in access to, use and analysis of
information on scientific publications and patents has

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

opened innovative ways to study the structure and the
evolution of science. In particular, mapping knowledge
has received widespread recognition as a newly evolving
area of research. These endeavours aim to develop new
tools for easing information access, exploring the
structure of knowledge, and assessing the evolution of
knowledge [4]-[8].
The ultimate goal of this study is to contribute to
endeavours aimed at understanding and tracking the
changing nature of science. Furthermore, our mapping
aims to provide reliable information on current scientific
activities to policy makers for planning and evaluating
science and technology policies. In this study, the
citation behaviour of scientists is used as a proxy to
measure various information exchanges that translate
into knowledge creation and flows. Clusters of papers
having similar research subjects are retrieved through a
co-citation analysis.
This report shows our methodology for grasping the
nature of science and the results of mapping 133 research
areas, and introduces 14 research categories that
constitute large domains in modern science. The full
results of identification of research areas and content
analysis on individual research areas are documented in a
report published by NISTEP [9]. Development of new
science, technology and innovation (STI) indicators
based on the mapping are documented in a report
published by OECD [10].

2. Methodology
2.1. Basic concept of co-citation analysis
Knowledge creation and flows in cutting-edge
research are transmitted through information exchanges
among researchers. Exchanges can take various forms.
Citation of scientific papers is one of the major ways by
which knowledge flows. Analysis of citations and
identification of core papers—the papers that play a
central role in research areas—enables an examination of
the characteristics of research areas and relations among
them.
In this research, clusters of papers having similar
research subjects were identified via co-citation analysis

[2]. Co-citation is a form of citation in which a set of
papers is simultaneously cited by other papers. Figure 1
is a schematic representation of co-citation, where papers
A, B and C are co-cited papers, and papers 1, 2 and 3 are
citing papers. If papers A and B are co-cited frequently,
one can speculate that they have a common research
subject. Thus, successive clustering of papers yields a
cluster of papers, i.e., papers A, B and C in Figure 1,
relate to a common research subject.
Core papers

Co-cited papers

A

C

Papers with a common
research subject

B

Citing papers

1

2

3

Figure 1 Identification of research areas via cocitation analysis
Research areas
2nd clustering
Research fronts
1st clustering
Highly cited papers

Figure 2 Concept of highly cited papers,
research front
Research areas were identified through two stages to
cluster highly cited papers. Clusters of papers obtained
through the first and second clustering are referred to as
“research fronts” and “research areas”, respectively.
Highly cited papers aggregated by co-citation are
referred to as “core papers”. Figure 2 shows the relations
among core papers, research front and research area.

2.2. Basic dataset for clustering
The basic dataset for clustering is highly cited
papers, i.e., the top 1% of frequently cited papers. They
were selected from each field and each year to avoid a
bias of fields. This study covers the period from 1999 to
2004 to analyse recent trends in science. There were 47
218 highly cited papers in this period. The portfolio of
major countries by scientific field in highly cited papers
are consistent with the portfolio obtained by all
publications, thus we believe the highly cited papers are
a reliable dataset for assessing the statistical characters of
research areas.
A dataset of core papers and research fronts was
retrieved from the ESI database. A dataset of cited
papers was obtained from Science Citation Index on CDROM [1999-2004]. Both datasets are commercial
databases provided by Thomson Scientific Inc.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.3. Clustering papers through co-citations
2.3.1. Parameters for clustering Clusters of highly
cited papers were identified using a single-link clustering
method [3]. Three parameters characterise clustering: i)
threshold of clustering, ii) maximum cluster size, and iii)
minimum cluster size. The threshold determines the
strength of linkages within clusters. The maximum and
minimum cluster sizes limit the sizes of clusters. It
should be mentioned that setting threshold, maximum
cluster size and minimum cluster size is entirely
subjective. The number of research areas strongly
depends on the settings.
2.3.2. First stage of clustering Co-citation
frequencies for all pairs of highly cited papers were
counted and normalised. There were approximately one
million co-citation relations among highly cited papers.
Among the various indicators for measuring similarities
between a pair of papers [11], normalised co-citation
frequencies were calculated using the following
equation:
nij
N ijnorm =
ni n j
where ni ( n j ) is the citation frequency of a paper i (j),
and nij is the co-citation frequency. The normalised cocitation frequency can be regarded as the strength of the
linkage between the papers i and j.
The threshold of the normalised co-citation at the
first stage was set at 0.3. This means that the linkages
whose normalised co-citation was larger than 0.3 were
only taken into account during clustering. The maximum
cluster and minimum cluster size were 50 and 2,
respectively. If the number of core papers in a cluster
exceeded 50, the threshold was increased until a huge
cluster was divided into smaller ones including less than
50 core papers. This method is known as variable level
clustering [3].
The results of the first stage of clustering were
retrieved from the ESI database. The database includes
about 5350 clusters, i.e., research fronts. They contain a
total of 21411 core papers, which correspond to about
half of all highly cited papers. In other words,
information on half of the highly cited papers was not
included.
Usually, the number of research fronts speculated
from core papers tends to be smaller than the number of
research areas. Thus, research fronts were further
aggregated to obtain their clusters, i.e., research areas.
2.3.3. Second stage of clustering The second stage
of clustering is almost identical to the first stage. One
major difference is that an individual research front is
treated as a single super-document. This means that if a
research front contains a number of core papers, all
papers citing these core papers were treated as papers
citing this single super-document. There are several
choices among clustering methods. Because the research

fronts were constructed by single clustering, the same
clustering method was applied to keep the methodology
consistent. Experimental clustering of research fronts
through complete-link clustering yields very few
research areas compared to single-link clustering,
indicating sparse linkages among research fronts.
2.3.4. Parameter setting In this analysis, the second
stage of clustering for three different parameter sets was
conducted to seek the most suitable parameters. Table 1
shows three parameter sets. Table 2 shows a short
summary of the results of the clustering. Figure 3 shows
the distribution of cluster size.
Case 02 has the largest number of research areas.
Small research areas consisting of 6~10 research fronts
explain the differential. It exemplified that a small
threshold generates small research areas connected by
weak links.
Case 03 has the smallest number of research areas,
but the average cluster size is the largest among the three
cases. Compared to case 01, the number of research areas
with a cluster size ranging from 36 to 50 shows a
remarkable decrease in case 03. On the other hand, there
are 10 research areas that consist of more than 50
research areas. It could be said that parameter sets with
larger thresholds generate research areas with specific
concepts, and a larger maximum cluster size widens the
concepts of research areas.
Table 1 Three parameter sets
Maximum cluster Minimum cluster
size
size

Threshold
case01

0.1

50

6

case02

0

50

6

case03

0.1

100

6

Number of research areas

Table 2 Summary of results of clustering
Research areas

Average cluster size

case01

145

14.5

case02

182

14.8

case03

133

16.5

120
case01
100

case02
case03

80
60
40
20
0
6 - 10 11 15

16 20

21 25

26 30

31 35

36 40

41 45

46 50

51 More

Number of research fronts

Figure 3 Distribution of cluster size in three
cases

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Generally, it is difficult to say what parameters are
most adequate for clustering, because there is no way to
measure and define the conceptual expanse of actual
research areas. In this study, the parameter set for case
03 was applied for mapping science because the
parameter set is the most reasonable one for the analysis,
especially to obtain stable clusters for longitudinal
analysis and to obtain a feasible number of research areas
for a content analysis. The second clustering in case 03
yielded 133 research areas. These form the basic dataset
for this analysis.

2.4. Identification of “hot” research areas
“Hot” research areas, i.e., research areas with a
high level of activity, were also identified through the
following stages [12]. First, number of citations and
average annual growth rate of citations in the past six
years were calculated for all research fronts. Their field
averages were also computed for the ESI’s 22 fields.
Next, research fronts in which both the number of
citations and the average annual growth rate of citations
were larger than the field average were identified. This
analysis assigned approximately 1000 research fronts as
hot research fronts. Finally, the number of hot research
fronts in each research area was counted and research
areas including four or more hot research fronts were
selected as hot research areas. Forty-two out of 133
research areas were identified in this research.

2.5. Content analysis of selected research areas
Clustering of highly cited papers yielded 133
research areas. These areas form the basic dataset for this
research, but are only lists of papers just after clustering.
Thus, it is necessary to determine unique names of
research areas. In this study, an elaborate expert analysis
was conducted to understand the contents of areas. To
our knowledge, the names of clusters in the usual
mapping exercise were determined by a keyword
analysis or a consultation with a few experts.
Preliminary analysis was conducted by experts in
NISTEP. They were asked to assign proper names and a
brief overview of research areas, while referring to a map
of research area and a list of core papers obtained by the
co-citation analysis. These results were sent to over 100
experts in universities, public and private institutions in
Japan to check their reliability. Experts were asked to
modify the results of the preliminary examination
referring to a map of research areas and a list of core
papers.
The content analysis required most effort. It took
approximately six months to finalise the results. This
process provided a good opportunity to listen to the
opinions of experts on the validity of mapping and get
valuable insights that are not available from a purely
statistical approach. The full results of the content
analysis are documented in a report published by
NISTEP [9].

2.6. Mapping research areas
Mapping research areas aims to generate a bird’s eye
view of science activities and trace their changing nature.
How are scientific areas linked to each other? Immense
endeavours are required to answer this question [1]-[8].
Observing the changing nature of science based on the
mapping would be helpful to understand how science
evolves over time.
The map was created using a gravity model (or
force-directed-placement method). In the calculation,
first research areas are put randomly in a twodimensional space. Then, research areas are moved
incrementally in the direction of net force until the most
stable configuration is achieved. The mapping relies on
attractive and repulsive forces among research areas,
thus only the relative locations of research areas are
important. The authors developed Excel VBA programs
for the mapping. The program we have developed so far
does not have a panning and zooming function. The
maps at the different stages, e.g., 1st stage and 2nd stage,
are drawn independently. Recent progress in mapping
provides a variety of techniques to make more
sophisticated maps. Implementation of these functions in
our program would be helpful for making our map easy
to read.

3. Mapping current scientific activities
One hundred and thirty-three research areas were
obtained from the co-citation analysis. A map showing
their interrelations was generated by the gravity model.
The map provides a bird’s eye view of current science
activities, and future analyses will shed light on how
research areas evolve over time.
A map of 133 research areas is shown in Figure 3.
Each circle represents a research area, and the size of the
circle is proportional to the number of papers cited. The
bigger circles represent bigger research areas. Shaded
circles represent research areas showing high activities,
i.e., “hot” research areas. The relative locations of circles
reflect how strongly they are linked to one another. The
strongest link stemming from an individual research area
is depicted by a solid line if its normalized co-citation
frequency exceeds a certain threshold. However,
research area ID82 “Application of cryptographic
technologies to digital information distribution” is not
included in the map in order not to have a co-citation
relation with other research areas.
Based on the map and referring the results of the
content analysis to experts, it was found that 133
research areas could be categorized into 14 categories
(C1-C14, as shown in Figure 3). Approximately half of
them relate to bioscience or healthcare, reflecting the
database structure. Research areas in the same category
are indicated by a dotted circle in the map. Each category
consists of some in about ten research areas. The solid
lines that connect research areas do not necessarily
correspond to the classification of categories. The

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

classification of a category is based on the concept of a
traditional research genre, and it cannot be denied that
there is a portion that cannot be quantified and depends
on the analyzer to categorise the research area.
Research areas located at the top central part of the
map relate to bioscience or healthcare. Clearly separating
bioscience and healthcare is difficult because research
areas show complicated interactions. However, it can be
said generally that the upper half corresponds to research
areas relating to healthcare and the lower half to
bioscience.
Thirty-eight research areas fall under bioscience and
they make up four research categories. They are “Brain
research (C6)”, “Genomics (C7)”, “Regenerative
medicine (C8)” and “Plant science research (C9)”.
Healthcare consists of 35 areas and four categories:
“Cancer research (C10)”, “Research on infectious
diseases and immunology (C11)”, “Study of obesity
(C12)” and “Research on heart and blood vessels (C13)”.
Brain research (C6) is separated and located at three
places on the map. That is, it is suggested that modern
brain research consists of molecular biological-brain
research, brain research related to Research on heart and
blood vessels (C13) and the cognitive science brain
research related closely to “Social science (C14)”.
At the middle right region of Figure 3, 32 research
areas relate to Nanoscience and materials. The region can
be further divided into three categories. The location of
“Nano materials and devices (C3)” between “Chemical
synthesis (C1)” and “Superconductivity and quantum
computing (C2)” apparently illustrates its multidisciplinary character. The mapping only relies on cocitation relations among research areas; thus, the
intermediate location implies that this research category
is materialised through active interactions between
physics and chemistry. It is worth mentioning that
Nanoscience and materials is slightly closer to
Bioscience as shown in Figure 3. This presumably
indicates the existence of weak interactions between
them; the interactions are not strong enough to
substantiate visible research areas. The blank region
between them may be a ground for an emerging area,
e.g., nano-bioscience.
“Environment (C4)” is located at centre of the map.
The central location probably shows active knowledge
flows between “Environment” and other research, and is
a reflection of its notable multi-disciplinary character.
The category “Particle physics and cosmology (C5)”
lies at the bottom right of the map in Figure 3. Its
isolated location suggests a weak interaction with other
categories. In other words, the research is pushing
frontiers within its own discipline.

C13_Research on heart and blood vessels
C11_Research on infectious diseases
and immunology
C10_Cancer research

C6_Brain research

C12_Study of obesity

C8_Regenerative medicine
C6_Brain research
C9_Plant science

C1_Chemical synthesis

C6_Brain research

C14_Social
sciences

C7_Genomics

C3_Nano materials and divices
C2_Supercomductivity
and quantum computing

C4_Environment

C5_Particle physics
and cosmology

Figure 3 A bird’s eye view of current scientific activities: result of mapping research areas
Note: Each circle represents a research area, and the size of the circle is proportional to the number of citing papers. Among the circles, shaded ones
represent research areas showing high activity. Research areas in the same category are indicated by a dotted circle in the map. The strongest link
stemming from individual research areas is depicted by a solid line if its normalised co-citation frequency exceeds a threshold.
Source: Research Front dataset [1999-2004] extracted from Essential Science Indicators; provided by Thomson Scientific; analysed by authors.

4. Capturing features of research activities
Basic science is promoted by curiously driven
motivations of scientists. However, it is necessary to grasp
the balance of research activities as a scientific indicator
for a country. Using information on the share of core and
citing papers, the conditions of participation of researchers
of each country can be visualized on the map of 133
research areas.
Core papers are aggregated from highly cited papers
through co-citation, so it is considered to reflect the
situation of the top-class researchers in each country.
Incidentally, the share of each country for about 10000
core papers is 61% for U.S, 13% for Germany, 12% for
UK, 9% for Japan, 7% for France, 3% for China, 2% for
South Korea and 1% for India. On the other hand, Citing
papers that cite core papers are thought to show the
population of all researchers. The share of each country
for about 330000 citing papers is 39% for U.S, 9% for
Germany, 9% for UK, 8% for Japan, 5% for France, 4%
for China, 2% for South Korea and 1% for India.
Figure 4 shows a part of the map in the Japanese case.
In each research area, inner circle and outer circle indicate
shares of core papers and citing papers, respectively. The
size of a circle is the same. In Chemical synthesis (C1),
Superconductivity and quantum computing (C2), Nano
materials and devices (C3) and Particle physics and
cosmology (C5), there are high shares for both core and
citing papers. This result suggests that Japanese research
has an established presence, and that Japan has diverse
human resources in these categories.
Figure 5 show a mixture of strengths and weaknesses
for research activities in bioscience-related categories (C69) and healthcare-related categories (C10-13). Lack of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

visibility in core papers indicates that there are a few top
researchers in these categories. In Environment (C4),
Japanese scientific activity tends to be less represented.
In Germany, there are top-class researchers and a
population of researchers in Superconductivity and
quantum computing (C2), Environment (C4) and Particle
physics and cosmology (C5). There is a mixture of
strengths and weaknesses for research activities in
chemical synthesis, bioscience-related categories (C10-13)
and healthcare-related categories (C6-9).
In UK, a remarkable presence is shown in biosciencerelated categories (C10-13) and healthcare-related
categories (C6-9), Environment (C4), Particle physics and
cosmology (C5).
Compared to the maps of India, South Korea, China
and Japan, it is considered that research activities tend to
extend from “Nanoscience and materials” to “bioscience
and healthcare” through four stages. At the first stage, as
in the case of India, the map shows that a top researcher
does not exist and there are few researchers. They work to
catch up with cutting-edge research. At the second stage,
as in the case of South Korea, researchers for
“Nanoscience and materials” are shown in the map.
However, this country still lacks a top-class researcher. At
the third stage, as in the case of China, there is a sufficient
population of researchers in “Nanoscience and materials”.
That is, China has produced top-class researchers from its
population of researchers. Moreover, China has human
resources for research on “bioscience and healthcare”.
And at the fourth stage is the case of Japan shown in
Figure 4 and Figure 5. These results suggest that the
number of top-class researchers and the total number of
researchers have a close relationship.

C1
89

92

90

94

86
81

88

85
84

87
106

103

C3

102
124

80

122

101

104

60
65
61
62
67

70

73

66

: 15%-

C2

71

: 9-15%

: 4-9%

: 0-4%

: 0%

Figure 4 Mapping share of core and citing papers

A detailed analysis of the statistical characteristics of
papers reveals the nature of research. Elaboration of
citations shows which research areas have experienced
rapid development in recent years. Country-specific
specialisation in a certain area of research will be unveiled
through analyses of shares of core and citing papers.
Methodological features also suit a longitudinal
analysis. This will reveal how science has been changing
shape over time. The map of science obtained in this study
will be a starting point for a longitudinal analysis. The
evolution of nano-bioscience is an issue of interest. One
common argument in modern science is that it is
becoming increasingly inter-/multi-disciplinary. A
longitudinal analysis will also reveal if the inter-/multidisciplinary character of research areas obtained by this
study is increasing or decreasing over time.

(Nanoscience and materials, JAPAN)

Acknowledgements
9

C13

The paper was prepared under the supervision of
Alessandra Colecchia, DSTI, and benefited from valuable
comments by Anthony Arundel, DSTI, and Terutaka
Kuwahara, NISTEP.

52

23
3
53
112
1

19

15
2

C11

24
4

26
22

108

C10

17

13

21

18
10
14

126

16
12
100

C8

99

25

11

128

34

125
35

20

109

110

C6

132
49

51

93

131

121

5
98

32

48

105

7

74

31

C9

[1]

95

127 117 118

33

8

115
116

111
129 130

References

113

6

27
114

C12

28
30

107

96

C7

29

91
97

: 15%-

: 9-15%

: 4-9%

: 0-4%

: 0%

Figure 5 Mapping share of core and citing papers
(bioscience and healthcare, JAPAN)

Conclusions
From the results of this study, the method can be seen
to have the following features.
One remarkable feature of this analysis is that it does
not require keywords for identifying research areas.
Interactions among researchers, which are observed in the
form of citations, provide a unique element that is
responsible for the formation of research areas. Research
areas emerge spontaneously through interactions such as
the self-organisation process. This methodological feature
makes a holistic understanding on scientific activities
beyond borders lying among traditional disciplines
possible.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Garfield, E., Sher, I.H., and Torpie, R.J. (1964), “The Use
of Citation Data in Writing the History of Science”,
Institute for Scientific Information, Philadelphia.
[2] Small, H. and Sweeney, E. (1985a), “Clustering the
Science Citation Index using Co-citations. I. A
Comparison of Methods”, Scientometrics, 7, 3-6, 391-409.
[3] Small, H., Sweeney, E., and Greenlee, E. (1985b),
“Clustering the Science Citation Index using Co-citations.
II. Mapping Science”, Scientometrics, 8, 5-6, 321-340.
[4] Börner, K., Chen, C., and Boyack, K. W. (2003),
“Visualizing Knowledge Domains”, Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 37, 179-255.
[5] Chen, C. (1999), “Visualising Semantic Spaces and
Author Co-citation Networks in Digital Libraries”,
Information Processing & Management, 53, 401-420.
[6] Chen, C. and Paul, R.J. (2001), “Visualising a Knowledge
Domain’s Intellectual Structure”, Computer, 34, 3, 65-71.
[7] Mane, K, K. and Börner, K (2004), “Mapping Topics and
Topic Bursts in PNAS”, PNAS, 101, 1, 5287−5290.
[8] Shiffrin, R.M. and Börner, K. (2004), “Mapping
Knowledge Domains”, PNAS, 101, 1, 5183-5185.
[9] National Institute of Science and Technology Policy
(2007), “Science Map 2004”, NISTEP Report No. 100 (in
Japanese).
[10] Igami, M. and Saka, A. (2007), Capturing the evolving
nature of science, the development of new scientific
indicators and the mapping of science, STI WORKING
PAPER 2007/1
[11] Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994), Social Network
Analysis: Methods and Applications, Cambridge
University Press.
[12] National Institute of Science and Technology Policy
(2005a), “The 8th Science and Technology Foresight
Study on Rapidly-developing Research Area-”, NISTEP
Report No. 95 (in Japanese).

