Aesthetic Primitives of Images for Visualization
Gabriele Peters
Universit¨at Dortmund, Informatik VII, Otto-Hahn-Str. 16, D-44227 Dortmund, Germany
peters@ls7.cs.uni-dortmund.de
Abstract
Images play an important role in visualization. As users
are more willing to adopt a product if it evokes pleasurable
feelings the aesthetic appeal of interfaces becomes more important. Thus, there is a growing need to generate also images which appear aesthetically to the user. Starting with
the modularities of the human visual system, we derive six
dimensions of visual aesthetics. For each dimension we explore, inspired by principles of the visual arts and insights
of cognitive neuroscience, which pecularities of the dimensions are particularly adequate for an aesthetic impression.
Accompanied by a fair number of image examples, these
considerations result in an easy to understand guideline
for computer scientists and interface designers how to deal
with images in terms of aesthetics.

1. Introduction
The roles of images1 in visualization are manifold. Stone
et al. [1] name four main benefits. Images motivate and attract the attention of the user and have the function to persuade her. They communicate information, which is often
exploited in computer-based learning. Furthermore, they
have the great power to overcome language barriers, and
they support interaction. Images are especially powerful
whenever it is difficult to describe the depicted information
by words or numbers. This is the paradigm for most humancomputer interaction applications. For example, in web design images are utilized mainly for two different purposes.
They can have the function to attract the user and may be
used as anticipation of the overall topic of the website. On
the other hand, small thumbnails promote interaction. In
e-learning images usually are the support of the information, that should be conveyed by the course. Other examples
of interfaces from several applications of augmented reality
(geovisualization, navigation, maintenance and repair, and
a museum guide) where images are the key components of
1 The term ”images” is used here in the sense of pictures, i.e., photographs or drawings. It does not denote diagrams or charts.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1. Images as key components of visualization: navigation and maintenance.

the visualization, are shown in figures 1 and 2. The left picture of figure 1 shows an image of the environment which
is augmented by data indicating a possible path for a vehicle. One could be of the opinion that such a real-time
navigation system has to show ”just the image the camera
captures”. But the interface designer has to decide for the
specification of numerous variables that determine how the
captured image is presented in the user interface. To name
but a few, she has to choose color space, contrast, dynamic
range, spatial arrangement of the image components (e.g.,
the position of the horizon), depth of field, and focal length.
The right part of figure 1 shows an example for maintenance
instructions for an engine. The previous statements hold
true for this example, as well. The last example is given in
figure 2. A virtual guide for the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao refers the visitor to architectural features of the building
or gives explanations of exhibits. Two screenshots from the
user interface are shown. In the context of information visualization and human-computer interaction topics such as
the importance of aesthetic qualities of graphical elements
of user interfaces [2] or the aesthetics of interaction [3] have
frequently been addressed. Also the relation between visual and verbal information in presentations has been dealt
with [4]. What is underrepresented in the literature is the
role of image aesthetics in visualization. This paper is an
attempt to fill this gap. To identify aesthetic dimensions
that, on the one hand, allow for the evaluation of the aesthetic qualities of an image and, on the other hand, enable
an interface designer to adapt her tools to the needs of the

Figure 2. Images as key components of visualization: museum guide (project AMIRE of
C-LAB, Paderborn, Germany).

user, we have to start at the user, i.e., the human, and have
to know basics about human visual information processing.
In section 2 we summarize results from cognitive neuroscience, that give an understanding of the basic principles
of the human visual system. This system solves a perceptual problem by filtering out the salient features of an object
from the details and varieties of its appearance. This is akin
to visual artist’s abilities to cull from the sensory manifolds
those image features that enhance the clarity of the representation. Thus, cognitive neuroscience as well as artistic
principles give us clues to define dimensions of visual aesthetics. These dimensions are the starting point for section 3
where we investigate for each dimension (e.g., spatial organization) which specific characteristics (e.g., the golden
mean) would best evoke an aesthetic experience. These
characteristics we call aesthetic primitives.

Figure 3. Cortical areas of the human visual
system dedicated to different visual modularities. (Images taken from [9].)

We start with an overview of the human visual system
in subsection 2.1 and draw the conclusion in subsection 2.2
that the basic dimensions that constitute an aesthetic experience can directly be derived from the modularity of our
visual system.

called V2, V1 sends this information further on to other specialized areas. A colored stimulus leads to an activation in
V1 and in a complex of areas called V4. Analogously, a
moving visual pattern activates V1 and an area called V5
located on the outside surface of the hemispheres (right part
of figure 3). Form is processed in several parts spread out
over the cortex. There are cells in V1 that respond to oriented lines, but also cells in other areas such as V2 and V3
respond selectively to orientation. Another intersting modularity that has its own representation in the brain is the body
and parts of it, such as faces and hands. In the monkey temporal cortex cells have been identified which are responsive
to different body posture and movement [5]. The human
fusiform gyrus (in the left part of figure 3 marked by the
turquoise color) is important for the perception of faces.
The functional specialization of the human visual system
and the independence of its modules is also reflected by the
fact that the brain needs different amounts of time to perceive color, form, and motion. Color is perceived before
form which is perceived before motion [6]. It also has been
shown in a behavioral study that motion perception is sensitive to luminance, but not to color cues [7].

2.1. Modularity of the human visual system

2.2. Correlation to the aesthetic experience

The human visual system is organized as a parallel, modular system. It processes different attributes of a visual
scene, such as color and motion, in different, specialized
subdivisions of the brain. These cortical areas are dedicated
to the analysis of a single property of the visual scene, only.
The left part of figure 3 shows a human brain from the medial side with some of these areas. From the retina the visual information is carried along the optic pathway to the
primary visual cortex (V1) at the back of the brain. Signals
carrying information on color, motion, form, and depth are
transported to V1 and are collected into specialized compartments in V1. Both, directly and via an intermediate area

The above mentioned modules of the visual system
(color, form, motion, body parts) and other not mentioned
ones (such as depth and spatial organization) are also attributes that have been important for the formal aspects of
visual arts, and thus for aesthetics. We speak of the aesthetics of color or the aesthetics of portrait painting, as
if there are also different categories of aesthetics. These
categories seem to correspond to the modules of visual
perception [8, 9]. Neuroscience studies revealed that the
judgement of a painting as beautiful or ugly correlates with
specific brain structures, principally the orbito-frontal cortex [10]. But Zeki suggests that there is not one visual aes-

2. Dimensions of visual aesthetics

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4. Only a Few Strong Colors and Complementary Contrast.

thetic ”sense” only but many, each tied to a different specialized processing system. Different attributes of the formal
aspect of art excite different groups of cells in the brain, thus
there is also a functional specialization in aesthetics [9]. It
is intersting to study patients with brain lesions in different
parts of the visual system. A patient of Sacks suffered from
achromatopsia due to a damage to area V4, which is dedicated to color processing [11]. This patient was an artist
and before his attack he had a preference for the colorful
paintings of the Impressionists. However, the deterioration
of V4 changed the aesthetic quality of these works for him,
as he could not perceive color anymore. Also his own paintings became grayish and dirty, but his form vision was not
impaired, so he still could sketch objects and enjoy the aesthetic quality of forms. Latto posed the question as to why
some features - aesthetic primitives - of the modularities
provoke a stronger aesthetic impression than others [8]. He
came to the conclusion that a property of a stimulus is intrinsically interesting if it resonates with mechanisms of the
visual system. Aesthetic primitives isolate or exaggerate
one of the processes of the human visual system by evoking maximal responses of those cells in the brain dedicated
to that special attribute. They are aesthetically moving because they blend with our brains. Summarizing, we suggest the basic dimensions of visual aesthetics to be exactly
the different modularities of the human visual system. The
most important of them are color, form, spatial organization, motion, depth, and the human body.

3. Aesthetic primitives of vision
Having identified the main dimensions of visual aesthetics, we will consider the question now, which pecularities of
these dimensions are capable of evoking an aesthetic sensation. Those pecularities we will call aesthetic primitives.
Many books have been filled with principles of lay-out and
arrangement of color and form in visual arts, whether it is
drawing, painting, or photography. In this section we refer
to the classic benchmark by Feininger [12] as it summarizes
the basic principles of aesthetic composition and is still a
reference for photographers and artists. For each primitive
described in this section we give an example, mostly in from

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 5. Monochrom coloration and color
circle by Goethe.

of a photograph2 , but the described principles hold true for
all kinds of images.

3.1. Color
Color is a modularity of the visual system, which just in
the context of beauty is an important means to evoke aesthetic experiences. We examine three properties of color
and its distribution in an image, which are known to appeal
to our aesthetic sense.
Only a few strong colors. Less is more. Two to three
strong colors usually are the maximum for an image still to
be pleasant to the eyes. If more than a few strong colors occur in an image usually the effect of beauty is lost. (Maybe
this corresponds to the isolated process in the human visual
system triggered by only one special visual attribute which
was mentioned in subsection 2.2.) In principle, color in an
image should correlate with its content [12]. If color is not
the salient feature of an object depicted in the image, as it
holds true, e.g., for a butterfly, the visual system of the observer is overcharged and an aesthetic impression is missed.
An example is shown in the left image of figure 4. The orange color of the turbans of the musicians is the dominant
property of them in this image. Thus, they are depicted in
such a way that the orange color is also the dominant property of the whole image. All other colors are subordinate or
even non-colors. Also the right image of figure 4 gets by
with only a few strong colors, the yellow of the taxis and
the red rear lights of the cars. An exaggeration of this rule
is monochromaticity, the deliberate choice of only one main
color. Quite aesthetic results can be achieved if only a small
range of colors adjacent in the color circle (see below) are
chosen, e.g., only red, brown, and orange tones in a picture
of autumn foliage. The left images of figure 5 show an example of this principle, where only a brown tone is used.
Such a subtle monochrom coloration allows for the accentuation of important elements which come to the fore (such
as the bench and the person in these examples).
Complementary contrast. Complementary colors are
pairs of colors that are in some way opposites of each other.
2 If

not otherwise stated all photographs are taken from [13].

Figure 6. Exploitation of the dynamic range.

The traditional set of complementary pairs in art are red
and green, blue and orange, and yellow and purple. They
face each other in the color circle, as, e.g., advocated by
Goethe [14] (figure 5). Two complementary colors reinforce themselves mutually in their luminance. By a moderate application of this effect the attention of the observer
can be directed. The most beautiful effect often is achieved
if the complementary colors are the only strong colors. The
hindu picture of figure 4 with the dominant orange of the
turbans and the contrasting blue tone of the blanket may
hold as an example for this effect, as well. The complementary contrast becomes evident in two phenomenons, the
simultaneous and the sucessive contrast, where the nonexistent complementary color is anticipated either simultaneously in the environment of an existent color or immediately after the exposure of a color, respectively. Colloquially speaking, the human visual system requests the complementary completion and generates it on its own authority
if it is not present. This can hold as another argument that
supports the thesis of the foundation of aesthetics in cognitive neuroscience.
Exploitation of the dynamic range. Exploitation of the
dynamic range concerns the distribution of tonal values in
an image. Although it applies for colored as well as for
black and white images the principle is best explained by
means of gray value images. The dynamic range describes
the ratio of luminance values from the brightest highlights
to the deepest shadows in an image. Our visual system can
perceive much a greater dynamic range than that which can
be rendered in an image via a monitor or a print. When
we consider the instantaneous dynamic range (where our
pupil opening is unchanged) this ratio is indicated between
1:1000 and 1:10,000 [15]. But our visual system is extremely adaptive and the dynamic range actually changes
depending on brightness and contrast of a scene. If we consider situations where our pupil opens and closes for varying light, we can see over a range of nearly 1:1,000,000. In
contrast to this, the dynamic range of prints is about 1:250
and those of monitors can reach values of about 1:1000. To
come back to aesthetics, one can say that an image looks
pleasing to the eye if the display medium (print or monitor)
is able to render the dynamic range of the depicted scene

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 7. Clarity and simplicity of form.
in a similar way as it is perceived by the human visual system. The contrast ratio of an image should be controlled
in such a way that the wide range of intensity levels from
the brightest light to the deepest shadow is represented in
an image. As a rule of thumb, an image is said to be aesthetic only if the full tonal range is present and, in addition,
the tonal values are distributed in a well-balanced manner.
The images of figure 6 can pass off as examples for that.
The histogram of an image can serve as an indicator for
an advantageous distribution. An overall Gaussian shape
which covers the whole range of gray level values is a good
precondition for an aesthetic image. It indicates that both
shadow and highlight detail is captured. In general, the
very bright and dark parts of an image should only take up
small portions of an image, just as it holds true for the images of figure 6. A technique that should be mentioned in
this context is Ansel Adams’ zone system [16]. With this
system he gave a recipe to bridge the gap between the limited dynamic range of prints or monitors in comparison to
our visual system. The zone system allows for the prints or
monitor displays to approximate the way the world looks to
our eyes. It does this by providing a simple way to control
the contrast of images. Although originally developed for
film negatives, its principles can easily be adopted for digital imaging. Another technique worth mentioning is high
dynamic range imaging [17]. As a field primarily evolved in
computer graphics, it provides a set of methods to generate
an image of high dynamic range, e.g., from multiple exposures of the same scene. The source images are overlapped
and masked appropriately so that the resulting composite
represents a wider gamut of colors and tones.

3.2. Form
Form provides the source of information necessary for
basic survival function such as navigation, recognition of
prey, predators, and mates, as well as for high level behaviors such as reading. But the shape of objects does not only
allocate essential information on the world surrounding us,
it is also a source of aesthetic sensation.
Clarity of form. When we speak of form in the context
of elements constituting an image we usually mean lines

Figure 8. Animal silhouettes: statue of a dog
by Alberto Giacometti (”Le Chien”, 1951) and
”The Horse in Motion” by Eadweard Muybridge (taken from [18]).

and surfaces. Lines can actually be present by the contrast
gradient or color changes or they can emerge through our
perception. Elements of an image can be arranged in such a
way that they are connected by imaginary lines. Those can
be attributed by their orientation, as well. An image, that appeals favorably to our visual system, should comprise only
a few predominant orientations in any case, either evolving
from actual lines, by edges and boundaries of surfaces, or
by imaginary lines. The main orientations of the left image of figure 7 are constituted only by straight lines (verticals, horizontals, and diagonals), those of the right image
of the same figure by straight and curved lines and concentric ovals. The few and overall shapes of these images are
consistent, simple, and clearly recognizable. This is what
Feininger means when he speaks of clarity and simplicitiy
of form [12]. Curved lines seem to appear beautiful if they
obey a continuous function (yet in the mathematical sense)
and take a uniform course within the image as a whole.
Silhouettes. Feininger explicitly lists silhouettes as components of aesthetic images (”outlines which are typical for an
object, vigorous and unusual; clear silhouettes” [12]). Also
artists from other disciplines have realized the value of silhouettes for the visual effect. Giacometti with his sculptures of men and animals can hold as an example. The
strong impact of his works is achieved mainly by their silhouettes, viewed from a distance [19], rather than by their
three-dimensionality. Giacometti was a master in reducing
objects to their characteristic outlines. The left part of figure 8 shows an example. Another prominent example is the
series of photographs of moving humans and animals by
Muybridge (right part of figure 8). Here the outlines of the
objects play a decisive role in the aesthetic classification of
his works, as well. But not only shapes of animals and humans are perceived as beeing beautiful, also the silhouettes
of other objects can be aesthetic elements of an image, such
as the couple under the umbrella in the left image of figure 9 or the bench in the left image of figure 5. As a rule of
thumb, one can say, that silhouettes appear beautiful, if they
capture the main characteristics of an object. The outline
of the object should either be clearly identifiable or graphi-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 9. Silhouettes of other objects, clarity
of spatial organization, and golden mean.

Figure 10. Human silhouettes. Photographs
by G. Peters (”Dark Days - Venice”, 2006).

cally interesting. In addition, silhouettes are supposed to be
sharp-edged and clearly distinctable from the background
rather than ambiguous and bleary. However, this last rule
does not apply unrestrictedly. The shape of the human body
can be regarded as an exception to this rule, as already indicated by the fact that the human brain handles body shapes
separately. Apparently, human silouettes can evoke a sense
of beauty even if they are depicted in a blurry fashion (see
figure 10).

3.3. Spatial organization
Not only the shapes of the elements constituting an image are of importance for its aesthetic appearance, but also
their mutual spatial relations in the two-dimensional surface
of the image play a major role for the aesthetics of an image
as a whole. Analogously to the form primitive clarity in the
last subsection, we will here comment on the aesthetic primitive clarity of spatial organization. Other aesthetic primitives of spatial organization are the golden mean, texture
and pattern, and rhythm, repetition, and variation.
Clarity of spatial organization. Feininger argued that clarity and simplicity of spatial organization is the silver bullet
for an aesthetic image [12]. Too many objects in a single
image cause confusion and derangement. An image should
not be overloaded by details, as well. The middle image of
figure 9 shows an example which demonstrates the power of
spatial organization. The attention of the viewer is focussed
on the person in the center, although the visible parts of the
boy occupy only a very small portion in the image. This ef-

Figure 11. Texture and pattern.

fect is only in part due to the form contrast between curved
and straight lines, but mainly due to the spatial arrangement
of the image elements. In general, an image appears aesthetically, if no element neither can be omitted nor can be
added without destroying the visual balance. There are also
some more restrictive rules concerning the distribution of
light and dark parts of an image. The usual way to scan an
image is supposed to be from the left upper part diagonally
to the right lower part. Accordingly, the most important
portion of an image is the left upper part, because here the
image inspection starts. As humans are more inclined to
examine lighter parts of an image rather than darker parts,
an image should have its lighter parts in the upper left, its
darker parts in the lower right, just as exemplified by the
pictures of figure 7.
Golden mean. The golden mean denominates a particular
ratio of an asymmetric line division. Whereas symmetry
appears rather statical and boring, divisions in accordance
with the golden mean are considered as beeing harmonic
and interesting. A line should be divided in such a way that
the ratio of the smaller part a to the larger part b is the same
as the ratio of the larger part b to the whole a + b. Put in
formulas it reads like this: φ √
= a/b = b/(a + b). The
only positive solution is φ = ( 5 − 1)/2 ≈ 3/5 ≈ 0.618,
which is the geometric definition of the golden mean. It has
the continued fraction expansion φ = 1/(1 + 1/(1 + . . .))
and the best rational approximations to φ are given by
the convergents of this infinite continued fraction, arrived
at by cutting it off at different levels in the expansion:
1/1, 1/2, 2/3, 3/5, . . . Thus, the convergents of the golden
mean are the ratios of successive Fibonacci numbers [20].
Therefore, a division of a line, surface, or volume in the
ratio of about 3 : 5 appears harmonic. From antiquity until today φ has constantly been present in art. Even acient
Chinese paintings show the golden mean in an accuracy of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

three decimal places. The main explanation for the usage of
this proportion in art is that it is found frequently in nature,
e.g., in sea shells or in human proportions. Figure 9 shows
an image constructed according to the rule of the golden
mean. The woman is placed approximately in the golden
mean. The majority of the images in this article obey this
construction rule, in particular the left images of figure 5.
Texture and pattern. Texture denotes the structural characteristics of a surface. The number of the different dimensions of texture is still discussed, but is probably five
or larger. For example in a classical study [21] texture
was classified into coarseness, contrast, directionality, linelikeness, regularity, and roughness. Patterns are regular visible surface structures which underlie a more or less repetitive entity. These structures can be graphical ones, which
means that they are arrangements of combinations of certain
visual themes (e.g., stripes, or checked patterns). Nature is
full of patterns. Sand dunes, tree branches, and snowflakes
display most beautiful patterns, to name but a few. It is an
open question as to why patterns evoke aesthetic feelings in
humans, but our visual system seems to look for patterns
in visual stimuli even if they are actually not present. We
are able to detect an organizing principle (i.e., something
meaningful) even in arbitrary structures of low information
content such as clouds. This phenomenon is known as clustering illusion [22]. For Feininger [12] ”pattern, rhythm,
and repetition of interesting, related forms” is one of the ten
most important properties of an aesthetic image. Examples
for images which appeal mainly because of their overall pattern and texture character are given in figure 11. The images
on the left are made up of fairly regular patterns, those on
the right display more random textures, but for all holds true
that the entire image plane is filled with consistent structure
and thus evokes a wholistic impression. Other examples
of images mainly beeing effective because of patterns are
given in figure 13, and maybe even the images of figure 7
work partly because of their pattern character.
Rhythm, repetition, and variation. Many visual patterns
are strongly related to repeated shapes or objects. These
copies can occur in regular spatial distances or they can be
arranged arbitrarily. Patterns of largest relevance for animals are those of medium entropy. Regarding aesthetics
conditions are similar. Perfect symmetry in images as well
as chaos (or noise) are not ranked beautiful. Figure 12
demonstrates the beauty of repetition by copying single
slices of an image and combining them without modification. Repeated structures are also present in the images of
figure 7 and contribute to their aesthetic appeal. As pure
repetition often is said to be monotonous another principle of art consists in variation, which means an instance
of change in present stuctures. This is usually applied to
increase the visual interest. Figure 13 shows variations over
a theme, namely stripe patterns in animal fur. Another ex-

Figure 12. Repetition.

Figure 14. Blur. Upper row: motion blur,
lower row: panning blur.

3.4. Motion
Figure 13. Rhythm and variation.
Photographs by G. Peters (”Streifzuge”,
¨
2000).

ample is given in figure 11. Variation of the overall stripe
pattern is realized here in the lower left image by the details of the different letters. Visual rhythm is the last aesthetic primitive of spatial organization we will explain. It is
an artistic principle closely connected to repetition and often described by the flow of how the viewer’s eye is drawn
across an image, for example, whether the eye is forced to
jump rapidly or glide smoothly from one image element to
the next. The most common explanation as to why humans
appreciate rhythm, either in music or in the visual arts, is
that it recalls how we walk and the heartbeat we heard in
the womb. There are several types of visual rhythm [23].
These include3 : Regular rhythms: ab ab . . . is the most
common type. Another example is abbb abbb . . . The picture in figure 12 exploits the schema aaa bbb ccc . . . Alternating rhythms: for example: aba cdc aba ef e aba . . .
Progressive rhythms: Progression occurs when there is a
gradual increase or decrease in the size, number, or some
other quality of the elements repeated. A sample pattern
would be: ab aabb aaabbb . . . The left image of figure 7 displays a progressive rhythm. In figure 13 the effect of visual
rhythm is even more evident: in the upper left image the
viewer’s gaze is led horizontally from the left to the right
by the arrangement of the vertical stripes, whereas in the
middel picture of the same row it is directed more smoothly
and diagonally from the upper left to the lower right.
3 In

the following examples, let the letters a, b, etc. stand for visual
elements of any sort.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Motion inherently is an aesthetic cue because it refers to
life and action. As this article is about images rather than
movies, we will illuminate the means by which motion can
be conveyed in an image. Calder, most famous for inventing
the mobile, used black, white, and red as the only colors for
his kinetic sculptures, because he was of the opinion that all
other colors would confuse the clarity of motion [24]. This
opinion is interesting because of the coincidence with the
functional specialization of the color and motion pathways
in our visual system, mentioned at the end of subsection 2.1.
According to Calder, motion is most effectively represented
by placing highly contrastive surfaces side by side. Translated into images, this means that motion is best expressed
in an image (even a color image), if it is based on contrast
changes, rather than color. The graphical means by which
this can be realized are manifold. We will concentrate here
on two of the most expressive motion symbols, blur and the
depiction of distinct motion phases.
Blur. Blur is an indicator for movement. Feininger defines
it as ”unsharpness in one direction”, namely the direction of
the moving object [12]. The stronger the blur, the stronger
the impression of speed. In photography4 it can be achieved
either by a static camera taking a moving object (so-called
motion blur) or panning the camera with a moving object
(so-called panning blur). Blur as an indicator for motion
is an aesthetic primitive if the blurred parts of the image
contain lines or stripes of high contrast rather than beeing
of homogeneous luminance. The upper row of figure 14
shows two examples of motion blur. Note the high contrast
changes in the blurred regions. The same holds true for the
images in the lower row. Here the blur was induced by a
4 It is irrelevant whether the image was generated with a camera,
whether it was painted, or created with computer graphic techniques. What
counts is the visual impression obtained by the described techniques.

Figure 16. Linear perspective.
Figure 15. Distinct motion phases. Left: Marcel Duchamp’s ”Nude Descending a Staircase”, 1911-12, right: double exposure indicating slight movement.

panning of the camera. In the left image it was panned with
the walking woman, thus she is depicted almost sharply. In
the right image the camera was panned with the right car.
Again, in both images the blurred regions exhibit high contrasts, which is essential to evoke an aesthetic impression.
Distinct motion phases. Another technique to illustrate
movement in images is the depiction of a number of distinct motion phases simultaneously in a single image. Its
high aesthetic appeal is probably partly due to the element
of repetition. A series of sharp, slightly different, partly
overlapping copies of an object, which is captured in different phases of movement, can symbolize the concept of
motion in a graphically smart way. Duchamp practised this
principle in his famous painting pictured in figure 15. In
photography distinct motion phases are usually obtained by
multiple exposures of a object (right image of figure 15).

3.5. Depth
As the image plane is two-dimensional, the threedimensional world has to be simulated by means of artistic
devices. A number of basic techniques of picture language
can be used to create the illusion of depth in an image. Examples of these techniques are: controlling the variation
between sizes of depicted objects, overlapping them, and
placing those that are on the depicted ground as lower when
nearer and higher when deeper [23]. We concentrate here
on the depiction of linear perspective, the contrast between
sharpness and unsharpness, and between light and shadow.
Linear perspective. The invention of linear perspective
dates to the early 1400s, with Filippo Brunelleschi’s experiments in perspective painting. It works by following
geometric rules for rendering objects as they appear to the
human eye. For instance, we see parallel lines as converging
in the distance, although in reality they do not. The lines of
buildings and other objects in a picture are slanted inward
making them appear to extend back into space. If lengthened, these lines will meet at the vanishing point along an

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 17. Sharpness and unsharpness.
imaginary horizontal line representing the eye level [23].
Examples for images composed in linear perspective, each
with its vanishing point in the center, are given in figure 16.
Sharpness and unsharpness. In contrast to blur, which is
unsharpness in one direction, unsharpness here is more generally defined by an absence of high frequency content. The
visual impression of the contrast between sharp and unsharp
parts of an image can act quite aesthetic on the viewer. This
can be exploited for the purpose of focussing attention to
the important image elements. The most common application of this principle can be found in potrait photography,
where a large aperture is used to obtain a small depth of
field, which results in an unsharp background and thus emphasizes the portrayed person (figure 17).
Light and shadow. How the shape of a three-dimensional
object may be recovered from shading in a two-dimensional
image is still the subject of a large field of research in machine vision, called shape from shading [25]. Different illumination conditions cause different shadings of the objects
we perceive. Somehow our brain is able to suggest the from
of an object from this shading. Put in terms of image areas, the human visual system is able to perceive depth from
the distribution of light and shadow in an image. A strong
visual effect is achieved, if objects are depicted as if illuminated under extreme conditions. We often find sharp contrasts then on the surface of the object and our recognition
is accompanied by a feeling of beauty. This principle is employed, e.g., in the pictures of figure 18.

3.6. Human body
As already mentioned in subsection 2.1 the human body
and its parts such as hands and heads take up a special position in visual information processing, which reflects the

Figure 18. Light and shadow.

Figure 20. Silhouettes of the human body.
Photographs by G. Peters (”Dark Days - New
York”, 2006).
Figure 19. Human body. Left: part of a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti (”Le Place”, 194849), right: photographs by Eadweard Muybridge (taken from [18]).

importance of these visual stimuli for our survival. Also in
our aesthetic sensation it seems to be worth to be regarded
as a separate category. A concept which is important in this
context is that of the principal axes of an object.
Principal axes. Principal axes are axes of symmetry or
elongation around which the local parts of objects are
grouped in order to constitute their global form. If an object is enlarged, shrunk, or rotated around its principal axis
the relationship between the parts and the principal axis remains constant across all variations. Principal axes are considered as aesthetic primitives [8]. Supporting arguments
for this opinion can be derived from the arts as well as
from cognitive neuroscience. Stick figures have been used
by artists ever since, even humans in cave paintings have
been depicted by means of their principal axes. On the
other hand, it has been shown in a study that little animal
models made of pipe-cleaners are sufficient to represent the
animals [26]. They are easily recognizable altough no information on the surface of the shape is present. The authors
supposed, that the success is due to the correspondence between the pipe-cleaners and the axes of the volumes they
stand for. To come back to aesthetics, Giacometti again provides examples for the thesis that the human body intrinsically is capable of evoking a feeling of beauty. What distinguishes his statues is the fact that they almost only consist
of their principal axes. Giacometti reduces the body to its
basic shape, and thus we recognize the concept of a human

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

at once (left image of figure 19). Sartre put this as follows:
”As soon as I see them [these figures], they spring into my
visual field as an idea before my mind; the idea alone is
at one stroke all that it is.” [19]. Other examples are given
again by a motion study of Muybridge in figure 19, this time
boxing men, and the shapes of humans in figure 20, which
illustrate both, the aesthetic primitive of silhouettes dealt
with in subsection 3.2, as well as the beauty of the human
body defined by its principal axes. It seems that the human body does not appear beautiful arbitrarily, but because
its shape, especially in the exaggerated version of principal
axes, corresponds to the simplifications and transformations
our visual system performs to analyze and represent it.

4

Summary

In the context of human-computer interaction users are
more willing to adopt a product if it evokes pleasurable feelings. In addition, the acceptance of an application has severe implications for its safety. Disregarded for a long time,
the aesthetic appeal of interfaces recently becomes more
important. In this article we addressed only one element
of interfaces, namely images. The best content of an image
does not reach the recipient, if the image is designed poorly
and thus appears confusing or ugly. Motivated by the modularity of the human visual system we have identified six
dimensions of visual aesthetics. For each dimension we explored the conditions and properties that enhance the clarity or vividness of the visual presentation. These aesthetic
primitives are justified in an interdisciplinary fashion by the
way how sensory information is processed by our visual
system, as well as by approved practices of artists. We did

not address here the question how more than one of these
primitives can be combined in a single image. Also exceptions to the rules stated in section 3 have not been subject
of our considerations. Clearly, not all aesthetic images obey
the stated rules of image composition. Of course, there are
exceptions and often just famous works of art break these
basic rules. But to keep control over the process of generating appealing images it is necessary to break the rules consciously rather than randomly or just by exploration. And
for that purpose interface designers have to be aware of the
basic aesthetic primitives. Summarizing, we list here, in
striking terms, the directives for image composition for the
six identified dimensions of visual aesthetics. These directives should not be adhered to too seriously but rather be
regarded as rules of thumb. Color: use a few strong colors
only; often complementary contrasts are effective; exploit
the dynamic range Form: forms should be clear and simple; silhouettes are aesthetic Spatial organization: spatial
organization of image elements should be clear and simple; apply the rule of the golden mean; attain a wholistic
impression by textures and patterns; apply variations to patterns and take care for the visual rhythm induced by repetition of elements Motion: express motion by blur of high
contrast; distinct motion phases are aesthetically appealing
Depth: illustrate linear perspective; exploit the contrast between sharpness and unsharpness; the distribution of light
and shadow may evoke the impression of depth Human
body: let the pricipal axes of the human body be clearly
visible.

References
[1] Stone, D., Jarett, C., Woodfoffe, M. and Minocha, S.:
User Interface Design and Evaluation. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers/Elsevier, 2005.
[2] Tufte, E.: Envisioning Information. Gra. Press, 1990.

[8] Latto, R.: The Brain of the Beholder. in: The Artful
Eye, 66–94, Oxford University Press, 1995.
[9] Zeki, S.: Inner Vision. Oxford University Press, 1999.
[10] Kawabata, H. and Zeki, S.: Neural Correlates of
Beauty. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91(4), 1699–
1705, American Physiological Society, 2004.
[11] Sacks, O. and Wasserman, R.: The Painter who became Color Blind. NY Rev. Books, 34, 25–33, 1987.
[12] Feininger, A.: Die hohe Schule der Fotografie. ECON
D¨usseldorf und Wien, 1961.
[13] Peters, G.: www.eyeszeit.net, 2007.
[14] Goethe, J. W. v.: Zur Farbenlehre. T¨ubingen, 1810.
[15] McHugh, S. T.:
Cambridge
www.cambridgeincolour.com, 2007.

in

Color.

[16] Adams, A.: The Negative. New York Graphic Society,
Little, Brown, and Company, 1981.
[17] Reinhard, E., Ward, G., Pattanaik, S., and Debevec, P.:
High Dynamic Range Imaging: Acquisition, Display,
and Image-Based Lighting. Morgan Kaufmann, 2005.
[18] Muybridge,E.: Animal Locomotion.Philadelphia,1887.
[19] Sartre, J.-P.: The Search for the Absolute. in: Exhibition of Sculptures, Paintings, Drawings [by Alberto
Giacometti], New York: Pierre Matisse Gallery, 1948.
[20] Cartwright, J., Gonzalez, D., Piro, O., and Stanzial, D.:
Aesthetics, Dynamics, and Musical Scales: A Golden
Connection. J. New Mus. Res. (31), pp. 51-58, 2002.
[21] Tamura, H., Mori, S., and Yamawaki, T.: Textural
Features Corresponding to Visual Perception. IEEE
Trans. Sys., Man, Cybern., 8(6), pp. 460–472, 1978.

[3] Norman, D.: Emotion and Design: Attractive Things
Work Better. Interact. Magazine, ix(4), 36-42, 2002.

[22] Gilovich, T., Vallone, R., and Tversky, A.: The hot
hand in basketball: On the misperception of random
sequences. Cog. Psy., vol. 17, pp. 295-314, 1985.

[4] Ware, C.: Information Visualization: Perception for
Design. Morgan Kaufman, 2004.

[23] Delahunt, M. R.: Rhythm. ArtLex Art Dictionary,
http://www.artlex.com, February 17, 2007.

[5] Perrett, D. I., Rolls, E. T., and Caan, W.: Three
Stages in the Classification of Body Movements by
Visual Neurons. In: Images and Understanding, 94–
107, Cambridge University Press, 1990.

[24] Calder, A.:Temoignages Pourl’Art Abstrait. in: Alvard,
J., Gindertael, R., eds., Ed. Art d’aujourd’hui, 1952.

[6] Moutoussis, K. and Zeki, S.: A Direct Demonstration
of Perceptual Asynchrony in Vision. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. B., 264, 393–397, 1997.
[7] Ramachandran, V. S. and Gregory, R. L.: Does Colour
Provide an Input to Human Motion Perception? Nature 275, 55–56, 1978.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[25] Zhang, R., Tsai, P.-S., Cryer, J. E., and Shah, M.:
Shape from Shading: A Survey. IEEE Trans. on
PAMI, 21(8), 1999.
[26] Marr, D. and Nishihara, H. K.: Representation and
Recognition of the Spatial Organization of ThreeDimensional Shapes. Proc. R. Soc. of London, B, vol.
200, pp. 269–294, 1978.

