Visual Exploration and Discovery of Atypical Behavior in
Financial Time Series Data using Two-Dimensional Colormaps
Hartmut Ziegler, Tilo Nietzschmann, Daniel A. Keim
University of Konstanz, Germany
{ziegler, nietzsch, keim}@inf.uni-konstanz.de
Abstract
This work describes two pixel-based paradigms for
visual financial time series data analysis that allow analyzing assets in overview and in detail, and offer improved insights into the characteristics of assets compared to traditional visualization methods. We contribute a two-dimensional color coding scheme for inter-/intra-asset analysis
that extends the two paradigms and supports the discovery of significant characteristics of assets, such as atypical ”against-the-market”-behavior in form of exceptional
stability in case of whole market losses, or the discovery
of assets in a portfolio that - while still being profitable notably underperform the market median. We apply our
techniques on real world data sets, and focus on assets of
the banks of Switzerland.

1

Introduction

The financial market is an important domain dealing
with large amounts of complex time dependent data every
day. Companies like Reuters currently provide 50.000 updates of data per second for the world wide stock market.
Although it is possible to use algorithms to automatically
analyze the data for making automated decisions, a deep
understanding regarding the huge amount of data can only
be achieved through information visualization and visual
data mining. In financial analysis, the almost exclusively
used techniques by analysts for decades are still traditional
line and bar charts, and new visualization techniques are
only slowly entering this domain. In this paper, we illustrate several approaches for visualizing financial time series data that have been proposed in the past, and describe
two conceptual models for getting better insights into the
development of an asset over a period of time. We propose
a basic - yet highly effective - technique that reveals the
characteristics of an asset in overview and detail, its performance compared to the whole market, and special atypical
tendencies that are usually not evident at first glance and
that can effectively be emphasized with our technique.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2

Motivation

The financial market with its large amount of data is
a challenging and interesting field for information visualization. Especially the ten thousands of assets that can
be analyzed for potential investments have a high demand
for suitable visualization techniques, and should not only
allow an overview and detailed view on the data of one
asset, but also allow comparative views in order to evaluate the performance of an asset in comparison to other
assets. Higher level functions, which result from a combination of the mentioned techniques, include detection of
atypical behavior of assets under certain market conditions,
like exceptional stability in case the whole financial market crashes, or detection of too slowly growing assets in a
portfolio while other assets have much higher growth.
In contrast to this, financial analysts and investors still
primarily work with easy to use traditional line charts and
statistical measures for their daily work, which on the one
hand supply the basic information, but on the other hand
only offer a very limited insight into the real characteristics
of an asset. While few statistical numbers are per se not
sufficient to describe the real market characteristics of an
asset, analysts that use line charts also have no possibility
to compare an asset against thousands of other assets on
the market at the same time. One could say about these
analysts: they see some single words, but they will not see
or understand the full sentence.
In this paper, we describe two pixel-based paradigms
that allow to having an overview as well as a detailed view
on the performance of an asset. We describe, how these
two concepts can be used to analyze the growth of an asset over time, and how it can be used to compare the performance of an asset against the whole market or market
sectors for all possible time intervals. Our visual approach
supports the discovery of patterns, trends and correlations
in different markets, and allows comparative screening in
order to support the decision making process.

3

Related Work

Large time series data in financial markets offer many
possibilities for developing improved visualization techniques in order to get more insight into the market behavior. However, Information Visualization is only slowly entering this domain, and analysts and investors still primarily focus on known techniques like line charts for making
their decisions [11]. Several approaches in recent years
have tried to visualize the financial market with maps, like
treemaps [16], Neovisions RiskMaps [12], Smartmoneys
’Map of the Market’ [15] or Self-Organizing Maps [1] [14]
[4]. These techniques offer a good overview over the financial market, but do not allow any detailed analysis or
comparison of single assets, neither analysis of effectively
more than one interval of time and therefore cannot replace
traditional line charts. Commercial products for visualizing financial time series data are GSphere by Gravity Investments [5], Market Topology [10], Portfolio Impact by
High Tower Software [8], or StockVIS [13]. Other well
known projects are TimeSearcher [6] or ThemeRiver [7].
One of the most recent approaches for visualizing financial
time series data is based on pixel-based triangular matrices [9], which allow analysis of the development of an asset in overview and detail for one or many assets. Except
the last, none of the other approaches allows the visualization of large amounts of time periods, and therefore do
not provide sufficient information for an analyst for making reasonable investment decisions.

4
4.1

Pixel-based Concepts for Visualizing
Financial Time Series Data
The Growth Matrix Approach

Regarding financial time series data, as the financial
market focuses on profits, analysts and investors are primarily interested in growth rates and not absolute values of
assets. A growth rate can be defined as the growth of an
asset in a time interval from the time of purchase (starting
point) to the point of sale (end point). As line charts do not
reflect the growth rates directly and do not allow intuitive
perception of all possible growth rate intervals at a glance,
a different approach for visualizing growth rate intervals is
required.
As all possible combinations of ”time of purchase” and
”time of sale” for an asset should be covered by our visualization, the one-dimensional time series data is transformed into a two-dimensional spectrum with two axes in a
Cartesian coordinate system, mapping ”time of purchase”
on the x-axis and ”time of sale” on the y-axis, thus spanning a triangle covering all possible n ∗ (n − 1)/2 time

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

subintervals of an asset (see Figure 2). Each time subinterval is represented by one pixel, with the result that showing
all time intervals in one single view is possible at the same
time. This technique is called Growth Matrix [9].
As both axes of the 2D-coordinate system are used to
represent the time intervals, the color is used to indicate
and encode the value of the growth rate at each position
(x,y). The color coding scheme forms a smooth transition
from shades of red (losses) over beige (unchanged growth)
to green (for profits), see Figure 1.

Figure 1: The color map covers a range from shades of red (negative growth, loss) to beige (no growth) to green (positive growth,
profit)

For generating our images, we use a real-world database
that contains data of 12.000 funds which consists of various types of assets (bonds, stocks, property) and is sampled
on a monthly basis from January 1991 to March 2005. The
171 months therefore create a maximum of 14535 possible
combinations of time of purchase and time of sale, each
with its individual growth rate. For illustrating our examples in this paper, we have selected assets from banks in
Zurich (Switzerland).
Two examples of such pixel-based layouts can be found
in Figure 2. The example on the left illustrates the intraasset analysis of a bond with a nearly continuous steady
growth over time, accordingly the positive growth rates of
all possible subintervals form a completely green triangle
illustrating the positive growth for all possible combinations of time of purchase and time of sale. The image on
the right illustrates the intra-asset analysis of an asset that
consists primarily of technology shares, with significant
growth rates and profits if purchased in the early years and
sold in 2000, and high losses after 2000 during the breakdown of the ”new economy” in the so-called ”dot-com”
crisis.
The examples reveal typical growth rate patterns, identifying strong and weak regions where an asset has been
profitable, mediocre or lossy. They also allow analysis of
the short-term volatility along the diagonal, or long-term
behavior of the assets for up to eleven years holding time
the further we move to the upper left corner of the image.
The Growth Matrix therefore can be defined as a function GM : (Integer, Integer) → Color, mapping discrete 2D coordinates (i, j) to color codes taken appropriately from a color space. Regarding growth rate normalization, we define two metrics. The first one is called growth
index, and is a function giA (i, j) based on relative growth

We can therefore consider the second growth metric as
rank index as a function riA (i, j, DB), defined as the [0, 1]normalized rank of a given growth coefficient with regard
to all corresponding growth coefficients in a database of
time series DB. Formally:
riA =

Figure 2: Two examples of Growth Matrices with prototypical
patterns: The image on the left illustrates a bond with a continuous growth, resulting in a completely green triangle as all possible
combinations of times of purchase and times of sale have a positive growth. The image on the right shows a highly volatile fund
that consists primarily of technology stocks, with high profits towards the year 2000 and high losses after the crash of the new
economy during the ”dot-com” crisis, with corresponding green
and red regions in the Growth Matrix triangle for the affected
combinations of times of purchase and times of sale representing
the absolute profits and losses.

of the price of an asset A within the interval [i, j]:
giA (i, j) =

vjA
,
viA

i, j ∈ T,

i < j,

where i and j are the indices of time stamps corresponding
to valid start and endpoints in a global time interval T as
defined by the respective time series. viA and vjA are the
observed prices of asset A at time indices i and j. Then,
giA (i, j) ∈ [0, ∞), also referred to as growth coefficient,
is the relative increase (decrease) of the time dependent
variable v in the interval [i, j].
The Growth Matrix so far only reflects the characteristics of the performance of an asset, and does not allow
to compare the funds one to each other which would be
even more interesting for investors because for a specified
time frame a different fund might have been the better investment with a higher growth rate and return. To allow
a relative inter-asset comparison of how good a fund has
performed compared to the whole market, for each of the
14535 positions (x,y) of the matrix we can compute the
growth rate for all 12.000 funds from our database for the
corresponding time interval, create a sorted list of 12.000
elements for each pixel, and determine the ranking of the
asset which is then linearly mapped across the spectrum of
our color map, with the worst and best performing assets
in the database on the opposite ends of the color coding
scheme.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

1
|DB| − 1

A ∈DB∧A =A

1 giA (i, j) < giA (i, j)
0 otherwise

This descriptor allows to compare the performance of a
fund against the whole market for all possible time intervals, Figure 3 illustrates an example. For creating a spaceefficient view on both absolute and relative-to-market performance, the Growth Matrix for inter-asset comparison is
placed in the large triangle, and the Growth Matrix for the
growth rate is placed in the small triangle in the lower right
corner.
We perceive by the small green triangle that while the
bond never creates any absolute loss, in the times before
the year 2000 the relative comparison shows large red areas, indicating that other funds would have been a better
investment than the bond because the share market had
higher growth rates compared to bonds. Vice versa, we can
derive from the green areas between 2000 and 2002 that in
times where the stock market crashed, a bond with a moderate positive growth has outperformed most other assets
in the database and would have been a good investment.
It is also possible not to match against all 12.000 funds,
but to match against a specific type of asset (bonds, equities, property), market sector (technology, energy, metals), market region (USA, Asian, Europe) or any other selection in order to compare a subset of funds one to each
other. As can be identified on the images, our technique
creates unique fingerprints for each asset, revealing local
and global asset fund characteristics with prototypical patterns for visual analysis and exploration.

Figure 3: This image compares the performance of the two assets from Figure 2 against the market. The small triangles illustrate the absolute intra-asset analysis, the large triangles a comparative (relative) inter-asset analysis against a database of 12.000
funds.

4.2

The Performance Matrix Approach

While the Growth Matrix offers many new insights into
the characteristics of an asset compared to line charts, it
is often difficult to give intuitive answers to several specific interests of analysts and investors. One of the main
interests for financial investments is the long-term performance of an asset, especially the 1, 3 and 5 years holding
time. These statistical values have the disadvantage that
they only describe 3 out of several thousand possible time
intervals, and do not reflect any important behavior of the
asset that has taken place between the three time intervals.
It is even possible that the ”dot-com” crisis with a duration
of nearly 2 years is completely missed out by the three statistical values because it is completely located between the
time intervals [17]. This incompleteness is inappropriate
for a reasonable financial investment. The three performance values can also be derived from the Growth Matrix,
but are difficult to read as the ”time of sale” on the y-axis
and the holding period (time of sale minus time of purchase) on the diagonal line form a 45 degree angle.
A conceptual approach to overcome this is a two-dimensional rectangular approach, as sketched in Figure 4.
It allows simultaneous comparison of 4500 combinations
of times of sale and holding periods in one space efficient
pixel-based visualization, forming a Performance Matrix
PM with 90 degree angles and giving a much deeper, more
reliable and easier to interpret insight into the long-term
characteristics of an asset. In order to illustrate the concept,
the statistical measures P M (2005, 1y),P M (2005, 3y) and
P M (2005, 5y) for 1, 3 and 5 year performance are denoted
in Figure 4.
The performance for each combination of holding period and time of sale can be described as a metric function
P M A (s, h):
P M A (s, h) =

Figure 4: This figure shows the rectangular Performance Matrix model for analyzing characteristics of long-term investments.
This pixel-based approach visualizes 4500 combinations of time
of sale and holding periods in a single view by colorizing the
growth rate for the corresponding time intervals. If an asset has
been a good 3- or 5-year long-term investment can be analyzed
by the corresponding horizontal line. The point ”a” for example
denotes the 3-year-performance of an asset with a time of sale in
January 2001.

negative impacts i on the x-axis create diagonal effects, because the pixel at position x + x for the time of sale and
a holding time of x refers to the same point of the impact x for calculating the corresponding growth rate. The
short-term volatility of the asset can be recognized by the
quickly changing red and green pixels directly along the
x-axis.

V A (s)
s, s − h ∈ T
V
− h)
A (s

where s is the time of sale, s − h is the time of purchase of
an asset A taken from the set of all possible points of time
T , and h is the holding period. We use the same color map
as in Figure 1 for colorizing the values.
Accordingly, we can use the rectangular model both on
the absolute and relative analysis of an asset. Figure 5
illustrates the concept applied on the two already known
examples from Figure 3. While the bond (left) with its
continuous moderate growth rate is a stable and risk-free
long-term investment for all holding periods, the technology fund (right) has been a good long-term investment until the year 2000, but even to the year 2002 if the asset has
be bought before 1998. This also explains the diagonal
structures that can be seen in the right image. Positive or

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 5: These images illustrate the same assets as seen in Figure 3 with focus on long-term investments. Instead of time of
purchase / time of sale, now time of sale / holding time form the
two axes of the matrix. The long-term capability for a specified
holding period can easily be derived from the corresponding horizontal line.

5
5.1

Improvement by 2-Dimensional Color Map
Motivation and Conception

Both conceptual models in the previous chapter are well
suited for evaluating global asset returns and for comparing
the performance of funds for a large amount of time intervals among a large database. However, for certain constellations and to answer important questions, the two separate
visualizations for absolute growth and relative ranking are
not the optimal choice. To give two examples, a fund can
have absolute profits, but can still perform worse than the
market average making a different asset much more attractive (for example, see the red region in Figure 3 (left) for
the bond between 1997 and 2000 where other assets have
outperformed the bond even though the bond had continuous absolute profits). In contrast to that, there are also
situations where almost the whole stock market has losses,
and the investor is interested in finding assets for a longterm investment that tend to have the most stable behavior
in such situations. In order to quickly find answers to these
questions, the investor has to analyze both Growth Matrices for intra-asset and inter-asset performances for a large
amount of assets, and create a mental overlay of the two
triangles for each asset in order to derive which of the red
areas in the inter-asset Growth Matrices have a corresponding green area in the intra-asset Growth Matrices, and vice
versa. This is impossible to accomplish when trying to analyze a set of hundred funds, because the analyst has to keep
each overlay image in mind in order to compare it to the
others. In order to facilitate the decision making process
and to reduce the mental overhead, the problem of combining the intra-asset and inter-asset Growth Matrices can
be solved by using a two-dimensional color map, visualizing all four possible combinations of intra-asset/inter-asset
and positive/negative growth/rank with a separate color in
a single Growth Matrix (see Figure 6).
The color map is defined by a two-dimensional grid,
with inter-asset performance on the x-axis and intra-asset
performance on the y-axis. Therefore the color map is
tiled into four regions with a different color representing
each region, and a color in the middle considered as ”neutral” which originates from the middle of the 1D color
map (Figure 1 in chapter 4.1). The colors form smooth
transitions from one region to the other and towards the
middle. Several color models have been explored to create the two-dimensional color map (complementary colors,
CMYK color model, and others) in order to find suitable
colors for the four corners, as well as several algorithms to
compute the color transitions from region to region, but as
cognitive recognition and intuitive associative correlation
of the colors to the meaning of the corresponding corner is

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

not a mathematical but a perceptual problem, we selected
the colors of the four corners manually with respect to an
intuitive recognition of the corresponding meaning: On the
horizontal split axis, in the upper half we chose ’positive’
colors like ”yellow” and ”green” for absolute profits, and
’negative’ colors ”red” and ”blue” in the lower half representing the absolute losses. Accordingly, we split up
the vertical axis, but as the region for ”better inter-asset
performance” should be filled with a ’positive’ color and
the lower right corner also represents absolute losses at the
same time, it would be contradictory to fill this corner with
a ’positive’ color like yellow (accordingly for the upper
left corner). As a conclusion, we decided to set the focus on the intra-asset performance, as an absolute profit is
more attractive to the investor than having an absolute loss
yet having one asset that only had the smallest loss. Therefore, we use ”yellow” in the upper left corner. These colors
have also been chosen because they maintain differentiable
color transitions between the four regions with respect to
the whole color map. The colors for the corners and the
center as well as various transition algorithms can also be
modified with a color chooser tool according to user preferences if the user prefers different colors.
While appearing to be complicated if applied on the assets for the first time, after getting used to the new color
map it allows an instant visual analysis of the characteristics of an asset within few seconds.

Figure 6: Our two-dimensional color map is split into four
regions, representing all four combinations of positive/negative
and intra-asset(absolute)/inter-asset(relative) performance values
of assets. The colors for the corners and for the neutral center
of the map have been chosen manually according to the semantic
correlation that the colors intuitively have (like green for profits
and red for loss).

5.2

Application

Applied to real-world examples, Figure 7 illustrates the
effect of this idea if used in conjunction with the previous
assets in Figure 3 in chapter 4.1. Figure 7 (left) now clearly
reveals large areas in orange color, where the bond - while
still being profitable - has significantly underperformed the
market median. The technology fund (right) shows a similar structure as in Figure 3, the red area is surrounded by
an orange area which reflects the time intervals where the
technology funds has been a bad investment compared to
other assets due to the high losses in this market sector, but
has still been profitable in the long term regarding the time
interval between purchase and sale.

Figure 7: Our two-dimensional color map applied on the assets
from Figure 3. The asset on the left instantly reveals by the orange regions where it has performed weak compared to the whole
market, while still having an absolute growth. The color map instantly reveals that this asset is growing slower than the rest of
the market, and a different fund would have been the better investment in this time frame.

Accordingly, this idea can also be applied on the rectangular Performance Matrix from chapter 4.2. for evaluating the long-term performance of assets (see Figure 8). If
getting familiar with the four colors of the color map, an
investor instantly sees within seconds that the bond (left) is
composed of the two colors which represent absolute profits, and there are time frames where other investments have
been better a better choice (orange color) and times where
this asset was optimal (green color).
Apparently, it could be anticipated that assets that generate absolute profits also tend to have a better relative performance ranking compared to other assets and vice versa,
so due to this correlation using a two-dimensional color
map like in Figure 6 the colors that are displayed in the
visualization should group along the diagonal axis from
red to green. In fact, it could already be seen in Figure
7 with the strong orange color that assets with continuous
solid profits like bonds often underperform the market during the boom times of the share market, and therefore the
color spectrum does not only consist of the colors along

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 8: Our two-dimensional color map applied on our Performance Matrices from Figure 5. With little practice, an analyst
instantly sees by the yellow and green color in the left image that
there have been no losses for the investment, although there have
been other assets that have had higher growth and higher return
for the orange regions of the matrix. The nearly optimal choice
here would have been to have the asset on the right side from the
beginning up to 2001, and then have the left asset from 2001 to
2005, as the combined rectangle of these two assets and holding
times results in an almost completely green Performance Matrix.

the diagonal axis but also consists of colors that originate
from orthogonal regions of the color map.
This can be seen in Figure 10 which illustrates six assets from Swiss banks, giving an instant impression of the
real characteristics of a fund for all possible time intervals
and which has not been perceptible before while using separate Growth Matrices for inter-asset and intra-asset comparisons. It reveals deviations from market specific general patterns at one glance, and allows to identify structural similarities and uncorrelated ”against the market”behaviors by yellow and blue color instantly, which is difficult to recognize by having only traditional line charts.
The blue color, for example, indicates that in case of an absolute loss, the fund has still performed as one of the best
assets in the database, indicating an extraordinary stability
of the fund towards a general negative market tendency.
With respect to the two-dimensional color map, an optimal fund would consist of mostly green color, meaning
absolute intra-sset growth over all time intervals while still
outperforming most other assets on the market. By visually screening hundreds of assets from Swiss banks in
the database on a large screen powerwall display, with this
suitable visualization technique it only takes few seconds
for the human eye to derive the assets that almost fulfill
these conditions. Therefore, this visualization technique
can greatly improve the exploration and speed up the decision making process for the financial analyst. Figure 9
illustrates the best performing fund in the comparison of
all Swiss assets in our database.

Figure 10: These images illustrate six typical assets from Swiss banks. It can be perceived that each asset not only generates its own
unique fingerprint, but also comprises colors from orthogonal regions of the color map (see Figure 6) that are not arranged in a spectrum
along the diagonal between red to green. This new visual approach reveals which assets behave different than most other assets in the
database. The images shows large regions in yellow and blue, emphasizing regions where assets have made absolute profits while still
being outperformed by most other assets and therefore other assets would have been a better investment (yellow), as well as regions
where assets made absolute losses while still performing better than most other assets on the market which illustrates an exceptional
stable behavior of an asset towards general negative market tendencies (blue).

6

Future Work

In addition to further technical improvements of this
project, a usability study that evaluates the usefulness of
this technique is planned. Due to the fact that this is a special visualization technique developed to support financial
experts, the candidates for the usability study will also be
taken from this group.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have described two pixel-based paradigms for visual financial time series data analysis that allow analyzing assets in overview one to each other and
into smallest detail. Compared to traditional line charts,
our visualization technique offers powerful insight into the
characteristics of assets in one view, by covering all possible combinations of time of purchase / time of sale, time
of sale / holding time, and inter-asset analysis by compar-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

ing the performance value for each pixel of an asset with
the performance values of 12.000 other funds in the same
time intervals. We have presented a two-dimensional color
coding approach for inter/intra-asset analysis that can be
applied to both pixel-based paradigms, and which offers
significantly improved insights into the characteristics of
an asset by revealing uncorrelated atypical ”against-themarket”-behaviors in form of exceptional stability against
general market losses, or general low relative performance
with respect to the overall market, which are difficult to
perceive by using separate visualizations for intra-asset and
inter-asset performance or by using previous visualization
techniques.
Our methods show how modern visualization techniques
can effectively extend the knowledge discovery and decision making process in financial markets for analysts and
investors in one single view, with valuable insights that
usually cannot be easily derived with any traditional visualization method.

[9] Daniel A. Keim, Tilo Nietzschmann, Norman Schelwies, J¨orn Schneidewind, Tobias Schreck and Hartmut
Ziegler. A Spectral Visualization System for Analyzing Financial Time Series Data. In Proceeding EuroVis 2006:
Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization
(EUROVIS’06), Lisbon, Portugal, May 2006
[10] Market Topology: url: http://www.market-topology.com
[11] John Murhpy (Ed.): Technical Analysis of the Financial
Markets: A Comprehensive Guide to Trading Methods and
Applications, Prentice Hall Press, 1999.

Figure 9: This fund represents one of the best performing candidates of Swiss assets in our database. Nearly all possible time
intervals show a clear green color, which reflects that with respect to our two-dimensional color map both intra-asset growth
and inter-asset ranking have been very positive. In fact, this fund
is not only the best performing Swiss asset, but represents one of
the best funds in our complete database of 12.000 assets.

[12] NeoVision Hypersystems Inc.: HeatMaps and RiskMaps,
url: http://www.neovision.com
[13] Edward Parrish. StockVis: An Internet-Based System for
Visualizing Stock Market Data. Master Thesis, UC Santa
Cruz, Department of Computer Science, 2000
[14] Kresimir Semunic, Visualizing of Stock Market Charts.
In Proceedings from the 11th International Conference in
Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and
Computer Vision 2003 (2003), Plzen-Bory (CZ), 2003

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under grant GK-1042 ”Explorative Analysis
and Visualization of Large Information spaces”.

[15] Smart
Money:
’Map
of
the
Market’,
http://wwww.smartmoney.com/marketmap/ , 2005
[16] Martin Wattenberg. Visualizing the stock market. In CHI
´99: CHI´99 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, New York, NY, USA, 1999. ACM Press,
pp. 188-189.

References
[1] Barbro Back, Mikko Irjala, Kaisa Sere, Hannu Vanharanta, Competitive Financial Benchmarking Using SelfOrganizing Maps. Department of Computer Science, Series
A No 169, Abo, 1995
[2] Deutsches Aktieninstitut e.V.:
http://www.dai.de/, 2005

Return triangles, url:

[3] Tim Dwyer, David R. Gallagher. Visualizing changes in
fund manager holdings in two and a half dimensions. In
Information Visualization 3, 4 (2004), 227-244
[4] Guido J. Deboeck, Tuevo K. Kohonen. Visual Explorations
in Finance with Self Organizing Maps, Springer-Verlag
New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 1998
[5] Gravity
Investments,
Inc.:
GSphere,
url:
http://www.gravityinvestments.com/product tour.htm
[6] Hochheiser, Harry; Interactive Graphical Querying of Time
Series and Linear Sequence Data Sets, PhD. Dissertation,
University of Maryland, Dept. of Computer Science, May
2003
[7] Havre, Susan, Hetzler, Elizabeth G., Nowell Lucy T.: ThemeRiver: Visualizing Theme Changes over Time, Proceedings of the Infovis 2000, p. 115-124
[8] High Tower Software, Inc.:
http://www.portfolioimpact.com/

Portfolio

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Impact,

[17] Hartmut Ziegler, Tilo Nietzschmann, Daniel A. Keim.
Relevance Driven Visualization of Financial Performance Measures, In Proceedings of the EuroVis2007:
Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization
(EUROVIS’07), Norrk¨oping, Sweden, May 2007

