Interactive Tag Maps and Tag Clouds for the Multiscale Exploration of Large
Spatio-temporal Datasets
Aidan Slingsby1, Jason Dykes1, Jo Wood1, Keith Clarke2
1 – giCentre, School of Informatics, City University, London, EC1V 0HB, UK.
2 – Geography Department, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-4060, USA.
a.slingsby@city.ac.uk; jad7@soi.city.ac.uk; jwo@soi.city.ac.uk; kclarke@geog.ucsb.edu.
Abstract
‘Tag clouds’ and ‘tag maps’ are introduced to
represent geographically referenced text. In combination,
these aspatial and spatial views are used to explore a
large structured spatio-temporal data set by providing
overviews and filtering by text and geography. Prototypes
are implemented using freely available technologies
including Google Earth and Yahoo!’s Tag Map applet.
The interactive tag map and tag cloud techniques and the
rapid prototyping method used are informally evaluated
through successes and limitations encountered.
Preliminary evaluation suggests that the techniques may
be useful for generating insights when visualizing large
data sets containing geo-referenced text strings. The
rapid prototyping approach enabled the technique to be
developed and evaluated, leading to geovisualization
through which a number of ideas were generated.
Limitations of this approach are reflected upon. Tag
placement, generalisation and prominence at different
scales are issues which have come to light in this study
that warrant further work.

1. Tags, Tag Clouds and Tag Maps
The exploration of large spatio-temporal data sets
can benefit from the use of aspatial techniques developed
for information visualization in a geographic context.
Here we explore synergies between information
visualization and geovisualization by using ‘tag maps’ [1]
and tag clouds to help seek structure and relationships in
the usage logs of a business directory for mobile
telephones. We rapidly prototype these techniques using
freely available technologies and reflect upon the
possibilities for using this approach in the
geovisualization of large datasets.
‘Tags’ are free form text labels that are independent
of controlled vocabulary. They are widely employed for

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

labelling digital content, such as photographs (Flickr1),
video clips (YouTube2) and WWW bookmarks
(del.icio.us3). Tags can form the basis of resource
indexes, built by user communities for organising and
sharing content due to their individual nature, widespread
use and the diversity of those who contribute [2]. Patterns
may emerge from these masses of tags, leading to
classification schemes of tagged content known as
folksonomies [3] that evolve over time in response to user
communities [4].
Tag clouds are a visualization technique developed
for assisting in this process by summarising the relative
importance of tags [2]. Each tag is displayed, usually in
alphabetical order, at a size according to some measure of
its prominence. Tag clouds are now also widely used for
summarising collections of words other than tags and
online services exist for generating them4. Tag clouds
may be extended to convey additional information about
tags and the relationships between them. HassanMonteroa et al. [2] identify and order representative tags
from tags clustered by semantic similarity, resulting in a
tag cloud with a greater semantic range and in which the
ordering is significant. Kerr [5] surrounds each tag with
tags that share tag space, with a distance from the central
tag reflecting the level of association. Techniques that
rely on the distance and placement of words often use
spatial metaphors for conveying relations [6]. Dubinko et
al. [7] use the semi-spatial metaphors of the river and the
waterfall to show temporal changes in the tag allocation
of photographs in Flickr, and Havre et al. [8] use the river
metaphor to show changes in the content of document

1
2
3
4

http://www.flickr.com/
http://www.youtube.com/
http://del.icio.us/
http://www.tagcrowd.com/

collections over time. Skupin [9] uses space more
explicitly with 2D mappings of hierarchical similarities
between documents.
Tag maps [1] are tag clouds in which the position of
words is based upon real geographical space and sizes
represent word prominences at specific locations – thus,
tag maps can be considered to be tag clouds grounded in
real geographical space (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Tag map (left) and tag cloud (right) of
the top 20 business directory searches, centred
on South Manhattan.
Milgram’s “psychological map of Paris” [10] uses
words corresponding to Parisian attractions and word
sizes relating to the number of people who identified the
attractions as such. This inspired Jaffe et al.’s [1] tagmap
work, in which Flickr tags from georeferenced
photographs are placed on a map. This is viewable
through the Yahoo Tag Map applet [11] which enables
users to explore the tags by zooming and panning the
maps and to view some photographs from Flickr
associated with the tags. Rather than Milgram’s discrete
items, these tags correspond to localised spatial
concentrations of tagged items. Spatial distributions of
this nature are often modelled as density estimation
surfaces; e.g. Mehler et al. [12] show the spatial
concentration of keywords used in news reports as
estimated density surfaces shown as continuously shaded
maps. Just as tag clouds have diversified to show the
prominences of words other than tags, tag maps could
show the spatial prominences of other words, e.g. Mehler
et al.’s news report keywords.
The automatic placement of words on maps such that
they are legible is a well-established cartographic research
area [13]. Interactive maps provide the challenge of realtime placement of labels appropriate to users’
interventions, but also the opportunity to dynamically
reveal
detailed
information
for
user-identified
neighbourhoods in real-time [14]. Such label-placement
issues also apply to tag maps; in particular, how to deal
with spatially-coincident prominent tags or words.
The prominence of tags for inclusion in a tag cloud is
usually computed as the number of times the tag is used
for tagging, but other measures are possible. It is often

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

constrained by time (e.g. occurrences over the previous
month). In the case of tag maps, prominence is
necessarily constrained by space – i.e. the number of
times a tag or word is used within a localised area – in the
same way that spatial densities are a function of area [15].
Thus, prominence is explicitly linked to scale. In addition
to their use for visualizing geo-referenced text, interactive
tag maps and tag clouds can be used for selecting data in
both geographical space and information (tag) space and
exploring these scale effects (Figure 2) as part of the
exploratory process. We can consider this as a cycle of
filtering by space and attribute using the two linked
views. An interactive tap map in which prominences are
calculated in real time across a geography appropriate for
the map’s changing viewing extent helps explore scale
effects. Complementing this functionality with a linked
tag cloud constrained to the current viewing extent,
reveals the extent to which concentrations of tags within
the viewing are localised.
panning zooming
spatial comparison & selection

Tag Map
Geovisualization

Information Visualization

Tag Cloud
ordering
thematic comparison & selection

Figure 2. Exploratory cycle – Geovisualization
proceeds using interactive views that are spatial
and aspatial for overview and filtering.
These views and links are prototyped here using
widely available technologies, which we evaluate
informally in the context of exploratory geovisualization.

2. Data, Context and Approach
This work arose from a wider challenge to develop
visualization techniques to explore a large data set with
rich temporal, spatial and aspatial components. We also
wanted to investigate the potential of combining a set of
freely available network-friendly technologies that use de
facto data standards with published APIs, for rapidly
prototyping the techniques. This approach has become
known as a ‘mashup’ [16]. Mashups often use mapping or
graphical technologies as the basis for integration and can
provide a more flexible alternative to single proprietary
Geographic Information Systems for geovisualization. An
advantage of this approach is that a prototype can be
rapidly produced by selecting and flexibly combining a
set of tools which work well together in a network-based
environment. This approach has considerable potential for
supporting the visualization process that requires
flexibility and can benefit from rapid development and reusing data and code as the process progresses.

2.1 Data Set
A log of 1.42 million proximity-based requests for
businesses and services made by mobile telephone users
was supplied by go25, a US-based mobile telephone
service. The requests were made over one month in 2005,
and each request contained the business name queried and
the locations and times at which each query was made.

2.2 Basic Requirements
The implementation of interactive tag maps linked to
tag clouds requires the means to compute spatial and
aspatial prominence with the ability to constrain by time,
at a number of scales in real time, and at a speed that does
not hinder visual thinking. Using these computed values,
the means to position text at particular locations, at
particular sizes and with some control over the colour
symbolism used, is required. As the user zooms in and
out, more words need to be revealed as the scale of spatial
prominence changes. The linked tag map and tag cloud
views required the means to trigger the generation of each
view type in response to user actions.

2.3 Enabling Technologies
Two readily available spatial information clients
were used to implement interactive tag maps – Yahoo!’s
tag map applet7 [1] and Google Earth8. The former is a
Macromedia Flash applet, designed specifically for tag
maps, that runs directly in most web browsers and which
can read a stream of input data from a customised XMLbased web service [11]. The latter is a widely-used
general-purpose geobrowser that can display spatial and
temporal data specified in KML [17] (an XML-based
grammar). Geobrowsers such as Google Earth are helping
enable the deployment of Internet GIServices [18]
through their ease of use and access to high resolution
geographic information [19].
Both browsers fulfil the basic graphical and user
interface requirements stated in section 2.2. Both also
provide contextual data and gazetteers; the former uses
multiscale mapping and the latter provides access to a rich
variety of additional high resolution datasets.
MySQL9 is a free, fast and widely-used relational
database, which together with the server-side scripting

5
7
8
9

http://www.go2.com/
http://developer.yahoo.com/yrb/tagmaps/
http://earth.google.com/
http://www.mysql.com/

language PHP10, fulfils the storage and computational
requirements stated in section 2.2, enabling us to store
1.42 million records, retrieve spatio-temporal subsets and
generate the XML-based outputs required by the Yahoo!
Tag Map applet and Google Earth.

3. Implementation and Preliminary Findings
We present our technique and implementation and
informally evaluate these through what we subjectively
consider to be ‘successes’ assessed according to our
expectations and basic requirements, before discussing
limitations and associated issues that have arisen and
which require further consideration. We also suggest
some insights gained through the visualization. Typically,
in the case of preliminary findings, insights relate to the
nature of the data and the ways in which it models the
phenomena of interest.

3.1 Successes
Storage and retrieval – The 1.42 million records
were stored using MySQL, a task well within the
capability of comparable relational databases. SQL
provided the flexibility required to query, sort and retrieve
data from these records and the speed to support real time
interaction and visualization in both browsers.
Spatial aggregation – Jaffe et al. [1] calculated
spatial prominence by using a spatial clustering algorithm
for identifying local concentrations of tags. This
technique involves starting with one tag, and iteratively
grouping tags of the same value to form clusters until the
maximum distance between the tags in the group is
appropriate for a particular spatial scale. The iterative
nature of this approach does not lend itself to its real time
execution for any given spatial scale. Jaffe et al [1]
therefore precomputed a hierarchical set of clusters to
achieve the levels of interaction required.
In order to compute real-time spatial prominence, we
implemented a computationally-efficient algorithm that
counts tags of the same value contained within regular
grid cells in the same way that a series of density
estimation surfaces might be generated for each tag. This
prominence measure is scale-dependent. The size of cells
is arbitrary, but computing the cell width as a proportion
of the width of the viewable map display allows the scale
dependence to be interactively explored. The algorithm
was implemented as an optimised SQL query that
processed only those records that lie within the currently
viewable geographical extent.

10

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

http://php.net/

Speed – MySQL and PHP enabled us to dynamically
generate tag maps and tag clouds at any spatial scale in
response to user interaction. Both browsers can report
their viewable geographical extents, which are used by
PHP to set the cell resolution and query the database. The
database ran at 2.4GHz on a Pentium Xeon dual core, and
after optimising the queries and building an index, a tag
map could be generated in less than one second for high
zoom levels and in ten seconds for the entire country –
speeds that we found acceptable for the interactive
exploration that is fundamental to visualization.
Cartography / Representation – Both clients
enabled us to place suitably sized text at specific
geographic locations and to update this information as the
maps were panned and zoomed (Figure 3). The XML
language used by Yahoo!’s tag map applet provided just
enough control over text formatting for our requirements.

Ancillary data – Both browsers have contextual
data and built-in gazetteers. The Yahoo! Tag Map applet
has street-level mapping and Google Earth has access to a
range range of data including high resolution aerial
photography, administrative boundaries, geo-referenced
photographs11 and elevation data. This ancillary data,
considered through visual synthesis, contributed
significantly to our understanding when visually
analysing the go2 data set and resulted in the development
of a number of ideas.
Linking and interactions – Panning, zooming and
interacting with the various graphics is accompanied by
automatic map updates in both viewers. This supports the
visual exploration of tags in their geographical context
(tag map), and provides an information summary of
selected geographic areas (tag cloud). This is where the
limits of interaction in Yahoo’s tag map applet are
currently reached. In Google Earth, hyperlinks in tag
maps can be used to trigger the generation of HTML tag
clouds that are displayed in Google Earth’s integrated
web browser. Hyperlinks in the tag clouds can also trigger
further HTML or KML. It is this hyperlinking between
tag maps and tag clouds that facilitates the cyclical
exploration process shown in Figure 2.

Figure 3. Tag maps of the most prominent word
in each (identically-sized) grid square; Yahoo!’s
tag map applet (left) and Google Earth (right).
KML [17] allows much more control over
formatting, including a wider range of text sizes, colour
and transparency. We reduced the opacity of the more
prominent (larger) words in the tag maps – a useful
technique for developing visual hierarchies in dense and
overlapping text. Semi-opaque backdrops were used to
diminish the prominence of the aerial photography and
ancillary spatial data and to visually synthesize tag maps
with continuous data such as the density surface of tag
prominence (Figure 4).

Figure 5. Filtering by geography and attribute.
For example, Figure 5 shows the map and spatial tag
cloud for San Francisco. Larger words in the tag cloud
Figure 4. Tag map of the 20 most prominent
business requests and their aggregate densities
as a high resolution raster surface.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

11

http://www.panoramio.com

draw attention to potentially interesting patterns or
outliers. Here the details of the ‘california check cashing
store’ tag can be inspected by clicking on the tag in the
tag cloud, triggering the generation of KML that zooms to
the spatial extent of this tag in the tag map (lower image),
a small area in this case. The tag map and tag cloud can
be subsequently updated. Inspecting the temporal
properties of this tag through additional graphics showed
that these requests were made at exactly the same time
from the same location. This leads to questions about
information seeking behaviour, its representation in the
database and ways of associating records with the needs
and behaviours of individual users [20]. The updated tag
map and tag cloud can be further queried to promote
additional insights into the nature of the spatial
distribution of tags – particularly important when
exploring large datasets that require aggregation, selection
or summary.
Timestamps can be associated with KML elements,
causing Google Earth to display a scaled timeline that can
be used to interactively filter data by date and time (see
upper right of images in Figure 6). For example, tags of
log requests can be constrained by the time at which they
were made using the timeline. It is also possible to map
other ordinal data to the timeline. Figure 6 maps the days
of the week as dates, but original times are retained.
Sunday is 10th January through to Saturday as 16th
January. The tag map for Friday evening to early
Saturday morning (18:01 to 06:23, top) shows service
requests that focus on eating and accommodation whilst
on Saturday between 09:22 and 14:03 (bottom) the
emphasis is on finance and jobs at home.

Figure 6. Interactive timelines for exploration.
Tags are constrained to Friday night (top) and
Saturday morning and early afternoon (bottom).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 6 also illustrates how further symbolism can
be introduced to convey additional information about tags
in tag maps. Upper case is used to show positive
deviations from expected occurrences of words based
upon their spatial and temporal aggregate ratios. This and
other information can also be conveyed in colour
(specified in KML), using a continuous rather than binary
encoding.

3.2 Limitations / Issues
The mashup approach has enabled us to rapidly
prototype a set of techniques, to test different solutions
and to identify issues that warrant further research.
Although we have found that Yahoo!’s Tag Map applet
and Google Earth provide accessible, useful, and flexible
functionality, we have also found some limitations. In
particular, the balance of map legibility with positional
accuracy and data omission is an issue that requires
further consideration.
Text placement – The grid-based approach
computes the prominence of words for each cell as simple
frequencies. As many words as can be displayed legibly
should be shown in the resultant tag maps. Yahoo!’s Tag
Map applet displays all the words it is given, often
resulting in completely illegible maps (Figure 7, top left).
This problem was addressed in Figure 3 by only
displaying the most prominent word in each grid cell for
display, but as the figure shows, this does not necessarily
prevent the map from being cluttered because it is hard to
predict whether words will overlap. Google Earth reduces
cluttering by automatically and selectively culling words.
Those with the same formatting style (size, colour,
opacity) are not allowed to overlap.
Figure 7 (top left) shows that plotting words at the
centres of grid squares results in extensive illegible
overplotting in Yahoo!’s tag map applet and mass culling
in Google Earth (top right). Randomly locating words
within cells gives much better results in Google Earth as
more space is available and so fewer words are culled
(centre right). A Gaussian distribution around grid centres
was also tested to address possible edge effects, which
may help interpretation by reducing the likelihood of
words being placed close to cell boundaries (bottom).
However, the spatial focus of the Gaussian distribution
may result in more words being culled by the Google
Earth browser than occurs with the more dispersed
rectangular random distribution. There is evidently a
cartographic trade-off here that can be overcome to an
extent through interaction and by providing alternative
versions of the tag maps. A grid showing the boundaries
of cells used in the aggregation, provides important
information about word distribution (implemented in
Google Earth as a KML ‘layer’ – see Figure 7, right).

result of some artefact of the data such as the word length
or the first letters of words, because this would introduce
undesired bias. If culling were completely random then
every static view of a tag map might be seen as a random
sample. Were this the case, repeated panning, zooming
and tag map regeneration would result in the user being
exposed to multiple random samples, revealing the degree
of culling taking place and the diversity of tags.

Figure 7. Word placement in Yahoo!’s tag maps
applet (left) and Google Earth (right).
Words are located at cell centres (top), randomly
within cells (centre) and using a Gaussian
random function around cell centres (bottom).
Culling – Overplotting can be addressed by
modifying the position of tags or by culling tags when
generating KML. We have also seen that Google Earth
employs a tag culling algorithm to reduce clutter. In this
section, we refer to the effects of this when the maps is
zoomed and panned using the same data, i.e. in a mode in
which the tag map is not automatically updated for the
new viewing extent. The way in which Google Earth
selects words for culling is not documented and we found
a lack of consistency in tags displayed chosen between
zoom levels and panned views. Figure 8 shows the same
KML file at different Google Earth zoom levels, in which
the sample of visible words is very different, though this
discrepancy is less marked where fewer words compete
for space. A similar effect is evident when panning.
Dealing with culled and obscured tags – The
Yahoo! Tag map applet displays all the tags it is given,
however illegibly. This might be used as an indication
that there is too much information to synthesise all at
once and that one needs to zoom or filter the results.
However, the issue is left to the XML web service; e.g.
the web service used in Figure 3 (left) only supplied one
tag per grid square. Google Earth’s tag culling algorithm
operates dynamically as it places words on the map. As
discussed, this is achieved using means that are
undocumented without indication to the user and
produces results that are not consistent between views.
This is of particular concern if the culled selection is as a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 8. The same data at different zoom levels.
The lower view is zoomed to the box extent.

Figure 9. The user-initiated inspection of all tags
in a specific grid square.

Alternatively details can be provided on demand.
Google Earth can automatically collapse multiple
spatially coincident items, ‘exploding’ these when clicked
[14]. In Figure 9, grid-squares have symbols at their
centres. When these are clicked all the tags contained in
the grid square are revealed.
Culling and spatial dilution – Figure 10 shows a
tag map and a linked tag cloud of the twenty most popular
text strings occurring in queries centred on South
Manhattan. The tag map is dominated by a large ‘duane
reade’ tag, but ’starbucks’ is not visible, despite being
prominent in the associated tag cloud. Either the
‘starbucks’ tag has been culled by the browser or it may
be the result of its spatial dilution (low frequency over a
wide area). Generating a tag map of these two key words
shows that both explanations play a role, but the main
effect seems to be that the sources of 'starbucks' queries
are more widely distributed, suggesting that our tag map
and tag cloud combination has identified a geographic
effect. Using both the tag map and tag cloud in
combination enables us to explore the distributions of
these words in geographical space and information space
and identify differences in the geographic nature of
particular queries.

Figure 10. Spatial dilution. Tag map (left) and
associated tag cloud (centre) with tag map of
only ‘starbucks’ and ‘duane reade’ tags (right).

4. Conclusions and Ongoing Work
We enhance tag clouds with tag maps and use freely
available network-friendly technologies to dynamically
link the two for selection and filtering. By spatially
‘grounding’ textual information, we show how data can
be filtered and selected in both geographical space and in
tag space to reveal characteristics of each at different
scales and at different times. Tag maps allow us to browse
and generate spatial tag clouds. Tag clouds allow us to
select aspects of information space and see the geography.
Technologies such as MySQL, PHP and spatial XML
dialects provide simple yet powerful means of doing so.
Yahoo! Maps and Google Earth are examples of freely
available spatial browsers that make a wide range of
geographical information available for visual synthesis to
empower and stimulate geovisualization. Such tools are

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

updated regularly and possibilities change rapidly
resulting in unexpected opportunities, but also some risks
when undertaking geovisualization in this way. For
example, at any time, more control may be provided over
name placement priority in Google Earth and Yahoo! may
provide additional options for text symbolism. Both
organisations are associated with active user communities
with which they appear to be well engaged.
Consequently, specific results reported in papers such as
this are subject to change (and may indeed affect change).
Our key findings, however, relate to the more general
opportunities for synergy between information and
geovisualization to support exploration and the
development of bespoke visualization techniques such as
interactive tag maps and tag clouds using widely available
technologies. The configuration we describe has helped
us identify structure and anomalies, detect spatial and
temporal patterns and effects and to develop hypotheses
in our exploration of a large multivariate spatial dataset in
which text plays an important role. The ancillary data
available in Google Earth was particularly useful for
context and ideation prompted by visual synthesis.
Work continues on techniques that support
geovisualization using this technological configuration.
The cell-based approach for generating tag maps is
computationally efficient and can be computed for any
required spatial scale – important characteristics for real
time multi-scale visualization. However alternative nonraster approaches to spatial aggregation may address
some of the artefacts of grid-based sampling. Hierarchical
schemes, such as the Hungarian clustering algorithm
mentioned in section 1.3, are potentially useful sources of
information about relationships between spatial scales –
investigating cluster composition, for example. In terms
of cartography, colour can be used to show characteristics
of words other than their under or over-representation in a
spatial sample. For example, symbolizing temporal
frequency or geographic extent can be achieved and may
be useful. Whilst we have developed methods to address
some of the browser behaviours in terms of the selection
and culling applied, our investigations into these are
ongoing and involve isolating the effects and assessing
their implications. One approach is to let the user control
spatial tag sampling where tags overlap and employ a
multiple random method where tags on a tag map are
particularly dense. Our tag clouds are arranged
alphabetically, but other orderings may be beneficial
[2,7]. Tag maps and tag clouds can be used to explore a
range of text-rich spatial data sets including spatially
referenced news items [12], the origins of family names12
and spatial tags [1]. KML can be used to generate abstract

12

http://spatial-literacy.org/UCLnames/

spatial graphics representing the multivariate nature of
numeric datasets as well as textual information for display
in Google Maps and Google Earth.

[5] Kerr, B., 2006, “Sketches: worth a thousand words:
TagOrbitals: a tag index visualization”, ACM SIGGRAPH 2006
Sketches SIGGRAPH '06, Boston, Massachusetts. 2006.

Importantly, the open and accessible methods
reported here provide the flexibility to develop such
bespoke combinations of layout, symbolism and
interaction for visualization in a way that cannot be
readily achieved with off-the shelf GIS software –
interactive tag maps were rapidly and effectively
implemented for real time geovisualization. The specific
techniques presented here allow us to visually explore the
relationships between the frequencies, times and locations
of the requests, and through these, to interactively
constrain the data by spatial and temporal extent for
visual analysis. The interactive tag maps allow us to
explore patterns at different spatial and temporal scales.
Linking the tag clouds to the tag maps provides a nonspatial and non-temporal view of the same data. Our
preliminary findings indicate that this combination
provides an intuitive and powerful means to explore a
large spatio-temporal dataset with a strong textual
component with methods drawn from information
visualization and geovisualization.

[6] Wise, J.A., Thomas, J.J., Pennock, K., Lantrip, D., Pottier,
M., Schur, A., and Crow, V., “Visualizing the Non-Visual:
Spatial Analysis and Interaction with Information from Text
Documents”, in Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., and Shneiderman,
B., eds., Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think, San Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 442-445, 1999.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support of Lee Hancock
and go2 Directory Systems (http://www.go2.com) for
permission to use the query data and help with this work.
The Leverhulme trust funded Keith Clarke's sabbatical at
City University. Four anonymous reviewers provided
informative suggestions that have resulted in significant
enhancements to the submitted draft of this paper.

Large, high resolution colour figures
http://www.gicentre.org/papers/gIV07/

References
[1] Jaffe, A., and Naaman, M., “Generating Summaries and
Visualization for Large Collections of Geo-Referenced
Photographs”, MIR 2006: 8th ACM SIGMM International
Workshop on Multimedia Information Retrieval, Santa Barbara,
CA, ACM, 2006.
[2] Hassan-Montero, Y., and Herrero-Solana, V., “Improving
Tag-Clouds as Visual Information Retrieval Interfaces”,
InScit2006: International Conference on Multidisciplinary
Information Sciences and Technologies, Mérida, Spain. 2006.
[3] Hammond, T., Hannay, T., Lund, B., and Scott, J., “Social
Bookmarking Tools (I)”, D-Lib magazine, v11(4). 2005.
[4] Russell, T., 2006, “Cloudalicious: folksonomy over time”,
6th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital libraries (JCDL
'06), Chapel Hill, North Carolina, p. 364, 2006.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[7] Dubinko, M., Kumar, R., Magnani, J., Novak, J., Raghavan,
P., and Tomkins, A., “Visualizing Tags over Time”, WWW
2006, Edinburgh. 2006.
[8] Havre, S., Hetzler, E., Whitney, P., and Nowell, L., 2002,
“ThemeRiver: Visualizing thematic changes in large document
collections”. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, v8, p. 9-20. 2002.
[9] Skupin, A., 2000, “From Metaphor to Method: Cartographic
Perspectives on Information Visualization”, IEEE Symposium
on Information Vizualization, Salt Lake City, Utah, p. 91. 2000.
[10] Milgram, S., 1977, “Psychological Maps of Paris, The
Individual in a Social World”, Addison-Wesley, pp. 68-90.
[11] Yahoo! Inc., “TagMaps Web Services : Roll Your Own
API – Yahoo! Developer Network”. http://developer.yahoo
.com/yrb/tagmaps/tagapi.html
[12] Mehler, A., Bao, Y., Li, X., Wang, Y., and Skiena, S.,
“Spatial Analysis of News Sources”, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, v12, pp. 765-772. 2006.
[13] Van Dijk, S., Van Kreveld, M., Strijk, T., and Wolff, A.,
“Towards an evaluation of quality for names placement
methods”, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, v16, p. 641-662. 2002.
[14] Fekete, J. D. and C. Plaisant. “Excentric Labeling:
Dynamic Neighborhood Labeling for Data Visualization”. CHI
99: the CHI is the limit, human factors in computing systems,
Pittsburgh; PA, New York. 1999.
[15] Goodchild, M., and Quattrochi, D., “Scale, multiscaling,
remote sensing and GIS”, in D.A. Quattrochi and M.F.
Goodchild (eds), Scale in Remote Sensing and GIS, London,
CRC Press, p. 1-11. 1997.
[16] Miller, C. “A Beast in the Field: The Google Maps Mashup
as GIS/2”, Cartographic, v41(3), pp. 187-199, 2006.
[17] Google Inc., 2007, KML 2.1 Reference – Google Earth.
http://earth.google.com/kml/kml_tags_21.html
[18] Zhang, T., Clarke, K.C., and Guan, Q., “The GIS Web
Portal: Beyond Data Services”, AutoCarto, Vancouver, WA.
2006.
[19] Clarke, K.C., Guan, Q., and Zhang, T., “The Anatomy and
Physiology of the GeoGrid”, AutoCarto, Vancouver, WA, 2006.
[20] He, D., Goker, A., Harper, D., “Combining evidence for
automatic Web session identification”, Information Processing
and Management 38(5), pp. 727-742, 2002.

