Evaluating Two Visualization Techniques for Genome Comparison
Morel Henley, Mikkel Hagen, and R. Daniel Bergeron
Department of Computer Science, University of New Hampshire
{mhenley@unh.edu, mhagen@unh.edu, rdb@unh.edu}
Abstract
Genomic study is fairly novel. Typical research
processes are not established yet. Many new discoveries
are happening in this area all the time. Are current
methods of visualizations effective? What works well?
What could be improved? These are some of the
questions we are interested in evaluating for two
graphical tools used to compare nucleotide sequences.
Scatter plots and parallel coordinate-like visuals have
been used in genomics for identifying similarities in
genetic code. Our preliminary evaluation focuses on
determining the aspects of the two visualizations that are
successful and those that need enhancements.

1. Introduction
Genome analysis produces large amounts of data. It
is hard to display this information in a way that is
effective for understanding genomes.
These
visualization efforts are important for both fully
sequenced genomes and partial sequences. Comparative
genomics focuses on comparing two or more genomes.
We are particularly interested in identifying and showing
regions of similarity between two genomes. Two
standard information visualization techniques have been
used to display this information: scatter plots and parallel
coordinate diagrams.
Dot plots, a form of scatter plot, have been used for
comparing sequence variation since about 1981, which is
early in genomic studies. It was introduced for genomic
research when Maizel and Lenk used dot plots to
visualize nucleotides [10]. Dot plots have been used in
programs such as “dotup”, “dotpath”, and “dotmatcher”
from the EMBOSS package [16] and Dotter, another
open source dot plot program [17]. More recently,
Rasko has used color in scatter plots to represent
significance of BLAST hits at a protein level [15].
Several genome visualization tools have adopted
techniques similar to parallel coordinates [8]. Parallel
coordinate techniques have been used to compare
locations of various functional genes in multiple
genomes [11] and to depict related genome sequences as
in the Mauve program [5].
Our goal in this research was to evaluate the
effectiveness of the two types of visualizations are for
comparing sequences. We describe a heuristic study [12]

to make this evaluation. Section 2 provides background
information on the two visualizations, the genomics
field, and the common visualizations for genome
comparison. Section 3 discusses in more detail the
specific images used in this study. Our evaluation
approaches are discussed in section 4. Section 5
summarizes our conclusions gathered from the survey.
Section 6 identifies future research.

2. Background
In this section, we briefly introduced the scatter plot
and parallel coordinate techniques, genomics, and two
current visualizations used for comparing genomes.

2.1 Scatter Plot and Parallel Coordinates
Scatter plots have been used primarily in statistics
and database visualization for comparing two data
variates in a collection of records. Two orthogonal axes
are used to represent the values of the two data variates;
a dot or other glyph is drawn for each data record at the
position represented by its values. The pattern of dots
can provide insight into the relationship of the data
values in a particular data set. One weakness of a scatter
plot is that multiple records will get mapped to the same
position if their values are the same. Multiple variates are
typically shown as an array of bi-variate scatter plots
called a scatter plot matrix [13].
Parallel coordinates have also been used for
comparing multi-variate data for statistical and database
analysis. Each variate is represented as a parallel axis
and a data record is displayed by a line connecting data
values on each neighboring axis. Due to the sheer
volume of genes and nucleotide sequences, the parallel
coordinate technique suffers from excessive visual
clutter that hides information. The loss in the visibility is
a result of the number of crossing connections. This is a
classic limitation of all parallel coordinate visualizations.
Pillat et al. record a limitation of about 1000 links before
their parallel coordinate visualization becomes
indecipherable [14].
Dwyer et al. suggest that both scatter plots and
parallel coordinates become cumbersome when dealing
with large datasets, even using colors [6]. Since we
often deal with hundreds or even thousands of genes at a
time, this weakness is a significant factor in the

1

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

effectiveness of any visualization technique in this
context.

BLAST tool was used to draw the two visualizations
used in this study.

2.2 Genomics

2.3 Mauve Visualization

Genomics is the study of genomes, specifically their
genes and gene function. Most genes are distinct
segments of DNA that are transcribed to become
proteins. At the heart of genomics is the sequence of
nucleotides that make up genes and other non-coding
sections. Nucleotide sequences are comprised of four
bases: A (Adenine), T (Thymine), C (Cytosine), and G
(Guanine). Recently, a number of sequencing projects
have worked to assemble the entire nucleotide code of
many species of plants, animals, bacteria, and other
organisms. DNA sequences produce enormous amounts
of data that could use effective visualization techniques
in order to view and better understand the underlying
information in a genome.
Understanding DNA is valuable to many areas of
biological sciences. Obviously, it is very important to
medicine, as a means of discovering diseases and
potential cures. Additionally, the sequencing of DNA
can be used to help explain the earth's evolutionary
history.
Commonalities can infer the ancestral
relationship between two species as well as determining
species divergence. A phylogenetic tree is a pictorial
view of how species are related and predicts common
ancestors (see figure 1). Phylogenetic tree creation relies
on understanding how closely related genomes are.
Recent efforts in comparative genomics have
focused on comparing closely related species or strains
of a genus for similarities and differences. Comparing
genomes is not only used in deciding the evolution of
organisms; it is also a means of resolving what parts of
genomes affect functional behavior. Our goal is to show
regions of two genomes that have high similarity
measure. Related sequences can be grouped into various
categories. Sequences that are shared due to common
ancestry are classified as homologs. Homologs can be
broken down into orthologs and paralogs based on the
way they formed.
Orthologs are caused from a
speciation event while duplication events cause paralogs
[7]. Therefore, multiple matches of a sequence to a
single genome are usually considered paralogous
sequence.
There are various programs for acquiring sequence
similarities. BLAST [2], basic local alignment search
tool, is a common tool used by biologists in genomic
research. This tool takes genome sequences obtained
from genome libraries and determines the similarity
between the genomes based on nucleotide or protein
matches between the two genomes. Data from the

Mauve is a tool used to identify and show
homologous sequence between genomes [5].
Its
visualization is similar to a parallel coordinate diagram.
Mauve uses this technique to match the whole genome of
nucleotide sequence between multiple genomes as blocks
of correlates. We use a version of the Mauve software
package modified here at the University of New
Hampshire (UNH) [1]. This version of Mauve uses
BLAST to find homologs between two genomes. It then
removes the paralogs, leaving only orthologs, or regions
that are only found once between the two genomes
(excluding duplications across genomes). It identifies
these matching sections of the nucleotide sequence as
Multiple Maximally Unique Matches (multi-MUMs). It
then groups these multi-MUMs into closely related
regions called Locally Collinear Blocks (LCBs) [5].
These blocks are displayed on the screen with connecting
lines to identify the shared sequence. The visualization
can be seen in Figure 4. The boxes are randomly color
coded to help distinguish between different blocks.
Mauve can progressively simplify the visualizations by
creating higher levels of abstraction for regions of the
genome, but each level of abstraction loses information.

2.4 Dot Plot Visualizations
The dot plot methodology is a classic visualization
technique for comparing nucleotide sequences which
was initially referred to as graphics matrix analysis [10].
Data groups are plotted on the x and y axes like a scatter
plot. Researchers have identified different patterns a dot
plot can produce including: no features, diagonals,
broken diagonals, squares, diagonal texture, and square
texture [4]. 1
For genome comparison, nucleotide sequences are
essentially plotted on the horizontal and vertical axes.

Figure 2: Illustration of Dot Plot Method. Notice the
diagonal representing the sequence similarity. [10]

Figure 1: Phylogenetic Tree. [3]

1

Dot plots have also been used to compare news stories, lines of
source code, and DNA sequence [4].

2

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The graphic matrix marks each location in the matrix
where the nucleotide bases are the same (figure 2).
Some common features that can be highlighted in
genomics are homology and large areas of duplicated
DNA (paralogy).

3. Visualizations
In this section we discuss the visualizations used for
our study including a brief presentation of the images'
attributes.

3.1 Dataset
We have identified three closely related strains of a
Burkholderia bacterium to use in our study. Bacteria
tend to have smaller denser genomes than more complex
organisms. Even with the smaller genomes, the amount
of data generated is still quite large, but manageable.
Various strains of Burkholderia have very recently
diverged but have very different functionality; some are
extremely pathogenic while others are benign or even
beneficial [9]. Helping identify the homology of the
strains in an effective manner will be very beneficial to
the research of these organisms. Our goal was to
evaluate the effectiveness of two visualization techniques
to identify the homology in this data. We used three
strains in the Burkholderia cenocepacia complex (Bcc)
genomes, B. cenocepacia AU1054, B. cenocepacia
HI2424, and B. cenocepacia J2315. Bcc AU1054 and
Bcc HI2424 are within the same clad and therefore are
more closely related.
The genome data is represented as sets of strings of
letters (A, C, G, and T). In a finished complete assembly,
there is one sequence for each chromosome. Most
assemblies are not finished, however; in this case, the
sequences are called contigs and each represents a
contiguous region of the genome. In both visualizations,
the sequences are concatenated into a single string
representing the entire genome. However, there is no
expectation that neighboring contigs in the layout are in
fact neighbors in the actual genome.

3.2 Visualization Methods
Our goal was to compare visualization techniques
based on the scatter plot method and the parallel
coordinate method as implemented in Mauve. In order
to obtain a consistent comparison, we created a version
of scatter plot with the same homologs identified by a
nucleotide BLAST in the Mauve program. We then
were able to run a small heuristic evaluation with
members of the genomics community at UNH to
compare the visualizations.
3.2.1 Scatter Plot Implementation:
We
implemented a scatter plot visualization similar to that of
Rasko [15]. Our scatter plot tool plots two genome
sequences on each axis like the dot plot method.
However, with an entire genome comparison, the plots
can become cluttered when matching base by base.
Therefore, instead of matching at the nucleotide or
protein level, we reduced the clutter by only plotting the

similar sequences selected by BLAST, based on a
moderate similarity measure.
This visualization was developed using an open
source software package called JFreeChart [18]. This
package can create a variety of elaborate graphs and
charts using the Java programming language. Producing
a scatter plot graph of the data consisted of two steps.
The first step converted the data obtained from the
BLAST results into a simple x, y data file representing
the locations of pairs of sequences that were identified as
similar. The second step read this data file for the scatter
plot graph provided by the JFreeChart package.
Horizontal and vertical lines were added to the graph to
show the division of chromosomes. Finally, the scale of
the axes of the scatter plots was varied between 10, 100
and 1000 base pairs per dot. After observing the
resulting scatter plots, we determined that the 10 base
pair graph provided the right mixture of detail and
clarity.
3.2.2
Scatter plot Features: The scatter plot
images used in this study are shown in figure 3. Notice
that when a sequence is homologous and sequential it
forms a straight diagonal line (figure 3A). The more
differences in the genomes, the more jagged the lines
appear and the more breaks in continuity (figure 3B-C).
A slope in the negative direction is a match of reverse
sequence. The chromosome breaks are the horizontal
and vertical darker lines on the graph. Paralogous
sequence shows up as lines that overlap the same x or y
region.
3.2.3 Parallel Coordinate Features: The images
used in this survey can be seen in figure 4. The inverted
sequences can be seen in the blocks below the line in the
second genome. The large blocks show segmental
changes in the genome well (figure 4A), while small
segments of similarity are more difficult to see (figure
4B-C). In figure 4C, the blocks on the right create many
crossing lines that muddle the arrangement. The more
blocks and rearrangements you have, the more cluttered
the lines become. Color aids in separating the blocks
that are next to each other.

4. User Evaluation Study
In this section we describe the heuristic evaluation
that we performed.

4.1 Participants
The methodology employed in this study amounted
to a small survey of professionals in the field of
bioinformatics. The seven subjects included computer
scientists, biologists, geneticists, and biochemists. Each
subject was supplied a two part survey and asked to fill it
out to the best of their ability.

4.2 Survey
The first part of the survey involved a task requiring
the subject to establish a phylogenetic tree (figure 1)
among three unknown genomes labeled A, B, and C to

3

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 3: Scatter Plot Visualizations. (A) AU1054
vs. HI2424 (B) AU1054 vs. J2315 (C) HI2424 vs.
J2315
conceal their identity. The subject was given a brief
introduction to the project and a basic description of how
the different visualization techniques represented the
genomes.
The subject was then given three
visualizations of the Burkholderia cenocepacia complex
genomes: Bcc AU1054, Bcc HI2424, and Bcc J2315.
These genomes belong to a family of closely related
bacteria. The subject was asked to draw a phylogenetic
tree based on the three scatter plots (figure 3), identifying
the more closely related species. Then he/she is
provided with the parallel coordinate visualization from
Mauve (figure 4) of the same three genomes. After
providing the subject with time to form the phylogenetic

Figure 4: Mauve visualization of the three pair-wise
comparisons of the Burkholderia Genomes. (A)
Bcc AU1054 vs. Bcc HI2424. (B) Bcc AU1054 vs.
Bcc J2315. (Bcc HI2424 vs. Bcc J2315.
tree based on the parallel coordinate visualizations, the
subject moves on to the second part of the survey.
The second part of the survey provided the subject a
scatter plot and a parallel coordinate diagram of the two
most closely related species, Bcc AU1054 and Bcc
HI2424 genomes, for a side-by-side comparison. The
subjects were asked a series of generic questions
including which graph is more effective at various tasks,
the advantages/disadvantages of each, and the subject's
opinion of which is better overall.

5. Results
In this section we present the results from the study
and provide preliminary analysis based on them.

4

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

5.1 Phylogeny Prediction Test
For the task of constructing a phylogenetic tree for
the three unidentified strains, the subjects were more
successful at recognizing the more closely related
genomes when using the parallel coordinate method.
Only four of the seven subjects identified the correct
phylogeny using the scatter plots as a reference, while
six subjects were able to identify the correct phylogeny
using the parallel coordinate technique, generally, in
significantly less time. However, this may be a result of
the order in which the graphs were presented. It could
also be a result the very simple genomes and therefore
favorable for the parallel coordinate diagrams.

5.2 Survey Results
The subjects were then asked to evaluate both
visualizations. Each of the visualizations has its own
advantages and disadvantages. Therefore, each subject
was asked a series of questions to try and quantify them.
Because of the small scale of the study, it is not possible
to infer significantly valid conclusions. However, we
have found the subjects’ observations interesting and
report them as anecdotal results.
Six of the subjects said that the scatter plot was the
visualization that was better overall. All the subjects
stated that our version of a scatter plot was better at
showing chromosome breaks and hits in the reverse
direction than the parallel coordinate diagram. Four
subjects identified a disadvantage of the scatter plot as
the difficulty in noticing the small changes and small
scale differences in the genomes.
The remaining
critiques were suggestions for improvements to the
visualization, such as adding color and clearly showing
the boundaries between contigs.
The scatter plot
advantages were that it is easy to obtain a big picture and
it is clear and easy to understand once you know how to
read them. Also, some other comments included, “seems
like it has more information” available and “probably
more powerful.”
All subjects indicated that the drawback of the
parallel coordinate diagram was the confusion resulting
from the crossing lines. One subject stated that there was
“too much clutter in the center of the diagram.” Another
subject noted that the diagram caused “too much
stimulation with the colors, lines, breaks, etc.” There
were some expressed advantages for the parallel
coordinate diagrams. For example, it “shows long
common sequences well.” One subject also indicated
that it shows the “horizontal comparison” or side-by-side
comparison well.

5.3 Observations Based on Anecdotal Comments
The scatter plot visualization method is the more
traditional method used for genome comparisons, while
the parallel coordinate method has appeared recently. To
the amazement of many of the subjects, the scatter plot
was the method they preferred, even though it is older
and takes longer to learn how to read. Once you learn
how to use it, it seems to show much more information,

and has the capability of being more powerful and
descriptive. The parallel coordinate method appears
more intuitive at first. One subject stated that it “seems
easier at first.” It shows position in the genomes more
naturally. However, it appears to be more limited when
showing detail.
Small breaks appear less obvious using the
scatter plot diagram and can be easily masked as a long
hit in the visual. This was not a problem for
parallel coordinates because matching sequences could
be identified by their matching color. Color also helps
to show long contiguous sequences and complex
rearrangements. For these reasons, one subject indicated
that the parallel coordinate diagram could be “superior to
the scatter plot when the re-arrangements are
complex.” These perceived advantages of the parallel
coordinate visualization are all based primarily on its
effective use of color, whereas our scatter plot
implementation does not use color at all. These
advantages would be significantly reduced or disappear
with a relatively minor enhancement to the scatter plot
visualization: we could assign a color to each dot based
on the BLAST hit from which that dot was generated.
With this change, it would be much easier to see breaks
between hits, long contiguous sequences, and large
rearrangements.
On the other hand, the parallel coordinate approach
suffers fairly quickly from excessive clutter as the data
size increases [6, 14].
The number of crossing
connecting lines grows rapidly as the evolutionary
distance between genomes becomes larger. One subject
stated that the problem with the parallel coordinate
representation was that with a more complex comparison
the “diagram becomes too busy to make sense of.”
Although, we initially thought that the directionality
of the sequence hits would show more information in the
scatter plot, this function can become an obstruction
since it breaks up the similarities of the genomes. One
person's comment suggested that the “directionality” of
the lines “hinders the visualization of similarities.”
Parallel coordinate diagrams have the advantage of
keeping the hits next to each other for this purpose.
The scatter plot has the advantage of showing
paralogs better than parallel coordinate diagrams.
Parallel coordinates becomes even more confusing when
you add paralogs to the visualization. Many subjects
asked about paralogs in the visualizations and liked
being able to see them in the scatter plot.
Although overall the scatter plot was preferred,
many of the subjects suggested that the visualization they
would choose depends on what they were looking for.
Most of them wanted the option of looking at both.

6. Future Work
The case study needs to be expanded to include
more subjects. An increased subject size would help
analyze the qualities of the two visualization techniques
in a more general and significant way.
Also,
randomizing the order in which the phylogenies question
is distributed would help the significance of the results.

5

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The case study also needs to be run on more
complex genome comparisons. The current study used
fairly closely related, simple, single celled organisms.
There are much more complex genomes in the animal
kingdom that could provide different results when
comparing the two visualization techniques.
We did not test the current interactive capabilities of
these visualizations. Interactively, Mauve can show as
far down as the nucleotide level. Also, clicking on a
block aligns the connecting segments. Our scatter plot
currently has a zoom feature, as well, but not down to the
nucleotide level. This feature could be added to the
scatter plot.
A suggestion was made to identify contig
boundaries along with the chromosome boundaries.
There were identifiable breaks in the scatter plot method
that looked to be contig boundaries; it would be
beneficial to be able to verify when these breaks are
caused by contig boundaries. It could be especially
helpful to have either automatic or user-assisted
reordering of the contigs to be able to show more
continuous similarity in the genomes. This reordering
could also be beneficial for the parallel coordinate
method by reducing the number of crossing lines.
Multiple genome comparisons could be very helpful
in the visualizations. Mauve already can show multiple
genomes laid out in parallel with connections between
neighboring pairs. The scatter plot can only have twoby-two comparisons on a single graph, but could be
extended using a scatter plot matrix approach [13].
Scatter plot has the potential of showing more
information such as bolding to identify sections that are
continuous hits or showing paralogs more easily. Color
could also be used to distinguish breaks in hits. Colors
could be added to the visualization to add more detail.
For example, Colors could be mapped to the different
bases in the nucleotide sequence: A (Adenine), T
(Thymine), C (Cytosine), and G (Guanine).

Conclusion
This study compared the advantages and drawbacks
of parallel coordinate and scatter plot methods for
comparing similar sequences in different genomes. We
performed a heuristic evaluation with three closely
related genomes of the Burkholderia species. Subjects
were asked a series of questions related to two different
visualizations expressing the same data.
The scatter plot diagram was strongest at showing
chromosome boundaries, reverse directions, and
paralogs. The parallel coordinate diagram appears to be
better at determining phylogenetic relationships and
breaks in continuity but this could be an artifact of the
nature of the study. Although, it appears that the scatter
plot approach is probably more effective than parallel
coordinates for visualizing two genomes, this may not
hold when comparing three or more genomes
simultaneously.

References
[1] Bancroft, Charles L.. 'MAGENTA: A Reciprocal Best
Blast Environment for Performing Multiple Genome
Alignments'. Thesis Proposal. April 2006.
[2] Bedell, Joseph, Ian Korf, Mark Yandell. BLAST.
O'Reilly. July 2003.
[3] Carrizo, Savrina F. 'A Colour-Filling Approach for
Visualising
Trait
Evolution
with
Phylogenies.'
Proceedings of the 2004 Australasian symposium on
Information Visualisation – Vol. 35, pp. 117-126. 2004.
[4] Church, K.W., and J.I. Helfman. 'Dotplot: A Program for
Exploring Self-Similarity in Millions of
Lines of Text
and Code'. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics: Vol 2, No. 2, June 1993.
[5] Darling, A.C.E., B. Mau, F.R. Blatter, and N.T. Perna.
2004. 'Mauve: multiple alignment of conserved genomic
sequence with rearrangements.'
Genome Research.
14(7):1394-1403.
[6] Dwyer, Tim, Seok-Hee Hong, Dirk Koschützki, Falk
Schreiber, and Kai Xu. 'Visual analysis of network
centralities.' Proc Asia-Pacific Symposium on Information
Visualisation - Vol 60 APVis '06, pp. 189 – 197. 2006.
[7] Hartwell, Leland H., Leroy Hood, Michael L. Goldberg,
Ann E. Reynolds, Lee M. Silver, Ruth C. Veres.
Genetics: from Genes to Genomes. Second Edition. The
McGraw-Hill Companies. 2004.
[8] Inselberg, A. & Dimsdale, B. 'Parallel coordinates: A tool
for visualizing multidimensional geometry.' Proc IEEE
Visualization (Vis '90). pp. 361-378. 1990.
[9] Mahenthiralingam, E, T.A. Urban, and J.B. Goldberg.
'The Mulifarious, Multireplicon Burkholderia Cepacia
Complex.” Nature Reviews Microbiology. Feb 1, 2005.
[10] Maizel, J.V. and R.P. Lenk 1981. 'Enhanced graphic
matrix analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences.'
Proc National Academy of Science. USA vol 78(12),
p7665-7669.
[11] Michaels, G.S, et al.
'Cluster Analysis and Data
Visualization of Large-Scale Gene Expression Data'.
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing: 3:42-53, 1998.
[12] Nielsen, J. (1994). Guerrilla HCI: Using discount usability
engineering to penetrate the intimidation barrier. In Bias,
R. G., and Mayhew, D. J. (Eds.), Cost-Justifying Usability.
Academic Press, Boston, MA, 245-272. As found at
http://www.useit.com/papers/guerrilla_hci.html
[13] NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods,
http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/, Feb. 2007.

http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/eda/section
3/scatplma.htm
[14] Pillat, R.M., E.R.A. Valiati, and C.M.D.S. Freitas.
'Experimental study on evaluation of multidimensional
information visualization techniques', Proc Latin
American Conf on Human-computer interaction, p. 20-30,
Oct 23-26, 2005, Cuernavaca, Mexico
[15] Rasko, D.A. (2005) Visualization of comparative genomic
analyses by BLAST score ratio. BMC Bioinformatics, 6,
1471–2105.
[16] Rice, P. Longden, I. and Bleasby, A. 'EMBOSS: The
European Molecular Biology Open Software Suite'
(2000). Trends in Genetics 16, (6) pp276—277.
[17] Sonnhammer, E., L.L. Sonnhammer and R. Durbin. 'A
dot-matrix program with dynamic threshold control suited
for genomic DNA and protein sequence analysis'. Gene
167:GC1-10. 1995.
[18] Viklund,
Andreas.
JFreeChart.
Web
site:
http://www.jfree.org/jfreechart/. 2005-2007.

6

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

