Sidh – a Game Based Firefighter Training Simulation
Per Backlund
University of Sk¨ovde
per.backlund@his.se

Henrik Engstr¨om
University of Sk¨ovde
henrik.engstrom@his.se

Mikael Johannesson
University of Sk¨ovde
mikael.johannesson@his.se

Abstract
This paper presents Sidh – a game based firefighter training simulator developed in cooperation between the University of Sk¨ovde and the Swedish Rescue Services Agency.
Sidh is based on computer game hardware and software solutions but adds a novel interaction model and gameplay
specifically developed for the purpose of training firefighters. The simulator environment is a Cave where the player
is interacting with the game through a set of sensors. Players move in the virtual world by movements in the physical
world and a substantial physical effort is required to accomplish game tasks. Sidh has been used in a feasibility study
where 31 firefighter students have been playing the game
and the performance of these students as well as their reflections from using the game have been analyzed. Results
from this study show that Sidh is a useful complement to
traditional training methods and that the subjects give very
high grades on the entertainment value of the game which
indicate that this form of training may be self-motivating
which is an important issue for voluntary, after-hours training.

1. Introduction
The firefighter profession is one of the most stressful and
dangerous, exposing its practitioners to tasks that are highly
demanding, both physically and psychologically, in extreme
environments [2]. One common task is to enter a building
on fire and to search for victims. This activity, in this paper
referred to as Breathing Apparatus Entry (BAE), requires
a systematic and thorough scanning of the building where
the sight may be extremely limited due to smoke. This in
combination with the heat from fires forces the firefighters
to crawl on the floor. When a victim is found, it must be
dragged to a safe environment before the search can con-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Cecilia Hammar
Swedish Rescue Services Agency
cecilia.hammar@srv.se
Mikael Lebram
University of Sk¨ovde
mikael.lebram@his.se

tinue. The training for BAE is traditionally performed in
training areas with buildings of different types where victims are replaced with dummies. These methods have been
shown to be effective but they are not optimal for all situations. First of all, they are relatively costly as they require
trained instructors and access to a dedicated training area
where each type of environment (e.g. hotel, ship, train, gasstation etc.) requires a separate physical model. Moreover,
if the same persons participate in repeated exercises they
should ideally be exposed to new models.
A complement to real-world training areas is to use virtual environments [22]. In this paper we present Sidh
– a game based firefighter training simulator developed
in cooperation between the University of Sk¨ovde and the
Swedish Rescue Services Agency. A unique feature of Sidh
is that it is based on cave-technology which allows the user
to move freely inside a small room surrounded by screens
(Figure 1). The projection on the screens use fixed angles
which means that the orientation in the virtual world corresponds to the orientation in the real world. Sensors read
user movements which gives a natural interface to the game
and puts a physical load on the user. The latter is a central characteristic of BAE. An important property of Sidh,
which differentiate it from traditional simulators, is that it
is game based. Game technology, hardware as well as software, has been used to produce the application. More importantly, the application itself is deliberately designed to
be a game. The goal is to provide its users with an entertaining and motivating experience combined with learning
goals. In this way learning becomes self-motivating and the
system may be used for off-hour training.
Sidh has been used in a set of experiments where firefighter students have been using it to prepare for a BAE
exercise. Partial results indicate that the simulator gives a
realistic and meaningful preparation for the BAE exercise.
In addition, the students report that the simulator is both
physically demanding and entertaining. Sidh is hence an

Figure 1. The Sidh game environment
example of a serious game [19, 14] i.e. a computer game
that engages the user, and contributes to the achievement of
a defined purpose other than pure entertainment
In this paper, we present Sidh and the experiments conducted. The paper is organized as follows: In section 2,
we give some background to serious games and firefighter
training. In section 3, we present the problem and methods we have used. In section 4, we give an overview of the
simulator environment and the game development. In the
subsequent section, we present results from a set of experiments where Sidh have been used. In section 6, we elaborate on the future work and finally in section 7, we draw
some conclusions.

2. Background
In this section we give a brief account for our view on
the concept of serious games and serious gaming, i.e. the
activity of using games for purposes other than entertainment. We also summarize previous work on firefighter simulations and give a brief background on Swedish firefighter
training.

2.1. Serious games
Today, the term serious games is becoming more and
more popular, see e.g. [19] and [14]. The term itself is
established, but there is no current singleton definition of
the concept. Zyda [24, p. 26] defines a serious game as:
“a mental contest, played with a computer in accordance
with specific rules, that uses entertainment to further government or corporate training, education, health, public pol-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

icy, and strategic communication objectives.” Furthermore,
Zyda [24] argues that serious games have more than just
story, art, and software. It is the addition of pedagogy (activities that educate or instruct, thereby imparting knowledge or skill) that makes games serious. However, he also
stresses that pedagogy must be subordinate to story and that
the entertainment component comes first. In our work we
define serious games as games that engage the user, and
contribute to the achievement of a defined purpose other
than pure entertainment (whether or not the user is consciously aware of it). A game’s purpose may be formulated
by the game’s designer or by the user her/himself, which
means that also a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) game,
used for non-entertainment purposes, may be considered a
serious game.
Serious games can be applied to a broad spectrum of
application areas, e.g. military, government, educational,
corporate, and healthcare. A question of interest concerns
the claimed positive effects of such games, or of applications from related and sometimes overlapping areas such
as e-learning, edutainment, game-based learning, and digital game-based learning. In addition to obvious advantages,
like allowing learners to experience situations that are impossible in the real world for reasons of safety, cost, time,
etc. [4, 20], serious games, it is argued, can have positive
impacts on the players’ development of certain skills. We
also note that some of these positive effects of gaming are
not necessarily associated with any specific training or information objectives. As discussed by Mitchell and SavillSmith [16] analytical and spatial skills, strategic skills and
insight, learning and recollection capabilities, psychomotor skills, visual selective attention, etc. may be enhanced

by playing computer games. Other reports [12] have also
pointed out the positive effects on motor and spatial skills.
More specific positive impacts have been reported, e.g., by
Enochsson et al. [7], who found a positive correlation between experience in computer games and performance in
endoscopic simulation by medical students. The better performance of gamers is attributed to their three-dimensional
perception experience from computer gaming. Backlund et
al. [1] investigate the correlation between; playing racing,
action, sports computer games and driving behavior. A survey conducted at three driving schools, questioned driving
students about their gaming habits. The driving instructors
evaluated their students’ driving skills and traffic safety attitudes. The results indicate that experience in computer
games can have a positive effect on some aspects of driving.
Experienced gamers were ranked significantly higher by
their instructors regarding their overall driving skills compared to students with low experience in computer games.
However, no evidence was found to indicate that experienced gamers have a worse attitude towards fellow roadusers or traffic safety.
The positive effects of games may hence be further utilized if we can identify the correct content and accurately
exploit the user’s experience as a driving force for developing serious games. Swartout and van Lent [21] identify
the areas of experience-based systems and experience-based
education as potentially benefiting from such a game-based
approach. The general idea is to influence users by exposing them to some type of experience. Even though gaming
is not a replacement for simulation it may well serve as a
complement in some regards [18]. In this sense we find the
intersection between gaming and simulation to be an interesting one.

2.2. Virtual environments for firefighter training
As firefighters have to handle extreme tasks there is a
continuous need to develop training programs to prepare for
such tasks [13]. There exist a number of reports of the use
of virtual environments for firefighter training in the literature. Tate, Sibert and King [22] present a study where
a virtual environment training system was used to prepare
shipboard firefighters for a mission. The virtual environment allowed users to navigate in a 3D-model of the exUSS Shadwell fire research and test ship. A group of 12
trained firefighters participated in a study where their performance in a firefighting training mission was evaluated.
Half the group was offered traditional mission preparation
and the other half prepared using the virtual environment.
The result of the evaluation showed that the second group
had a better performance than the group using traditional
preparation.
In a different study, Julien and Shaw [9] present a virtual

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2. Firefighter training
firefighter command training environment which allows its
users to inspect a house on fire and to command virtual firefighters. The fire is extinguished by issuing the correct sequence of commands to the firefighters. Perdigau, Torquit,
Sanza and Jessel [17] present an application for managing
virtual reality scenarios and their main scenario is a Firefighter Training Simulation used for crisis situations training and understanding.
There are also examples on commercial simulation software used for firefighter training. The tactical command
trainer is a tool from VectorCommand Ltd [15] which allows users to train emergency management.

2.3. Swedish Rescue Services Agency
The Swedish Rescue Services Agency (SRSA) is the
government authority responsible for the training of fire
and rescue operatives. All municipal fire and rescue services staff are trained and certified by the SRSA. BAE is
one of the tasks a firefighter has to perform. It is of crucial importance that the firefighter can remain orientated
with very limited or no vision in a building. Traditionally
the firefighter students practice search methods with and
without smoke in different physical buildings (Figure 2).
When training is done without smoke the students use a
mask with translucent visor. To evaluate performance an
instructor must be present. The training is time consuming and requires flexible buildings. The optimal training for
BAE search methods would be in an environment with a
great number and types of buildings. Training would also
be more efficient if students could practice individually yet
with professional feedback and evaluation.

3. Problem and methods
The training methods traditionally used at the SRSA
have been shown to be satisfactory in most ways. There
are still situations where more flexible training methods are

required. For example, the environmental regulations may
put limitations on real fire exercises. In addition, the cost
of exercises may be too high to allow for large amounts
of training in different environments. For reasons such as
these, the SRSA has taken an interest in the possibility to
use game based simulators. Although the use of virtual environments for firefighter education has been reported in the
literature, there is no reported use of game based simulators,
to the best of our knowledge.
BAE training is a substantial part of the curriculum in
firefighter training and it was hence selected as the target
domain. An important ability required for BAE is to navigate and memorize locations. This requires a sense of orientation. In a conventional computer game, the user is fixed
while the virtual world rotates. To better make use of the
users sense of orientation Sidh is developed for a cave environment where the player may rotate in a fixed virtual world.
Each screen has fixed camera orientation and the camera position is updated when the player moves. This means that if
a player is entering a door facing north (in the actual world)
the player will have to return back through the door by heading south (in the actual world). The sense of orientation will
hence help the user to navigate in the virtual world.
Another property of BAE is that it is a strenuous physical
activity. The search and rescue task has to be accomplished
at high heart rates and with high deep body temperatures
[6]. To incorporate this, a design goal for Sidh was to include physical motion in the interaction model. In combination with heat and other stress factors, this will make the
user experience some of the tensions of real BAE.
Given these goals concerning the educational part of the
game, the second and equally important goal with Sidh was
to produce an entertaining game which would attract firefighter students to voluntarily spend time on training. This
is a non-functional and fragile goal which relates to the art
of computer game design [10]. One key problem of this
project was hence to balance the non-functional game design goals with explicit learning goals from the curriculum
for firefighter training and to make these goals a part of the
game play.
The development of the game was conducted using an
iterative collaborative design method [8, 11]. Co-design
aims to consider and possibly involve all stakeholders that
may be somehow influenced by the technology. A group
composed of instructors from SRSA, researchers and game
developers from the University of Sk¨ovde developed the
game-design at frequent seminars. The game went through
a number of prototype stages. At each stage prototypes
were tested by students and firefighter instructors. The experiments using the final version of the game was conducted
on a group of 36 firefighter students where the vast majority
had no previous experience of BAE. The group was divided
in two halves referred to here as A and B. Participation

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

was voluntary and 31 students accepted with 15 students
in group A and 16 in group B. There were no notable difference between group A and B with respect to age or gender.
For both groups the average age was 24 years and 13% of
the students were females. Participation was compensated
with a gift worth approximately e 8 for each session.
Group A were offered two sessions in Sidh separated by
approximately a week. Each session lasted for a maximum
of 30 minutes. After these two sessions, the subjects performed an individual search mission in a training area. The
participants of group B started with this search mission and
were then offered a single session in Sidh. The experimental setup allows for comparisons of the performance in the
search mission of students that prepared by playing Sidh
with those that did not. In addition, questionnaires and monitoring of the performance in the game allows for analyses
of the game using data from both groups.
The performance of the subjects was monitored during
the game both through a camera in the ceiling and through
logging functionality in the software. This includes both
discrete sampling of user operations (position, direction
and nozzle action) as well as through an ingame recording
mechanism.

4. Sidh
The Sidh game includes a physical simulator environment as well as a game design and content. The game content has been developed using the Half-Life 2 game engine
[23]. This engine has been modified to support the highly
specialized hardware environment that has been developed.
This section presents the simulator environment as well as
the game content.

4.1. Simulator environment
The base for the simulator environment in Sidh is a cave
[5] developed at the University of Sk¨ovde (Figure 1). The
player is surrounded by four screens (1.6 × 1.2 meter each)
covering the majority of the field of view. Each screen
is projected by a LCD projector connected to a dedicated
client PC. The simulation runs on a server PC which synchronizes the clients to run identical simulations except for
their camera angle.
User interaction in a cave requires other steering and
control devices compared to the typical mouse and keyboard for traditional PC applications. For Sidh, a specialized interaction solution was developed that uses gesturebased steering [3]. The user selects a direction by pointing
with a Fogfighter nozzle (Figure 4, right). The movement
speed is controlled through accelerometer sensors attached
to the boots of the player. This means that the player can

Figure 4. The air mask with Savox unit (left)
and the Fogfighter nozzle (right) used by
players

Figure 3. In smoke-filled areas the sight is
more limited when the player has an upright
position (top) compared to when the player is
crouching (bottom)

action. Five instances of the game are running on separate
computers where one is the main instance (server) and the
others are spectators to the server with the camera located at
the same point, but with different yaw angles. The sensors
values are provided to the game through a joystick API and
specialized algorithms have been developed to map sensor
readings to game actions.
A major advantage of developing a game as a modification of a commercial game is that it gives sophisticated tool
support. Further development of missions and locations is
easily conducted using the Hammer world editor supplied
with the Half-Life 2 game.

4.2. The Sidh game
navigate the virtual environment by facing the desired direction and walk or run on the spot. The speed is controlled
by the frequency of the steps. When the player carries a victim in the game, a higher step-frequency is required which
results in a higher physical load put on the player just as is
the case in a real situation.
In addition to controlling the direction, the Fogfighter
nozzle is also used to record the vertical height of the
player’s arms. This is used to mark actions (start search,
end search, pick up victim and drop victim) as well as to
control the camera when the player is crouching. When the
player is crouching the camera is lowered and this gives a
better field of view in smoke-filled areas (Figure 3).
The simulator is equipped with a 5.1 sound system with
speakers placed outside the cave. Radio communication
from the instructor in the game is transmitted through an intercom system and the player is equipped with an air mask
(Figure 4, left) with a Savox unit (a radio communication
interface integrated in the mask).
The Sidh game developed for the simulator is based on
the Half-Life 2 game engine. The engine has been modified
to support the cave environment and the specialized inter-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The learning objectives of the game are grounded in
the curriculum for the Swedish firefighter training program.
The main goal of the game is to get the players to develop
systematic and thorough search behaviour in the presence
of physical tension and other stress factors.
The game objective in Sidh is to scan various locations
and to evacuate any victims found. A non-player character (NPC) instructor briefs the player before a mission
and gives feedback on the outcome when the mission is
finished. When a player successfully scans a location the
game advances to the next level. A scan is successful if all
rooms have been visited and all victims have been evacuated within the maximal time allocation. The score system
gives the player a base score in proportion to the percentage of the area that has been scanned. The base score is
multiplied with factors related to the remaining time and
the number of attempts required to finish the level. In the
debriefing after a mission (successful or not) a map of the
premises is presented to the player (Figure 5). This means
that the player will get feedback on which rooms and areas that were scanned and which were not. If the mission
failed, it will be easier to succeed in the next attempt as the

and the learning objectives behind them.
A late design decision was taken when the experimental
setup was developed: If a player fails three times on a level
the next level is loaded. The reason for this decision is to
avoid that a player is trapped on one level. This could easily have been an integral part of the game logic, but it was
handled manually by the experimental leader during experiments.

5. Experiments and results

Figure 5. The map presented to the player after a completed mission. The circle indicates
the start position and the dark grey area is
the area scanned by the player

player has received additional information on the layout of
the location.
The scan percentage is computed based on the orientation of the player and the sight distance. The amount of
smoke in a room affects the sight distance. If a player
crouches in a smoke filled room the sight distance increases.
The health status of a player is continuously presented
in the game and if the health meter reaches zero the player
“dies” and the mission has failed. The health is decreased
by time and by the distance moved inside the location. The
decrease is bigger when the player is acting in an upright
position (i.e. is not crouching) in a room filled with smoke.
A player may reload its health by returning to the instructor who is located outside the dangerous environment. One
of the goals with the game is to expose players to physical
and psychological stress factors of real BAE. The physical
stress factors are covered mainly by the interaction model
which requires real physical motion. In addition, players
wear a breathing mask (with the tubes detached), boots and
a firefighter coat. This in combination with the heat from
computers and projectors raises the temperature of the players. An initial idea was to use infra-heaters from the top of
the cave but this was dismissed as it would make the environment too hostile. To increase the psychological stress
on players, victims may start to scream hysterically in some
missions. In addition, the NPC instructor gives very harsh
feedback when a mission has failed.
16 levels have been developed for the game of which one
is a tutorial and two are bonus levels introduced to provide
some variation to the players. The remaining 13 levels have
been designed to model typical and varying scenarios for
BAE. Table 1 gives a brief description of the game levels

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The Sidh game has been used in a set of experiments
where a group of firefighter students have been playing the
game and participated in exercises to evaluate their performance. The analysis of part of these experiments is ongoing
work. This paper focuses on the game related aspects of the
experiments. In this section we present the experimental
setup and results based on questionnaires from the participants and analyses of the game play.
The participant of group A played the game at two separate occasions, separated by approximately a week. At the
first occasion they played levels 0–7 and at the second occasion they played levels 8–15. Group B played the game only
at one occasion (level 0–7). The allocated time was maximized to 30 minutes. This means that each participant was
playing until the final level was passed or until the time was
up. Before the subjects started to play they were equipped
with step sensors, a radio, and a Fogfighter nozzle and were
given brief instructions on how to use them. When they had
finished playing they were asked to answer a questionnaire.

5.1. Game characteristics
First of all, the gameplay was successful in that all players except four managed to finish all levels within the allocated time. One person managed to reach level 6 before
the time was up. Another person decided to quit playing
at level 7 due to simulator sickness. The third person managed to level 14 when the time was up. Finally, there was
one person from group B that did not play a second time
(level 8-15) due to technical problems. All in all, there
were 45 successful occasions with an average playing time
of 24 minutes. The fact that the vast majority managed to
complete their mission within the stipulated time shows that
the interaction model worked well. All players managed to
navigate and operate in the virtual environment. It is notable
that the subjects were equipped with boots, a heavy coat and
a mask, and carried a heavy nozzle while playing the game.
The interaction model is hence successfully designed to be
operational by using coarse movements (gross motor control). On the statement “I understood what I should do” in
the questionnaire the average score was 4.6 on a 5-graded

Table 1. The levels of the game and their
learning objectives
Nr

Description

Objective

0

Tutorial

1

Two room apartment

2
3

A club building
Garage

4
5
6

Bonus level
A one room apartment
A six room youth hostel

7

Office space

8

A grocery

9

A three room apartment

10

A large apartment

To handle the interaction
model and game goals
To get a first contact with the
game
To realize that time is limited
To realize that a low position
is advantageous
To get a break
To look in closets
To handle large number of
rooms
To handle complex corridor
architecture, closet
To handle areas divided by
shelves
To handle heavy fire, closet
and limited time
To handle extremely limited
sight in a complex design
To handle fenced areas with
lots of junk
To handle doors at
unexpected positions
To handle numerous identical
doors
To handle veiled areas
To finish the game

11

Basement storage area

12

A four room apartment

13

A hotel corridor

14
15

A butcher shop
Bonus level

Likert scale where 1 was “fully disagree” and 5 was “fully
agree”.
Another goal with the game is that it should be fun and
self motivating. The subjects were asked to grade the statement “it was fun”. The average for all experiments was 4.4.
Interestingly, subjects from group A had a higher average
(4.6) the second time they played compared to the first time
(4.4). Even if it is not a significant difference it may indicate
that some initial training is needed before the player is comfortable with the environment. This is also reflected in the
result on the statement “I would like to play again”. Here
group A had an average of 4.3 after playing two times while
group B had an average of 3.9 after playing only once. This
is also not a significant difference.
Some of the subjects experienced problems with simulator sickness. The average for all experiments on the statement “I felt sick” was 2.1. One person decided to end the
experiments due to sickness and fully agreed (5) to the “I

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

felt sick”-statement. The same person did however return
for the second session and completed it successfully and
partially agreed (3) to the “I felt sick”-statement. This corresponds to the trend for the whole group A which had an
average of 2.5 after the first session but 2.1 after the second
session. This suggests that some of the simulator sickness
problems may be reduced through repeated exposure. It is
worth noting that the participants who rated sickness to 3
or worse also agreed to the statement “I would like to play
again” with high values (4 or 5). This can be interpreted as
even if simulator sickness is present to some degree, it does
not seem to have much negative impact on the usability of
the game.

5.2. Learning effect
The outcome of the learning objectives for the game may
be evaluated using two different methods:
1. By studying the performance in the game. This includes comparing the result of group A in the first occasion (levels 0–7) with the performance in the second
occasion.
2. By analyzing the answers in the questionnaires.
Concerning the performance in the game it is interesting
to note that there was a clear learning curve for the players. The performance of group A in their second session
was significantly better than their first (using a one-tailed
Student’s t-test). For example the total number of times
victims were missed in group A’s first session was 21 (an
average of 1.5 missed victims per player). The second session this number was reduced to a total of 3 missed victims
(an average of 0.2 per player).
This may obviously be explained by initial problems to
navigate in a new environment. On the other hand the number of victims is higher in the second session and the levels are more complex and difficult than in the first session.
Four of the levels are equipped with closets large enough
for a person to be inside. Although it may not be very common for people to walk into the closet when there is a fire,
it is possible that, for example, a frightened child tries to
hide itself both from the fire and from the strange looking
firefighters. For that reason searching this type of objects is
important.
In level 2, almost none of the players looked in the closet.
In this case it was empty, so no negative feedback was given
during debrief if it was missed. In each of the forthcoming
levels with closets, the closets contained people, with the
result that a missed closet rendered negative feedback. In
level 5 (a small apartment with few places to search), four
of the participants from group A did not check the closet.
Three of these repeated their mistake in level 7 (a large office with complex architecture) together with another four

participants. Level 9 (a medium sized apartment with heavy
fire and two victims of which one was in the closet) was
played in the next session a week later. This time none of
the participants missed the closet. This indicates not only
that learning occurred, but also the importance of repetition
to accomplish it.
In firefighting, it is important to keep a low position to
avoid heat and to get good sight conditions in smoke-filled
areas. In the game, players held a low position 63% of the
time, which suggests that the game is successful in promoting a low position. This result is an average for all levels,
except tutorial and bonus levels, for all subjects. There is a
tendency for players to keep a lower position in levels with
heavy smoke.
An anecdotal evidence that the game requires the same
abilities as real firefighting is that the two persons that got
the highest scores in the game were the only two persons
in the class that had experience from real firefighting. The
subject with the highest score had been working for three
years as a part time firefighter and the subject with the second highest score had been a voluntary firefighter for several
years.
The goal to expose the players for physical stress was
also successful. After the experiments, the experiment leaders asked the participants the open question “how was it?”
All participants mentioned the physical load in some way
or another in their response (“it was tiresome”, “it was a
sweaty” etc.). This was also apparent from their sweating.
Unfortunately, no pulse meter was used during experiments
which would have given additional information on the physical load of the game.
The analysis of the questionnaire reveals some interesting differences between group A and B. On the statement “I
learned something through the game” the average for group
A was 4.3 while B had the significantly lower 2.8. A possible explanation to this is that group B had experienced a
live search mission some days before they played the game.
They may have achieved some of the learning objectives
through that mission. The total average for the learning
statement is 3.5 which is clearly a partial agreement to the
statement. The subjects were also asked to exemplify what
this learning consisted of. The result shows that 77% of the
players states that they have learned things related to the
objectives. There were comments such as:
– “I must be 100% convinced that there is no one left in
the room when I have searched it”
– “To search everywhere – even in closets”

– “I’ve got an understanding of how to search an apartment. I’ve also realized that it is tiresome”
– “To search systematically and make sure all areas are
covered”.
These comments show that the learning objectives have
been met at least with respect to the subjects’ self-reported
learning. As a parenthesis it is mentionable that there probably occurred some non-reported learning. A couple of the
participants talked for themselves during the play session.
One person cursed his bad sense of orientation, obviously
aware of the importance of this skill in a search mission.
Another participant started to count the doors out loud on
his second attempt in level 10 (a large physically demanding apartment) which can be seen as a strategy developed
during the game.

6. Future work
The partial results from the feasibility study presented
in this paper give very positive indications for the usefulness of the developed game. This opens a number of interesting opportunities for future work. The motivation of
using a cave is that it allows for using the real world sense
of orientation in the virtual world. It would be interesting
to study this effect by replicating the experiments using a
PC-version of the game where the player is facing a fixed
screen with the virtual world rotating. This will potentially
reveal differences between the cave-navigation and traditional first-person computer game navigation. A limitation
with the presented game is that it is a single player game.
BAE is a collaborative task where two firefighters enter a
building and a commander supervises the mission through
radio communication. It would be interesting to extend Sidh
to support multiplayer operation and let players communicate through radio to accomplish a mission. Another interesting future work would be to use Sidh as a preparation
for specific location, as was the case in the study reported
in Tate, Sibert and King [22]. Currently, plan drawings
are used to prepare for missions, but the virtual experience
may give additional advantages. This may be useful for fire
departments responsible for locations inaccessible for live
training. It may also be useful for police forces as preparation for high risk raid and tactical entry operations. One
aspect of firefighting not covered in the game is to put out
fires with the nozzle. Several students participating in the
experiments made remarks that they would like to have this
feature included in the game.

– “To be careful and to search everywhere”

7. Conclusions

– “To be calm and to have trust in myself and not wander
around too much”

This paper presents a game based firefighter training simulator and partial results from experiments using it. The

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

development of the game has been conducted in close collaboration between firefighter instructors, researchers and
game developers. The result of the collaboration has been
successful in that goals concerning the pedagogical content
as well as the entertainment value of the game have been
met. Experiments using the game show that users enjoy
playing the game and that they report to have gained knowledge from it. This is an important result as it witness of a
successful serious game implementation. The learning objectives have been met without killing the entertainment in
the game which implies that it may be useful in voluntary,
off-hour training. A novel interaction model has been developed for the game. Sensors are used to let the player
navigate in a cave-environment with a 360 degree field of
view. The modification of a commercial computer game
for this environment has been successfully conducted. The
results is an environment which allows the user to act naturally using coarse body movements the game may in fact be
played without moving a finger. In the experiments subjects
were using boots, coat and a mask and had no problems to
master the game although all of them reported that it was
physically demanding. The result of this feasibility study
gives confidence that the use of game based simulators for
firefighter training is feasible. It also shows that the interaction model and the cave solution are useful. The subjects
quickly learned to navigate in the environment and accomplish missions. It cost them a lot of sweat but they enjoyed
it.

Acknowledgements
Authors in alphabetical order.
The authors would like to thank Niclas V¨anstr¨om and
Daniel Andersson for contributions to the game development, the firefighter students who participated in this study,
and Anna-Sofia Alklind Taylor for her assistance during experiments. This work has been financed through the EU
INTERREG IIIC DISTRICT project.

References
[1] P. Backlund, H. Engstr¨om, and M. Johannesson. Computer
gaming and driving education. In Proceedings of the workshop Pedagogical Design of Educational Games affiliated to
the 14th International Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE 2006), Beijing, China, December 2006.
[2] J. Bos, E. Mol, B. Visser, and M. Frings-Dresen. Risk of
health complaints and disabilities among dutch firefighters.
International Archives of Occupational and Environmental
Health, 77(6):373–382, 2004.
[3] D. Bowman. Interaction techniques for immersive virtual environments: Design.
In Proceedings of the
Human-Computer Interaction Consortium (HCIC) Conference, 1998.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[4] K. Corti. Games-based learning; a serious business application. PIXELearning.com White paper, 2006.
[5] C. Cruz-Neira, D. J. Sandin, T. A. DeFanti, R. V. Kenyon,
and J. C. Hart. The cave: audio visual experience automatic
virtual environment. Commun. ACM, 35(6):64–72, 1992.
[6] C. M. Eglin and M. J. Tipton. Can firefighter instructors
perform a simulated rescue after a live fire training exercise? European Journal of Applied Physiology, 95(4):327–
334, 2005.
[7] L. Enochsson, B. Isaksson, R. Tour, A. Kjellin, L. Hedman,
T. Wredmark, and L. Tsai-Fellander. Visuospatial skills
and computer game experience influence the performance
of virtual endoscopy. Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
8(7):874–880, 2004.
[8] O. Forsgren. Churchmanian co-design basic ideas and
application examples. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Information Systems Development
(ISD 2005), pages 35–46. Springer, 2005.
[9] T. U. S. Julien and C. D. Shaw. Firefighter command training virtual environment. In Richard Tapia Celebration of
Diversity in Computing Conference, pages 30–33, 2003.
[10] R. Koster. A theory of fun. Paraglyph Press, 2004.
[11] P. Kruchten. Tutorial: introduction to the rational unified
process. In ICSE ’02: Proceedings of the 24th International
Conference on Software Engineering, pages 703–703, New
York, NY, USA, 2002. ACM Press.
[12] A. Lager and S. Bremberg. H¨alsoeffekter av tv- och datorspelande. en systematisk genomg˚ang av vetenskapliga
studier. Swedish National Institute of Public Health. (In
Swedish).
[13] R. Lasky. Firefighter survival training: from reactive to
proactive. Fire Engineering, (June):117–119, 2004.
[14] P. LoPiccolo. Serious games. Computer Graphics World,
27(2), 2004.
[15] V. C. Ltd. http://www.vectorcommand.com (retrieved 200703-15).
[16] A. Mitchell and C. Savill-Smith. The use of computer and
video games for learning: A review of the literature. Learning and Skills Development Agency, 2003.
[17] E. Perdigau, P. Torguet, C. Sanza, and J.-P. Jessel. A distributed virtual storytelling system for firefighters training.
In International Conference on Virtual Storytelling, pages
227–230, 2003.
[18] B. Sawyer. The serious games summit: emergent use of interactive games for solving problems is serious effort. Computers in Entertainment, 2(1):5, 2004.
[19] Serious Games Initiative. http://www.seriousgames.org (retrieved 2007-03-15), 2007.
[20] K. Squire and H. Jenkins. Harnessing the power of games in
education. Insight, 3(1):5–33, 2003.
[21] W. Swartout and M. van Lent. Making a game of system
design. Commun. ACM, 46(7):32–39, 2003.
[22] D. L. Tate, L. Sibert, and T. King. Virtual environments for
shipboard firefighter training. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 17(6):23–29, 1997.
[23] Valve. HλLF-LIFE2 . http://half-life2.com (retrieved 200703-15).
[24] M. Zyda. From visual simulation to virtual reality to games.
Computer, 38(9):25–32, 2005.

