Applying Animation to the Visual Analysis of
Financial Time-Dependent Data
Tatiana Tekušová, Jörn Kohlhammer
Fraunhofer IGD, Darmstadt, Technische Universität Darmstadt
{tatiana.tekusova@igd.fraunhofer.de, joern.kohlhammer@gris.tu-darmstadt.de}
Abstract
For decades, financial analysts have strived to use
modern data visualization tools to improve the timeliness
and quality of their analysis. As the amount of data to be
processed increases rapidly and requirements on quality
of financial analysis rise, the demand for analysis
support systems grows. We present a system for the
visual analysis of large amounts of time-dependent data
using animation. For each data entity, indicators are
presented in a scatter-plot framework, displaying the
correlation between them. The design of the glyphs
illustrates additional data dimensions. The system uses
animation to handle the time-dimension of the data. It
offers various features, such as focus, zoom, details on
demand and time period selection to support the
analysis. Financial indicators are used to demonstrate
the usability of the system. The animation proves to be a
powerful tool for analysing time-dependent processes in
cross-sectional data sets and discovering patterns in the
data.
Keywords- information visualisation, financial data,
time-dependent data, animation, applications.

1. Introduction
Financial analysts need to assess large amounts of
numerical data usually under time pressure in order to
provide sophisticated investment advice or to make high
quality decisions. The analysis is supported by modern
statistical and information visualization systems. As the
amount of data to be analyzed is increasing at a high
pace and requirements on quality and promptness of
financial analysis are rising, further development of the
visualization systems is needed in order to cope with the
higher demands of the analysts for data presentation.
There is a wide spectrum of financial analysis
methods. However, the analysis of correlations between
financial indicators remains one of the most widely
applied techniques. To support the correlation analysis,
the relationships between variables are visually presented
in form of scatter plots. The standard analysis based on
the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) underlying the
pricing of securities is commonly conceptualised in this
format [19] and [21]. For this reason, financial analysts
are educated to think in terms of this presentation and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

can easily interpret the observations [1]. However,
classical scatter plots can show only correlation either
across the time- or cross-section (i.e. observations of
many subjects such as firms, stocks or countries/regions
at a certain point in time) dimension of the data, whereby
the data used in financial analysis often have to be
assessed along both dimensions.
As there is a strong need to present both the time
and the cross-section component simultaneously when
analysing the relationship between indicators, we have
chosen a natural way to circumvent the problem – to use
animation We have kept the scatter plot as a basic data
presentation type, because it reflects the abovementioned previous user experience in financial analysis,
as recommended by [9]. The system animates the glyphs
representing the entities of the sample, i.e. it maps the
time-dimension of the dataset to animation time.
The main advantage of using animation in a scatter
plot is the possibility to show long time series while
retaining the focus on cross-section dimensions of the
data. This is currently not possible with commonly used
applications for data analysis in financial institutions.
Animation supports more efficient and timely analysis of
large amounts of multi-dimensional data, than the current
state-of-the-art applications allow. With the help of our
system, different financial indicators can be analysed.
The cross-section dimension may, for example, refer
either to the companies forming a stock market index, or
to the government bond yields with different maturities
or economic subjects. The time dimension represents the
time period for which the data need to be analysed.
In this paper, we present a visual analysis of daily
data stock market data from four countries for the period
ranging from 17.5.2005 to 13.11.2006, implying a
visualization of more than 70 000 data points. The
usability study showed that the animation can reveal new
unexpected patterns in the data which cannot be
perceived in a static analysis of correlation. Furthermore,
animated data visualization better reflects real market
movements.

2. Use case – Stock market analysis
Decisions on financial investment are based on a
thorough analysis of the indicators for individual stocks
and the outlook for the stock market. The main focus of
investors is on the return, the liquidity, and the risk of a

stock. The return measures the yield of the stock
(dividend plus the change in the price of the stock
relative to the price in the previous period) and the traded
volume of the stock represents its liquidity. The value of
the outstanding stocks, i.e. the size of the market
capitalisation, for investors indicates the importance of
the company for the market developments. The riskiness
of future returns is proxied by the volatility of the return
(i.e. the variability of the expected return). It means that
the higher the volatility, the higher the risk associated
with the stock. Usually higher return is bound to higher
risk, therefore the securities can be categorised as shown
on the Figure 1 [24]. According to his risk profile, an
investor is interested in particular asset categories.
However, in general, stocks with higher returns keeping
the volatility constant are preferred.

Figure 1: Example of asset categories showing
relationship between return and volatility
The user case for the visual analysis system
presented in this paper is twofold: to facilitate both the
monitoring of financial market developments over time
and the analysis of the co-movement of stock market
indicators. The relationship between risk and return over
time is at the centre of the investors’ attention. Changes
in risk and return lead to investment decisions and
impact future performance of the stocks that are
currently held. In case the parameters change rapidly or
the market is subject to turbulences, the composition of
the portfolio needs to be adjusted in order to achieve the
targeted returns and avoid large losses. The current
systems used by the financial analysts do not allow for a
simultaneous presentation of all these factors through
time. Using the available techniques they can see a static
picture of the relationship between risk and return but do
not see the dynamics of the relationship between the
stocks in their portfolio. On the other hand they could
display the development of either risk or return over time
(i.e. as a line chart) for selected stocks but then it will not
be possible to assess the correlation between the two
factors. The solution to the problem is to enhance the
classical scatterplot display with the additional variables
and to map the time dimension into the animation. The
necessary information is encoded in glyph appearance (to
visualise the country and the capitalisation of the stock).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The co-movement of the stock market is demonstrated
by the animation of scatterplot glyphs over time.

3. Related work
Effective data presentation is essential in order for
financial analysis to support efficient decision making,
placing visualization techniques for financial data at the
centre of interest for several decades. We present a brief
overview of the current available techniques, which deal
with visualizing time-dependent and cross-sectional data.
Most current time-dependent data visualization
techniques applied to financial and economic data,
employ mainly static graphs. Such a static presentation
only allows for the display of only a very limited number
of data points. The systems currently used by financial
analysts are not interactive and do not provide animation
of data points (inter alia Excel, E-views, SPlus),
although it has been shown that smooth animation
increases the accuracy of the decisions ([9]).
A complete overview of the literature on
visualisation techniques for presenting time-dependent
data, the use of animation in information visualisation
and scatterplot based data visualization would exceed the
scope of this paper. However, we would like to mention
the main techniques discussed. The surveys on systems
specialized on time-series can be found in [7], [11] and
[26], other interesting visualizations are described in
[20].
The use of animation in data visualization
overcomes limitations on the number of data points
displayed especially for time-dependent data. It is
however not a new topic. Several systems have been
developed, which use motion to enhance visual analysis
of time-series data (see for example [2], [6], [8] and
[15])).
In this paper, we concentrate on the visualisation of
data in a scatterplot framework as this builds on the user
experience with visualisation systems and supports the
way the analysts are used to think about the data. The
scatterplot technique is not new and the amount of
references to literature on scatter plot design and
application is extensive. Selected surveys on scatter plot
techniques are for example [3], [4], [5], [17], and [22].
However, systems providing scatter plots with
animation, with the exception maybe of the presentation
shown on gapminder.org, are rare. We do not consider as
animated systems those systems that do not animate
movement of glyphs in the scatter plots. North at al. [16]
represents data changes as “wear marks in the
visualization background”. Moere [14] presents a
technique for visualizing time-varying datasets using
animated “flocking boids” in 3D space. The position and
movement of the boids, which represent data on stocks
on financial markets, is determined by behaviour rules.
Each boid is represented as a trajectory of the previous
time-states it has passed with diminishing transparency.
Therefore this approach cannot be considered as a scatter
plot showing real data in the original sense. Time-series
Explorer [6] uses scatter plots to enhance visualisation of

time-series. Glyphs in the scatter plot show development
of time-series during a certain time period. They are
animated by smoothly adjusting the start and end of the
time period. Time-series plot and the corresponding
scatter plot in the system offer focus and zoom as well as
linking functions. The Time-series Explorer is currently
used for analysing biological data.

4. Cognition aspects of motion visualization
and their implications on system design
The human perception plays an important role in the
design of visualisation systems. These systems try to
make use of the laws of human perception in order to
maximize the results of visual queries that are made in
the course of system usage. As stated in [23], the “most
promising uses of animation seem to be to convey realtime changes and reorientations in time and space. “
Animation is therefore evidently well suited for the
visualizations of time-dependent data. In this section, we
present several issues which have to be taken into
consideration when designing motion-based visualisation
systems. However, our purpose is not to present a
thorough discussion on the perception of motion.
An overview of the main principles which apply to
human perception of motion in information visualisation
can be found in the section “Patterns in Motion” in the
chapter 6 of [25]. With regard to designing the animated
visualisation system presented in this paper, the
correspondence problem and the issue of perception of
motion in context need to be taken into account.
The correspondence problem of moving objects is
characterised by a confusion of a moving object with
another object. This phenomenon can be overcome by
the smoothing the motion of the object and by
visualizing objects differently, for example by using
different sizes or colours for the glyphs. Perception of
motion is dependent on its context. For example a static
dot in a moving box is perceived as moving. Therefore
the environment in which glyphs are moving should be
static, e.g. the environment is bound by static axes.
Tversky [23] recommends that animations should be
“slow and clear enough for observers to perceive
movements”. To overcome disadvantages of animations,
the application should allow for the control of motion’s
speed, allow stopping and reviewing of the animation
and zooming in and out. More specifically, Huber and
Healey [12] provide some critical measures for direction
and velocity of objects in order for that human beings to
be able to distinguish difference in motion of glyphs.
Pylyshyn [18] studies the human ability of tracking
objects in a multiple object tracking paradigm. He
reports that observers can track very precisely four
independent but identical moving objects, suggesting a
serial tracking process. This would imply, that in our
animated scatterplot framework, the users are able to
track various object in a serial way. This supports the use

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

of animation for analytical purposes (i.e. for tracking the
dynamics of the stock market and co-movement between
individual shares).
Finally, Buehler, et al. [2] summarise a set of
recommendations for the design of motion visualisation.
We follow selected guidelines for an effective visual data
analysis: Motion should characterise changes in the data;
visualisation velocity should be proportional to the rate
of change of the underlying data, and objects which
move similarly should indicate similarity of data
changes.

5. Description of the system
The system’s design and functions have been conceived
to provide an effective visualisation of multi-dimensional
time-dependent financial data across entities. The system
presents data in a 2D scatter plot with other data
dimensions encoded in the size and colour of the glyphs.
Following the user case presented in the paper, the
animation is used to facilitate analysis and monitoring of
stock market indicators over time. The user can choose
to focus and zoom in on the currently visualized data
and/or to see further information on selected data points.
An export of the visualisation is possible both as a
picture of the current view or as a video of the data
animation.

5.1 System design
The current system design of our first prototype is
based on previous experience with financial analytical
systems and on a thorough task analysis carried out in
cooperation with financial analysts. Moreover, the
system functionality has been adjusted on the basis of
user evaluation results. The system components comprise
data storage and loading, data calculation and
presentation. Interactive features such as focus and
zoom, and details on demand are also incorporated in the
system. The system also includes animation and
animation manipulation modules.
The user interface is designed to suit analytical
requirements and to allow an intuitive control of the
system features. It is composed of the main visualisation
window and the interaction panel. Five panes are used
(see Figure 2):
- Pane 1: is used for scatter plot view, which is the
main analytical focus. The interaction panel comprises
tools for interacting with data and analysis support tools.
- Pane 2: The data pane provides data description
and data manipulation tools.
- Pane 3: In the data selection pane, main selection
features are available.
- Pane 4: Further data visualization and manipulation options are provided.
- Pane 5: The animation pane provides tools for
manipulating motion features.

Figure 2: FinMotion System Design
Note: 1: the scatter plot view, 2: the data pane, 3: the data selection pane, 4: the options pane, 5: the animation pane.

5.2 Data visualisation and data manipulation
The system’s main window (see Figure 2, pane 1)
presents a scatter plot that visualises the relation between
indicators of a set of cross-sectional data. The initial
visualisation shows four dimensions of the whole data
set at the starting time period. Data are presented as
rectangles, where x position, y position, colour and size
each encode one dimension of the data. The description
of the dimensions as well as the time frame of the loaded
data is provided in the pane 2 seen in the Figure 2. Pane
2 also provides functions for loading the data and
exporting the visualisations.
In our example, time-varying data on stock volatility
and stock return are analysed. As usually presented in
financial applications, the x-axis shows the volatility and
the y-axis the return of the stocks. The axis minimum
and maximum are determined by the data over the whole
time period so that the glyphs do not move outside the
plot area during animation.
Further data on stock market capitalisation, i.e. the
importance of the companies stock for market
developments, is encoded in the area of the rectangular
glyph. The area instead of side size of the rectangle is
used, because humans perceive size as area but not the
side of the rectangle. The size of glyphs is normalised by
minimum and maximum stock market capitalisation in
the sample.
The encoding of a third data dimension as size has
been a major drawback with respect to the problem of
visualising negative values. The support of negative
values is an important issue as negative values are
plausible, for example, in case users choose to use

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

weights in the portfolio as the size dimension. We have
decided to show negative values as unfilled rectangles
with the size corresponding to the absolute value of the
value of the data point (see Figure 3).

Figure 3: Visualisation example of glyph size negative values shown as unfilled rectangles
With an increasing number of cross-sectional
entities, the overlap of glyphs and labels will pose
problems for visualizing the data. In order to separate the
glyphs, we firstly have chosen to use a different colour
for the glyph’s borders from its “filling” colour and
secondly to position glyphs on the back/foreground of
the screen according to their size. The border colour
highlights contours of the glyphs and back/foreground
positions controls for overdrawing smaller glyphs with
bigger glyphs
A further dimension of the data is represented by the
colour of the glyphs. For example, German stocks are
coloured red and French stocks are in blue. It enables
users to compare the development of the two stock
categories more easily.

5.3 Animation
Animation is the major feature of the system. The
main advantage of animation is that users can see the
time dependent changes in the data while remaining
focussed on the cross-sectional diversity of the data. The
linear movement of the glyphs represents the data change
between two subsequent points in time. The animation
steps are smooth in order to support the accuracy of
decision making [9].
There are different options for the choice of
interpolation technique which can be used for animating
scatter plot glyphs. We have employed a simple linear
movement between two subsequent data points, because
this motion is intuitive for users and easy to follow. In
linear interpolation, the speed of motion is proportional
to the rate of change in the data between two subsequent
time points, as advised by [2]. It is also important for
analysis purposes, as analysts can see, for example,
which financial instruments exhibit larger price
movements.
The animation of the glyphs is a powerful tool for
showing data changes. However, it obscures the history
of past data points. Therefore, the system provides users
with the option to draw trajectory paths of the items
during animation. This feature is particularly important
for users interested in analysing and comparing the
history of data items in more detail, when viewing a
“static picture” of the data (see Figure 4). In the example
below, we see a trajectory of the dynamics of three
German car producers during one week in June 2005. A
priori, the user might suppose that they move in sync.
The trajectory feature highlights, that the movements in
return and risk of Volkswagen (VOW) and BMW were
indeed
similar,
whereas
the
evolution
for
DaimlerChrysler (DCX) was quite different. This would
reflect that the risk and return changes of the two former
companies were highly correlated in the period, whereas
the factors affecting DCX were of a different nature.

a picture or can decide to save the animation as a video.
The video and picture export function allows the user to
view saved results of his or her analysis at a later time or
to use it in other reporting applications.

5.4 Focus and Zoom
As financial analysts need to examine large datasets,
selecting and zooming features are required in order to
provide users with the possibility to concentrate the
analysis on interesting data. The system provides
conventional focus and zoom functions for scatter plots
together with special tools in response to the animation
feature.
As can be seen in the Figure 2, pane 3, users can
choose among several focus options. The selected items
are displayed in their original colour and the other items
are coloured in grey (see Figure 5). Apart from focusing
on stocks from the chosen countries, she can highlight
items that satisfy a user defined threshold on the
dimensions represented by the x- and y-axis or the
rectangle size. The highlighting of stocks according to
size allows to compare the dynamics of different stock
groups - big companies versus small companies. The x
and y threshold shows whether the companies satisfying
the risk and return criteria in one time period keep on
satisfying these limits over time. Furthermore, a free
selection option allows the highlighting of user selected
items by mouse-clicks or by using a search tool for the
stock symbol. This is useful for the objective of
monitoring, as it enables defining “target stocks” from a
group of stocks and allows tracking their development
over time while comparing their relative performance to
the rest of the stocks shown. The user can show or hide
those items which are not selected, depending on
whether she wants to concentrate on the selected group
only or to keep the “comparing view” to the rest of the
stocks displayed.
Zooming is provided either by delimiting an area of
the scatter plot using the mouse or via clicking on the
axis labels and determining minimum and maximum
values of the axis. We implemented both zoom types as
users are accustomed to these kinds of zooming
interaction in financial applications. The system saves
the zooming history. The user can return to the previous
selection sequences by pressing the back button.

Figure 4: The animation trajectory visualisation
The user can choose to focus on a certain time
period by choosing the start and end date of the
animation and by choosing to visualise certain points in
time via the time slider (see Figure 2, pane 5). The
animation speed can be adjusted, in order to better
concentrate on changes in glyph positions during the
play. Furthermore, the user can save the current view as

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 5: Highlighting of selected data items

5.5 Details on demand
As users may wish more information on the
visualised data, a legend and further information on
demand are provided. The legend tool visualises further
information chosen by the user for currently selected
glyphs. More detailed information for a chosen data
point is shown in a pop-up window (see Figure 6).
Similar to the problem of the overlapping of glyphs,
the legend placement is a challenge for the system
design. The legend currently overplots all displayed
items and its positioning is done similarly to the
algorithm proposed in [10]. The legend position is bound
to the glyph rectangle as shown in Figure 7, where it is
not restricted to only the four positions shown but can be
placed in the whole area around the glyph (the grey
area). The algorithm used in the system enables all
legend items to be placed, although the issue of
overlapping of legend items cannot be overcome
completely.

Figure 6: Data label placement and details on
demand visualisation
Legend text

Legend text

Glyph
Legend text

Legend text

Figure 7: Possible positioning of glyph legend
text around the glyph (shown as grey area)
6. Qualitative user evaluation
We have conducted a usability survey both with
experienced users from the financial industry and with
users that are not familiar with financial analysis. We
have asked ten financial specialists and several persons
not working in the financial industry to answer questions
about design and usability of the system. The questions
for the second user group concentrated on design and
ease of function control. The experienced users also

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

answered questions on the value added by the new
software in their analytical work and possible usage in
their business areas. Users also provided input for further
functionalities of the system.
The general impression of all users was very
positive. The users liked the ease of application of the
software. They were able to control the system without
any previous explanation. Upon user feedback we added
the option to see the visualisation pane in full screen as
some analysts’ display areas are limited.
The data presentation which encodes many
dimensions was deemed valuable by users allowing one
data display to illustrate all the needed data
characteristics. In contrast, currently used data
presentations only show a few dimensions. The users
currently produce various visual representations of the
same data using only a limited number of dimensions,
and then compare them across the different visual
representations. This can be avoided in the new system.
The animation feature was very positively ranked.
The experienced users claimed it was very useful for
their analysis. The comparison with other tools used in
financial analysis shows that the animation is an
interesting new feature which cannot be found in the
currently used systems. In the analysis process using
available tools, the users are forced to examine the data
either across time or across entities, but not both at the
same time. This poses major limitations for the analysis
process and makes it cumbersome. The animation offers
the possibility to better interpret market parameter
changes of individual entities over time. The users would
have appreciated the possibility of showing labels also
during animation which was not available during the
tests. The trajectory feature helps analysing the
development of indicators of individual stocks during
time also on static picture. However, some users found
this feature confusing when too many stocks are shown,
as it can be difficult to follow individual trajectories The
record of video output and the possibility of taking
screenshots were seen as useful for later comparative
analyses and for decision making support and
documentation.
The selection feature has proven to be very helpful.
The users especially liked the threshold selection feature
as it helps them easily identify stocks which are “good”
or ”bad” (i.e. low volatility and high return vs. high
volatility and low return) and to observe their behaviour
over a longer period of time. The size threshold helps
them to compare the data performance of small and big
companies. Upon user request we also added the stock
symbol search so that users can easily highlight stocks
which interest them.
Zoom and details on demand are standard tools and
have proven necessary for the users in order to view
more detailed information on the current state of the
market.
In general, the tool adds dynamic data change
presentation and an easy presentation as well as
interpretation of analysis results. It was overall deemed a

useful tool for decision making support and analysis of
market movements.

[4]

6. Discussion and future work

[5]

We have presented a system for the visual analysis
of financial time-dependent data with an extensive
number of entities. We have used a scatter plot
framework to display relationships between two entity
indicators including additional dimensions of the data
encoded by a suitable glyph design. The choice of
scatterplot framework is based on previous user
experience in analysing financial indicators. The system
uses animation of glyphs to handle the time-dimension of
the data which responds to the user task to analyse the
relationship between stock market indicators over time.
Further features of the application include for example
focus and zoom, details on demand, and time period
selection.
The usability of the system has been demonstrated
on stock market data example. The daily data comprised
various financial variables of stocks from several
countries over a period of about 1½ years. User
experience suggests the usability of the system and
especially the value added by the animation feature in the
analysis process. The animation better reflects real
behaviour of the stock market. Further features, as for
example stock symbol and threshold selection, are
deemed very useful because the analysts can then better
focus on the examination of interesting stocks.
In the future, we would like to implement modules
for search in news feeds of stock market developments.
Such news can help to explain market movements
observed by the user in this analysis tool. Furthermore,
semantic information can be used to enhance zoom and
search in the stock market data [13]. It could also answer
the scalability issue by semantic-based display of
aggregated entities (i.e. stock market indices). The
application can be used I n various other business
analysis fields, for example in macro-economic analysis,
consumer behaviour analysis, insurance analysis, or in
industrial or medical applications. The user survey
showed that the calculation and display of the “efficient
frontier” and of sharp ratio would improve analytical
features of the software. These will be implemented in
the near future.

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

R. A. Brealey, B. Razavi and S. Myers. Principles of
Corporate Finance, 7th edition, McGraw Hill, New York,
2002.
C. Buehler, B. Watson and D. Shamma. Visualizing live
text streams using motion and temporal pooling, IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, Volume 25 , Issue
3, pp. 52- 59, May-June 2005.
W. S. Cleveland and B. Kleiner. A Graphical Techique
for Enhancing Scatterplots with Moving Statistics,
Technometrics, Vol. 17, Nr. 4, pp. 447-454, Nov 1975.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[18]

[19]
[20]

W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill. The Many Faces of a
Scatter plot, Journal of the American Statistical
Association, pp. 807-822, Dec. 1984.
P. Craig and J. Kennedy. Coordinated Graph and ScatterPlot Views for the Visual Exploration of Microarray
Time-Series Data, Symposium on Information
Visualization 2003, pp.:173 – 180, 19-21 Oct. 2003
P. Craig. J. Kennedy and A. Cummin. Animated Interval
Scatter-plot Views for the Exploratory Analysis of Large
Scale Microarray Time-course Data, Volume 4, Issue 3,
pp. 149-163, Sept. 2005.
S. S. Fernandes and T. Catarci. Visualization of Linear
Time-Oriented Data: a Survey, Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Web Information Systems
Engineering, Vol. 1, No. 2, p. 310- 319, 2000
Has
the
world
become
a
better
place?
http://www.gapminder.org/index.html
C. Gonzalez. Does Animation in User Interfaces Improve
Decision Making? Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems:
common ground, ACM Press, pp. 27-34, April 1996.
S. A. Hirsch. An algorithm for automatic name
placement around point data. The American
Cartographer, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 5-17, 1982.
Yu Ch. Ho and S. Stockford. Comparison of Spatial and
Temporal-oriented Multi-dimensional Visualization
techniques, Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
American Statistical Association, August 5-9, 2001,
2001,
see
also
http://www.creativewisdom.com/pub/ASA2002a/asa1.htm.
D.E. Huber and C.G. Healey. Visualizing data with
motion Visualization, 2005. Oct. 2005 pp. 527- 534
J. Kohlhammer. Knowledge Representation for
Decision-Centered
Visualization,
GCA-Verlag,
Herdecke, 2005.
A. V. Moere. Time-Varying Data Visualization using
Information Flocking Boids, IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization 2004, pp.97 – 104, 10-12 Oct.
2004
K. Nakakoji, A. Takashhima and Y. Yamamoto.
Cognitive Effects of Animated Visualization in
Exploratory Visual Data Analysis, Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Information
Visualisation, p.77-84, 25-27 July 2001.
North, C., Farooq, U., Akhter, D., DataWear: Revealing
Trends of Dynamic Data in Visualizations, LBHT Proc.
IEEE Symposium on InfoVis 2001, pg. 8-11, (Oct.
2001).
H. Piringer, R. Kosara and H. Hauser. Interactive
Focus+Context Visualization with Linked 2D/3D
Scatterplots, Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Coordinated & Multiple Views in
Exploratory Visualization (CMV 2004), p. 49-60, July
13, 2004,
Zenon W. Pylyshyn and Vidal Annan, Jr. Dynamics of
target selection in Multiple Object Tracking (MOT),
Journal
Spatial Vision, Volume 19, Number 6, pp.
485-504, November, 2006
W. F. Sharpe. Capital asset prices. A theory of market
equilibrium under conditions of risk, Journal of Finance,
Volume 19 Number 3, pp. 425-442, 1964
T. Taskaya and A. Khurshid. Bimodal Visualisation. A
Financial Trading Case Study, Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on Information
Visualization, 2003, pp:320 – 326, 16-18 July 2003.

[21] J. Tobin. Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk,
The Review of Economic Studies, Volume 25, pp. 65-86,
1958.
[22] L. Tremmel. The Visual Scalability of Plotting Symbols
in Scatterplots, Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 101-112, June 1995.
[23] B. Tversky, Julie B. Morrison, M. Betrancourt.
Animation: can it facilitate? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, Volume 57, Issue 4, , Special
issue: Interactive graphical communication Pages: 247 –
262, October 2002
[24] K. Vlachynský Et al. Financial Management, Elita,
Bratislava, 1996.
[25] C. Ware. Information Visualization, Second Edition,
Elsevier, 2004.
[26] Wright W. Business visualization applications, Computer
Graphics and Applications, IEEE, Volume 17, Issue 4,
pp. 66-70, July-Aug. 1997

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

