A Data Forest: Multi-Dimensional Visualization
Ronan Jamieson, Vassil Alexandrov
Advanced Computing and Emerging Technologies Centre,
The School of Systems Engineering, University of Reading,
Reading, RG6 6AY, United Kingdom
r.jamieson@rdg.ac.uk

Abstract
As Terabyte datasets become the norm, the focus has
shifted away from our ability to produce and store ever
larger amounts of data, onto its utilization. It is becoming increasingly difficult to gain meaningful insights into
the data produced. Also many forms of the data we are
currently producing cannot easily fit into traditional visualization methods. This paper presents a new and novel
visualization technique based on the concept of a Data Forest. Our Data Forest has been designed to be used with virtual reality (VR) as its presentation method. VR is a natural medium for investigating large datasets. Our approach
can easily be adapted to be used in a variety of different
ways, from a stand alone single user environment to large
multi-user collaborative environments. A test application
is presented using multi-dimensional data to demonstrate
the concepts involved.
Keywords— Data Forest, Virtual Reality, Multidimensional Data, Immersive Visualization, VieGen.

1

Introduction

The advances in computational power and storage size
coupled with the decreasing costs of these components, has
now changed the focus of visualization research into the
ability to map this data into a form that is usable. Historically the search to efficiently extract and map information
and meaning from data has preoccupied mankind. As humans we mainly rely on our primary sense which is sight,
this, has lead us to experiment with many different forms of
presenting data from hieroglyphics to printed tables. This
reliance is due to the fact that humans have a highly developed visual system, that has evolved over time from the
need to survive (i.e. finding food sources) to being used for
more complex requirements like entertainment (e.g. pattern matching in games like dominos). Humans excel at
pattern recognition and are capable of gaining a better insight and understanding of information from this ability.
Based on this aptitude, we find it possible to make intuitive

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

decisions even if there is incomplete or missing data. Any
method that uses a 3D object approach will be more effective because it represents the way in which humans view
near objects and therefore it is more natural and intuitive.
At present, methods (e.g. Isosurfaces) used to extract
information from variable data sets that do not fit into traditional designs do not necessarily scale well to large multidimensional levels. Therefore a different approach is required that overcomes these limitations and utilises the recent advances in computer and graphics technology. A VR
Data Forest fulfils this requirement. VR is a discipline that
enables users to view large complex data sets in an intuitive
and natural manner. For example it is possible to represent
a particular data value as a 3D object (e.g. the size of a
box can represent a parameter value within a dataset). VR
systems use a wide range of technologies to achieve their
aim of presenting a stereoscopic 3D environment, these
range from powerwalls to Immersive Projection Technology (IPT) systems such as CAVEs[1]. Both these methods
are becoming increasingly popular systems for high-end
visualization and analysis of large multi-parameter data
sets. The feeling of immersion(i.e. present within an environment), coupled with natural forms of interaction are
particularly useful when visualizing large data sets.
VR allows us to create Virtual Environments (VEs) in
which we can render our 3D objects representing our data.
The advantage that these VEs have over traditional approaches is that they allows us to be immersed within the
data. We can use methods to examine the different features
of the data that are more intuitive to us. An example of
this is the ability to track the users head position so that
we can appear to look around object, this is how as humans we are familiar with examining objects of interest,
rather than moving a mouse. In a totally immersive virtual
environment we can use body movement to walk around
objects or put our head inside virtual representation of our
data. Also within an immersive environment it is possible to map the users hand position in the real world to a
virtual hand in the VE, therefore allowing the user to ma-

nipulate virtual objects. VR is currently being utilised by a
wide range of industries to help explore and understand the
information contained within their data sets. These industries range from the car industry (e.g. wind tunnel data) to
construction (e.g. design of heat flows within buildings).
The next section describes the related work in data visualization; section 3 gives a detailed explanation of the concepts involved. Section 4 examines some of the potential
application areas. Then section 5 presents a discussion of
the work and outlines the conclusions. Finally any future
work required is outlined.

2

Related Work

The term visualization is generally split into two distinct categories, scientific visualization which is usually
concerned with data representation and associated algorithms or sensory information such as audio and haptics
(touch). Information visualization is seen to be related to
applying statistical methods to financial, business or marketing data. In simpler terms it is possible to classify scientific visualization methods as 3D(x,y,z) data with the added
element of time, and information visualization methods as
(N)D data based on abstract ideas (e.g. theory of options
on swap agreements).
Researchers using scientific visualization methods have
been developing different approaches to analysing and exploring large multi-dimensional data sets for many years.
These efforts have resulted in a wide range of highly developed tools specific to fulfilling their requirements, for example application like VTK[6], AVS[8] and Open DX[5]
are readily available and commonly used.
Information visualization has relied on traditional methods, namely data mining techniques. These methods are
usually based on statistical techniques, genetic algorithms
and neural network to extract the required data. This data
is usually visualized using 2D graphs, spread sheets, or
quasi-3D structures but using a 2D medium (e.g. desktop monitor or projector). The ability to interact with the
data is an advantage that data mining techniques does not
easily fulfil, also there is a lack of feedback to the user,
in timescales that could be considered useful. Examples
of data mining applications that take advantage of basic visualization techniques are MineSet[7] and Iris Explorer[2],
but they use 2D & quasi-3D structures to represent the data.
Furthermore these methods do not scale well to the large
multi-dimensional data sets. New methods are required
that utilise the advantages of new technology (e.g. VR).

3

A Data Forest

The Data Forest concept is based on the standard visualization approach of having a pipeline. This pipeline
consists of a data source at the start of the pipeline and
rendering 3D objects to a display at the end. Our ap-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

proach is novel because it uses data trees to represent
the data. A simple overview of this approach can be
seen in Figure 1. Another explanation of this concept is
that a Data Forest is a graphical representation of complex data using the concept of data trees, where each tree
represents a set of parameters from the dataset. Each
data tree consists of a trunk and crown; each object represent a chosen set of different parameters of that data
set. From Figure 1 it can be seen that by applying a filter or algorithm to the data source, it is possible to create a series of data structures to store the data. Then using these data structure we generate a forest of data trees
that represent the complex data in an effective manner.
The trees are rendered in a VE enabling the users to take
full advantage of using VR as the presentation method.

Figure 1 - Overview of System
Using VR which supports natural movement and interaction enables users to effectively spot trends, discover relationships or uncover unusual patterns in the data trees in
an efficient way. Dependent on which type of VR system the user has access to, users can then walk and/or
navigate through the forest (see Figure 2). Using flexible data structures that are represented by the data trees
it is possible to allow the user the ability to further examine the underlying data. The forest can either be static or
dynamic, depending on the nature of the data to be visualized. This approach will further increase the flexibility
of the system. A dynamic forest will allow for the use
of time variant information. A data tree has been chosen due to the fact that it is a simple object that people are familiar with. People can relate to making decisions on the size and shape of a tree relative to another.

Figure 2 - moving inside the Data Forest
Using our approach up to eight different parameters can
be visualized by any one data tree. This number can be
achieved by matching the physical properties of the tree
(i.e. trunk and crown) to different parameters within the
data set. The eight different parameters are listed below,

an important feature that allows our approach to be used
by a wider range of hardware platforms. This is further
enhanced by the use of VieGen[3], which helps ensure that
our approach will also be platform independent. VieGen
allows us to use simple confirguration files to specify different VR configurations easily. Using VR we are able
to develop an interactive VE, this gives us the ability to
interact with the data in a more natural manner, especially
if we are using an Immersive VR system. From this interaction it is possible to represent different level/layers of
abstraction of the data, by creating different Data Forests.
“Drilling down” is a common term in mentioned in data
mining techniques, but here we have taken the approach
of “exposing the roots” of the data tree. Users can choose
a particular tree that they are interested in by using their
input device to “touch” the tree, then using a 3D menu (see
Figure 3) choose to further examine the related data.

• position of the tree within the VE
• height of trunk
• width of trunk
• colour of trunk
• transparency value of the trunk
• size of crown
• colour of crown
• transparency value of crown
It is possible to expand the number of parameters even
further by inverting the tree (i.e. crown below the trunk)
or using all axis of the tree position. Therefore we do not
have to have a level forest; the trees could be positioned at
various heights and depths depending if we match a data
parameter to the y or z axis.
A tree was chosen due to the fact that it can be graphically a simple object, as it just consist of two primitive
objects a sphere and cylinder. These two primitive shapes
have been chosen as the default at the moment, but depending on the application it will be possible to use different
objects if they are more relevant to the specific dataset(e.g.
a trunk might have two crowns, therefore a V shaped trunk
might be more effective). Currently using these two primitive objects is desirable due to the fact that they retain
their shape if a low graphical computation is required (i.e.
a tree with a low numbers of polygons will still resemble
a tree object). Therefore when required to render a large
dataset there will be a large numbers of trees, this will
assist in retaining a fast and smooth environment. This is

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 3 - using the 3D Menus
This gives the users an opportunity to examine in a more
detailed fashion the underlying data that is relevant to the
chosen tree (see Figure 4). For example if a user was running the simulation mode and noticed a particular tree of
interest, they can stop the simulation, select the tree and
choose to examine all the underlying data associated with
that tree in a static mode. It is possible to return to the original Data Forest or descend to a lower layer (i.e. assuming
there are further layers below the current layer) by using
the 3D menu approach.

3D menu (see Figure 3). A new forest is then rendered
based on any related underlying data associated to that tree
(see Figure 4). Once the user is finished with this requirement, they can return to the previous forest.
3.1.4

Figure 4 - underlying data
A data filter can be applied to the input data to check
the validity of the data; this filter would be in the form of
a reference table. Once the data has been verified a data
structure for each tree is created containing all the data that
is relevant to that tree (e.g. trunk size, object name, etc).

3.1

Features of the system

A design aim has been to create a modular framework
that will easy allow specific functionality to be added, depending on the data type that will be analysed. The current
functionality is discussed below
3.1.1

Simulation Mode :

It is possible to change the forest from a static mode to a
dynamic or simulation mode (e.g. steps through the time
dependant data) if required. In simulation mode the forest is changed every set time period to reflect the new time
variant data (e.g. the data trees are updated with new values based on the time step). It is also possible to pause/stop
the simulation at any time; also there is a step forward/back
one time period function. This can be useful when the user
discovers an interesting feature in the forest.
3.1.2

Scaling Objects :

The user had the ability to change the scale of the forest,
this allows for different methods of analysis. Scaling down
gives the users an improved overview of the complete forest while scaling up allows for more natural interaction and
exploration of the data (i.e. the trees could be made life
size) by moving around the data trees freely.
3.1.3

Exploring Underlying Data :

If the user has decided to examine a particular data tree in
more detail (i.e. exposing the roots of the tree), all that is
required is that the user selects the desired tree with their
input device and then selects the examine function on the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Predict Tree :

While in the examine mode it is possible to carry out further analysis, with algorithms such as the predict tree function. This particular algorithm has been developed for
our test application. This calculates an average crown and
trunk value for this particular forest and then creates a tree
based on these values. This is then added to the forest. Currently this is a very simple mathematical approach, but this
could easily become a more complex prediction algorithm.
This feature has the potential to become a very powerful
tool.
3.1.5

Collaborative Session :

It is possible to create collaborative sessions by networking
VEs together. This feature is based on using the structure
proposed in Collaborative Virtual Visualization (CVV)[4];
this also allows us to retain our hardware and platform Independence. When using the CVV approach we will represent our remote users as avatars, communicate with them
via audio and video links. The avatars will be mapped to
the remote user’s position and orientation, so we will be capable of determining gestures (e.g. pointing to a particular
tree) and location within the Data Forest. User decisions in
each environment (i.e. remote and local) will be reflected
in the connected environment by the use of event messages.
Event messages that allow the environments to be updated
to reflect the user’s activities will be passed over the network(e.g. when a user chooses a tree to examine further).
An event message will be passed to the other remote user’s
application with all the relevant information to inform the
application that a change has occurred. The application
will update the remote users VE to reflect this decision.

4

Potential Applications

There are potentially numerous areas that would benefit
from using our approach. The following areas are a selection of these, chosen due to their diversity of data, and in
which work is currently taking place.

4.1

Stock Market Data

The daily movement of the stock market, with its wide
range of different parameters produces a vast amount of
time dependant data. Also the relationships between some
of the parameters are abstract in nature (e.g. is the volume
of trades reflected in the percentage yield ?). The ability to
analyse this movement correctly and predict future changes
has the potential to generate a considerable amount of

money. Therefore this data is subject to many different traditional visualization techniques (e.g. 2D graphs, spreadsheets). Our approach is more suited to what would be
considered off-line (i.e. non real-time) studies, but with
some of the improvements mentioned in section 6 (future
work) it could then have the potential to move to real time
use.
A test application was develop to visualize this type
of data. This example was chosen to generate the forest,
due to the different number of parameters that would be
found in the data set. An example of some of the potential
parameters are share price, volume of trades, whether the
share provides a dividend and how much, the percentage
yield, the capital appreciation of the company, total number of shares in company, etc. Some of these parameters
are highly dynamic (e.g. share price, volume of trades), but
others are of a static nature for a long period of time (e.g.
total number of share, amount of dividend). Therefore it
is possible to match the movement of share prices with the
changing shape/growth of the forest. An example of this
can be seen in Figure 5.

Figure 5 - Overview Mode of Complete Dataset
The main methods of interaction with the Data Forest environment is through the use of 3D menus and an input
device (e.g. a wand in an immersive environment). The
use of 3D menus allows the user to easily interact with the
data and environment. Currently the menus contain the
functionality mentioned in section 3.1.

4.2

Network Data

Computer networks are under constant monitoring and
analysis to ensure the efficient and effective transfer of data
over the network. The data produced requires a method
of visualization that will allow for time dependant analysis with a large complex number of parameters. It can be
hard to get an overview on the whole system, but by using
different layers of data abstraction we can simplify the process. Our approach would be by changing the axis of the
Data Forest from vertical to horizontal we can use the for-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

est to represent a computer network, or by using different
primitives to represent the trunk and crown. The different
parameters that could create a data tree are different network bandwidths, number of servers on the system, number of users connected to a server, load on server, amount
of memory available and consumed at any one time by a
server, etc. This could be visualized in real time as discussed in the previous section or used for historical analysis. Another area of use can be as a forensic tool to simulate network conditions at the time of failure, so the user
could navigate around the forest and examine all the factors that could have contributed to the problem. Companies are always interested in maximising their network usage; therefore they must visualize their current structure
and data flows. As our design is modular similar functionality used in the stock market application could be reused
here via the 3D menus.

4.3

Marketing Data

Retail companies collect and store vast amounts of data,
based on consumer’s behaviour through their shopping
habits and preferences on a daily basis. Also advances in
the methods of gathering this data, such as the use of radio
frequency ID (RFID) tags on products has only increased
the availability and complexity of this data. Marketing departments within these companies are therefore faced with
data that is extremely large and multi-variable. Analysing
this collected data is extremely important to them, but it is
complicated by the fact that the data can have a very short
life span. This is due to the short time to market of products and the pace of changing customer demands. Therefore any insights into the shopping behaviour of customers
are vital. An example of this could be point of sale data;
it would produce parameters that would be in the form of
frequency of product purchase, cost of product purchase,
number of associated product purchases, profit margin on
product purchase, purchased from and many more. This
data is not as time dependant as the other examples but
analysing the purchasing decision of customers using traditional methods is complex and not intuitive. Therefore
this is another area that could use a Data Forest, with similar features developed in the test application.

5

Discussion and Conclusions

This paper has presented the concept of a Data Forest,
which we feel is a potentially new and novel approach that
utilises VR to visualize data that does currently not easily
fit traditional approaches. As this approach is new and still
undergoing development there still are issues that need addressing, but we feel that our approach will contribute to
this field. The advantages of using VR in terms of creating 3D objects, natural forms of interaction, especially in
immersive systems are superior to the traditional desktop
systems, which rely on 2D and quasi 3D objects and mouse

driven interaction. A data tree is a simple but very powerful
way of representing data, it is an object that people are familiar with and are used to examining. Traditional systems
rely on boxes, points, arrows and graphs to try and interpet the data. With all systems there is always a trade-off
between performance and complexity of the environment,
but as data trees are simple objects in terms of rendering,
this should reduce this trade-off. In using a data tree we
have managed to create an object that will allow us to map
at least eight different parameters of a dataset to that object,
but still remain a coherent object. Issues that still need further investigation are, increase the number of users to fully
test the system, find the limit to the size of the forest that
can be created and used effectively, determining the best
method of matching the parameters from the dataset to the
physical characteristics of the data tree. The latter being
vital so that the meaningful relationships between the data
can be extracted.
The visualization results achieved so far are based on
using share data and marketing information, also we have
access to networking data which is yet to be tested. These
visualizations developed have utilised complex data and
have been demonstrated to an interested party who is currently evaluating the system for their own purposes. A collaborative session is in the process of being tested using
the collaborative structure proposed by CVV. Our modular
approach is flexible and allows for the reuse of different
function within different contexts, by just changing modules, different types of data sets can be used to create our
Data Forests.

6

Future Work

Future work under investigation includes incorporating
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds directly into the
environment in the form of a scrolling text bar. The ability to extract data from this RSS feed directly and utilise it
in updating the relevant data trees accordingly will also be

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

investigated. This will allow for the potential of real-time
information to update our VE. Further work will include
giving the user the ability to use filter conditions to specify
areas of interest, which will enable greater ease in searching the forest for particular trees (e.g. in the test application
the user might like to group the trees according to their relevant sectors).

References
[1] C.Cruz-Neria et al, “The CAVE: audio visual experience automatic environment”, Communication of the
ACM, 1992, p64-72, Vol.35, No.6.
[2] D. Foulser, “Iris Explorer - a framework for investigation”, Computer Graphics, 1995, 29(2):13-16
[3] A.Haffegee, “Creation and Control of Interactive
Virtual Environments”, International Conference on
Computational Science, 2006, Reading, May.
[4] R. Jamieson et al, “Collaborative Virtual Visulaization”, First Austian Grid Symposium, Austira, 2005
[5] B. Lucas et al, “An architecture for a scientific visualization system”, Proceddings of Visualization ’92,
1992, p107-114
[6] W.J. Schroeder et al. “The design and implementation
of an object-oriented toolkit for 3d graphics and visualization.” Proc. of Visualization,ACM, 1996, p93100.
[7] SGI Inc, “MineSet: a system for high-end data
mining and visualization”, Int.Conf. On Very Large
Databases (VLDB’96), Bombay, India, 1996, p595
[8] C. Upson et al. “The Application Visualization System: a computational environment for scientific visualization”, Computer Graphics and Applications,
1989, 9(4):30-42

