Games and Traffic Safety – an Experimental Study in a Game-Based Simulation
Environment
Per Backlund, Henrik Engstr¨om, Mikael Johannesson, Mikael Lebram
University of Sk¨ovde
per.backlund@his.se, henrik.engstrom@his.se, mikael.johannesson@his.se, mikael.lebram@his.se

Abstract
In this paper we report results from an experimental
study of games and traffic safety performed in an advanced
gaming environment. During car simulator-sessions we
collected data over different traffic safety variables, such
as speed, headway distance and lane change behavior, from
70 subjects.
The data was analyzed in order to investigate possible
individual learning effects and differences between groupings of subjects. The experiment shows clear positive individual learning effects for all traffic safety variables analyzed. Hence we conclude that game based simulations can
be used to enhance learning in driving education.

1. Introduction
Serious games usually refer to games used for training,
advertising, simulation, or education that are designed to
run on personal computers or video game consoles. In this
paper we report results from an experiment in an advanced
gaming environment with some similarities to a mid range
driving simulator. Our focus is to develop game content in
order to achieve serious game abilities while keeping the
game look and feel. We want to emphasize the element
of engagement in games. As recognized by many authors,
serious games is not merely the application of games and
game technology for non-entertainment purposes, in domains such as education, health, etc. In our view, games
should be engaging and motivating, which is advantageous
for the development of a variety of skills and abilities. We
acknowledge that some applications of three-dimensional
visualization and simulation in car driving education, e.g.
RoadQuiz [20], and Bonniers Trafikskola [8] exist. However, none of these applications can be characterized as
highly interactive. Blackman [3] describes the 3D DrivingSchool [2] as being more gamelike. We consider this
program primarily an educational tool. Educational games
form one important genre within serious games. In order to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

be successful the learning objective should be incorporated
in the game design, i.e. the game design should enhance
learning.
Kostyniuk et al. [9] distinguish between knowledge
change, attitude change, and behavior change in driver education. As instructional targets are getting more complex
and require interaction with the environment the strategies
used needs to be more closely matched to the situation for
which the student is trained. Since simulators form a class
of systems that closely resemble games in terms of creating
a virtual duplicate for training [19] we hypothesize that an
advanced gaming environment is particularly useful in these
aspects.
In this paper we present an experiment where we compare two types of simulator sessions, one which has a game
task and one which has not. The experiment is designed to
evaluate the learning effect of the simulation by comparing
the two versions. More specifically, we focus our attention
on traffic safety variables collected from the simulator sessions.
The paper is organized as follows: we first give a brief
account for serious games and some relevant traffic safety
variables identified in traffic safety research. In Section 3
we present the experiment setup. Section 4 presents the results with respect to the subjects’ overall behavior and the
identified learning effects. The paper is closed by some concluding remarks.

2. Background
In this section we give a brief account for our view on
the concept of serious games and serious gaming, i.e. the
activity of using games for purposes other than entertainment. We also summarize relevant traffic safety research
from which we have been inspired in our experiment design.

2.1. Serious games
Today, the term serious games is becoming more and
more popular, see e.g. [17] and [12]. The term itself is
established, but there is no current singleton definition of
the concept. Zyda [21, p. 26] defines a serious game as:
“a mental contest, played with a computer in accordance
with specific rules, that uses entertainment to further government or corporate training, education, health, public policy, and strategic communication objectives.” Furthermore,
Zyda [21] argues that serious games have more than just
story, art, and software. It is the addition of pedagogy (activities that educate or instruct, thereby imparting knowledge or skill) that makes games serious. However, he also
stresses that pedagogy must be subordinate to story and that
the entertainment component comes first. In our work we
define serious games as games that engage the user, and
contribute to the achievement of a defined purpose other
than pure entertainment (whether or not the user is consciously aware of it). A game’s purpose may be formulated
by the game’s designer or by the user her/himself, which
means that also a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) game,
used for non-entertainment purposes, may be considered a
serious game.
Serious games can be applied to a broad spectrum of
application areas, e.g. military, government, educational,
corporate, and healthcare. A question of interest concerns
the claimed positive effects of such games, or of applications from related and sometimes overlapping areas such
as e-learning, edutainment, game-based learning, and digital game-based learning. In addition to obvious advantages,
like allowing learners to experience situations that are impossible in the real world for reasons of safety, cost, time,
etc. [6, 18], serious games, it is argued, can have positive
impacts on the players’ development of certain skills. We
also note that some of these positive effects of gaming are
not necessarily associated with any specific training or information objectives. As discussed by Mitchell and SavillSmith [14] analytical and spatial skills, strategic skills and
insight, learning and recollection capabilities, psychomotor skills, visual selective attention, etc. may be enhanced
by playing computer games. Other reports [10] have also
pointed out the positive effects on motor and spatial skills.
More specific positive impacts have been reported, e.g., by
Enochsson et al. [7], who found a positive correlation between experience in computer games and performance in
endoscopic simulation by medical students. The better performance of gamers is attributed to their three-dimensional
perception experience from computer gaming. Backlund et
al. [1] investigate the correlation between; playing racing,
action, sports computer games and driving behavior. A survey conducted at three driving schools, questioned driving
students about their gaming habits. The driving instructors

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

evaluated their students’ driving skills and traffic safety attitudes. The results indicate that experience in computer
games can have a positive effect on some aspects of driving.
Experienced gamers were ranked significantly higher by
their instructors regarding their overall driving skills compared to students with low experience in computer games.
However, no evidence was found to indicate that experienced gamers have a worse attitude towards fellow roadusers or traffic safety.
The positive effects of games may hence be further utilized if we can identify the correct content and accurately
exploit the user’s experience as a driving force for developing serious games. Swartout and van Lent [19] identify
the areas of experience-based systems and experience-based
education as potentially benefiting from such a game-based
approach. The general idea is to influence users by exposing them to some type of experience. Even though gaming
is not a replacement for simulation it may well serve as a
complement in some regards [16]. In this sense we find the
intersection between gaming and simulation to be an interesting one.

2.2. Traffic safety variables
Traffic safety research utilizes a number of different variables to analyze driving behavior in instrumented cars [15].
There are various areas of use for these measurements such
as evaluation of drivers’ training and driver performance under certain circumstances as well as differences between
categories of drivers. Nyberg et al. [15] identify a set of
variables which have been used in traffic safety research.
The variables of interest in our research are:
Speed is the single most commonly used variable. It is
clear that the number of accidents increases with speed and
speed is also associated with risky driving behavior. The
speed variable is used in different ways but the most common way is to calculate average speed. Brackstone et al.
[5] utilize relative and absolute speed when analyzing lane
changes on motorways.
Use of turn-signal (and operating other controls such as
steering wheel, gas and brake) is also a rather frequent measure. Typically, studies concentrate on one or two controls.
For example, when analyzing the use of turn signals Boyce
and Geller [4] used the sequential actions of giving signal
and committing to make a turn. Notably, Boyce and Geller
[4] did not analyze the use of rearview mirrors in conjunction with lane changes.
Distance to other traffic is typically measured using
some sort of time interval. There are various ways of measure such as following distance [4], time headway [13] and
time to collision [5]. Boyce and Geller [4] use a measure
defined as the distance to a car in the same lane not more
than 5 seconds ahead when driving at a speed of at least 20

mph. McLaughlin and Serafin [13] defines headway time
as time gaps less than 0.5 seconds, 0.5 seconds – 1 second,
1 second – 1.5 seconds, 1.5 seconds – 3 seconds and more
than 3 seconds. The amount of time spent within time gaps
of less than 1 second is considered dangerous headway distance.
Look in rearview mirrors, displays and to the left/right
has been measured by means of analyzing video sequences
as well as direct observations. These measures are used
to investigate drivers’ attention to traffic behind them by
means of the number of glances in the rearview mirror.
Such measures are motivated by the fact that insufficient
attention is a major cause of accidents [15]. Nyberg et
al. [15] describe the following situations: total number
of glances, the probability of looking in the mirror before
making a left hand turn, adjusting the direction of view to
relevant maneuvers, looking to the right when approaching
roundabouts, looking to the left when overtaking another
vehicle and looking in the mirror (or turning the head) to
assure that another vehicle has been passed before reassuming original lane position.
Lateral lane position is typically described in terms of
relative position since lane width differs. The motivation
for this type of measurements is the fact that a vehicle’s
position in relation to nearby traffic has an impact on traffic
safety.
Lane change may be described in terms of
planned/unplanned changes. An unplanned lane change is
an indication of inattention. Brackstone et al. [5] analyze
the tendency to change lanes on a motorway with respect
to time gaps in adjacent lanes, the speed of the car in front
and the behavior of the driver in the car behind.

Figure 1. The gaming environment used in
the ongoing experiments – overview

ing COTS games we have also developed an infrastructure
based on an open source game engine. This allows for custom made simulation application and games. The simulation used in the experiment has been developed in-house.

3. Methods
The experiment was carried out in an advanced gaming
environment (see Figure 1 and Figure 2) which utilizes a
real car as a game control surrounded by seven screens.
Each screen shows the output from a LCD-projector controlled by a standard game PC. The seven PCs act as clients
in the system, and yet another PC acts as a server. Hence,
the system is composed by eight computers which are all
standard game PCs. The simulator has a 220 by 30 degrees
forward and 60 by 30 degrees rear field-of-view. The use of
consumer electronics, standard game technology and limited motion feedback makes this simulator relatively inexpensive.
By using of-the-shelf hardware components it is possible
to utilize game software and technology. To utilize all seven
screens the software has to support multiple clients with adjustable camera positioning. The extensions required are
rather small and several commercial games have successfully adjusted to use multiple screens. In addition to us-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The generation of physical feedback in a driving simulator may be extremely complex. In this case the simulator
adopts a fixed-based approach which means that no g-forces
are generated. The illusion of movement is generated by the
use of sound, vibrations and the car’s fan. The fan is controlled by the simulation and the force of the fan is linear to
the speed of the car. The sound is generated in the internal
surround system of the car. In addition, a “ButtKicker” is
used to generate vibrations in the body of the car which are
propagated to the whole car including the steering wheel.
One important property for the wheels is to strive to return
to their original position. In this simulator this has been
achieved by placing each front wheel on an axial ball bearing. Due to the steering axis inclination the wheels will
strive to return to a parallel position. In addition, the movements of the front wheels give a notable movement of the
car that can be considered to be a form of passive physical
feedback. The gaming environment is described in more
detail by Lebram et al. [11].

experience). 21 (30%) subjects had a low experience with
computer games (a rating of 1 or 2) and will here be referred
to as “non-gamers”. 32 (46%) subject had a high experience
with computer games (a rating of 4 or 5), and will here be
referred to as “gamers”.
During the whole experiment, a vast amount of parameters like speed, position, use of break and use of turnsignals, were sampled every 1/10:th of a second for all vehicles. In addition, the use of rearview mirrors was manually
added by analyzing video films of the subjects’ faces during
driving.

4. Results

Figure 2. The gaming environment used in
the ongoing experiments – example

3.1. Experiment setup
The experiment was carried out during two periods of
time. During the first period 24 driving school students were
tested and during the second period 46 university students
were tested. The driving school students received reimbursement for traveling and the university students received
a cinema ticket for their participation. Of the total 70 subjects, 29 (41%) were female and 41 (59%) were male.
Subjects were divided in two groups. One group played
a version with a game task in which they were to follow
an ambulance without losing it from sight. After each level
the subjects received automated feedback and grades concerning their performance. In case of failure the level was
restarted. The other group was exposed to a non-game version which was stripped of the game task and explicit feedback. Other than that the conditions were the same.
All subjects were first given instructions on how to operate the vehicle. They then performed a first reference test in
which they were to change lanes seven times on command
as they were driving a certain distance. The subjects playing the game version were then given a background story
and the instruction to play a game with an infinite number
of levels. The other group got the instruction to drive a number of road sections. All subjects were informed that they
could drive for as long as they wanted and that they could
stop whenever they so decided. The maximum time limit
of 30 minutes was unknown to the subjects. After this, the
main driving session, all subjects performed a second reference test comparable to the first and answered a questionnaire with basic and gaming-related questions. Of relevance
for this paper is that subjects rated their previous experience
with computer games from 1 to 5 (were 1 meant very low

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In the following analyses traffic safety variables in line
with the ones described in section 2.2 were used as dependent variables, whereas version of main driving session, reference test, category of gaming experience, and sex were
used as independent variables. The specific definitions of
the traffic safety variables are:
Speed violation: the average number of seconds per kilometer a subject spent driving 10 or more km/h above the
speed limit.
Short headway distance: the average number of seconds
per kilometer a subject spent within a distance of 0 – 3 seconds behind a vehicle.
Rearview mirrors use – general: the average number of
times per kilometer a subject looked in a rearview mirror.
Number of lane changes: the average number of lane
changes per kilometer a subject performed.
Lane change and rearview mirror: the proportion of lane
changes preceded by the subject looking in a rearview mirror.
Lane change and use of turn-signal: the proportion of
lane changes preceded by the subject using the turn-signal.
Lane change – both rearview mirror and signal: the proportion of lane changes preceded by the subject both looking in the rearview mirror and using the turn-signal.

4.1. Traffic safety variables during the main driving session
During the main driving session we collected data concerning traffic safety variables (summarized in Table 1).
Speed. We observed no difference between the two versions (game vs. non-game). Interestingly, we nor found any
difference in speeding between gamers and non-gamers.
However, we found a statistically significant difference between sexes in that the male subjects spent relatively more
time driving 10 or more km/h too fast.
Distance to other traffic. Regarding distance to other
traffic we found that those playing the game version spent
relatively more time within a distance of 3 seconds behind

Table 1. Traffic safety variables during the main driving session
Speed
violation

Short
headway
distance

Rearview
mirror use
- general

Number
of
lane
changes

Lane change
and rearview
mirror

Lane change
and use of
turn-signal

Lane change both
rearview
mirror and signal

Game version

47.2

180

50.8

29.4

.681

.671

.516

Nongame version

44.3

117

44.8

23.8

.688

.667

.546

P (t-test)

.308

.000

.084

.001

.448

.462

.292

Gamers

50.2

145

48.5

27.7

.658

.676

.517

Nongamers

44.0

155

39.9

24.8

.648

.671

.511

P (t-test)

.201

.210

.027

.089

.433

.465

.465

Male

51.6

149

51.6

27.4

.703

.680

.546

Female

37.6

150

42.5

25.6

.658

.655

.508

P (t-test)

.008

.480

.018

.159

.207

.296

.250

All subjects

45.8

149

47.8

26.7

.684

.700

.530

Short headway distance

Rearview mirror use general

Lane change and rearview mirror

Lane change and use of
turn-signal

Lane change - both rearview mirror and signal

Table 2. Traffic safety variables in R1 and R2
– general

Speed violation

other vehicles. No corresponding differences were found
for gamers vs. non-gamers or between sexes.
Use of rearview mirrors in general. Those playing the
game-version tended to use the rearview mirrors more, although not statistically significant, than those playing the
non-game version. Gamers used the rearview mirrors significantly more compared to non-gamers and so did male
subjects compared to female subjects.
Lane change behavior. Subjects in the game version
performed significantly more lane changes per kilometer
than subjects in the non-game version. Gamers tended (although not significant) to change lane more often than nongamers. No difference was observed between sexes. No differences regarding the use of turn-signals or rearview mirror before changing lanes could be observed for any of the
groupings.

All (R1)

86.7

34.8

33.0

.722

.727

.622

All (R2)

50.6

15.0

42.2

.868

.904

.790

P (t-test)

.000

.000

.000

.000

.000

.001

4.2. Changes during the experiment
The data collected during the two reference tests were
compared in order to identify possible changes of traffic behavior from before to after the main driving session. The
results are summarized in Table 2 and Table 3. Table 2
presents the average values for reference test 1 (R1) and reference test 2 (R2), respectively. Table 3, however, presents
the average differences (defined as a subject’s value of the
specific traffic variable in R2 – the corresponding value in
R1).
Speed. Overall, subjects spent less relative time driving
10 or more km/h above the speed limit in Reference test
2 (R2) compared to Reference test 1 (R1). No differences

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

could be found between the different groupings analyzed.
Distance to other traffic. Subjects, overall, spent less
relative time within a distance of up to 3 seconds behind the
nearest vehicle in R2 compared to in R1. No clear corresponding differences could be found between the different
groupings even though there was a slight (non-significant)
tendency that male subjects decreased the time spent close
behind other vehicles from R1 to R2 more than femalesubjects.
Use of rearview mirror in general. Generally, subjects
looked relatively more often in the rearview mirrors in R2
than R1. This pattern was also significant when comparing

Table 3. Differences in traffic safety variables between R2 and R1 for different groupings
Speed
violation

Short
headway
distance

Rearview
mirror use
–general

Lane change
and rearview
mirror

Lane change
and use of
turn-signal

Lane change – both
rearview mirror and
signal

Game version

-34.9

-18.4

12.6

.886

.224

.794

Nongame version

-37.4

-21.2

5.47

.848

.126

.787

P (t-test)

.448

.373

.086

.280

.126

.463

Gamers

-45.1

-16.7

8.40

.189

.212

.248

Nongamers

-34.9

-19.3

4.45

.038

.202

.078

P (t-test)

.340

.410

.184

.036

.461

.074

Male

-43.2

-24.3

13.1

.234

.194

.292

Female

-26.1

-13.4

3.46

.019

.152

-.009

P (t-test)

.186

.110

.033

.002

.312

.001

males and females in this data set: the increase in number of
looks in a rearview mirror was larger for males. Participants
in the game version had a larger, but not significant, increase
than participants playing the non-game version.
Lane change behavior. Since subjects changed lane on
command in both R1 and R2, an analysis of the number of
lane changes/km was considered to be obsolete. Analysis
of the use of rearview mirrors as well as of turn-signals in
combination with lane-change were still relevant. Overall,
the proportions of lane-changes preceded by use of rearview
mirror and use of turn-signal, respectively, were both larger
for R2 than R1 – and so was also the proportion of “correct” lane-changes (i.e. when both rearview mirrors and
turn-signals were used). Significant changes in the use of
the rearview mirror before changing lane were fond also
between gamers and non-gamers (to the gamers advantage)
and male and female subjects. The only significant change
when using both mirror and signal was found for males vs.
females.

5. Conclusions
We have described how a game based simulation can be
used to enhance some aspects of learning in a traffic safety
context. The clear positive individual learning effects for all
traffic safety variables analyzed show that game based simulations can be used to enhance some aspects of learning in
driving education. We note that learning effects took place
with respect to simple (e.g. speed) as well as more complex
tasks (e.g. lane change in combination with rearview mirror
use). Hence the learning effects are not about learning how
to operate the simulator but rather about the specific traffic

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

safety behavior [9].
The comparison between the two versions shows that the
use of rearview mirrors was higher in the group playing the
game version. We attribute this to the fact that the behavior
of the fellow road users encourages such game tactics.
With respect to speed and headway distance we think
that both behaviors can be further influenced by tuning the
game element. For example, the game design made it hard
to drive below speed limits while fulfilling the game task.
In all, our results indicate that the game design can be used
to enhance learning objectives; a result which is of great
interest to the serious games community.
When looking at the differences between gamers and
non-gamers (as defined by the subjects’ own rating of their
experience) we do not find any indications of more aggressive traffic behavior for gamers. On the contrary, gamers
used rearview mirrors more frequently which may be interpreted as positive from a traffic safety perspective. Furthermore, gamers became relatively better at using the rearview
mirrors before changing lanes, i.e. they showed better behavior in a more complex task.
Concerning the gender effect our results show a higher
proportion of speeding among male subjects. This is in accordance with what is reported in current traffic safety research. We also found that male drivers looked more frequently in the rearview mirrors and that they showed a relatively better development of lane change behavior.
Future work includes further development of the pedagogical use of game based simulations with a specific emphasis on using logging functions for debriefing. Game
technology offers great potential in this area since built in
functions such as in-game cameras can be complemented
by specifically designed tools. In line with this we have

developed a tool to allow for explorative analyses of driver
behavior in the game. Primarily this allows for mining of interesting effects of the game, but we are currently exploring
the potential of using the tool as a pedagogical instrument
for drivers’ education. We also note that incorporating the
pedagogical goals in the game design and tuning the game
element so that the desired effect is achieved pose interesting challenges for developers of serious games.

[8]

[9]

[10]

Acknowledgements
Authors in alphabetical order.
This work has been sponsored by L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar
Forskning och Framtid, Sk¨ovde Kommun, Tillv¨axt
Skaraborg and Volvo Cars. Experiments have been carried
out in cooperation with Skaraborgs Trafikskolef¨orening.
Erik Pettersson assisted in carrying out the experiments.

[11]

[12]
[13]

References
[14]
[1] P. Backlund, H. Engstr¨om, and M. Johannesson. Computer
gaming and driving education. In Proceedings of the workshop Pedagogical Design of Educational Games affiliated to
the 14th International Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE 2006), Beijing, China, December 2006.
[2] Besier 3D-Edutainment. 3d driving-school. http://www.3dfahrschule.de/uk index.htm (retrieved 2007-03-15).
[3] S. Blackman. Serious games...and less! SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics, 39(1):12–16, 2005.
[4] T. E. Boyce and E. S. Geller. An instrumented vehicle assessment of problem behavior and driving style: Do younger
males really take more risks? Accident Analysis and Prevention, 34(1):51–64, 2002.
[5] M. Brackstone, M. McDonald, and J. Wu. Lane changing on
the motorway: factors affecting its occurrence, and their implications. In 9th International Conference on Road Transport Information and Control, pages 160–164. IEEE, 1998.
[6] K. Corti. Games-based learning; a serious business application. PIXELearning.com White paper, 2006.
[7] L. Enochsson, B. Isaksson, R. Tour, A. Kjellin, L. Hedman,
T. Wredmark, and L. Tsai-Fellander. Visuospatial skills
and computer game experience influence the performance

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]

of virtual endoscopy. Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
8(7):874–880, 2004.
K.
E.
Media.
Bonniers
trafikskola.
http://www.bonnierstrafikskola.se (retrieved 2007-0315).
L. P. Kostyniuk, F. M. Streff, and J. Zakrajsek. Unsafe driver
actions that lead to fatal car-truck crashes. Report Prepared
for AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety. University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, 2002.
A. Lager and S. Bremberg. H¨alsoeffekter av tv- och datorspelande. en systematisk genomg˚ang av vetenskapliga
studier. Swedish National Institute of Public Health. (In
Swedish).
M. Lebram, H. Engstr¨om, and H. Gustavsson. A driving
simulator based on video game technology. In Proceedings
of SIGRAD 2006, November 2006.
P. LoPiccolo. Serious games. Computer Graphics World,
27(2), 2004.
S. McLaughlin and C. Serafin. On-road investigation of
driver following and deceleration on surface streets. In Proceedings of the IEA 2000/HFES 2000 Congress, 3-294-3297, 2000.
A. Mitchell and C. Savill-Smith. The use of computer and
video games for learning: A review of the literature. Learning and Skills Development Agency, 2003.
A. Nyberg, P. Henriksson, S. Nol´en, and I. Engstr¨om.
K¨orbeteenden som m¨ats med instrumenterade bilar i verklig
trafik. (In Swedish, Driver behavior measurements in instrumented cars in real traffic). VTI notat 53-2002, Swedish
Road and Transport Research Institute (VTI), Link¨oping,
Sweden, 2002.
B. Sawyer. The serious games summit: emergent use of interactive games for solving problems is serious effort. Computers in Entertainment, 2(1):5, 2004.
Serious Games Initiative. http://www.seriousgames.org (retrieved 2007-03-15), 2007.
K. Squire and H. Jenkins. Harnessing the power of games in
education. Insight, 3(1):5–33, 2003.
W. Swartout and M. van Lent. Making a game of system
design. Commun. ACM, 46(7):32–39, 2003.
traffic 3D AB. Roadquiz. http://www.roadquiz.com (retrieved 2007-03-15).
M. Zyda. From visual simulation to virtual reality to games.
Computer, 38(9):25–32, 2005.

