PRISMA – A Multidimensional Information Visualization Tool
Using Multiple Coordinated Views
1

1

Paulo Igor A.Godinho,1Bianchi Serique Meiguins, 2Aruanda Simões Gonçalves Meiguins,
Ricardo M. Casseb do Carmo, 2Marcelo de Brito Garcia, 3Leandro Hernandez Almeida, 2Rodrigo
Lourenço
1
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciência da Computação – Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA)
2
Área de Ciências e Tecnologia – Centro Universitário do Pará (CESUPA)
3
Bacharelado em Sistemas de Informação – Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA)
Belém-Pará-Brasil
{piagodinho@gmail.com, bianchi.serique@terra.com.br, aruanda, ricardo, marcelo, leandro,
rodrigo@redeinformatica}
Abstract

Information Visualization techniques have been
successfully used to build visual and interactive analysis
of data and data relationships. However, dimensionality,
volume and diversity make it difficult for a single
technique to completely solve the problem. Information
visualization tools that support multiple coordinated
views allow the user to better understand the dataset by
providing different perspectives based on the same set of
data items. These tools support the correlation between
data views and the coordinated real-time interaction
mechanisms. The goal of this paper is to present the
PRISMA information visualization tool that explores the
use of multiple coordinated views. PRISMA provides
usability, portability and extensibility. Initial usability
essays are discussed.
Keywords--- Information Visualization, Multiple
Coordinated Views, Visualization Tools, Treemap,
Parallel Coordinates, Scatterplot.

1. Introduction
A visual and interactive representation of data is
useful when the goal is to explore and analyze data.
However, current information visualization tools are
presented
with the challenge of increasing
dimensionality and volume. Usually, the user expects to
find a single visualization technique that is able to
support every exploration and analysis requisite. In many
cases, this is such a difficult task that an alternative path
is to use a number of views to improve user perception.
One approach for the use of multiple views in
information visualization is the multiple coordinated
views tools. Coordination determines that when the user

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

interacts with one of the views, every other view must be
updated. Whenever a user interaction takes place, the
tool should process it in a coordinated manner in order to
keep the views coherent. The coordination minimizes the
additional cognitive effort intrinsic to multiple views
environments. The data interaction mechanisms have a
crucial role in this process. These characteristics allow
the user to explore a complex set of data items by
presenting different aspects of the same data and
improving or facilitating perception, interpretation,
correlation and exploration.
This paper presents PRISMA, an information
visualization tool based on multiple coordinated views to
explore multidimensional datasets using the following
techniques: treemap, scatterplot and parallel coordinates.
PRISMA is extensible, portable and easy to maintain
since it has been developed in Java using design patterns.
The graphic interface is automatically customized to data
types and the range of data values in each dataset. The
filter components are optimized for the user tasks using
the same principle. Coordination is supported in filter,
color, shape and size settings, as well as in the detailson-demand component. Many data sources are
supported, such as relational databases, XML files and
pre-formatted text files. Pie, bar and line graphics and
automatically-generated
reports
are
additional
coordinated components. The use of multiple
coordinated views is a current challenge for information
visualization tools, particularly in regard to the
development of coordination, interaction and layout
organization mechanisms.

2. Information Visualization
The Information Visualization research area studies
the transformation of abstract data into images easily

visualized and understood by the human beings [1].
Information Visualization tools are computer-based tools
that support interaction and data presentation
mechanisms. The tools should allow the user to easily
and efficiently manipulate and visually rearrange
multidimensional data in order to support data analysis.
The goal of information visualization tools is to improve
data perception, correlation and exploration [2].
The characteristics of a good information
visualization tool are defined according to the following
user tasks [3].
• Overview of the entire dataset.
• Zoom: focus on a certain data subset.
• Filter: reduction of the dataset according to
specified attribute values.
• Details on Demand: additional data provided by
an action performed by the user.
• Relationships: the ability to relate data items
with similar characteristics.
• History: the ability to undo an action and show
the steps performed up to the current point.

3. Information Visualization with Multiple
Coordinated Views
Multiple views systems use two or more distinct
views to support the investigation process of a single
conceptual entity [4]. A view is considered distinct of
other views if it allows the user to learn different aspects
of the conceptual entity whether by presenting different
data or emphasizing different aspects of the same data.
An approach to the use of multiple views in
information visualization are the coordinated multiple
views. The purpose of coordination in this approach is to
specify the appropriate changes for each view when the
user interacts with one of them or with any available
interaction mechanism. The data interaction coordinated
mechanisms should efficiently keep the views coherent
and facilitate the discovery of non-trivial data
relationships [5].
Information visualization systems with multiple
coordinated views may be classified by levels of
flexibility; number of datasets, the choice of a specific
representation type for a dataset and coordination
characteristics for each pair of views [5].
A coordinated multiple views system is often
recommended in the following scenarios [4]:
• When there is many different attributes, models,
user profiles or levels of abstraction;
• When different views highlight correlations or
disparities;
• When the dataset is complex;
• Use multiple views minimally.
The following techniques are highlighted as the
main coordination possibilities [6]:
• Selection: highlight of selected data items in
other views.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

•
•

•
•
•

Filter: data items outside a specific interval of
values are not be represented in the views.
Color, transparency and size: used to represent
the variation of values of a user-selected
attribute. The same criterion may be applied to
represent the information in different views.
Order: the order in which the data are presented
in each view may be determined by the values
of an attribute of the dataset.
Label: specifies the content of labels associated
to each data item.
Attribute manipulation: allows the user to add
or remove or change the order of an attribute in
the visual representation.

4. Related Work
This section presents some tools that apply multiple
coordinated views to different fields and describes the
coordination characteristics of each tool.
Snap-Together is a general-purpose system that
supports the use of different types of datasets.
Coordination is limited to the selection of data items [5].
DEVise represents multidimensional data by
separating them into several bi-dimensional visual
representations. View integration is accomplished by
zoom or focus [7];
exploRase uses multiple coordinated views to
explore biological data. It supports coordinated selection
of data items [8];
GeoVista Studio uses multiple coordinated views to
analyze and visualize geo-scientific data. Coordination is
supported by selection, highlight and color-map dynamic
queries [9].

5. PRISMA
PRISMA is a computational tool for information
visualization that supports user interaction for analysis
with a dataset. The following main aspects guided the
conception of PRISMA.
• Support for the requisites of any dataset or
visualization technique.
• Development of an easily usable interface for
user tasks;
• Support for visualization and interaction with
data in more than one visualization technique,
simultaneously or individually.
• Coordination
mechanisms
between
the
developed information visualization techniques
and with the data interaction mechanisms.
• Implementation
of
three
information
visualization techniques: 2D scatterplot,
treemap and parallel coordinates.
• Portability to different platforms and software
extensibility provided by the use of JAVA as the
programming language.

•

Support for different data sources, from preformatted text files to XML files and relational
databases.

PRISMA includes all of the mentioned
functionalities. Figure 1 presents PRISMA main screen
after loading a dataset. PRISMA menu options are in
Portuguese.

Figure 1: PRISMA user interface.
Next sections will discuss the main software
functionalities and preliminary usability tests.

5.1.

Main Functionalities

This section describes PRISMA main characteristics
and functionalities.
5.1.1.
Visualization Techniques PRISMA
implements three information visualization techniques,
each favoring a different kind of data analysis:
scatterplot, treemap and parallel coordinates (Figure 3).
Treemap is a space-filling technique that represents
hierarchical data as rectangles using visual grouping
[10]. PRISMA implementation of Treemap is based on
the squarified method (Figure 3). It is possible to set the
attribute representing each rectangle size, color, the label
attributes and the ones used to create the group hierarchy
of items.

values for a certain attribute [12] (Figure 3). It is possible
to choose the color for attribute values, to select the
attributes that will be part of the visualization and to
specify the order the attributes will be presented.
5.1.2.
Coordination PRISMA uses a single
dataset for all views. The user may analyze data in each
view individually or simultaneously in all views.
Coordination between techniques is static, i.e., the
coordination of each pair of views is pre-defined. Color,
for instance, is strongly coordinated since the same color
is defined for all views. Size, on the other hand, is
loosely-coordinated since it may be used in the
scatterplot and treemap views but needs to be explicitly
specified in each view (Figure 4). Other coordinated
tasks are filter, (Figure 12), selection (Figure 5), and
details on demand.

Figure 3: PRISMA modules.
The scatterplot technique is based on X-Y axis
graphics. Each axis may represent any attribute. Each
coordinate of the main plan may represent a set of
attribute values [11] (Figure 3).
The parallel coordinates technique connects each
attribute axis to the adjacent axis by straight lines. The
lines are drawn according to attribute values of the data
items. Each axis represents a scale with all possible

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4: Coordinated Items.

PRISMA uses two types of filter mechanism to
select the data items represented in the views:
RangeSlider and Checkbox (Figure 8).
The filter interface is dynamic. The user selects the
attribute to be filtered. The corresponding attribute filter
is then added to the interface. The interface highlights in
red the attributes with any active filter selection: a set of
values or an interval. Each attribute filter component
may also be minimized. These features help to reduce the
overload in the user interface when the dataset has many
attributes. Figure 9 presents the results of the application
of filters as in Figure 8.
Figure 5: Data Selection.
Details-on-demand are set for all visualization
techniques. The user selects the attributes that will be
presented as additional information about each data item
using the corresponding menu option (Figure 6).

Figure 9: Use of filter in the coordinated views.

Figure 6: Details on demand.
5.1.3. User Interface and Filters When a dataset is
loaded, PRISMA analyzes the attributes and graphically
represents the data according to each visualization
technique. Filters are built according to the
characteristics of each attribute (Figure 7).

5.1.4. Other Features PRISMA also includes Pie,
Line and Bar graphics so support data analysis. The
graphics are coordinated with the views, i.e., any filter
selection applied to the views updates the graphics
(Figure 10).

Figure 7: Building filter components

Figure 10: Auxiliary Graphics.
Additionally, there is a report generator and menu
options to save and load visualizations or to export data
items.

5.2.

Figure 8: Filter dynamic interface.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Usability Tests

Usability tests were performed in order to evaluate
PRISMA effectiveness for supporting data analysis with
multiple coordinated views and to measure the usability

of PRISMA interface. The tests were based on predefined tasks. User interaction was observed carefully.
The observers gathered information on the most
frequently used technique for each task, the amount of
time needed to complete each task and any usability
problem detected or reported by the user.

distributed. Horsepower is concentrated
between 88 and 155.
• Task 3: Are the 4-cylinder Japanese cars usually
lighter than the 6-cylinder American cars?
Answer 3: No.
• Task 4: what is the tendency of European cars
over the years?
Answer 4: acceleration between 12.2 and 24.8,
and light weight. The horsepower kept stable until
1977 when it rose just to reduce again the next year.
There are few 5 or 6-cylinder cars but most of them
are 4-cylinder. MPG was between 18 and 31 from
1970 to 1976 and considerably rose since them.

5.2.1.
User profile The users that participate
in the tests were familiarized with computers but with
little or none experience with information visualization
tools. There were 11 users (8 male and 3 female). Six
users were computer science professionals, and five
users worked in other areas. They were between 20 and
32 years old.

5.2.4.
User tasks The proposed tasks
approach different user actions [14]: identification,
visualization, comparison, inference, configuration and
location. The user needs to perform these actions to
appropriately analyze data in visualization techniques
and tools. The following four tasks were used during the
tests.
• Task 1: In what period the major Japanese car
production took place?
Answer 1: Between 80 e 82.
• Task 2: Analyze the data and describe the main
characteristics of the American cars;
Answer 2: acceleration is between 8 and 22.2,
mainly between 11 and 19. Most of the cars
have 8 cylinders. Weight is uniformly
distributed. MPG values are also uniformly

5.2.5.
Results PRISMA tests were based on
right or wrong answers. Two user groups were analyzed:
the computer-science professional group with 6 users and
the general user group with 5 users.
Both the computer professional group and the
general users group had high success rates in all the
tasks. The low success rate in task 4 was caused by a
usability problem. The PRISMA assigned similar color
shades to different attribute values, leading the user the
wrong answer (Figure 11).
Accuracy Rate in User Answers
120,00%

100,00%

80,00%
Computer Professional

60,00%

General User

40,00%

20,00%

0,00%
Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Task 4

Figure 11: Accuracy rate in user answers.
The time spent in each task by computer
professionals and general users is presented in Figure 12
and Figure 13.
Task Execution Time for Computer Professional
14
12
10
Minutes

5.2.2.
Evaluation procedures Initially, a 20minute training was offered to the users. The user was
trained to explore the available techniques and their
functionalities and was asked to practice with a simple
task.
Each test was followed by two observers. These
observers took notes listing the problems found by the
users and the techniques used to solve the tasks. The user
was asked to speak during the test about what he was
trying to do or even thinking about doing. The initial step
was always the multiple coordinated views interface.
After the test, each user filled out a 10-question form
about the preferred visualization technique, the difficulty
to specify the desired view, the interface, and the
coordinated views, among other issues
.
5.2.3.
Dataset The selected dataset for the
usability tests was the Car dataset, containing
information on American cars, Japanese and European
cars manufactured from 1970 to 1982 [13]. The dataset
was chosen because of the familiarity the users have with
the data about cars, and its use in previous work [14]
[15] [16]. The dataset includes 8-dimensional 392 items,
including five continuous attributes (acceleration, MPG,
weight, displacement and horsepower) and three
categorical attributes (cylinder, year and origin).

Task 1

8

Task 2
Task 3

6

Task 4

4
2
0
User 2

User 4

User 7

User 8

User 9

User 10

Figure 12: Task execution time for computer
professionals.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

problem it strategically helped the user to select the best
technique or to better understand the data.

Task Execution Time for General Users
25

Use of Coordinated Views by Computer Professionals

20

Minutes

4,5
Task 1

15

4

Task 2
Task 3
10

3,5

Task 4
Quantity

3
5

2,5

Single View
Coordinated Views

2
1,5

0
User 1

User 3

User 5

User 6

User 11

1
0,5

Figure 13: Task execution time for general
users.

0
Task 1

Task 3

Task 4

Figure 15: Use of coordinated views by
computer professionals.

The average task execution time for the computer
professionals group was better than the time for the
general users group. However, after the general users
group had more experience and confidence in the use of
the tool (as more tasks were accomplished) the
difference between average execution times reduced
(Figure 14). For example, there was a difference in
average execution time of 3.44 minutes in task 1 and of
1.02 minutes in task 4.

Use of Coordinated Views by General Users
3,5
3
2,5
Quantity

Average Execution Times

Task 2

2

Single View
Coordinated Views

1,5
1

12,00

0,5

10,00

0
Minutes

8,00

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Task 4

Computer Professional

6,00

Genereal Users

4,00

Figure 16: Use of coordinated views by general
users.

2,00

0,00
Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Task 4

Figure 14: Average Execution Times.
The following observations were made about the use
of the coordinated views during the execution of the
tasks: if a technique was used individually; if several
techniques were used in sequence; if several techniques
were simultaneously used. The latter two are typical uses
of coordinated views.
The coordinated views were always the first step to
solve each task. One observation was that the computer
professionals group used the simultaneous coordinated
views to solve the first tasks. On the last two tasks, they
typically used the simultaneous coordinated view to
choose the more appropriate individual technique view
(Figure 15). The general user group followed the
opposite path (Figure 16). Therefore, even when the
coordinated view was not directly used to solve the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

As another interesting set of results, there were the
following user answers to the fill-out form:
• 72% considered PRISMA interface easy to use.
• 81% approved the tool feedback
• 72 % found difficulties setting the scatterplot
technique because of the large number of
options;
• 63% found the parallel coordinates technique
difficult to understand;
• 81 % found the use of coordinated views useful
if combined to the treemap technique;
• 63% indicated occlusion as the major problem
in the coordinated views;
• 90% considered the filter components easy to
use;
• 72 % considered the graphics legible but only
50% found them easy to customize;

6. Final Remarks
This paper presented PRISMA, a multiple
coordinated views information visualization tool
developed in JAVA language. PRISMA includes three
visualization techniques: treemap, scatterplot and parallel
coordinates.
The implementation of the coordination mechanisms
between views presented a great challenge to the
developers. Strong and loose coordinated mechanism
concepts were applied to PRISMA coordination policies.
The usability tests involved a small number of users.
However, it is possible to state that the use of multiple
coordinated views does not harm user performance. It
did interfere in the task execution time during the first
use of the tool, but this obstacle may be easily overcome
once the user has larger experience with the tool.
The answers filled out by the users and the user
observation during task execution highlighted some
usability issues. PRISMA needs better color
representation, easier to use auxiliary graphics and a
reduced number of configuration options for the
scatterplot technique.
However, the user general evaluation of PRISMA
was very good. At the end of the test, users were able to
indicate many prominent applications in different
professional and non-professional fields.
6.1.
Future Work We highlight the following
future developments.
• Comparative study with other multiple
coordinate views tools;
• New ergonomic evaluation and usability cycles;
• More flexible coordination mechanisms;
• Additional views, such as dynamics maps, 3D
scatter plot, and graph visualization techniques;
• Extended architecture to support collaborative
environments;
• Extended architecture to support multiple
simultaneous and coordinated output devices;
• Application generator that automatically selects
the
appropriate
techniques
and
the
corresponding configuration, coordination and
filter options, among other features.

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

Spence, R. Information Visualization. Addison Wesley ACM Press, 2001. 459 p.
Oliveira, M. C. F; LEVKOWITZ, H. From Visual Data
Exploration to Visual Data Mining: A Survey. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 378-393, July-September 2003.
Carr, D. A. Guidelines for Designing Information
Visualization Applications. Proceedings of ECUE'99.
Stockholm, Sweden. December 1999.
Baldonado, M. Q. W.; Woodruff, A.; Kuchinsky, A.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information
visualization. Proceedings of the working conference on

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Advanced Visual Interfaces, pp. 110 – 119. Palermo.
Italy. 2000.
North, Chris; Shneiderman, Ben. Snap-Together
Visualization: A User Interface for Coordinating
Visualizations via Relational Schemata. Proceedings of
the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces,
pp 128-135. Palermo, Italy. 2000.
Pillat, R. M.; Freitas, C. D. S. Coordinating Views in the
InfoVis Toolkit. Proceedings of Advanced Visual
Interface. pp. 496-499. Venezia, Italy. 2006.
Livny, M., Ramakrishnan, R., Beyer, K., et al. DEVise:
Integrated Querying and Visual Exploration of Large
Datasets. In Proceedings of the SIGMOD’97. pp. 301312. 1997.
Lawrence, M.; Lee, E.; Cook, D.; Hofmann, H.; Wurtele,
E. exploRase: Exploratory Data Analysis of Systems
Biology Data. Fourth International Conference on
Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization (CMV'06) pp. 14-20
Takatsuka, M.; Gahegan, M. GeoVISTA studio: a
codeless visual programming environment for
geoscientific data analysis and visualization. Computers
& Geosciences. Vol. 28, Issue 10, pp. 1131 – 1144.
2002.
Bederson, B. B.; Shneiderman, B.; Wattenberg, M.
Ordered and quantum treemaps:Making effective use of
2D space to display hierarchies. ACM Transactions on
Graphics. Vol 21, Issue 4, pp. 833 – 854. 2002.
Card, S. K.; Mackinlay, J. D.; Shneiderman, B.
Readings in Information Visualization—Using Vision to
Think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
Inselberg, A.; Dimsdale, B. Parallel Coordinates: A Tool
for Visualizing Multidimensional Geometry, In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization’90 (1990), 361-375.
Newman, D.J.; Hettich, S.; Blake, C.L., Merz, C. J. UCI
Repository
of
machine
learning
databases.
[http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn/MLRepository.html].
Irvine, CA: University of California, Department of
Information and Computer Science, 1998.
Pillat, R. M.; Valiati, E. R. A.; Freitas, C. D. S.
Experimental Study on Evaluation of Multidimensional
Information Visualization Techniques. Proceedings of
the 2005 Latin American conference on Humancomputer interaction (ACM). pp. 20-30. Cuernavaca,
Mexico. 2005.
Grinstein, G.G., Hoffman, P., Laskowski, S.J., and
Pickett, R.M. Benchmark Development for the
Evaluation of Visualization for Data Mining. In
Information Visualization in Data Mininig and
Knowledge Discovery. Academic Press, 2002.
Kobsa, A. An Empirical Comparison of Three
Commercial Information Visualization Systems. In
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis 2001), pp. 123-130. San Diego,
CA.

