Linguistic Interpretations of Scuba Dive Computer Data
Somayajulu G. Sripada and Feng Gao
Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen, UK
{ssripada,fgao}@csd.abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
Exploratory visualizations of dive computer data
are available to the scuba diving community to
examine the safety of their recorded dives. In a study
involving certified scuba divers on the usage of these
visualizations we found that these are not used
regularly which agrees well with the suspicions
expressed by the medical staff who attend to patients
with diving related illnesses. We built a prototype
knowledge based system that interprets dive computer
data to automatically generate their linguistic
interpretations
to
supplement
the
existing
visualizations. We hypothesized that linguistic
interpretations by virtue of their structure
communicate safety related messages directly to
divers. Our evaluation showed that divers like the idea
of integrating linguistic interpretations into existing
visualizations. However, the study also showed that
linguistic interpretations can be useful only if they are
emotionally appropriate to individual divers.

1. Introduction
Not all information available for exploration using
visualizations is emotionally neutral to end-users.
When subjectivity acts as a demotivating factor even
well designed visualizations are often abandoned. In
these cases, we need to explore other means to bring
the end-user to her data. In this paper we describe a
case study in the domain of SCUBA diving (Self
Contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus) where
divers who are into scuba diving for the sake of
adventure and fun often find records of their dives
(which contain records of their diving mistakes) less
motivating to examine and therefore fail to learn
important lessons from their mistakes. In our case
study we built a prototype knowledge based system
that interprets dive data to automatically generate
linguistic descriptions as complements to graphical
presentations of dive data. Because linguistic
descriptions can be structured to achieve the desired

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

effect on readers, we hypothesized that linguistic
descriptions will be useful for communicating safety
related messages. When we evaluated the utility of
linguistic descriptions for making judgments about
dive safety we found that although divers liked the idea
of linguistic descriptions accompanying the graphical
presentations, they were very sensitive to the emotional
content of the descriptions. Some of them suggested
that we must neutralize the emotional content to make
the descriptions purely factual. Some others failed to
notice the emotional content completely while the
remaining subjects who did recognize the emotional
content were less sure if it is acceptable or
unacceptable. In other words, individual divers varied
in their sensitivity to emotional content. While we were
expecting the divers to either reject or accept the
linguistic interpretations, we found that acceptance or
rejection is driven more by the match between the
emotional state of the diver and the emotional content
of the linguistic description.
Multimodality has been a topic of investigation in
multiple disciplines. Much of the earlier work on
integrating natural language production with other
modalities focused on natural language dialogue
production by embodied conversational agents,
addressing issues such as modality choice and
information distribution among the different modalities
[1][2]. However, the current work focuses on
monologic language production. PostGraphe is a
system that produces a monologic summary report of
statistical data integrating text and graphics [3].
CogenTex’s ChartExplainer also produces reports that
show statistical graphics and monologic text.

2. Dive Computers
Dive computers are electronic devices that guide
SCUBA divers underwater in real time by providing
instructions about safe bottom times and safe ascent
schedules based on dive data such as depth-time profile
captured using sensors.

Depth-Time Profile
Surface
00
'2
0
01 "
'4
0"
03
'0
0
04 "
'2
0
05 "
'4
0
07 "
'0
0
08 "
'2
0
09 "
'4
0
11 "
'0
0"
12
'2
0
13 "
'4
0
15 "
'0
0"
16
'2
0
17 "
'4
0
19 "
'0
0
20 "
'2
0"
21
'4
0
23 "
'0
0
24 "
'2
0"
25
'4
0
27 "
'0
0
28 "
'2
0
29 "
'4
0
31 "
'0
0
32 "
'2
0
33 "
'4
0
35 "
'0
0
36 "
'2
0
37 "
'4
0
39 "
'0
0"
40
'2
0
41 "
'4
0
43 "
'0
0"
44
'2
0
45 "
'4
0
47 "
'0
0"

0
-5

-10
-15

85% MaximumDepth
MaximumDepth

Depth

-20
-25
-30
-35

Bottom Zone

-40
-45
-50

A
A
Bottom Time
Time

Figure 1. Depth-time profile of an example dive.
Risky dive with some minor problems. Because your bottom time of 12.0min exceeds no-stop limit by
4.0min this dive is risky. But you performed the ascent well. Your buoyancy control in the bottom zone
was poor as indicated by ‘saw tooth’ patterns marked ‘A’ on the depth-time profile.
Figure 2. Textual summary of safety related information produced by ScubaText prototype for the
example dive shown in Figure 1.
It’s long been known that badly performed scuba
dives cause decompression illness (DCI), a term used
to refer to disease(s) caused by reduction in ambient
pressure. Professional scuba divers and scientific scuba
divers perform well supervised dives that strictly
adhere to standardized safety regimes. However,
recreational scuba divers who do receive training to
perform safe dives during their certification courses,
dive subsequently pretty much on their own and
require support to cultivate safe diving habits.
The data recorded by a dive computer can be
uploaded to a PC and can be explored using the vendor
supplied software tool which presents the dive data
visually using coordinated multiple views. While the
real time feedback from a dive computer is useful to
divers in performing a particular dive safely, the
vendor supplied visualization tool helps divers to
assess their past dives in their leisure and learn
important lessons about their diving behavior in
general.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The vendor supplied visualization tool enables users
to perform exploratory data analysis of dive data. For
example, the tool requires users to draw insights into
the dive data by inspecting excess gas loadings in
different body tissues displayed in one view (histogram
view) in relation to specific observable patterns on the
depth-time profile displayed in another view (line
graph view). The medical staffs who attend to patients
with diving related illnesses have told us that many
divers do not use the available exploratory
visualizations to examine their data regularly which
allows them to gradually drift away from the trained
diving behavior. In some cases, the deviation might
reach a stage where the diver might begin to stretch
herself beyond recommended dive depths and bottom
times which may lead to fatal consequences.

3. ScubaText
ScubaText is a research project that aims to produce
feedback reports of scuba dives based on data recorded
by a dive computer. Patterns on the depth-time profile
of a dive are known to be helpful in judging the safety
of the dive. Depth-time profile data can be modelled as
time series, series of depth values recorded at regular
intervals by the pressure sensor on the dive computer.
We built a prototype knowledge based system to
integrate textual and graphical presentations of dive
computer data [4]. Figure 1 shows a line graph
representing the depth-time profile of a dive captured
by a dive computer. Time is plotted along the X-axis
and depth is plotted along the Y-axis. The structural
elements such as ‘bottom zone’ and ‘saw tooth’
patterns are marked as annotations on the line graph
thus providing grounding for their usage in the textual
summary generated by the ScubaText prototype shown
in Figure 2.
The architecture of our prototype is a four stage
pipeline as shown in Figure 3. The third stage in our
architecture performs text generation. This stage will
be eventually expanded into the standard three stage
pipeline [5] used in many modern Natural Language
generation (NLG) systems. With the expanded third
stage we will have a six stage pipeline for producing
bi-modal presentations of quantitative information.

Dive Computer Data

Data Analysis

Data Interpretation

Text Generation

Graph Generation

Linguistic
Interpretation

Annotated
Line Graph

Figure 3. Four stage pipeline architecture of
ScubaText Prototype.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Data Analysis - This stage is responsible for
determining the structure of the dive (global model)
and to detect observable patterns (local patterns) such
as ‘stop’ and ‘saw tooth’ that have direct bearing on
safety using time series analysis techniques [6][7]. In
other words, this stage performs information extraction
from raw dive profile data in terms of local patterns
and global models that potentially can be
communicated to the user. The patterns computed in
this stage carry all the information required to drive a
graphing package to locate them on the line graph and
to draw the required annotations. For example, the
horizontal line at 40m depth in figure 1 marks the
depth which is 85% of maximum depth of the dive.
Data Interpretation – In this stage, we compute what
each of the patterns (or other structural elements)
detected in the previous stage ‘mean’ in terms of
safety. Here we use a reference dive profile against
which we compare the actual dive profile. For the
purpose of generating the reference for each dive, we
used an algorithm similar to the ones used by dive
computers. Dive computers use algorithms known as
decompression models developed in the diving
medicine community. Decompression models generate
recommended safe bottom times and recommended
safe ascent schedules given a depth-time profile as
input. Using these recommendations, we then compute
deviations in the actual dive. Finally we rate a dive
based on the deviations, the larger the deviation from
the recommended behavior the smaller the rating. In
other words, the second stage is where the
patterns/models are interpreted using the domain
knowledge and also in the context of user tasks. For
this purpose analysing dive data for safety related
patterns is assumed to be the main user task. Therefore
only those patterns/models that are known to be related
to dive safety are considered here. The knowledge used
in this stage is acquired from several sources. We
conducted brief interviews of medical staff working
with patients suffering from dive related illnesses to
find out the different kinds of patterns linked to DCI.
Initially we also carried out some knowledge
acquisition (KA) studies with dive instructors at a local
diving school [8]. However, these KA studies with
medical staff and dive instructors did not produce
knowledge sufficient to drive the system development.
While building the prototype we relied on dive
computer manuals and other electronic sources on the
Internet such as news groups to acquire detailed level
knowledge. Because we acquired knowledge from
several sources we needed to consolidate the
knowledge under the guidance of domain experts [9].
However we failed to carry out this knowledge
consolidation during the prototype development and as

a result we do not claim that our system generated texts
can be useful in the real world.
Text Generation – In this stage, we use a
classification scheme based on the ratings decided in
the above stage to decide the messages to be
communicated and also to decide their organization.
Based on the overall rating of a dive, we initially
generate an overview message about the dive. For
example the first sentence in figure 2 ‘Risky dive with
some minor problems’ presents an overview message.
We then select messages describing those deviations
representative of that class and order them in the order
of the individual ratings of the deviations. The selected
messages are realized using templates. In our
prototype, the templates are implemented as
procedures that join phrasal/clause fragments based on
information such as deviations and ratings computed in
the earlier stage.
Graph Generation – In this stage, we determine the
graphical support needed to communicate the messages
selected in the above stage and pass this information to
the graphics package which plots the graph with the
required annotations.

4. Evaluation
We performed a user study to test the utility of
linguistic descriptions accompanying graphical
presentations. In this study, we used sample dive data
packaged with a well known model of dive computers.
We sent out a questionnaire to divers affiliated to a
local sports club and British Sub Aqua Club and
received twenty (20) completed questionnaire. In the
questionnaire we showed four different presentations
of a sample dive profile data set whose contextual
information such as location of the dive, water
temperature etc are provided common to all four
presentations:
Presentation A: A line graph showing the dive
profile data
Presentation B: A textual description of the analysis
of the dive profile data
Presentation C: A combination of the line graph and
the textual description of the dive profile data
Presentation D: A combination of the annotated line
graph and the textual description cross referencing the
line graph.
Presentation A is identical to the presentation that
the dive computer software allows users to print.
Presentation D combines the annotated line graph
shown in Figure 1 and the textual description shown in
Figure 2. Presentation B contains text similar to the
text shown in Figure 2 but the cross referencing

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

phrases removed. Presentation C combines line graph
from presentation A and the text from presentation B.
In one of the questions in our questionnaire,
subjects (divers) were asked to order the four
presentations in the decreasing order of usefulness
(most useful first and the least useful last) for judging
the safety of a dive.
Our hypothesis is that divers find bi-modal
(text+graph) presentations more useful to judge the
safety of a dive than uni-modal presentations. To test
this hypothesis, we need to show that users find
Presentations C and D more useful than Presentations
A and B for judging the safety of a dive. For this we
collected the ordered list of presentations the twenty
participants wrote in response to the first question. We
counted the number of participants who gave
maximum rank to a uni-modal presentation (A or B)
and the number of participants who gave maximum
rank to a bi-modal presentation (C or D). Three out of
twenty participants gave maximum rank to a uni-modal
presentation. A binomial test revealed that there is a
significant preference for the bi-modal presentations,
z=-3.125, p<0.05. Based on the ordered list received
from each participant, we ranked presentations with
rank values from 4 to 1. The presentation placed first in
the ordered list received a rank of 4, the presentation
placed next to it received a rank of 3, and the one next
to it received 2 and finally the last presentation in the
list received a rank of 1. Using this rank data and using
the Wilcoxon Matched-Pairs Signed-Ranks Test we
have tested if divers consider Presentation D more
useful than any of the other presentations. The
statistical test showed that divers indeed consider
Presentation D as the most useful one of the four
presentations for judging the safety of a dive.
In another question we asked the subjects the
frequency with which they analyze their dives using
the available visualizations provided by vendor
supplied software. Out of twenty subjects only four
subjects said they analyze their dives every time they
perform a dive. Another five subjects said they analyze
their dives more than 50% of times they dive. We ran
the above statistical test on this data set in comparison
to the data set obtained with the frequency values
expected if all the participants analyze their dives more
than 50% of times they dive. The test showed (with p
<= 0.041) that divers analyze their dives less than 50%
of times. When it comes to safety related issues
anything less than 100% should be unacceptable
(certain dive incidents can lead to fatal consequences
leading to even death). In fact the medical staff with
whom we interacted to acquire the dive safety
knowledge observed that most divers view that owning
a dive computer would somehow ensure their safety.
On the contrary even the most conservative dive

computers cannot ensure dive safety. All dive
computer manuals make this message very explicit at
the very outset. From the divers’ point of view safety is
really an issue that directly conflicts with the adventure
and fun they associate with their diving. They are
justified in their view because after spending a lot for
an exotic holiday (say in the Caribbean), not to dive
because their previous dive has slightly violated safety
recommendations is simply irrational for them.
Because of this conflict of goals (excitement versus
safety) it is hard for any diver to make cold judgments
based on facts. Many probably avoid the whole conflict
by simply not examining their dive data at all.
Potentially risky dive with some minor
problems. The bottom time of 12.0min exceeds
no-stop limit by 4.0min requiring mandatory
decompression stops. The ascent was at a
constant rate within the recommended rate. The
saw tooth patterns marked ‘A’ on the depth-time
profile should be avoided if possible as this
increases the chance of developing DCI even
within the recommended decompression limits.
The re-descent from 5m to 10m in the later stages
of the dive should also be avoided for the same
reason as saw-tooth profiles.
Figure 4. Suggested textual summary of safety
related information for the example dive
shown in Figure 1.
In our questionnaire we have also asked if the
participants find the textual description shown in
Presentation C (text without cross references to the line
graph) appropriate for the line graph shown in the same
presentation. Most participants disagreed (7/20 –
strongly disagree, 8/20 – disagree, 2/20 - neither agree
nor disagree, 3/20 agree and 0/20 strongly agree)
indicating that our text does not describe the dive data
accurately. In the free text comments participants
wrote at the end of the questionnaire they indicated that
the text is inappropriate more for other reasons than
because it is factually inaccurate. For example, some
participants felt that usage of expressions such as
‘risky dive’ are emotionally loaded and therefore
should be avoided. In other words, the appropriateness
of a text describing a dive depends on its emotional
content rather than on its factual content. A number of
earlier natural language generation (NLG) projects
such as STOP [10] and SKILLSUM [11] made similar
observations. Participants in our study had concerns
about the factual content as well. For example, sawtooth patterns in the bottom zone need not always be
due to ‘poor buoyancy control’ but could be the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

consequence of the uneven terrain on the sea-bed. In
other words, the relationship between a pattern on the
dive profile and its interpretation is of type one-tomany. One of the participants revised the text produced
by the system to make it more acceptable both
factually and emotionally which is shown in Figure 4.
As can be seen, the revisions suggested by this
participant soften the tone of the text and also insert
additional factual content such as the ‘re-descent from
5m to 10m’ not picked up by our data analysis module.
Also the saw tooth patterns are not linked to poor
buoyancy. Instead they have been linked to a possible
occurrence of DCI. In other words, this participant
carefully avoided linking the observable deviations
from recommended diving behavior to their possible
causes – possible faulty diver performance (although
there could be other causes such as the uneven sea-bed
example as explained above). Instead she chose to link
them to the consequences of these deviations in terms
of possible occurrence of DCI. From our knowledge
acquisition studies we learnt that observed behavior
should be used to understand the diver activities and
therefore machine generated texts (as in figure 2)
always link deviations to diver actions. However, this
participant had a different way of describing deviations
in diving behavior. Of course, this is a revision by one
participant which she felt was appropriate because it
avoids blaming the diver for the deviations. Others
were less forthcoming with their revised versions but
had plenty of suggestions that varied a lot in their
manipulation of the tone of the text.
Our study leads to the following observations:
1.
Existing visualizations of dive computer data,
which present factual information about dives,
are not used by divers regularly for examining
the safety of their dives.
2.
Divers like the idea of linguistic descriptions
accompanying the existing visualizations.
3.
However, divers had reservations about the
appropriateness of the linguistic descriptions
more because of their emotional content.
4.
Qualitative comments from the participants
indicate that there are individual variations in
their views of appropriate textual descriptions.
No one enjoys examining her mistakes with a view
to learn lessons. However, when mistakes lead to fatal
consequences (as in the scuba diving case) it is
important to find ways to present such emotionally
loaded information in acceptable ways. Although our
study does not establish that textual descriptions can
achieve this, it does suggest that individually tailored
linguistic descriptions might act as sugar coating
around bitter information. When these descriptions are
delivered in a visual environment then there could be

other advantages such as cross modal reinforcements
of messages communicated to the end-user
Using carefully crafted linguistic statements to
manipulate emotions of human subjects is a well
known mood induction procedure (MIP) [12].
However developing computer systems that can
generate individually tailored texts with appropriate
emotional content to be integrated into a visual
environment is a grand challenge. However, we believe
that the challenge is worth pursuing particularly
because in some cases (as in the scuba case) success in
this endeavor will really save lives.

5. Conclusions
We described a case study in using linguistic
descriptions integrated into a visual presentation for
communicating emotionally loaded safety information
in the domain of scuba diving. Our evaluation showed
that linguistic descriptions have the potential to be
useful. To be really useful they need to be emotionally
appropriate to the individual users.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to all the divers/instructors who
participated in our user study for taking time to write a
lot of comments and suggestions. Many thanks to Dr
John Ross, Occupational Medicine, Aberdeen
University who originally suggested the SCUBA
domain to apply techniques developed in the SumTime
project. This work is supported by The Nuffield
Foundation under their grant scheme for newly
appointed science lecturers (NAL/00889/G).

6. References
[1] E. André, “The Generation of Multimedia Presentations”,
A Handbook of Natural Language Processing: techniques
and applications for the processing of language as text, (Eds)
R. Dale, H. Moisl, and H. Somers, Marcel Dekker Inc., 2000,
pp. 305-327.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[2] M. Theune, “ANGELICA: choice of output modality in
an embodied agent”, In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Information Presentation and Natural
Multimodal Dialogue (IPNMD-2001), Verona, Italy, 2001,
pp 89-94.
[3] M. Fasciano and G. Lapalme, “PostGraphe: a system for
the generation of statistical graphics and text”, In
Proceedings of the 8th. International Workshop on Natural
Language Generation (INLG’96), 1996, pp 51-60.
[4] Hayes-Roth, F., D. Waterman, and D. Lenat, (Eds),
Building Expert Systems. Addison-Wesley,1983.
[5] Reiter, E., R. Dale, Building Natural Language
Generation Systems, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
[6] E. Keogh, “A fast and robust method for pattern matching
in time-series data”, In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI '97),
1997, pp 578-584.
[7] E. Keogh, S. Chu, D. Hart, and M. Pazzani, “An online
algorithm for segmenting time series”, In Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, 2001, pp
289-296.
[8] Scott, A., J. Clayton, and E. Gibson, A Practical Guide to
Knowledge Acquisition, Addison-Wesley, 1991.
[9] E. Reiter, S. Sripada and R. Robertson, Acquiring Correct
Knowledge for Natural Language Generation, JAIR, 2003,
18:491-516.
[10] E. Reiter, R. Robertson, and L. Osman, “Lessons from a
Failure: Generating Tailored Smoking Cessation Letters”,
Artificial Intelligence, 2003, 144:41-58.
[11] E. Reiter, S. Williams and L. Crichton, “Generating
Feedback Reports for Adults Taking Basic Skills Tests”, In
A Macintosh, R Ellis, and T Allen (Eds) Applications and
Innovations in Intelligent Systems XIII (Proceedings of ES05), 2005, pp. 50-63.
[12] E. Velten, A laboratory task for induction of mood
states, Behaviour Research and Therapy, 1968, 6: 473-482.

