Web Based Visual Exploration of Patent Information
Mark Giereth, Steffen Koch, Martin Rotard, and Thomas Ertl
Visualization and Interactive Systems Institute, Universit¨at Stuttgart
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
firstname.lastname@vis.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract
Patents are an invaluable source of scientific and technological information. Due to the strongly increasing number
of patent applications and the broadening of the objectives
of patent analysis, there is a great demand for ubiquitous
access to patent information and for flexible visualizations
meeting the requirements of different groups of users. In this
paper we propose new visualization techniques for patent
information and approaches for interactively exploring this
information in web based environments. We show how these
visualizations can be integrated into existing web portals by
using a new paradigm that we call Semantic Lens.

1 Introduction
Patents are an established instrument for protecting intellectual properties. But patents are also a valuable public
source of up to date scientific and technological information. This aspect is often unnoticed in the scientific community. Recently, also economists, engineers, or policy makers
have begun to analyze patent information at a general level.
Based on patent information new methods have been developed to forecast the market value of inventions, to identify
the direction of technical change, to trace knowledge flow,
or to monitor competitors.
Due to the huge stock of about 60 million patent documents worldwide software support is heavily required.
But since patents mainly comprise natural language content supplemented by figures, diagrams, chemical formulae,
gene sequences, etc. their analysis still requires human effort to make the best possible evaluation. Visual tools and
techniques can help to synthesize information and to derive
new insights from large patent collections.
In this paper we propose new visualization techniques
for patent information and new approaches to interactively
explore this information in web based environments. We
show how the visualizations can be integrated into existing

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

web portals like the esp@cenet1 patent search portal by using a new paradigm that we call Semantic Lens, which is
described in more in detail in [15].
The work proposed in this paper is based on the experiences within the PatExpert project [17, 16] funded by the
European Commission. PatExpert’s overall scientific objective is to develop a patent content representation formalism
based on Semantic Web technologies for selected technology areas. PatExpert especially focuses on the development
of techniques for the visualization, retrieval, classification,
extraction, summarization, and assessment of patent material.
The paper is structured as follows. The next chapter
gives an overview of related work. Chapter 3 introduces
different types of patent information focusing on bibliographic, patent family and classificatory information. In
chapter 4 the visualization of patent sets and classificatory
information is described in more detail. Chapter 5 discusses
the integration of visualizations into existing web pages using semantic lenses.

2 Related Work
In the recent years there have been several activities in
analyzing specific areas of patent knowledge spaces by exploiting author co-citations and semantic similarities between patent documents. Most of these activities are related to the field of scientometrics and use methods like
multidimensional scaling [13], factor analysis [2], or selforganizing maps [12] for data reduction and visualization.
An overview of methods for visualizing knowledge domains based on shallow semantic analyses on text documents and corresponding bibliographic data can be found
in [5].
Furthermore, there have been different approaches in visualizing patent metadata aspects. This includes visualizations of patent related social networks showing the relationships between inventors, applicants, and companies
1 http://ep.espacenet.com

Figure 1. Clusters in a patent family

[4, 6, 11] and visualizations of classificatory information
using treemaps [14]. There are also commercial products
such as Aureka, Citation Link, or Math´eo Analyzer that offer basic node-link diagrams for these aspects.
Our approach focuses on patent metadata and differs
from earlier work in that it can be integrated into existing
web pages and portals by using web technologies that range
from simple HTML + raster graphics to Java Applets. It allows for online processing of data received from the Open
Patent Services2 and from the PatExpert database.

3 Patent information
Patent documents have a well-defined structure according to national patent laws. Most patents have a title page
containing the bibiographic data and the abstract, a description of the state of the art, and a claims section. Optionally
images, diagrams, chemical formulae, etc. are attached to a
patent. Further, patent metadata comprise bibliographic and
classificatory data found on the title page, as well as legal
status and patent family information that needs to be derived
from external data sources. Most metadata are formally defined in standards of the World International Property Organization (WIPO). WIPO ST.9 [19] for example defines
about 60 different data fields for bibliographic information,

such as for the applicant and inventor names, the designated
contracting states, the filing and publication dates, etc.
Legal status information describes all significant events
in the lifetime of a patent, from filing the patent application
to the end of term of the patent. Examples for legal status
events are changes of owner, examination requests, patent
grants, or patent revocations. Most patent offices keep a
history of legal status events in online accessible databases,
for example the INPADOC database of the European Patent
Office that contains more than 32 million records 3 .
An important instrument when searching for patents are
patent families. A patent family encompasses all patents
belonging to the same invention. There can be different reasons for having more than one patent for the same invention,
e.g. protecting an invention in different countries results
in different national patents. There are various definitions
on what constitutes a patent family. A common definition
considers a patent family to include only those documents
whose priorities and claims match. Patent families can be
used to reduce the number of search results by grouping all
patents that belong to one patent family.
The International Patent Classification (IPC) [18] is another important instrument for the retrieval of patent documents that belong to one technical field. All major patent
issuing organizations agreed in using the IPC as common
3 http://www.european-patent-office.org/inpadoc/

2 http://ops.espacenet.com/

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

stats/

Figure 2. Patent family layout based on filling date (x-axis) and country (y-axis)
classification scheme. The IPC is hierarchically organized
up to a depth of 13 levels and also has cross references between its entries. Currently there are two levels in the IPC
version 8: a core level with about 17.000 and an advanced
level with about 68.000 categories.
A more formal description of patent metadata in terms
of an ontology can be found in [8]. For the visualizations
in the next section we have used the Open Patent Services,
the PatExpert database comprising of about 60.000 patents
of selected technology areas, and the IPC 8.

4 Visualizing Patent Data
A major goal for the development of patent visualizations is to amplify the users cognition processes, e.g. to enable a faster identification of appropriate search restrictions
during a patent search. In this section we describe new visualization approaches for patent sets and classificatory information related to the International Patent Classifiaction.

4.1

Visually Clustering Patent Sets

An important task in analyzing patent document sets is
the identification of clusters, i.e. groups of patents that are
related to each other by different criteria, such as having the
same applicant or inventor, belonging to the same priority,
or being classified in the same category.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

For visually identifying clusters we applied a forcedirected graph drawing algorithm that simulates a massspring system. We used the well-known Barnes-Hut algorithm [1] that allows efficient n-body force simulations in
O(N logN ) time. A good overview of force-directed graph
drawing methods is given in [3]. The default values for
masses, springs, gravity, iteration cycle, etc. can be overridden for each node type to optimize the layout for specific
needs. Each node type has an associated patent information
type, e.g. applicant, inventor, IPC, priority or patent document.
In figure 1 force-directed layout has been applied to
patent-priority networks to visualize the relations between
patents (in yellow) and their corresponding priority documents (in brown). A priority node is connected to a patent
node when the patent refers to that priority, which is denoted by an arc. The node labels show the patent and priority numbers. This visualization outlines patent clusters
around priority documents, so it is intuitivly possible to
identify important priority applications that have been the
basis for other patents. To aid the exploration all interconnected nodes are highlighted if a node is hovered. Additional information is shown in a popup window when a node
is selected.
Another visualization that presents the same patent set as
an interactive 2D matrix is shown in figure 2. The horizontal position (x-axis) is calculated based on the filing date

Figure 3. Visualization of classificatory information (right lower section magnified)

of the patents (shown as red nodes) and priorities (shown
as blue nodes). The vertical position (y-axis) reflects the
country or organization where the patents or priorities have
been filed. Each horizontal line shows the documents filed
in the same country. The lines can be expanded in order
to present more details for that country, which is shown for
the countries codes AT, DD and US. When hovering a node
the priority relations are visualized as arcs pointing from a
patent to its priority document. The node size reflects the
number of ingoing arcs of the node. This allows to get a
quick overview of documents that are often referenced such
as AT15674980A in the example.

4.2

Visualization of Classificatory Information

As described in the previous section the IPC is an effective instrument when searching for patent documents.
Since the IPC contains thousands of categories, visualization techniques can help keeping an overview of the used
categories in large patent sets. This is especially important
in the first iterations during a patent search. Based on the insights given by appropriate visualizations the search criteria
can be refined.
The visualization shown in figure 3 gives a fast overview

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

of the IPC categories in a given set of patent documents.
The hierarchical structure of the IPC is presented as treemap
in which IPC categories are rendered as nested rectangular
areas. The presentation as treemap gives an overview of the
distribution of the IPC categories in the patent set (in gray)
among all categories of the classification.
The category identifiers of the first 3 levels are shown in
the upper region of each item. The font size is adjusted to
the available space, which is as default 10% of the item’s
height. Zooming into a specific part enlarges the labels.
Capturing a region allows for drilling down and showing
further details.
One important requirement is the ability to search for
keywords in the titles of IPC categories. The search results
are presented as a list using a fisheye distortion in order to
minimize the space while showing the context. The search
results are also shown in the treemap as rectangles with red
and green filling, where red items are not contained in the
patent set and green items are contained in the patent set.

5 Technical Realization
In this section we descibe technical aspects concerning
the development of interactive visualizations for patent information that are accessible via a web browser. A com-

Figure 4. Patent information integrated in a web page as Semantic Lens
mon problem with web application development is the heterogeneity of the client software (e.g. different browsers
and plugins) and infrastructure (e.g. different bandwidths
or firewalls). In order to reach a large amount of potential
users, different technologies have to be combined for implementing rich visualizations.
We use the prefuse toolkit [10] as visualization framework. It provides a set of flexible components, such as layout algorithms, while taking software design patterns for
information visualization [9] into account. We extended the
toolkit by new components to create new patent visualizations as shown in the previous section. Furthermore, we
developed renderers for generating raster graphics together
with HTML image maps and Scalable Vector Graphics
(SVG) [7] in order to provide a range of different technologies for presenting the visualizations in common browsers.
We use Java Applets on the one end of the spectrum and
generated HTML + raster graphics on the other end. Java
Applets allow rich interaction capabilities such as zooming,
panning, dragging, etc. but require a Java plugin. Generating raster graphics + HTML image maps on the server side
does not require any additional client software and works
well with old browsers but provides only limited interaction
capabilities. Depending on the client software and infrastructure landscape tradeoffs can be made. For example the
image generation approach can be extended by using SVG
and Web 2.0 technologies such as AJAX.
Since there is currently no general Javascript based

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

framework that allows for computing complex layouts on
the client side (like the ones we presented in the previous
section), we have chosen a client-server based realization
where the client requests a visualization (e.g. as PNG raster
or SVG vector graphic) that is generated on the server. The
client specifies the parameters for the generation, e.g. the
image format, the selected node, the scaling factor, the center point used for panning, etc. All visualizations that have
been presented in the previous sections can be displayed in
a web browser either as Java Applet, raster graphic + HTML
image map or SVG vector graphic.
For the embedding of visualizations into web pages we
propose the usage of semantic lenses [15]. This requires two
user interactions: first, a link to the current web page has to
be sent to an augmentation service. This can be achieved
by a Javascript enabled bookmark. The augmentation service request the web page and checks the HTML source for
known keywords or – in our example – for patent numbers.
An augmented web page is returned that contains additional
linking information, markers for each patent number, and
Javascript code we call the Semantic Lens Engine. When
the user clicks in a second interaction step on a marker
the patent information is retrieved, processed and visualized. The result is presented in a moveable panel directly in
the current web page. Figure 4 shows a semantic lens that
visualizes a patent family using a radial tree layout as described in [20]. By using semantic lenses visualizations can
be added to already existing web sites and portals.

6 Conclusions
We have presented three visualization techniques for
patent information. First, a force-directed visualization to
identify patent clusters that correspond to the same priority documents. Second, an interactive 2D matrix visualization that positions and groups patents according to arbitrary
dimensions such as filing date or filing country. Third, a
treemap based visualization for giving an overview of the
used IPC categories within large patent sets.
Each visualization can be presented in a web browser either as Java Applet or as a dynamically generated raster or
vector graphic included in an (X)HTML page. This allows
for reaching different user groups depending on their local
infrastructure. In general Java Applets provide richer interaction capabilites but need a fast connection since the data
has to be transfered to the client to be rendered there. In
contrast raster graphics together with HTML image maps
only provide limited interaction capabilites but can be displayed in old browsers and only need small bandwidth. A
shortcoming is the large resource consumption on the server
side for the generation of the images. When generating
SVG instead of raster graphics the resource consumption
only differs marginally because the layout still has to be
calculated on the server. Concerning SVG there are still
problems with heterogeneous implementations and rendering performance on client side if the graphics get larger.
Finally we have presented semantic lenses as a method
to integrate visualizations into existing web pages. This
requires a domain specific augmentation and visualization
service. In the given example the augmentation service
looks up a given HTML page for patent numbers and the
visualization service creates appropriate visualizations for
the given patent information.

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the European Commission within the PatExpert project. For further information please refer to our project homepage http://www.
patexpert.org.

References
[1] J. Barnes and P. Hut. A Hierarchical O(N log N) ForceCalculation Algorithm. Nature, 324(4), pages 446–449, December 1986.
[2] A. Basilevsky. Statistical Factor Analysis and Related Methods: Theory and Applications. John Wiley and Sons, 1994.
[3] G. D. Battista, P. Eades, R.Tamassia, and I. Tollis. Graph
Drawing. Prentice-Hall, 1998.
[4] K. Boyack, B. Wylie, G. Davidson, and D. Johnson. Analysis of patent databases using vxinsight. Proceedings of New

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

Paradigms in Information Visualization and Manipulations
’00, 2000.
K. B¨orner, C. Chen, and K. W. Boyack. Visualizing Knowledge Domains. Information Science and Technology, Volume 37, pages 179–255, 2003.
C. Chen and R. Paul. Visualizing a Knowledge Domain’s
Intellectual Strucutre. Computer, 34(3):65–71, 2001.
J. Ferraiolo, J. Fujisawa, and D. Jackson, editors. Scalable
Vector Graphics (SVG) 1.1 Specification. W3C Recommendation, January 2003. http://www.w3.org/TR/
SVG11/.
M. Giereth, S. Br¨ugmann, A. St¨abler, M. Rotard, and T. Ertl.
Application of Semantic Technologies for Representing
Patent Metadata. In C. Hochberger and R. Liskowsky, editors, Informatik 2006, volume P-94 of Lecture Notes in Informatics, pages 297–305, 2006.
J. Heer and M. Agrawala. Software Design Patterns for Information Visualization. In IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5), 2006.
J. Heer, S. Card, and J. Landay. Prefuse: A Toolkit for Interactive Information Visualization. In Proc. of CHI’05, 2005.
A. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg. Patents, Citations and Innvocations. MIT, 2002.
T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer, 1995.
J. B. Kruskal. Multidimensional scaling and other methods
for discovering structure. In K. Enslein and A. Ralston and
H. Wilf (Eds.), Statistical Methods for Digital Computers.
John Wiley and Sons, 1977.
D. O. Kutz. Examining the evolution and distribution of
patent classifications. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04),
2004.
M. Rotard, M. Giereth, and T. Ertl. Semantic Lenses: Seamless Augmentation of Web Pages with Context Information
from Implicit Queries. Computers and Graphics, 2007. (to
appear).
L. Wanner, S. Br¨ugmann, J. Codina, B. Diallo, E. Escorsa,
M. Giereth, Y. Kompatsiaris, S. Papadopoulos, E. Pianta,
G. Piella, I. Puhlmann, G. Rao, M. Rotard, P. Schoester,
L. Serafini, and V. Zervaki. Towards Content-Oriented
Patent Document Processing. World Patent Information,
2007. (to appear).
L. Wanner, S. Br¨ugmann, B. Diallo, M. Giereth, Y. Kompatsiaris, E. Pianta, G. Rao, and P. Sch¨oster. PATExpert:
Semantic Processing of Patent Documentation (Poster). In
Poster and Demo Proceedings of 1st Int. Conf. on Semantics
and Digital Media Technology, Athens, Greece, 2006.
World Intellectual Property Organization. International
Patent Classification Guide. http://www.wipo.int/
classifications/ipc/en/download_area/
20070101/pdf/ipcr_en_guide_20060101.pdf.
World Intellectual Property Organization. Standard ST.9.
http://www.wipo.int/scit/en/standards/
pdf/03-09-01.pdf.
K. Yee, D. Fisher, R. Dhamija, and M. Hearst. Animated exploration of dynamic graphs with radial layout. In INFOVIS,
pages 43–50, 2001.

