Visualizing Quantitative Proteomics Datasets using Treemaps
Brian D. Halligan, Shama P. Mirza, Molly C. Pellitteri-Hahn, Michael Olivier,
and Andrew S. Greene
Biotechnology & Bioengineering Center, Medical College of Wisconsin
{halligan@mcw.edu}
Abstract

One of the major challenges of large scale mass
spectrometry based proteomics experiments is
organizing and visualizing the data in such a way so that
meaningful biological conclusions can be drawn from
the data.
Our tool, ZoomQuant, is capable of
quantitating relative protein abundance between two
samples in stable isotope labeled quantitative proteomics
experiments. The resulting protein ratios are then
annotated and categorized using the GO ontology terms.
Sets of data representing different biological states can
then be compared quantitatively and the results
formatted for dynamic visualization. Using TreeMap,
the user can visualize the quantitative differences
between the biological states in a single view. The
peptide or scan count and ratio for individual proteins
are displayed and organized by the GO ontologies so
that the user can easily see the global differences in
protein expression between the two samples.
Keywords--- proteomics/mass spectrometry/gene
ontology/stable isotope labeling/TreeMap/dynamic
visualization

1. Introduction
Proteomics, the study of the entire set of proteins
being expressed by a biological state, often provides far
more insight into biological problems than does
genomics because proteins comprise much of the
structural and functional components of biological
organisms. There are a number of challenges to the
analysis of proteomics data due to the large volume and
low reliability of the proteomics data stream [1-4].
One of the main experimental approaches to
proteomic analysis of biological conditions is often
referred to as ‘top down proteomics [5]. In top down
proteomics, proteins are first isolated from a biological
sample and then digested into peptides using a protease
such as trypsin. This increases the number of elements
that need to be measured by more than 10 fold, but this
step is required since whole proteins are usually too large
and complex to analyze by conventional tandem mass

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

spectrometry. While studying peptides instead of
proteins is more experimentally feasible, there is an
inherent loss of information since peptides from all of the
proteins in the system are commingled. Thus, the
presence of a specific protein is inferred indirectly from
the presence of peptides that the protein contains, rather
than direct observations of the intact protein. This is
further complicated by the fact that some peptides occur
in multiple proteins, so assignment of a peptide can be
ambiguous [6].
One of the promises of proteomics is the ability to
quantitatively determine the ratio of protein present
between two samples representing different biological
states [7-12]. To do this, a number of different methods
have been employed, many of which rely on some form
of differential labeling with a stable isotope label that can
be detected by mass spectrometry [8, 13-16]. More
recently, it has become more common to quantitate the
relative abundance of proteins by examining measures
such as the number of spectra (spectral counting) or the
total number of ions or ion current (TIC) attributed to a
protein [17-19]. This can be extended to the comparison
of protein signals between samples to derive relative
ratios of protein abundance between the samples.
At this step, the results are informative, but a long
list of protein ratios from a single sample or series of
samples can be daunting and difficult to put in a global
perspective. To aid in the interpretation of the results,
each of the proteins is annotated with its matching gene
ontology or GO terms [20]. Since the number of
matched GO terms can be nearly equal to or even greater
than the number of proteins matched, the GO terms are
simplified by mapping to a GO slim ontology which
groups them into more intellectually manageable number
of more general categories [21]. The hierarchical nature
of the GO assignments allow for the data to be easily
visualized using dynamic visualization tools such as
TreeMap [22-24] that have been developed as general
purpose data display programs.
Using the suite of software tools that we have
developed, it is easy for a researcher to analyze the
results of a large-scale quantitative proteomics
experiment as a single graphic.
The dynamic
visualization tools are powerful enough to allow the data
to be explored and changes between the two samples in

the ratios of proteins involved in different biological
processes, molecular function, or cellular localization to
be easily determined and displayed.

2. Methods
2.1. Mass Spectrometry
Samples of rat cell media were prepared and
analyzed by mass spectrometry as previously described
[25].

wild type, etc. More complex designs can also often be
constructed as a series of binary comparisons. The
overall experimental design used in this study is shown
in Figure 1.
Trypsin Digest
Sample B
(unlabeled)

Trypsin Digest
Sample A
(labeled)

2.2. Software
Binary data (.RAW) files produced by the mass
spectrometer were converted to individual spectra
centroided mass lists using the extract-ms program
provided by the instrument manufacture (Thermo).
Peptide identification was carried out using Sequest
(Thermo) [26] running in a cluster environment. Results
from the Sequest program were summarized and filtered
using the Epitomize program. Zoom scan spectra were
extracted from .raw files using the RawBiTZ program,
version 1.1. Stable isotope quantitation and .tm3 file
creation was performed using ZoomQuant version 1.4.
ZoomQuant, RawBiTZ and Epitomize are distributed as
a package by the National Heart Blood Institute
Proteomics Center at the Medical College of Wisconsin
(http://proteomics.mcw.edu) [27].

Mix Samples
A and B

Analyze
Mixed sample
by LC-MS

Perform Sequest
Analysis on
Results

Extract Zoom
Scan Data with
RawBitZ

2.3. Databases and Ontologies
The rodent subsection of the Uniprot 49.1 database
[28] was used in peptide searches. A local database
mapping the gene ontology (GO) terms to Uniprot
accession numbers was created from the Uniprot/GO
cross reference file publicly released by the Gene
Ontology
Annotation
(GOA)
Database
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) [29]. The GO terms were
then further mapped to their GO slim entries using the
generic GO slim released by The Gene Ontology
Consortium (http://www.geneontology.org) [21].

Filter Sequest
Results with
Epitomize

Quantitate
labeled/unlabled
sample ratios with
ZoomQuant

2.4. Dynamic Visualization
Dynamic visualization of the proteomics search
results was carried out using the TreeMap program
(version 4.1.1) produced by the Human Computer
Interactions Laboratory of the University of Maryland
[22, 23].

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Experimental Design
The main goal of quantitative proteomics is to
carry out the measurement of the relative abundance of
many protein species in a pair of samples. Many
biological experiments are set up to compare a binary
pair of samples, ie. drug treated and control, mutant and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Dynamic
Visualization
with TreeMap

Figure 1. Experimental Design
Pairs of biological samples are digested with
trypsin, to produce peptides compatible with analysis by
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS).
One of the samples is digested in normal water and the
other sample is digested in water in which 95% of the
normal 16O oxygen atoms have been substituted with the
18
O stable isotope. Serine proteases, such as trypsin, are

capable of catalyzing the exchange of the C-terminal
oxygen atoms on the peptides with oxygen atoms from
the water present in the reaction. In the case of samples
digested in the presence of 18O labeled water, one or two
18
O atoms can be incorporated into the peptide (single
and double labeled species). After protease digestion, the
labeled and unlabeled samples are mixed and analyzed
by LC/MS. The mixing and co-analysis of the unlabeled
and labeled samples thus avoids any problems with
chromatographic alignment or stochastic mass sampling
that can occur when comparing independent LC/MS
runs.

2.2. Spectral searching
The .RAW files generated by the mass
spectrometer were processed using the tools provided by
the Sequest browser (Thermo). Peak lists for individual
MS/MS spectra were generated using the extract_ms.exe
program. The resulting .dta files were used to search a
current version of the rodent subsection of the UniProt
database using the cluster implementation of the
Sequest_27.exe program (Thermo). The resulting search
results in the form of .out files were filtered and
organized using the Epitomize program. Filtering was
based primary on the cross correlation or Xcorr score
determined by Sequest as well as by percent ion match
between the theoretical and experimental spectra, total
ion current (TIC) and the magnitude of the difference
between the experimentally determined mass and the
theoretical mass calculated from the peptide
identification.

Zoom Scan Deconvol ution

Figure 3. ZoomQuant Spectral View

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

16O
2

isotopic distribution of the labeled and unlabeled species
based on the atomic formula. Using this information,
overlapping peaks of the unlabeled, single, and double
labeled isotope distribution curves are deconvoluted as
shown in Figure 2. The unlabeled and labeled (single and
double labeled) peptide signals are integrated by
summing up the intensities of spectra in the two regions.
These two areas are then used to calculate the
labeled/unlabeled ratio for each spectrum.
As shown in Figure 3, the program displays the
spectra and indicates each of the identified
unlabeled/labeled peptide peaks that are to be included in
the ratio calculations. Intensity indicated in the blue,
cyan, green and yellow peaks is included in the
calculation of the unlabeled signal and intensity indicated
in green, yellow, orange, red, pink and violet peaks is
included in the calculation of the labeled area. Areas
indicated in grey are considered background and are not
used in the calculation. The user is given the option of
shifting the spectra for the purpose of calculation in
fractional m/z steps. This allows for correction of miscalibration of the mass spectrometer.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

16O 1 8O
1
1

18O
2

Figure 2. Spectral Deconvolution

2.2. Quantitation
Quantitation of the spectra was carried out using a
version the ZoomQuant v1.4 program. ZoomQuant uses
the peptide sequence from the Sequest analysis of the
spectra to calculate the expected mass and expected

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The ZoomQuant program requires that the user
select a spectrum to be included in the final report. This
is done to insure that the spectrum has been examined
and is of sufficient quality to be included in the further
analysis and final report. There can be a number of
different reasons that a spectrum should be excluded
from further consideration. One cause would be that
both the unlabeled and labeled areas were not correctly
identified. This problem, as described above, is most
likely due to a failure of the search algorithm to correctly
identify the sequence of the peptide. Other problems
include excessive background or contaminant peaks.
The latter can be detected in that they change the
distribution of the peaks within the isotopic envelopes of
the unlabeled and labeled species. After the spectra have
been selected, the ratios are calculated and all of the
scans for each peptide are averaged and the standard
deviation is calculated. The data for all of the peptides
of a given protein are also combined to calculate the
average and standard deviation of ratio for each protein
detected in the sample. Finally, the average and standard
deviation is calculated for all of the proteins in the
samples. For normal biological samples, it would be
expected that the overall ratio between samples would
approach 1, i.e. while some proteins are present at higher

levels in one of the samples, other proteins would be
present at lower levels. This overall ratio value could
then be used to normalize the protein ratios for the
individual proteins. Reports can be formatted as HTML,
XML, text, or tab-delimited text for further analysis. In
this report, we describe the use of data formatted in the
.tm3 format for dynamic visualization. The .tm3 format
consists of two header lines that define the field names
and types, followed by tab-delimited columns of data. In
the first two columns, the protein name and description is
placed. This is followed by the calculated ratio between
protein abundance and the number of independent
peptides and scans that were quantitated for the protein.
A blank column is inserted to indicate the start of the GO
hierarchy information and is followed by columns
containing the GO category (biological process,
molecular function or cellular localization) and the GO
term. The last column repeats the protein name.
Proteins with multiple GO annotations are represented by
multiple lines with the same protein information for each
GO term.

2.3. Dynamic visualization
The quantitation and analysis of a large-scale
proteomic experiment is greatly facilitated by the use of
the ZoomQuant program, but deriving a biologically
meaningful conclusion from the resulting output, a long
list of protein ratios, can be a challenge. One of the
problems is that spectra often match peptides from
related proteins in the database search, ie. homologs and
orthologs. Although performing the spectral search
against a database that is limited to a single species
removes the redundancy of homologs, different protein
isoforms present in the database can make the
interpretation more difficult. One approach to this
problem is to attempt to collapse the results into more
general categories based on the Gene Ontology (GO)
annotations of the proteins matched.
The goal of summarizing the results by protein
GO annotation is to make the overall pattern of protein
changes more immediately obvious and easier to grasp.
If the protein accession numbers were directly mapped to
the GO annotations, this would only partway achieve this
goal. This is because it is the usual practice to annotate a
protein with the most ‘fine grained’ or lowest level GO
term. If the proteins were mapped to these fine grained
terms, there would be only a modest reduction in
complexity since many of the fine-grained terms will be
only represented by a single protein in the sample. A
better method is to use the GO-slim approach of
simplifying the GO ontology. This allows the fine
grained terms to be mapped to more encompassing,
higher level GO terms. Thus, instead of the location of
the protein being mapped to a very specific term such as
mitochondrial matrix (GO:0005759), the protein would
be mapped to the more general term mitochondrion
(GO:0005739). A number of different GO slims have
been created and are actively maintained. For this work,
we used the Generic GO slim produced by Suparna

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Mundodi and Amelia Ireland [21]. ZoomQuant can take
the results of a Sequest search against a UniProt based
database that have been quantitated and map them to the
GO annotations. This helps to convert the results from a
long list of protein ratios to a simpler list of changes in
proteins with different cellular localization, molecular
function or involvement in different biological processes.
If the primary GO based output of the ZoomQuant
program was again in the format of a long list, there
would be only a marginal improvement achieved by the
addition of the mapping to the GO terms. Instead, we
have chosen to use the TreeMap dynamic data
visualization tool. This approach allows the user to view
and manipulate the results of the entire experiment as a
single graphic. The output of the ZoomQuant program is
a .tm3 file that can be directly opened by either the
standalone or applet version of the University of
Maryland TreeMap program.
Since the TreeMap
program was designed to visualize hierarchal data, it is
an ideal choice to display the proteins ratio data that has
been mapped to the GO hierarchy. The TreeMap
program displays quantitative data as rectangles that vary
in terms of size and color, based on two quantitative
variables. Figure 4 shows the initial view of the data
formatted by ZoomQuant and visualized by TreeMap.

Figure 4. Initial TreeMap View
Once the .tm3 data file has been opened by the
TreeMap program, the user can then choose display
features such as labeling by protein name, accession
number, or description, and quantitative display variables
(size and color of boxes) using variables such as ratio,
peptide count, or scan count. (Figure 5)

Figure 5. TreeMap display options
In this display, the size of the boxes is determined
by the number of spectra for that protein that were
quantitated (scan count) and the color of the box is ratio
of protein abundance as determined by the ratio of
labeled and unlabeled peptides. The number of bins and
the distribution of bins can be configured by the user to
produce a more useful view of the data. Figure 6 shows
the use of additional bins and a logarithmic scale to
better differentiate protein ratios.

Figure 6. Use of color and binning to display
protein abundance ratios
One of the compelling reasons for using TreeMap to
visualize proteomics data is that it allows the data to be
displayed in the context of a hierarchy. The GO
ontologies are a natural candidate to provide this
hierarchical organization of quantitative proteomics data.
The GO ontologies are divided into main groups of
molecular function, cellular localization and biological

Figure 7. TreeMap view zoomed to show protein cellular localization

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

process. Each of these main categories is further divided
into more specific terms. In order to prevent the
generation of too many subcategories, a GO slim is used
to condense the terms to more obvious groupings.
The TreeMap program also allows a user to zoom in
on a particular part of the hierarchy. For example, the
user can double click on one of the GO categories and
expand it. This can then be repeated for any given GO
term and reversed by zooming out by right clicking on
the selected category.
TreeMap also allows the user to display the
color for the average value for each of the hierarchal
groups, rather than the individual protein boxes and
values. This allows the user to see the more global
picture of how the protein samples differ with less
distraction from the individual data points. In the
example shown in Figure 8, the averaged view makes it
evident that proteins which are secreted (endoplasmic
reticulum and extracellular space - pink) are enhanced as
compared to proteins associated with the cytoskeleton
(cytoskeleton and actin filament – yellow and green) in
the cell culture media samples.

Figure 8. TreeMap showing averaged
categories
It is often very valuable to be able to examine a
subset of the data rather than view the entire dataset. As
shown above, it is possible to zoom in on a particular
portion of the hierarchy. Another method for examining
subsets of the data is to use the filter functions built into
TreeMap. TreeMap allows the user to set limits, both
minimum and maximum for any of the quantitative fields
included in the .tm3 file. For example, the greater the
number of independent peptides seen from a given
protein, the more likely the protein identification is to be
correct. By using the filter functions of TreeMap, the
user can exclude data from proteins for which only one
peptide was quantitated. Figure 9 shows the same view
as Figure 6 in which proteins that only a single peptide
was observed removed were filtered out and removed.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 9. Data with single peptide proteins
removed

Conclusions
Quantitative proteomics is one of the fastest growing
fields in biomedical research. By focusing on proteins,
investigators are more likely to observe a wider range of
regulation in biological systems. One of the difficulties
that proteomics is facing is the large volume of data that
it produces. Not only is this an issue in terms of data
storage and handling, but also in the human
‘consumption’ of the data. Long lists of differentially
expressed proteins are difficult for most biologist to
digest and produce biologically relevant conclusions. In
order to make the data accessible, it needs to be
formatted in a way so that the results obtained can be put
into a global context so the ‘big picture’ becomes
evident.
Dynamic visualization allows the user to examine
multilevel hierarchal datasets in different ways so as to
aid in the understanding of the data. TreeMap is one of
the oldest and most well established paradigms for
dynamic visualization. It provides an interface to the
data that is comprehensive, but not overwhelming, and
since it has been commonly used in disk utilities and
other settings, also may be familiar and intuitive to the
average biologist. Previously, treemaps have been
applied to the visualization of microarray based gene
expression data in the context of GO annotations [30]. In
addition to examining microarray results rather than
quantitative proteomics data, that work differs from the
current study in several key aspects. In our approach, we
use a GO slim to simplify the data. This helps to
overcome the limitations of the fine-grained nature of the
GO annotations. Second, we export additional columns
of quantitative data. This allows for the data to be
filtered on different criteria then used for display. Lastly,
we have more tightly integrated the analysis application
with the generation of the .tm3 file used for visualization.
By including the code required to annotate and format
the data within the GUI based application used to
quantitate the data, we have made the process much
more automated and simpler and reduced the barriers to
acceptance by experimenters.

As proteomics datasets become larger and more
complex, it is critical that analysis tools take advantage
of the research done on human-computer interfaces and
provide the best view of the data possible to the end user.

[15]

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NHLBI Proteomics
Center contract NIH-N01 HV-28182.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

H. Zhu, M. Bilgin, and M. Snyder, "Proteomics," Annu
Rev Biochem, vol. 72, pp. 783-812, 2003.
S. D. Patterson and R. H. Aebersold, "Proteomics: the
first decade and beyond," Nature Genetics, vol. 33, pp.
311-323, 2003.
D. Lin, D. L. Tabb, and J. R. Yates, "Large-scale protein
identification using mass spectrometry," Biochimica Et
Biophysica Acta-Proteins and Proteomics, vol. 1646, pp.
1-10, 2003.
R. Aebersold and M. Mann, "Mass spectrometry-based
proteomics," Nature, vol. 422, pp. 198-207, 2003.
G. E. Reid and S. A. McLuckey, "'Top down' protein
characterization via tandem mass spectrometry," Journal
of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 37, pp. 663-675, 2002.
A. I. Nesvizhskii, "Protein identification by tandem mass
spectrometry and sequence database searching," Methods
Mol Biol, vol. 367, pp. 87-120, 2006.
T. J. Griffin, C. M. Lock, X. J. Li, A. Patel, L.
Chervetsova, H. Lee, M. E. Wright, J. A. Ranish, S. S.
Chen, and R. Aebersold, "Abundance ratio-dependent
proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry," Analytical
Chemistry, vol. 75, pp. 867-874, 2003.
M. R. Flory, T. J. Griffin, D. Martin, and R. Aebersold,
"Advances in quantitative proteomics using stable
isotope tags," Trends in Biotechnology, vol. 20, pp. S23S29, 2002.
M. P. Washburn, R. Ulaszek, C. Deciu, D. M. Schieltz,
and J. R. Yates, "Analysis of quantitative proteomic data
generated via multidimensional protein identification
technology," Analytical Chemistry, vol. 74, pp. 16501657, 2002.
T. J. Griffin, D. K. M. Han, S. P. Gygi, B. Rist, H. Lee,
R. Aebersold, and K. C. Parker, "Toward a highthroughput approach to quantitative proteomic analysis:
Expression-dependent protein identification by mass
spectrometry," Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 12, pp. 1238-1246, 2001.
M. Mann, R. C. Hendrickson, and A. Pandey, "Analysis
of proteins and proteomes by mass spectrometry,"
Annual Review of Biochemistry, vol. 70, pp. 437-473,
2001.
S. P. Gygi, B. Rist, and R. Aebersold, "Measuring gene
expression by quantitative proteome analysis," Current
Opinion in Biotechnology, vol. 11, pp. 396-401, 2000.
H. L. Zhou, J. A. Ranish, J. D. Watts, and R. Aebersold,
"Quantitative proteome analysis by solid-phase isotope
tagging and mass spectrometry," Nature Biotechnology,
vol. 20, pp. 512-515, 2002.
S. P. Gygi, B. Rist, S. A. Gerber, F. Turecek, M. H.
Gelb, and R. Aebersold, "Quantitative analysis of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

complex protein mixtures using isotope-coded affinity
tags," Nature Biotechnology, vol. 17, pp. 994-999, 1999.
D. R. Goodlett, A. Keller, J. D. Watts, R. Newitt, E. C.
Yi, S. Purvine, J. K. Eng, P. von Haller, R. Aebersold,
and E. Kolker, "Differential stable isotope labeling of
peptides for quantitation and de novo sequence
derivation,"
Rapid
Communications
in
Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 15, pp. 1214-1221, 2001.
M. B. Goshe and R. D. Smith, "Stable isotope-coded
proteomic mass spectrometry," Curr Opin Biotechnol,
vol. 14, pp. 101-9, 2003.
B. Zhang, N. C. VerBerkmoes, M. A. Langston, E.
Uberbacher, R. L. Hettich, and N. F. Samatova,
"Detecting differential and correlated protein expression
in label-free shotgun proteomics," J Proteome Res, vol.
5, pp. 2909-18, 2006.
W. M. Old, K. Meyer-Arendt, L. Aveline-Wolf, K. G.
Pierce, A. Mendoza, J. R. Sevinsky, K. A. Resing, and N.
G. Ahn, "Comparison of label-free methods for
quantifying human proteins by shotgun proteomics," Mol
Cell Proteomics, vol. 4, pp. 1487-502, 2005.
M. C. Wiener, J. R. Sachs, E. G. Deyanova, and N. A.
Yates, "Differential mass spectrometry: a label-free LCMS method for finding significant differences in
complex peptide and protein mixtures," Anal Chem, vol.
76, pp. 6085-96, 2004.
M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H.
Butler, J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S. S.
Dwight, J. T. Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. IsselTarver, A. Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, J. E.
Richardson, M. Ringwald, G. M. Rubin, and G.
Sherlock, "Gene ontology: tool for the unification of
biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium," Nat Genet,
vol. 25, pp. 25-9, 2000.
M. A. Harris, J. Clark, A. Ireland, J. Lomax, M.
Ashburner, R. Foulger, K. Eilbeck, S. Lewis, B.
Marshall, C. Mungall, J. Richter, G. M. Rubin, J. A.
Blake, C. Bult, M. Dolan, H. Drabkin, J. T. Eppig, D. P.
Hill, L. Ni, M. Ringwald, R. Balakrishnan, J. M. Cherry,
K. R. Christie, M. C. Costanzo, S. S. Dwight, S. Engel,
D. G. Fisk, J. E. Hirschman, E. L. Hong, R. S. Nash, A.
Sethuraman, C. L. Theesfeld, D. Botstein, K. Dolinski,
B. Feierbach, T. Berardini, S. Mundodi, S. Y. Rhee, R.
Apweiler, D. Barrell, E. Camon, E. Dimmer, V. Lee, R.
Chisholm, P. Gaudet, W. Kibbe, R. Kishore, E. M.
Schwarz, P. Sternberg, M. Gwinn, L. Hannick, J.
Wortman, M. Berriman, V. Wood, N. de la Cruz, P.
Tonellato, P. Jaiswal, T. Seigfried, and R. White, "The
Gene Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource,"
Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 32, pp. D258-61, 2004.
B. Bederson, B. Shneiderman, and M. Wattenberg,
"Ordered and quantum treemaps: Making effective use of
2D space to display hierarchies," ACM Transactions on
Graphics %M doi:10.1145/102377.115768, vol. 21, pp.
833 - 854, 2002.
B. Johnson and B. Shneiderman, "Tree-Maps: a spacefilling approach to the visualization of hierarchical
information structures," Proc. of IEEE Visualization '91,
pp. 284–291, 1991.
R. Vliegen, J. J. v. Wijk, and E.-J. v. d. Linden,
"Visualizing Business Data with Generalized Treemaps,"
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 12, pp. 789-796, 2006.
M. C. Pellitteri-Hahn, M. C. Warren, D. N. Didier, E. L.
Winkler, S. P. Mirza, A. S. Greene, and M. Olivier,
"Improved mass spectrometric proteomic profiling of the

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

secretome of rat vascular endothelial cells," J Proteome
Res, vol. 5, pp. 2861-4, 2006.
J. K. Eng, A. L. McCormack, and J. R. Yates, "An
approach to correlate tandem mass spectral data of
peptides with amino acid sequences in a protein
database," J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., vol. 5, pp. 976989, 1994.
B. D. Halligan, R. Y. Slyper, S. N. Twigger, W. Hicks,
M. Olivier, and A. S. Greene, "ZoomQuant: an
application for the quantitation of stable isotope labeled
peptides," J Am Soc Mass Spectrom, vol. 16, pp. 302-6,
2005.
A. Bairoch, R. Apweiler, C. H. Wu, W. C. Barker, B.
Boeckmann, S. Ferro, E. Gasteiger, H. Huang, R. Lopez,
M. Magrane, M. J. Martin, D. A. Natale, C. O'Donovan,
N. Redaschi, and L. S. Yeh, "The Universal Protein
Resource (UniProt)," Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 33, pp.
D154-9, 2005.
E. Camon, M. Magrane, D. Barrell, V. Lee, E. Dimmer,
J. Maslen, D. Binns, N. Harte, R. Lopez, and R.
Apweiler, "The Gene Ontology Annotation (GOA)
Database: sharing knowledge in Uniprot with Gene
Ontology," Nucleic Acids Res, vol. 32, pp. D262-6,
2004.
E. Baehrecke, N. Dang, K. Babaria, and B. Shneiderman,
"Visualization and analysis of microarray and gene
ontology data with treemaps " BMC Bioinformatics, vol.
5, pp. 84, 2004.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

