Visualizing the activity of a web-based collaborative platform
Benoît Otjacques*, Monique Noirhomme**, Xavier Gobert*, Pierre Collin*, Fernand Feltz*
*Centre de Recherche Public – Gabriel Lippmann, Luxembourg
**University of Namur, Belgium
{otjacque, gobert, collin, feltz}@lippmann.lu , monique.noirhomme@info.fundp.ac.be
Abstract
This paper describes a prototype that offers
visualization features for monitoring a web-based
collaborative platform. The data displayed supports
workplace awareness by providing an overview of the
activities carried out on the platform. The prototype
focuses on the information structured as hierarchical
data. Three views are included: a classic vertical tree, a
treemap view and an original new layout called ellimap.
The system has been implemented on a real case in the
domain of the support to innovation.
Keywords--- Collaborative Platform, Workplace
Awareness, Hierarchical Data Visualization, Ellimap

1. Introduction
Prior work in the field of CSCW stresses the importance
of awareness. Dourish and Belloti [4] introduced the
concept of awareness that they defined as ‘an
understanding of the activities of others, which provides
a context for your own activity’. Ellis [5] argued that ‘the
philosophy of groupware is to encourage cooperation by
making it known and instantly apparent to all who is
sharing what with whom’. Humphries et al. [8] define
activity awareness as ‘knowing what has happened, what
is happening and what will likely happen in the future
over extended periods of time’.
Greenberg [10] pointed out that there are many
forms of awareness: informal awareness, social
awareness, group-structural awareness and workspace
awareness. Workspace awareness, which will be under
focus in this paper, includes awareness of people, how
they interact with the workspace, and the events
happening within the workspace.
Otjacques et al. [15] proposed another classification
that distinguishes Workspace Individual Awareness
(WIA) and Workspace Global Awareness (WGA). WIA
refers to the notification of information relating to a
specific resource or user within the workspace. WGA
concerns aggregated or anonymous information.
Aggregated information refers to the general level of
activities in the workplace. Anonymous information
gives the user some feedback on what happens in the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

collaborative environment but does not explicitly
indicate which entities it relates to.
In this paper, we focus on workspace awareness in
the Greenberg’s taxonomy. In Otjacques et al.’s
classification, we include some elements relating to both
WGA and WIA but with a special interest for the global
overview. In other words, the purpose of our research
consists in providing the supervisors of a collaborative
platform with some global information about what
happens in this workplace. We do not aim to build an
individual tracking system that monitor a given user or
resource.
Graphical representations have proven to be of high
value for conveying information efficiently and rapidly
in a large number of situations. We have then chosen to
investigate how information visualization can support
web-based platform monitoring.

2. State of the Art
2.1. Visualization of cooperation
Numerous approaches have been proposed to visualize
data related to a cooperative context. They can be
distinguished according to different axes of analysis such
as the data type, the type of visualization technique, the
dimensions of the data space or the modalities of
interactions.
In information visualization, the dataset and its
properties (e.g. structure, size) plays a major role in
finding the best graphical representation. Therefore, we
propose to explore what kinds of data associated to a
collaborative platform it may be useful to represent
graphically.
A first classification relies on the semantics of the
data. From this viewpoint, several categories may be
encountered. In some circumstances, it may be
meaningful to visualize the electronic communications
(e.g. e-mail, chat, newsgroup). For instance, several
prototypes (e.g. ‘Themail’ [21] ,‘Mat’Graph’ [14] ,
‘Clique Panel’ [13] ) have focused on the visualization
of e-mails. Some researchers also explored the
representation of the presence of actors in a shared
environment (e.g. ‘Babble’ [6] or ‘Tower World’ [16] ).

The visualizations may also focus on the actions on
shared resources (e.g. Smartmaps [9] ) or the planning of
events (e.g. agendas [7] ).
A second approach concentrates on the structure of
the dataset. For instance, a seminal taxonomy [17] in the
information visualization discipline distinguishes
networks, trees, temporal, multidimensional, 1-D, 2-D or
3-D data. If this classification is considered, we can
observe that the data related to a collaborative platform
may take many of these forms. For instance, the
communications within a group are typically organized
as network data and the actions on shared objects are
often represented as temporal data. We have chosen to
concentrate on hierarchical data because this kind of data
structure also appears in many ways in collaborative
platforms. Indeed, a workplace defined as a combination
of sub-workplaces; a project split in work packages; and
a set of documents organized in directories are all some
examples of hierarchical data that may be encountered in
the context of collaborative platform monitoring.

2.2. Visualization of hierarchies
The visualization of hierarchical data is well documented
in the literature. However, most of the techniques that
have been proposed rely only on two basic visual
properties: enclosure and connectivity.
Connectivity means representing the nodes of the
hierarchy by punctual objects (e.g. points, icons) and the
parent-child relation among them by lines (e.g. straight
lines, curves). The vertical tree used in Microsoft
Windows Explorer is a typical example of this kind of
techniques. Nevertheless, some researchers have
proposed more original approaches, like the Disk Tree
[2] that uses polar coordinates or the Hyperbolic Browser
[11] based on hyperbolic geometry.
Enclosure consists in representing the nodes by
geometrical shapes that are successively inscribed one
into each other. This recursive process keeps the size of
the display space constant, whatever the size of the
dataset. Shneiderman’s treemaps [18] are probably the
most famous technique of this kind. The treemap
approach has been improved in many ways since its
initial version (see [19] for a review). Compared to most
of the connectivity-based techniques, the treemaps offer
the advantage that the area of the nested rectangles
visualizes the relative weight of the nodes. This very
useful feature makes it easy to realize the relative
‘power’ of each node.
In visualizing hierarchies, an important challenge
consists in finding the right trade-off that maximizes the
perception of the data structure and minimizes the
proportion of lost area in the display space. Moreover, it
is sometimes also required to represent the weight of the
nodes. In general, connection-based approaches perform
well in terms of structure perception and enclosure-based
techniques are very efficient to use the display space.
However, some proposals have appeared to tackle the
weaknesses of each category of representation. For
instance, the ‘Cushion Treemaps’ [20] make use of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

shading to improve the recognition of hierarchical
structure in an enclosure-based method.

3. The context of the research
In Luxembourg, a governmental agency is in charge of
all actions to promote innovation. In order to support this
mission, a collaborative web-based platform has been set
up. In addition to usual information diffusion features, it
also includes some workspaces where the stakeholders of
a given domain (e.g. polymers experts, surface treatment
specialists) can share their experience and ideas. In order
to determine the most suitable actions to be undertaken
to promote and support this platform, the persons
responsible for its animation expressed a need for an
efficient and easy-to-use monitoring tool. They were
looking for a way to rapidly realize what happens on the
platform. In practical terms, this can be expressed by
issues like which workspaces are active, what are the
largest spaces in terms of the total size of the stored
documents or what is the relative importance of the
topics considering the number of people joining the
discussions. Such questions typically relate to workspace
awareness and more specifically to workspace global
awareness.
To tackle this issue, graphical tools rapidly appeared to
be a suitable answer.

4. The prototype
4.1. Technical architecture
The system described in this paper is called Platform
Monitoring System (PMS) and is illustrated by Figure 1.
Lotus Domino Server

IBM Lotus Software

Team Workplace

Users
management
data file

Central Directory

Import data
Visualization Tool
Tree viewer

Query module

Ellimap viewer
XML file
Data formatting module

Treemap viewer

Data Provider Module
Platform Monitoring System

Figure 1 PMS Architecture
The platform is build upon the IBM Lotus Team
Workplace technology. In this software architecture, the

data are stored in proprietary files. Consequently they
appear more difficult to access than they would be in a
relational database. However, some data can be exported
as structured files and the PMS system relies on this
mechanism to collect the rough information on the
platform activities.
The PMS system is basically composed of two
modules: the Data Provider Module (DPM) and the
Visualization Tool (VT). The DPM module is
responsible for accessing the data stored on the Team
Workplace Platform (TWP) and for providing correctly
formatted data to the VT. The results are collected as
structured files. Then, the data are normalized and
formatted as XML files (e.g. size of the sub-workplace is
set as an attribute of the sub-workplace node). These
XML files are provided to the VT tool that handles the
interaction with the user. It must be noted that the
modular architecture of the PMS system implies that the
VT module is completely independent from the DPM
module. In other words, the VT can visualize any
correctly formatted XML data file. Therefore, the PMS
system can easily be extended to handle data issued from
a collaborative platform running on another technology
than Team Workplace.

4.2. Visualization techniques
The PMS user interface can show three totally different
views of the dataset: a classic tree, a treemap and a new
design called ellimap. The first two techniques are well
known and do not require an extensive description. The
latter, however, needs to be explained with some details.
The ellimap is a new approach that we have
developed. It is based on using some ellipses as graphical
primitives (instead of rectangles) in a treemap-like
recursive algorithm. The principle is quite simple. Each
node is associated to an ellipse. The children of a given
node are represented as smaller ellipses inscribed into the
ellipse corresponding to the parent node. In addition, the
area of each ellipse is proportional to the relative weight
(at the current level) of the corresponding node.

Root

Node 1
Weight(5)

Node 11
Weight(2)

Node 2
Weight(2)

Node 3
Weight(3)

Node 12
Weight(3)

Figure 2 Example of tree
For instance, in the Figure 2, the node 1 has two
children. The relative weight of node 11 is 0.40 and the
relative weight of node 12 is 0.60. Consequently, the
area of the ellipse associated to node 11 is equal to 40 %
of the sum of the areas of the two ellipses at this level.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Similarly, the area of the ellipse associated to node 1
represents 50% of the total area of the ellipses associated
to the nodes 1, 2 and 3.
Root node

Node 1

Node 2

Node 3

Node 11

Node 12

Figure 3 Ellimap: principle
The resulting picture shows the hierarchical
structure as a set of nested ellipses. The relative
importance of each node (cf. Figure 3) also appears
clearly. The purpose of the ellimap technique is to
highlight the nested structure of the dataset in an intuitive
way. Some preliminary evaluations have shown that
some users without any previous experience in
information visualization rapidly understand that the
ellimap represents some hierarchical data.
The prototype uses then one technique based on the
connectivity property (i.e. the classic tree) and two others
relying on the enclosure principle (i.e. treemap and
ellimap). This mix of different views is intended to
combine the advantages of the three techniques. The
drawbacks of a given view can be counterbalanced by
the advantages of another one. Indeed, as Blythe et al. [1]
showed with an experimental study, ‘they may be no
single [graph] drawing that best highlights every
characteristic [of the dataset].’ The combination of
multiple views appears then to be a reasonable strategy
because the graph characteristics and the tasks to be
carried out influence the relevance of a layout in a given
situation.
The tree view is especially efficient to visualize the
structure of the hierarchy. Moreover, as Lee et al. [12]
explain, ‘interaction with and interpretation of node-link
tree structures poses little difficulty for novice users and
therefore interactive tree visualizations can be used for a
large audience’. In comparison, the treemap allows
representing a large amount of data and visualizes the
node value. It is ‘appropriate when showing the attribute
value distributions is more important than showing the
graph structure’ [12] . The ellimap offers a rather good
trade-off between structure perception and node value
representation. Unfortunately, the lost space is higher
than for a treemap.
In the PMS system, the user can choose to visualize
the hierarchical dataset with one of the four following
combinations of views: tree + treemap (cf. Figure 4), tree
+ ellimap (cf. Figure 5), treemap alone or ellimap alone.
Though the ellimap view is a new approach to visualize

hierarchies, the purpose of this paper is not to explain it
in every detail but rather to focus on how to monitor a
collaborative platform with techniques dedicated to
visualize this type of data structure. In fact, all views are
important in the complete PMS application.
Each view offers to the user some easy ways to
navigate through the data. For instance, in the ellimap /
treemap, the user can go deeper in the hierarchy by
clicking inside an ellipse / rectangle and he can move up
either to the upper level or to the root with a right-click.

Figure 4 Tree coupled with a treemap
When the classic tree is combined with another view
(i.e. treemap or ellimap), both views are synchronized.
This coupling means that the active node in the tree
corresponds to the largest shape displayed in the other
view. In this configuration, the treemap/ellimap acts as a
detailed view and the tree provides the global context.

users start exploring the interface with the tree then they
focus on the other view to answer to some specific
questions (e.g. relative importance of the nodes).
In addition to the synchronization of the views, the
prototype also includes several interactive techniques
that enrich the user experience.
In the ellimap and treemap views, the depth of
display can be set via a dynamic query (cf. slider in the
upper part of the UI). The user can then adopt the level
of details that best suits the ongoing task. This feature
simplifies the representation and is useful when the user
wants to see an overview of the platform data without
being overwhelmed by information details.
The prototype also includes a zoom feature driven
by a dynamic query. In addition, the space between the
nested shapes (ellipses / rectangles) can be enlarged and
reduced dynamically. This feature allows the user to
lighten the graphics and to modify its rendering.
In the hierarchy, each node is associated to a set of
metadata (e.g. identification number, name, weight),
which are displayed in a specific textbox.
The ellimap view also allows the user to deactivate
the feature that makes the ellipse area proportional to the
relative weight of the nodes. This option can be used to
focus only on the structure of the data.
From another perspective, Demian and Fruchter [3]
pointed out that in some cases ‘only the leaf nodes are of
interest. Non-leaf nodes are important mainly for
emphasizing structural relationships (i.e. grouping
sibling together).’ For this reason, we have included the
option to visualize the leaves of the hierarchy with an
icon instead of an ellipse. It must be noted, however, that
the user can still choose to visualize the leaf nodes with
ellipses if this representation better fits the application
domain or if some properties of the dataset (i.e. number
of nodes, depth and width of the hierarchy) make the
view with icons not efficient.

4.3. Workplace awareness visualization

Figure 5 Tree coupled with an ellimap
Coupling views also supports progressive learning.
Indeed, the early tests that we carried out shows that the
users relies on their previous knowledge of classic trees
to represent hierarchies when they face more original
views (e.g. ellimaps). The dynamic coupling of the views
makes obvious to the user that they are different
perspectives of the same data. We observed that many

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In the previous section, we describe the views and some
interaction features that are included in the PMS
prototype. However, the description is generic and does
not explain how it is used to monitor the collaborative
platform. This is the purpose of this section.
Numerous elements can be used to render the level
of activity in a collaborative environment. Considering
our context, we were limited however by the data that is
made accessible by the technology of the platform. In
this context, the structure of the platform (i.e. how the
workspaces and sub-workspaces are nested one into each
other) represents a fundamental element. This structure is
then used as the skeleton of the XML documents used as
input of the VT module. In this first version of the PMS
system, several indicators are associated to the activities
carried out on the platform.
The first one is the number of people into each
workplace and the date of the most recent operation in
this workplace. This metrics shows how many people are
involved in the cooperation and if a given workspace was

active in the recent past. The weight represents the
aggregated number of registered users. If the treemap
view is used (cf. Figure 6), the area of the rectangles
represents the size of every group of participants. The
date of the last action in a given space is visualized by
the color of the corresponding rectangle.

workspace and the green color expresses that it was
active very recently (cf. Figure 6). In another case
(Figure 7), the red color can visualize the documents that
have not been updated for a long time. The recently
modified documents are painted in green. The global
picture clearly indicates in which workplaces some
recent documents are stored, which can be considered as
an indicator of some kind of activity.

Figure 6 Workspaces size and activities
A second indicator is associated to the documents
stored on the platform. The structural organization is still
based on nested workspaces but in this case the leaves
represent the documents. The Figure 7 illustrates this
case with an ellimap view.

Figure 8 Individual users activity (ellimap)

Figure 9 Individual users activity (treemap)

Figure 7 Documents in workspaces
Whatever the data displayed, two options are
available to color the ellipses. First, in accordance to the
opponent process theory [22] , the ‘red-green’ channel
can be chosen to establish a mapping between the time
and a two-colors scale. The red color is associated to the
idea that some action has to be undertaken to tackle an
issue while the green color is linked to a quiet situation
that does not require some specific intervention. The
attention of the platform supervisor will then be drawn to
the inactive objects (colored in red). Second, the user can
also use a monochromatic scale to visualize the data
range.
In our context, the red color can mean that no
operations were recently carried out in a given

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The difference between the treemap and the ellimap
to render the same dataset can be illustrated with another
valuable view showing the individual users, the group
that they belong to and their last connection date. Figure
8 and Figure 9 show around hundred users, they
distribution in the groups and the level of recent activity
of each of them. On one hand, the treemap allocates to
every user a larger space than the ellimap. Among others,
it is an advantage for labeling the leaves or for pointing
an element with a cursor. On the other hand, the
perception of the data structure is immediate in the
ellimap, which can also be a positive element if this
aspect of the data must be highlighted. To sum up, we
believe that both views have strengths and weaknesses
depending on the tasks to be carried out on the data.
Finally, we draw the attention to the fact that, for
confidential reasons, the figures presented above are
based on simulated data but they render what happens in
the real cases.

[9]

Conclusions
To the limit of our knowledge, few examples of use
of enclosure-based visualization methods have been
reported for monitoring a collaborative platform. The
PMS system illustrates however the potential of such
approaches to provide a global overview of a set of
workplaces and to visualize some metrics of the
activities carried out in such collaborative environments.
We consider two directions to extend the research
presented in this paper. First, we are investigating some
new algorithms to reduce the lost space in the ellimap
view. Second, we plan to extend the system to interface
it with some platforms running on different technologies.

[10]

[11]

[12]

Acknowledgements
The findings reported in this paper have been
supported by a grant of the National Research Fund
(FNR) of Luxembourg.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Blythe J., McGrath C., Krackhardt D. The effect of
Graph Layout on Inference from Social Network Data. In
Proceedings of the Symposium on Graph Drawing (GD
'95), 20-22 September 1995, Passau, Germany.
Chi E. H., Pitkow J., Mackinlay J., Pirolli P., Gosswiler
R. and Card S. K. Visualizing the Evolution of Web
Ecologies. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems 1998 (CHI’98),
18-23 Avril 1998 Los Angeles, USA.
Demian P, Fruchter R. Finding and understanding
reusable designs from large hierarchical repositories.
Information Visualization, 2006, Vol. 5, pp. 28-46.
Dourish, P. and Belloti, V. Awareness and coordination
in shared workspaces. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW’92) (Toronto, Canada, October 31 - November 4,
1992). 107-114.
Ellis, C. Keepers, Synchronizers, Communicators and
Agents. In ACM SIGOIS Bulletin, April 1995, Vol. 15,
N° 3, 10-14. Special issue: workshop write-ups and
positions papers from CSCW'94.
Erickson T., Halverson C., Kellogg W. A., Laff M. and
Wolf T. Social translucence, designing social
infrastructures that make collective activity visible, in
Communications of the ACM, April 2002, Vol. 45, Nº 4,
pp. 40-44.
Faulring A. and Myers B. A. Availability Bars for
Calendar Scheduling, in Proceedings of Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’06), 22-27
April 2006, Montréal, Canada.
Humphries, W. D., Neale, D., and McCrickard D. S.
Laboratory Simulation Methods for Studying Complex
Collaborative Tasks. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
(HFES’05) (New Orleans, Louisiana, September 20-24,
2004). 2451-2455.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

Gräter W. and Prinz W. Information Appliances
Supporting Cooperation Awareness in Collaborative
Business Processes, in Proceedings of the Conference on
Collaborative Electronic Commerce Technology and
Research (CollECToR 2005), 12-13 June 2005,
Furtwangen University, Germany.
Greenberg, S., Gutwin, C., and Cockburn, A. Awareness
Through Fisheye Views in Relaxed-WYSIWIS
Groupware, in Proceedings of the Graphics Interface
1996 Conference (Toronto, Canada, May 22-24, 1996).
Lamping, J. and Rao, R. Laying out and Visualizing
Large Trees Using a Hyperbolic Space. In Proceedings
of 7th annual ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology (UIST’94), 2 – 4 November
1994, Marina del Rey, California, USA.
Lee, B., Parr, C. S., Plaisant, C., Bederson, B. B.,
Veksler, V. D., Gray, W. D., Kotfila, C. TreePlus:
Interactive Exploration of Networks with Enhanced Tree
Layouts, in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 2006, Vol. 12 (6), pp. 1414-1426.
Li W.-J., Hershkop S. et Stolfo S. J. Email Archive
Analysis Through Graphical Visualization, in
Proceedings of VizSEC/DMSEC’04 Conference, 29
October 2004, Washington, USA.
Otjacques B. and Feltz F. Representation of Graphs on a
Matrix Layout, in Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Information Visualization (IV’05), 6-8
July 2005, London, United-Kingdom.
Otjacques B., Noirhomme M., Gobert X. and Feltz F.
Cooperation Indexes to Support Workplace Awareness,
in Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on
Groupware (CRIWG 2006), 17-21 September 2006,
Valladolid, Spain.
Prinz W., Pankoke-Babatz U., Gräther W., Gross T.,
Kolvenbach S. and Schäfer L. Presenting Activity
Information in an Inhabited Information Space, in
Snodown, Chirchill et Frécon (eds): Inhabited
Information Spaces, CSCW Series, Springer, London.
Shneiderman B. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy
for
Information
Visualizations,
in
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual
Languages, September 1996, Boulder, USA.
Shneiderman B. Tree Visualization with Tree-Maps: 2-d
Space-Filling Approach. In ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 1992, Vol. 11(1), pp. 92-99.
Shneiderman B. Treemaps for space-constrained
visualization of hierarchies, University of Maryland,
Human – Computer Interaction Lab, Internet address:
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/treemap-history/, accessed
25 Jan. 2007.
van Wijk JJ. and van de Wetering H. Cushion TreeMaps.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis 1999), 24-29 October 1999, San
Francisco, USA.
Viégas F. B., Golder S. and Donath J. Visualizing Email
Content : Protraying Relationships from Conversational
Histories, in Proceedings of Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’06), 22-27 April
2006, Montréal, Canada.
Ware C. Information Visualization, Perception for
Design. San Francisco, USA, Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, 2004.

