Representing, Analyzing, and Visualizing Scholarly Data in Support of
Research Management
Thomas Neirynck & Katy Börner
School of Library and Information Science, Indiana University
10th Street & Jordan Avenue, Bloomington, IN 47405
{tneirync@indiana.edu, katy@indiana.edu}
Abstract

This paper describes a data management system that
serves leaders and members of scholarly units (e.g.,
research groups, laboratories or centers) to organize,
store, and access information relevant to their work and
to the operation of their unit. In particular, we discuss
the representation of major data types such as people,
projects, teaching, publications, presentations, calls &
events, datasets, software, hardware, and funding as well
as their interlinkages. Based on this representation,
different analyses and visualizations become possible.
Each visualization is presented in detail and its usage
and relevance for the management and presentation of a
unit’s operation is discussed. We conclude with an
outlook and discussion.
Keywords: data management, visualization, network
analysis, network visualization

1. Introduction
This paper presents a novel approach and tool for
the tracking, management, and comprehension of data
relevant for the daily operation of a scholarly unit such
as a research group, laboratory, or center. Small research
groups with about five students might not require the
proposed tool as all data can be easily managed by one
person. Huge groups, e.g., entire departments or schools,
with more than 50 different people typically have fulltime paid assistants and staff to take care of finances,
hiring and firing, information technology, travel
arrangements, etc.. However, medium-sized research
units do not enjoy the luxury of paid assistants. They are
often lead by one person with part time help from
students or an hourly staff person. The task of keeping
track of up to 50 people (mostly students that stay a
rather short time), up to 30 research projects, teaching up
to 10 different classes, up to 30 publications a year,
about 50 presentations a year, about 10 co-organized
calls & events, a growing number of used and developed
datasets, different software packages and their versions
and dependencies, owned and licensed hardware, as well
as associated funding is easily overwhelming.
There are tools like Excel and Access that support
spreadsheet design and documentation. However, to our
knowledge, there exists no system that is designed to
support the management of scholarly data that is relevant

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

for the operation of a research unit and the
communication of this data to different stakeholders such
as group lead(s) and members, information technology
staff, funding agencies, or other scholars.
Subsequently, we discuss the needs of different
stakeholders. Next, we review related work. Then, we
present data representations, analyses, and visualizations
that are tailored to the identified stakeholders and their
needs. The paper concludes with a summary and
discussion of future work.
The proposed data representation, analysis, and
visualization approach has been fully implemented in the
InfoVis Lab management system, or IVL for short. All
examples in this paper are drawn from this prototypical
implementation.

2. Different stakeholders and their needs
As mentioned before, the presented tool aims to
support knowledge management for medium-sized
research units. Subsequently, we discuss the information
needs of different stakeholders.
Leaders of medium-sized units frequently need to
provide references for current or previous members.
Receiving a phone call about a student which worked in
the unit four years ago as a summer intern, they quickly
need to retrieve data about the project(s) the student was
involved in; software, papers, presentations s/he
produced and their quality; and any other, e.g., teaching,
contributions the student might have made. Leaders also
need to report the progress of different projects to
different funding agencies in different time intervals,
e.g., quarterly or annually. A particular challenge is
caused by the fact that almost every project starts on a
different day of the year and has a different funding
duration. When a report is due, one needs to retrieve
details about all people, educational/teaching activities,
publications, presentations, calls & events, datasets,
software, and hardware associated with a particular
project for the reporting duration, e.g., the last three or
12 months.
Group members might include Ph.D. students that
need to report their progress on an annual basis. That is,
they need to retrieve all projects they contributed to,
teaching activities, publications, presentations, events
they organized, service activities, and funding acquired
and/or received. Some members are project team leads

themselves and must manage the project team and
associated publication plans, presentation travels,
organized events, as well as the datasets, software, and
hardware associated with their project(s).
Information technology support staff needs to know
what projects and people are affected if certain hardware
is replaced or a piece of software is updated. Ideally,
they even know what publication or software release
deadlines the different projects are aiming for in order to
cause the least interruptions of scholarly activity while
building and maintaining a highly reliable infrastructure.
Funding agencies are interested to see the impact of
the work they fund. Impact might be measured by the
number and quality of produced ‘artifacts’ such as Ph.D.
students, publications, teaching material, datasets, or
software. Quality might be calculated based on the
‘consumption’ of artifacts by others, i.e., the citation of
papers, the hiring of students, the number of invited
talks, and the geospatial (national or international) and
topical (within domain of research or interdisciplinary)
spread of scholarly artifacts.
Scholars might like to gain a quick overview about
the expertise and productivity of a certain unit. They
might be interested to know when Ph.D. students become
available for hire, if an expert has ‘cycles’ left to serve as
a collaborator on a new funding proposal, if a unit
member is available to give a talk at a certain date or is
already committed to other travels, or how often unit
members will travel to Tokyo, Japan this year and might
be able to give a talk without causing additional costs
and travel arrangements.

3. Related work
There exists a rich diversity of knowledge
management books that report innovative approaches
and best practices of how individuals or organizations
can and should manage their knowledge [5]. However,
most of this work is rather qualitative than quantitative.
Recent work on mapping knowledge domains [3,
7] aims to represent, analyze, and map scholarly activity
on a global scale. This work is of great utility if general
trends, patterns, and outliers have to be identified to
support decision making. However, as we have seen in
section 2, most actions and decisions happen on a much
more local scale. To our knowledge there is a desperate
need for more sophisticated scholarly knowledge
management tools.

4. Scholarly knowledge organization
It is non-trivial to decide what general scholarly
record types are needed, what attribute values different
record types should have, and how the records should be
interlinked. These decisions need to be made based on
the information needs that the knowledge management
system is supposed to support, see section 2.
Semantic Association Networks (SANs) have been
introduced in [2] as a novel means of using semantic web
technology to tag and interlink scientific datasets,

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

services (e.g., algorithms, techniques, or approaches),
publications (e.g., papers, patents, grants), and expertise
(i.e., author and user information) to improve scholarly
knowledge and expertise management. Building on this
work, we propose a knowledge organization that
interlinks main scholarly data entities such as people,
projects, teaching, publications, presentations, calls &
events, datasets, software, hardware, and funding, see
Figure 1. Note that people and research projects are the
two central nodes in this network.
Using a visual metaphor, any node can be ‘pulled’
out of the network and other nodes linked to it will
follow. For example, a specific person can be selected
and all scholarly records associated with it will be
retrieved.
Grants
Datasets

Media
Semantic Tags

Teaching
Software
Research

People
Publications

Hardware

Presentations
Calls &Events

Travels

Locations

Figure 1. Simplified representation of the IVL
database schema showing the main associations
between the main data entities. Single and double
arrows respectively indicate one-to-many and manyto-many relationships. All entity types can be linked
to media items or semantic tags.
The database schema, represented in a simplified
manner in Figure 1, was implemented in a relational
PostgreSQL database for the IVL. In general, each
scholarly data type corresponds to a table in the database.
Research projects are stored in tblResearch, publications
in tblPublications, and so on. However, some entity
types are not coerced into a single data model and are
represented by multiple tables. An example is teaching,
which is used to represent everything from semester-long
classes to half-day tutorials. Therefore, each teaching
type (courses, tutorials, educational materials) has its
own table. Other peripheral tables store the different
people types like students that perform independent
studies, research center members, and others. These are
not mutually exclusive, as people can both be doctoral
students and be enrolled in an independent study.
In addition to the main scholarly data entities and
their subtypes, the IVL also monitors the movement of
people in geo-space from one event to another, adding a
spatio-temporal dimension to scholarly activity. Travels
are stored in a separate table, each record specifying a
displacement from one location to another. To simplify
data entry, every time a new presentation or meeting is

added, an automatic function adds a corresponding
record in the travel table. In the IVL, the default start
location is the default location of the person and the end
location being whatever the location of the related event
is. The default travel date is the first date of the event or
meeting. Multi-legged travels can be recorded. Unique
latitude and longitude coordinates are stored in a separate
location table, with corresponding address information.
There are two tables that have linkages to all other
tables: the media table and the semantic tag table. In
Figure 1, these tables are shown in the top right corner,
but to keep the diagram easy to understand, the links are
not drawn. The media table is used to store files
associated with different data entity types, from photos
of people and events, to text files of publications. The
semantic tag table stores a list of unique terms that can
be associated with any of the main data type records.
For example, tags are used to represent concepts such as
“Cyberinfrastructure”, “Knowledge Management” or
“Information Visualization” that are too specific or too
general to correspond to a specific project. Hence, tags
serve as an additional means to organize and retrieve
records.
So-called bridge tables store the relationships
between different data records, e.g. brdgAuthorsEditors
links tblPeople and tblPublications or brdgTeamCollabs
links tblPeople and tblProjects. In most cases, bridge
tables also store additional attributes. For example,
brdgTeamCollabs stores the time during which a link
was active, e.g., how long a person was associated with a
certain project and in what capacity (team lead, team
member, external collaborator). To ensure readability of
Figure 1, the bridge tables are not shown.
The database was prototypically implemented in the
IVL,
with
the
information
displayed
at
http://ivl.slis.indiana.edu. Data entry proceeded in a
variety of ways. Initially, spreadsheets were used to enter
the records of main entities. Later, web based input
forms were developed and used to interlink entities, see
sample forms in Figure 2. Throughout, a database
administration tool, PgAdminIII, was used to make
corrections as necessary.

Figure 2. Data input form for independent studies.
In the near future, the system will support data entry
via text files (.txt, .csv formats) or XML files to populate
the tables of the main data types. For the web based
forms, fielded forms, combo-boxes, and automated data
checking are employed widely to enforce data quality
and integrity.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

5. Data analysis and visualization
Given the data representation introduced in the
previous section, high quality data about scholarly
entities can be captured for subsequent analysis and
visualization in support of needs outlined in section 2.
Firstly, the tool supports the generation of progress
reports for funding agencies. Secondly, the data can be
analyzed to gain further insight into the areas of expertise
within a research lab. If one wants to gain a deeper
understanding of all the work and resources that have
been invested in research on “Information Visualization”
(IV), one can pull out all the projects that are tagged with
this term. All related data records, (type of software,
datasets, publications, etc.) are retrieved as well. Such an
approach goes beyond the mere reporting of a lab’s
activities. Rather, these rich semantic networks represent
the core of a research unit’s activity, which can be
navigated and explored. Returning to the IV example; a
colleague might have attended a presentation of a Ph.D.
student on an IV project. When visiting the research
unit’s web pages, the researcher not only finds a link to
the abstract and slides of the presentation in the
Presentations section, he/she can also find the datasets
for the related IV project and the publications written on
the topic. Hence, s/he can learn about collaborators who
are active on other IV projects, and in turn study their
publications and presentations.
Several graphical displays are supported to aid in the
understanding and communication of this data.
Subsequently, we discuss tabular formats, graphs and
networks, and geospatial visualizations that can be
generated by querying the database.
As for now, all displays are generated by querying
the database manually and use other software packages
or tools, such as Excel or Pajek [6], to generate the
visualizations. In the near future, these steps will be
automated using CIShell and the Network Workbench
technology [4].

5.1 Tabular displays
Sortable tables provide a global view of people,
projects, publications, etc., and their attributes. They are
useful for:
• Retrieving data for writing project specific progress
and final reports.
• Quickly gaining access to up-to-date information
about a person for writing letters of reference or for
giving phone references.
• Having an up-to-date list of all publications,
activities, etc.
• Identifying who has the most publications, projects,
etc.

5.2 Graph displays
Graph displays such as scatter plots and timelines
help to understand correlations and changes over time.
They can be used to correlate dollars spent to the number

of papers published or to check the number of
publications, presentations, people, etc. associated with a
certain person/project in a given time frame.
Results are displayed as simple graphs that represent
the number of entities of the selected type (y-axis) for a
specified time frame (x-axis), see example in Figure 3.

An example network of People and Funding records
for 2001 to 2006 is given in Figure 6. Circular nodes
represent awards, their color indicating the year it was
awarded. Squares (with or without the images as
available in the IVL database) represent the
investigators. Networks are displayed as a static image or
dynamic network visualization that evolves over time.
Networks can be downloaded as .net file for further
analysis and exploration.

5.4 Map displays
Space matters – even in the Internet age [1]. Given
that addresses are available for most entities of type
People, Presentations and Events the joint production of
results documented in papers, presentations, meetings,
travels etc. can be overlaid on a map.
Figure 4 shows an exemplary overlay of Travels in
2003 and 2004 using the Google Maps API.

Figure 3. Number of students and publications in the
InfoVis Lab between 2000 – 2006.

5.3 Network displays
Almost every project is a team effort that consumes
resources, e.g., people, funding, hardware, software, and
produces artifacts such as expertise, publications,
datasets, software, etc. Any team and project can only be
as good as the resource networks that support it and the
artifact networks it produces.
The explicit interlinkage of entity types presented in
section 4 supports the extraction, analysis, and display of
networks. Examples of networks that interlink entities of
only one type are co-author, co-PI, or paper-citation
networks. Figure 5 is an example of a co-authorship
network from 2005 – 2006. It represents all the
collaborations on papers produced by staff and students
active in the InfoVis Llab in that timeframe. The nodes
are color coded according to number of network
components he/she is connected too (when this number
is 2 or higher, this means that these people are
articulation points. Take them away and the network
would fall apart). This is useful to identify which people
have ties to other research groups. Node size represents
the number of papers written, while edge size represents
the number of times the authors collaborated. The border
of the nodes is color-coded too; red for Ph.D. students
that have worked at the lab at one point, blue for other
team members, and black for outside collaborators.
Other networks of interest connect entities of two
types, e.g., people and papers, people that are principal
investigators and projects, people and projects, projects
and funding, etc.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4. Interactive Google Maps interface that
shows travels of InfoVis Lab members in 2003 and
2004.

6. Implementation and usage
The scholarly data organization and representation
discussed in this paper was prototypically implemented
in the data management system of our InfoVis Lab,
online at http://ivl.slis.indiana.edu. Selection of any of
the main entity types brings up dynamically generated
pages with details about that record type, and other
associated information (team members, related
publications, links to software downloads, etc.). Such a
representation supports the needs of the different
stakeholders as outlined in section 2.
Given the easy to use interface and the up-to-date
status of all relevant data, the IVL management system
also serves another interest of scholars: to diffuse their
own data, software, resources, and expertise in exchange
for reputation and funding.

Figure 5: Co-authorship network for all publications of InfoVis lab group members in 2005 to 2006

Figure 6: Awards at the InfoVis lab and their investigators from 2001 to 2006

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

7. Discussion
If every research group would keep track of
scholarly data using an IVL-like setup, then access to
high quality papers, data, software, resources, and
expertise would be considerably easier. Any scholar
could access or disseminate data, software, resources,
etc.. For each expert/author/awardee in the system, a list
of associated datasets, software, resources, papers and
their ‘quality’ could be retrieved. A person’s affiliation,
country, and geo-location as well as his/her area of
expertise could be determined based on his/her datasets,
software, resources, papers, etc. Hence, the research
trajectory of any person could be analyzed and mapped.
Given the rich interlinkage of the different scholarly
data entities, new ways of searching for/sharing of
people/datasets/software become possible. For example,
all people that have worked with a certain dataset can be
retrieved. Analogously, all software that was applied to
study a dataset could be viewed.
Adding semantic tags and/or comments to datasets,
software, resources, papers, and other entities makes it
possible to retrieve entities based on word matches.
Ratings of datasets, software, resources, papers,
experts (manually done or automatically based on
#downloads, #citations, #comments) can be used to
determine what datasets, software, resources, or papers
are most valuable. A true marketplace of scholarly
records can be created. Plus, whoever utilizes this new
way to interlink and manage scientific data will be able
to generate high resolution inserts that can be embedded
in a global map of science.

8. Future work
While the IVL-prototype is operational, there is not
yet a fully integrated visualization environment in place.
All visualizations are generated manually; a query
returns results from the database, which in turn are
visualized using other tools like Excel, Pajek, or Google
Maps.
The
planned
Web-based
visualization
environment will enable true real-time visualizations of
the data. To facilitate data exchange, we also need to
implement better support for the input and output of
various data formats. Thus, immediate tasks include the
following:
•
•
•
•

Web based search interfaces to easily build detailed
queries, and generate various visualizations.
Add applets to the Web pages in support of the
dynamic network visualizations.
Upload papers automatically from Endnote or
BibTEX files.
Export data in different file formats for easy data
exchange, such as .kml for the spatial visualizations,
and GraphML or .nwb for the network
visualizations.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The IVL software and database will also be used to
serve the web pages for the newly funded
Cyberinfrastructure for Network Science (CNS) Center
at Indiana University. While the IVL serves data relevant
for the InfoVis Lab, the CNS site will serve data relevant
to network science research and cyberinfrastructure
development in accordance with the center’s mission.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sumeet Ambre, Gavin
LaRowe, and Russel Duhon for setting up the IVL PHP
code base and for their expert input to the presented
work. Elisha Hardy designed the Web interface. Bryan
Hook proof read this paper. This work is supported by
the National Science Foundation under IIS-0513650 and
IIS-0534909. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the NSF.

References
1.

Batty, M. The Geography of Scientific Citation,
Environment and Planning A, 35, 2003, 761-765

2.

Börner, K. Semantic Association Networks: Using
Semantic Web Technology to Improve Scholarly
Knowledge and Expertise Management. In Geroimenko,
V. and Chen, C. eds. Visualizing the Semantic Web,
Springer Verlag, 2006, 183-198.
Börner, K., Chen, C. and Boyack, K. Visualizing
Knowledge Domains. In Cronin, B. ed. Annual Review of
Information Science & Technology, Information Today,
Inc./American Society for Information Science and
Technology, Medford, NJ, 2003, 179-255.
Herr, B.W., Huang, W., Penumarthy, S. and Börner, K.
Designing Highly Flexible and Usable
Cyberinfrastructures for Convergence. In Bainbridge,
W.S. and Roco, M.C. eds. Progress in Convergence –
Technologies for Human Wellbeing, Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, Boston, MA, 2007, 161-179.
Montano, B. (ed.), Innovations of Knowledge
Management. IRM Press, 2005.
Nooy, W.d., Mrvar, A. and Batagelj, V. Exploratory
Social Network Analysis with Pajek. Cambridge
University Press, 2005.
Shiffrin, R.M. and Börner, K. (eds.). Mapping Knowledge
Domains. PNAS, 101, 2004.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.

