HANNAH: A Vivid and Flexible 3D Information Visualization Framework
Katja Einsfeld, Achim Ebert
Computer Science Department, Technical University Kaiserslautern, Germany
einsfeld@informatik.uni-kl.de, ebert@informatik.uni-kl.de
J¨urgen W¨olle
Institute of Urban Water Management, Technical University Kaiserslautern, Germany
woelle@rhrk.uni-kl.de
Abstract
In this paper we describe an adaptable multi-purpose
3D user interface for complex heterogeneous information.
The framework allows to create visualization instruments
by hierarchically combining small visualization widgets.
We integrate well known 3D visualization tools in our system and also present new metaphors like the RotaryDiagram. Due to the modular architecture and the underlying ontology we are able to build intuitive visualizations
that allow direct manipulation, that directly and vividly respond to user actions and adopt to changing needs. The
visualizations provide the user with multiple perspectives
on the data and semantic relations between items of various perspectives.
The effectiveness of our proposed concepts for 3D information visualization systems is being proven by applying
them to an user interface for monitoring, controlling, and
optimization of a complex wastewater treatment plant.
Keywords— HCI, Semantic Information Visualization, 3D
Interfaces, Information Visualization Framework

1 Introduction
1.1

HANNAH

The presented 3D interface is called HANNAH, which
stands for ”Here And Now, Near At Hand”. The name accounts for the claim for creating an HCI-framework which
is context sensitive, adaptable, ergonomic, intuitive, vivid,
allows direct manipulation and provides direct animated
feedback.

1.2

Application area: Process Visualization

The KOMPLETT-project (”komplett” is German for
”complete”) is engaged with the development of a small
unmanned Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) with
two distinct water circles and resource recycling ambitions.
The final goal of the information visualization system for
this complex plant is the intuitive representation of large

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

amounts of heterogeneous data (e.g. process data, optimization suggestions, expert knowledge, maintenance instructions) depending on the user profile. The visualization
should provide detailed and revealing information for the
remote expert as well as intuitive access to relevant instructions for the non-expert on site. In this context multiple semantic perspectives are essential. The development of the
WWTP as well as the visualization are still in progress.

1.3 Motivation
In the first years of Information Visualization research,
the focus mainly was on isolated and specialized visualization metaphors for specific data sets. Now, there is
more and more interest in the visualization of more complex, heterogeneous and semantically interconnected data.
Moreover, single visualization metaphors are being combined to Information Visualization systems or frameworks
that link multiple perspectives on the data. E.g. Seo et
al.[11] and Jern et al.[7] developed systems with linked 2D
visualizations like scatter plots, color coded maps, hierarchical clusterings, and parallel coordinates. This development is also driven by the fact that the amount and complexity of the data we have to manage and analyze today
increases steadily. This is true for researchers, journalists,
artists, politicians, and many others.
In our specific application area, the visualization of industrial processes, the plant operator has access not only to
some timeworn filers and few measured parameters but to
numerous on-line and off-line parameters that characterize
the current state of the plant in detail. Some WWTPs are
already provided with Decision Support Systems (DSS),
which suggest problem solving and process optimization
strategies to the operator. Moreover, expert databases and
specific support pages of plant manufactures are accessible through the World Wide Web. Thus, the operator is
overwhelmed with predominantly unstructured data. He is
overstrained with the task of finding relevant information,
spotting important trends, and detecting optimization po-

tential. In the worst case the operator is even overloaded
with irrelevant information and consequently no longer
able to respond adequately to exceptional circumstances
on the plant.
Considering the fact that in our case the plant is unmanned and thus even non-experts have to cope with the
system, it has to meet diverse requirements: It has to visually and intuitively indicate trends and irregular behavior
of quantitative data. Depending on the context, it has to
show semantic relations between currently relevant qualitative data like the technical process or the physical layout
of the plant and textual data like plant documentation.
In order to identify the drawbacks of current industrial
process visualization systems (see section 1.4.1) and the
requirements for a new system, we questioned a worker,
who daily interacts with such a system about his practical
experience and his wishes. He was able to quickly navigate
through the different views of the plant and understand the
meaning of symbols and colors that are quite unintuitive to
non-experts. Even experts need some time to understand
the arrangement of information and the interaction possibilities. As the system does not allow to view multiple
perspectives on the plant, our interviewee used multiple
monitors. What he lacked most was a possibility to adapt
the system to changing needs – the static system can only
be configured by system-experts. As a wish for a new
system he mentioned animations of process parameters
changing over a time period.

1.4

State of the Art

1.4.1 Process Visualization
Most process visualization systems, that are in use in industrial plants only provide a fixed number of static process
views which contain some animated elements like color
changing symbols and value displays to indicate the state
of the plant.
E.g. SIEMENS[12] develops SIMATIC WinCC, an
HCI for the visualization and control of industrial processes. They create hierarchical 2D maps of the processes
as well as partly animated 3D models with attached information labels. These visualizations often use unergonomic
color combinations, poor graphics, and unintuitive overcrowded interfaces. To some extent this might be due to
the fact that they want to provide the domain experts with
interfaces similar to conventional drawings, that were developed before the information age, instead of making use
of innovative information visualization techniques. The
most apparent drawback of these conventional process visualization approaches is, however, that the static process
views can not be adapted to changing needs.
When considering the requirement of multiperspective
visualization, not only the process visualization but also

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

the visualization of the physical layout of the plant have to
be addressed. Agrawala et al.[1] described an approach for
visually explaining the construction of 3D objects with the
help of explosion views.
1.4.2 Information Visualization
Brown et al. [3] visualized network performance with various animated 3D metaphors like 3D surfaces and 3D bar
charts. Moreover, they emphasized the importance of animations in visualizations with large data volumes: If a picture is worth a thousand words, then an animated visualization is worth a thousand static graphs.
Although there is still a controversial debate on the usefulness of 3D Information Visualization, some results like
that of Ware et al.[14] are often quoted and commonly accepted. Ware studied graph perception, which is quite important as graphs are generally useful for many visualizations. They found that the ability to decide if two nodes
are connected is improved by the factor 1.6 when adding
stereo cues, by the factor 2.2 when using motion parallax
depth cue, and by the factor 3 when using stereo as well
as motion parallax depth cues. (The motion parallax depth
cue is the depth information we gain when moving in front
of a 3D scene or moving the scene itself.)
As mentioned in section 1.3 Seo et al.[11] and Jern et
al.[7] developed 2D information visualization systems that
provide various views on the data with diverse visualization techniques in separate windows. The separated visualizations are visually connected by direct feedback and
brushing techniques. Pretorius et al. [9] presented a 2D
visualization for large transition graphs that combines two
visualization techniques in one window, namely hierarchical clustering as well as graph arcs between cluster elements.
In our previous work[4] we developed a 3D information
visualization environment for documents, called DocuWorld. In this approach 3D representations of documents
were automatically organized in 3D space depending on
search results, similarities and context. Qualitative evaluation indicated that most users intuitivelly understood where
to look for imported or similar documents.
Many of the 3D visualization and interaction concepts developed in the context of DocuWorld like the
ThoughtWizard metaphor, the Shake Metaphor, Structure on Demand, TacticalZoom, animated feedback, or
ThoughtFlashes are also leveraged in our recent project,
the HANNAH-framework for KOMPLETT. Other concepts are and will be added or improved. The exciting
question of future 3D information visualization interface
research will be, which of these concepts have the capability to exploit the immersive and intuitive potential of 3D
HCIs and finally become conventions.

2 The HANNAH-Framework
2.1

System Requirements and Architecture

In order to develop a system that instantly adapts to
changing user-, task-, and device contexts and that allows
the user to intuitively configure the interface depending on
his or her needs by simply plugging together virtual 3D
components, the system architecture has to be highly modular. The needed 3D support is made available by the use
of the graphics library OpenGL. All visualization items are
instances derived from the base class VisObject. This class
provides basic positioning, material, labeling, and drawing functionality. The next class in the class hierarchy is
AniVisObject, which supplies the functionality needed to
create animated slow-in/slow-out transitions between various states. From this class simple DiagramObjects, objects
in the the ExplosionView, control-elements, and nodes in
the ontology visualization can be derived. More complex
objects must be derived from the class CompoundVisObject, that is also a child class of AniVisObject. CompoundVisObject can be used to combine lower level VisObjects to more complex higher level VisObjects like control menus, Ontology visualizations, or ExplosionViews.
This modular and hierarchical architecture allows to consecutively develop more complex visualization objects in
multiple levels of abstraction, handle them consistently,
and plug them together easily. It also allows to intuitively
implement the previously mentioned (section 1.4.2) concepts: Individual VisObjects or CompoudVisObjects can
be rotated or shaken (ShakeMetaphor) to offer motion parallax depth cues. They can be moved along animated paths,
they can be moved in and out of view (Structure on Demand concept), and scaled depending on the current focus
(TacticalZoom).
2.1.1 Databases and Ontology
The data resulting from measurements on the plant is
stored in databases. The goal of the KOMPLETT-project
is, however, not only to visualize process data and static
process views, but to efficiently, intuitively, and visually
organize more information about the process and to interconnect these heterogeneous information items (see section 1.3). For this purpose, we decided to collect the information as an ontology. The process ontology modeled in
Prot´eg´e[10] contains process steps, the process sequence,
reactors, measuring instruments, links to diverse information material, table names of measured data, many other
information items, and the semantic links between all these
items.

2.2

Processdata Visualization

Most conventional process data visualizations only consist of simple two-color line graphs for one parameter in a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

specific time interval. Considering the findings of Information Visualization research concerning perception, visual scales, and intuitive metaphors, our approach strives to
provide the user with more efficient visual analysis tools.

Figure 1: Processdata in a single diagram
Figure 1 adds the visual scale color to the concept of
simple graphs. The value of the process parameter is
mapped to y-position as well as to a continuous color gradient. The color gradient can be interrupted at one or more
points (in this case between cyan and green and between
orange and red) to represent that the value is below or
above a certain limit. The small sphere on the diagram is
moved following the mouse pointer and continuously displays the exact value under the sphere.

Figure 2: a) Space multiplexing b) ColorPlane
When more than one parameter has to be displayed or
the time interval is enlarged, the user usually has the possibility to choose between time multiplexing (displaying
one diagram after the other) or space multiplexing (all diagrams are scaled down and displayed simultaneously, see
figure 2 a)). Thus, the user is in the dilemma of having to
decide whether he or she wants to abandon the possibility
to compare diagrams or to perceive details. The idea of representing large series of values with few color coded pixels,
the pixel based techniques, has a long history in Information Visualization research. E.g. Ankerst et al.[2] proposed
CircleSegments and Kincaid et al.[8] developed the Line
Graph Explorer. In our system we use ColorPlanes to visualize the value of one parameter in multiple time intervals.
The ColorPlane in figure 2 b) shows temperature measurements in our office. Each row represents on day. Comparing the rows easily reveals certain patterns: At about 9:00
a.m. the temperature falls due to the opening of the win-

dows and at about 1:00 p.m. the temperature rises as the
door is closed during lunchtime.

Figure 3: ColorRolls

Making use of the third dimension, multiple ColorPlanes with data from different process parameters can be
visualized as ColorRolls. The rolls can be simultaneously
rotated in order to move the time interval of interest to the
front. Due to perspective projection a natural focus & context effect is created. Weber et al.[15] proposed a similar
approach for visualizing time-series on spirals.

Figure 4: a) RotaryDiagram b) RotaryDiagram with AverageRings

Another new 3D process data visualization metaphor
that serves as a good compromise in the time vs. space
multiplexing dilemma is the RotaryDiagram shown in figure 4. Similar to the cards in a rotary file known form daily
life, the diagrams can be rotated by the user forward and
backward around the center. The rings in the center (figure
4 b)) are not only used to enforce the rotary file metaphor.
They visually indicate the average value of each column
from all diagrams. These average value rings help to spot
irregularities in the rotated diagrams. Moreover, the semitransparent style of the diagrams allows to directly compare consecutive diagrams.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.3 Process Visualization

Figure 5: a) Process ontology in Prot´eg´e[10] b) ConeView
of Process in HANNAH
As explained in section 2.1.1 the sequence of process
steps needed for the operation of the plant, the reactors involved, the data measured, and other information are organized in an ontology. Thus, one way to visualize the
functionality of the plant is to visualize parts of the ontology. Figure 5 a) shows a cluttered ontology visualization
in Prot´eg´e.
In the ontology visualization of HANNAH the diverse
semantic categories (e.g. process steps, reactors, process
data) are displayed in diverse colors, shapes, and at diverse
depth levels. The relations of the process steps that are
currently in focus are emphasized by animated arrows.
Figure 5 b) shows the ConeView ontology visualization.
It can be used when the user wants to focus on a particular aspect of the process. The selected focus element is
displayed in the center and front. Process elements that
are directly connected to the focus element are rendered in
a first circle around the focus point. This circle is more
distant to the user than the focus point. The second circle
which is even more distant contain items that are connected
to those of the first circle. When the user selects another
item, it is moved to the focus position and its connected
process elements are organized around it in an animated
way.

2.4 Process Plant Visualization

Figure 6: Three states in animated explosion view
Extending the 2D explosion-view metaphor to 3D we
created a visualization tool for the physical layout of the
plant, that allows to explore it hierarchically. Figure 6
shows three states in the exploration of the example geometry. The 3D ExplosionView tool is implemented by

creating a containment hierarchy of elements, for each hierarchy level a graph representing the way in which the
elements are connected to each other, and for each element
the direction in which it is expected to explode. With this
data the geometry can be exploded step by step or automatically to reveal one specific element (e.g. a reactor that has
to be inspected).

Figure 7: Modeling real plant geometry a) Model rendered
with blender[5] b) picture of real plant
In order to transfer this concept the the real geometry of
the plant, we started to model it with Blender[5] as indicated in figure 7.

2.5

Interconnected Perspectives

With the help of the process ontology described in section 2.1.1 we are able to visually relate information items
from diverse categories or perspectives to each other. E.g.
process data can be related to the reactor where it is measured or to the logical process step to which it belongs.

ThoughtFlashes. ThoughtFlahes, that were already used in
our last project[4], emerge from the item under the mouse
pointer and rise in the form of 3D arcs to related items in
an animated way.

Figure 9: Processdata in landscape-metaphor
One possibility to directly and intuitively connect process data to the process steps in which they are measured
is the use of the landscape metaphor as shown in figure 9.
The succession of the process steps is visualized as a planar
graph (calculated with the Graphviz library[6]). The hight
of the nodes is modified depending on the scalar value of
the process parameter. On top of this height field, a landscape is calculated with Shepard’s Scattered Data Interpolation method. As weight function we used the euclidean
distance. This method is often criticized for the fact that
distant points take to much influence on the shape of the
surface, interpolating local points. In our application, however, this is a volitional effect, as the mean value and the
deviation from that value in each process step is easily perceptible. The progression of process parameters over time
can be visualized with this metaphor as an animated deformation of the landscape. To give the user an additional hint
at the actual value in a process step, we plane to use color
as supplementary visual scale.

2.6 Interaction

Figure 8: Semantically interconnected perspectives
When navigating through multiple perspectives it is important that the perspectives are linked in order to help the
user track her current location in information space. Such
a link can be a visual connection between two information items like the curves and arrows connecting process
steps or an animated transition between two visualizations.
These links should help the user to understand the semantic
relation between the linked information elements. Figure
8 shows items two different perspectives, an example ontology visualization and the explosion view, connected by

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Due to the fact that ”getting lost in space” is a potential problem of 3D applications and that the mental load
needed for navigating the viewpoint through the scene
could be used for more important tasks we proposed the
Thought Wizard navigation metaphor[4]: The user relaxes
at a fixed point in 3D spaces and uses simple gestures to
move the needed information around him or her.
Our system supports navigation techniques like changing the visualization mode or perspective, scaling, rotating
or shaking the objects in the scene, or moving another process element to the focus position in ConeView.
The interaction with the HANNAH framework is to
some extend comparable to that of Blender[5], the 3D Content Creation Suite. The scene is directly manipulated (e.g.
rotating or resizing objects or object groups) by mouse
pointer gestures. There are several keyboard shortcuts that
can be used to invoke certain actions or to change visualization modes. As an alternative, there are context menus

displayed on demand directly in the scene. Thus, users can
choose the interaction method that suits their needs.
As a matter of fact, direct user feedback is guaranteed
in our dynamic 3D interface. Moreover, every transition is
animated with a slow-in/slow-out movement as proposed
by Thomas[13] to reinforce the massive character of the
visualization objects and to induce immersion.

3 Conclusions
We presented in this paper a 3D Information Visualization interface called HANNAH. The concepts of HANNAH are a modular architecture, flexibility, adaptability to
changing needs, and intuitive access. The proposed toolbox of concepts, visualization metaphors, and techniques
that can be used to develop interfaces to information rich
environments with large amounts of heterogeneous but semantically related data. Although our focus is on industrial
processes, most of the proposed ideas can easily be transferred to other information environments like for example
personal information collections or software architecture.
Due to the fact that our project is still at an early state
of development, an extensive evaluation of our implementation is hardly possible. When comparing our approach
to those presented in the section on Process Visualization
state of the art 1.4.1 some conclusions can, however, be
drawn: Our system is less static than conventional process
visualization systems. The animated 3D approach offers,
besides more enjoyment and immersion in daily work, new
possibilities like the animated 3D ExplosionView and the
RotaryDiagram that are not available in todays information
interfaces. First feedback from people working with conventional systems reveal that they quickly recognize the
potential of our visualization and are eager to evaluate it.
Future work will be concerned with the development of
more visualization and interaction metaphors, the integration of actual online-data from the plant, and first user evaluations.

4

Acknowledgements

This research is part of the interdisciplinary project
KOMPLETT, which is supported by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).

References
[1] Maneesh Agrawala, Doantam Phan, Julie Heiser,
John Haymaker, Jeff Klingner, Pat Hanrahan, and
Barbara Tversky. Designing effective step-by-step assembly instructions. ACM Trans. Graph., 22(3):828–
837, 2003.
[2] M. Ankerst, D.A. Kaim, and H.-P. Kriegel. Circle
segments: A technique for visually exploring large
multidimensional data sets. In Visualization ’96, San
Francisco, CA, 1996.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[3] J. Brown and A. McGregor. Network performance
visualization: Insight through animation. In Proc. of
PAM2000, pages 33–41, 2000.
[4] Katja Einsfeld, S. Agne, M. Deller, A. Ebert,
B. Klein, and C. Reuschling. Dynamic visualization
and navigation of semantic virtual environments. In
IV ’06: Proceedings of the conference on Information Visualization, pages 569–574, Washington, DC,
USA, 2006. IEEE Computer Society.
[5] Blender Foundation. Free open source 3d content creation suite - http://www.blender.org/.
[6] Graphviz. Free open source graph visualization software - http://www.graphviz.org/.
[7] Mikael Jern and Johan Franzen. ”geoanalytics” - exploring spatio-tempral and multivariate data. In IV
’06: Proceedings of the conference on Information
Visualization, pages 25–31, Washington, DC, USA,
2006. IEEE Computer Society.
[8] Robert Kincaid and Heidi Lam. Line graph explorer:
scalable display of line graphs using focus+context.
In AVI ’06: Proceedings of the working conference
on Advanced visual interfaces, pages 404–411, New
York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press.
[9] A. Johannes Pretorius and Jarke J. van Wijk. Visual
analysis of multivariate state transition graphs. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 12(5):685–692, 2006.
[10] Prot´eg´e.
Free open source ontology editor http://protege.stanford.edu/.
[11] Jinwook Seo and Ben Shneiderman.
A rankby-feature framework for unsupervised multidimensional data exploration using low dimensional projections. In INFOVIS ’04: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (INFOVIS’04),
pages 65–72, Washington, DC, USA, 2004. IEEE
Computer Society.
[12] SIEMENS.
Simatic
http://www.automation.siemens.com.

wincc

-

[13] Bruce Hunter Thomas. Animating direct manipulation in human computer interfaces, 1997.
[14] Colin Ware and Glenn Franck. Evaluating stereo
and motion cues for visualizing information nets in
three dimensions. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
15(2):121–140, 1996.
[15] Marc Weber, Marc Alexa, and Wolfgang M¨uller. Visualizing time-series on spirals. In IEEE InfoVis Symposium, pages 7–14, 2001.

