Investigating perceptual responses and shared understanding of architectural
design ideas when communicated through different forms of visual representations
Nada Bates-Brkljac
BSc Architecture, MA Urban Design
{Nada.Brkljac@uwe.ac.uk}
Abstract

Research to date has demonstrated the apparent
differences how architects, as ‘experts’ and members of
the public as ‘non-experts’ perceive and understand
visual representations. However, the studies that
compare architect’ responses with other professionals in
the field are rare. This paper reports the findings from
an Economic and Social science Research Council
(ESRC) funded study that investigated peoples’
perceptual and cognitive responses to traditional and
computer
generated
forms
of
architectural
representations. The study and analysis provide an
insight into factors that are relevant to the
communication, shared understanding of design ideas
and knowledge exchange amongst the participants in the
process. Findings indicate strong resemblance between
professionals’ and ‘lay’ peoples’ responses. Architects’
responses vary depending on the age and length of work
experience. The analysis of groups’ accounts of how and
why they prefer and value the forms they do shows the
fracturing of communication and shared understanding
amongst participants.
Keywords--architectural
representations,
perception and cognition, shared understanding,
knowledge exchange

1. Introduction
The role of architectural representations in design
process is widely acknowledged as crucial [1]. They
enable architects, other professionals and members of the
public to make decisions about design proposals based
on the information they receive through representations.
In the design review panel's discussions, when the
judges, professionals in the field are presented with the
design proposals, representations are employed to
explain what the development looks like. Throughout the
decision-making process, that involves the public as
members of the planning committees, their
understanding and assessment of design proposals are
facilitated by visual representations. Thus, both
processes cannot overlook the key role visual

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

representations play, not just in deciding the worth of
design proposals but also in actually determining what
gets built.
By looking at visual representation, people should
be able to make apt judgments on whether a building, a
city centre design scheme and similar, is ‘good’ or ‘ bad’
and whether they themselves ‘like it’. As such, this is a
subjective process and therefore people do not make the
identical judgments on the same design proposals. Their
perceptions and understanding differ and may even,
conflict.
This papers reports on the study that investigated
peoples' perceptions and responses to different forms of
architectural representations of urban development
proposals. The findings provide an insight into
understanding and knowledge exchange through issues
arising from visual communication of information about
architectural design to different communities of
professionals and the public. The paper starts with the
current discussion about the benefits of using computer
generated representations and their effects on the
decision-making process. Then, it focuses on the
description of the research study, its process and results
of the investigation. In the final part, it is argued that
computer generated and traditional forms of visual
representations of architectural schemes enter people’s
perceptions through a complex interaction of choice,
constraint and visual literacy.

2. Visual representations in the age of
computer technology
Recent times have seen significant changes in the
architectural representation methods. While traditional,
hand made representation forms are still in use, advances
in computer technology and simulation software have
fostered the use of computer generated representations
which has grown dramatically [2]. Many of the
arguments used in promoting computer visualization
methods are based on the understanding that they make it
easier for the professionals from other built environment
disciplines and the public to assess the visual and spatial
impact of development proposals. According to Langdorf
[3], this rationale is based on three premises:

a) Understanding complex information about
urban planning and design may be greatly extended if the
information is visualised;
b) To understand nearly any subject of
consequence it is necessary to consider it from multiple
viewpoints, using a variety of information;
c) Visualization aids communicating with others.
A recent Winterkom survey conducted in 2000 by
the British Research Establishment (BRE) and The
Construction Industry Computing Association (CICA)
identified improved quality of communication as the
most important benefit of computer technology for
architects. This trend is also supported by the claims that
computer generated representations are taking over the
traditional methods because traditional forms have
“failed to communicate design effectively” [4].
However, this view is not accepted by all researchers.
According to Alan Day’s [5], the new technologies
should be used as a complementary tool to the traditional
techniques because the state of computer development
has not reached a stage where it can satisfy all the
requirements needed to fulfil design proposal
presentation. While there is no doubt that, the potential
benefits of computer visualisation are substantial [6];
according to Sheppard [7], research recognises that
consensus that needs to be obtained in the process of
decision making among a broad group is sometimes
difficult to reach. Equally, Kalay [8] points out, while
computer programs "made communication easier and
more efficient, they have not, in and of themselves,
improved shared understanding, which is fundamental
for making joint decisions and for negotiating tradeoffs
among competitive worldviews".
Within research, there have been only a limited
number of systematic investigations to determine the
benefits to people’s understanding of design ideas and
knowledge exchange when information are visualized
through the medium of computer generated
representations. An example from the UK, the Heron
Tower inquiry, illustrates the issues relating to the use of
visual representations in the design decision-making
process.

2.1. The case of the Heron Tower inquiry
A planning application process for the first tall
building in London, Heron Tower development,
completed in 2002 by the Office of the Deputy of the
Prime Minister (ODPM), has caused a great controversy
and tested people’s understanding of design ideas when
communicated
through
computer
generated
representations. English Heritage, a party in this process,
questioned the accuracy and reliability of computer
visualisation showing that a new fifty-storey building in
the City of London would not affect the views of two
important historic monuments in London, St. Paul’s and
the Tower of London. Their experts could not agree with
the representatives of the Commission for Architecture
and Built Environment (CABE) whether computer
representations of the Heron Tower are accurate. The

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

team of experts’ commissioned to analyse computer
generated images, viewpoints and angles from where
original images were taken proved that the visualisation
method produced credible and accurate visual
presentation of the development and when built, the
development should not affect the existing historic
environment. Nevertheless, this inquiry demonstrates
that although the use of computer generated
representations is generally based on the rationale that
technology can provide credible information; observers’
perceptions and understanding may differ and conflict.

3. Visual communication, design decisionmaking process and knowledge
For most architectural professional purposes visual
representations are crucial for both the analysis and
communication of design ideas to others. Thus,
architecture has over time developed the extensive range
of representation forms architects learn in the course of
their training and use for design communication.
However, professional ‘jargons’, including architectural,
are often criticised as mystifying whose main purpose is
to exclude outsiders. While that may indeed be one of
their effects, they also should allow a professional
community’s accumulated knowledge to be codified and
transmitted in precise detail. Daniel and Meitner [9]
point out that "environmental visualisations may be
completely accurate with respect to their portrayal of
relevant and accurately projected bi-physical conditions,
but still produce perceptions, interpretations, and value
judgments that are not consistent with those that would
be produced by actual encounters with the environments
presented”. The potential consequence of such effects are
poor decisions, where unworthy projects are given
planning approval, good designs are turned down, and
planners and the public alike get that which they did not
expect [10].
The design decision–making process itself is
complex. It involves various groups of people in the
assessment of the qualities of the proposed architectural
urban development schemes and granting of the
permission to be built. These people share a concern and
a set of problems relating to design proposals and they
deepen their knowledge and expertise in this area by
interacting on an ongoing basis. Architects, as designers,
are involved to explain and communicate the intricacies
of their esoteric speciality through visual representation.
Planners, engineers, surveyors and other professionals in
the field analyse the proposals from their own
professional perspective, consider its relationship with
the existing development, assess the ‘buildability’ of the
proposals, and estimate feasibility of the scheme and
similar on the basis of the information presented in visual
format. Members of the public get a chance to learn
about the changes to the existing environment and
comment upon the proposed schemes. These people meet
to discuss design proposals, share information, insights,
make value judgements and by doing so develop a tacit

understanding that they share. However they accumulate
knowledge, they must understand design proposed and
each other’s perspectives. Decision-making process is a
good example of “the dance” [11] of the tacit and the
explicit knowledge. It needs both: architects to articulate
design and other professionals and the community to
interpret design and gives it a meaning in practice.
Appreciating this collective nature of knowledge is
especially important in an age when the use of computer
technology makes complex changes in design which
affect the existing built environment.

Two sets were computer representations, CGI images
(Fig.1) and photomontages (Fig.2). The other two were
traditional, hand made representations, freehand
perspective- ink on a white paper with the use of primary
colours (Fig.3) and watercolour painted perspective
drawings (Fig.4). To reduce extraneous influences, the
selected cases for analysis were all the proposals for
significant commercial developments in the UK with
similar contextual attributes.

4. The ESRC study
The primary aim of the recent study funded by
Economic and Social science Research Council (ESRC)
was to investigate communicative role and effects of
computer generated representations. By assessing and
comparing traditional and computer generated
representations this study addressed the issue of how
knowledge is acquired, communicated and valued. More
specifically, the results are intended to provide an insight
into the impact of the use of computer technologies on
professional relationships across interest groups in
architecture, and other built environment disciplines.
Three key concepts that emerged from the existing
research [18] ,[19] as relevant are accuracy, abstraction
and realism. Accuracy relates to the exactness of the
method of representation, i.e. construction of perspective
or chosen viewpoints, precision of dimensions and
proportions. Abstraction is understood as a level of detail
and refers to the overall amount of information provided.
If the level of detail is low the degree of abstraction is
higher. The concept of realism refers to the photorealistic
style of representations. According to Radford et al. [12]
the interrelation of these concepts has crucial influence
on visually mediated communication of architectural
schemes.
Variation in the perceptual responses, understanding
of design proposals and perceived credibility of the
representations were examined between architects, other
experts in the field of the built environment and members
of the public. The study combined two methodological
approaches: quantitative-semantic analysis of the
questionnaires and qualitative- collection of people’s
responses through focus group meetings and interviews.
This methodology has enabled the study to elicit and
report how representations are perceived and
experienced, people’s acceptance of computer
technology and what are the limiting factors in the
communication and the shared understanding of design
information.

4.1 Visual representations
The study used four sets of the final, static artistic
representations produced to provide an overall
understanding of the three-dimensionality of design
schemes. In these cases one is unable to interrogate for
information other than that which is shown in the view.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Princesshay, Exeter- Rep. Set 1

Figure 2 Broadmead, Bristol- Rep. Set 2

Figure 3 Paradise St. Liverpool- Rep. Set 3
The representation sets were produced by practices
or commissioned from the visualisation experts to allow
concepts and ideas to become visible [13]. As such, these
sets of data contain a sufficiently large number of similar
images in order to be both representative and statistically
significant and this unit and choice of representations is
regarded as "a reliable source of factual evidence" [14].
Each set of representations was presented to participants
in its own original format.

the assessment of the extent of shared understanding and
how the knowledge is communicated within three main
participating groups. The method of investigation was
focus group meetings. The data collected in this and the
subsequent stage of the analysis was synthesised and
analysed using NVIVO software
Individual views: The nature and range of
participants' subjective views were further explored
through semi-structured interviews with a structured
topic guide that allowed a focused dialogue.
Figure 4 New Swindon -Rep. Set 4

4.2 Participants
Twenty nine participants in the study were divided
into three main groups: sixteen architects, six
professionals and seven members of the public. They
were selected on a basis of several criteria for 'a good
informant’, in accordance with Morse’s approach [16].
The architect's group was further divide into two groups:
architects with less than five years and architects with a
minimum of fifteen years of work experience. The
professionals group comprised of experts from built
environment disciplines, such as surveyors, planners, and
engineers. The public group included seven elected
members of the public i.e. Bristol city councillors and
members of planning committees. This division was
intended to help to establish group differences, values,
the tension between expertise and laity [15] as well as
shared understanding and knowledge of various experts.

4.3. Research design and methods
The design for this study was based on a research
theory which regards visual analysis as both,” an
intellectual and craft process, in which a variety of
choices and procedures can make the investigator's
efforts easier and more productive" [14]. The process
was divided into three stages:
Evaluative Responses: the assessment of perceived
credibility of representations using the analytical
framework that included three main criteria –
abstraction, realism and accuracy, identified by the
literature and previous studies [4], [18], and [19]. The
research method was a semiotic analysis. Data were
collected through questionnaires comprising a 'logically
comprehensive' eighteen scale list of adjective pairs
applicable to architectural representations, in a similar
manner as conducted by Hershberger [20]. The same
sequence of adjective pairs was used for the same
representation set in all four case based studies. The data
analyses followed procedures described by Osgood et al
[21] and Palmer [22].
Dimensions of Perceptions: the differences in
people's perceptions and understanding triggered by
architectural representations. A comparison of the design
'expert' and 'non-expert' responses was conducted to
establish whether the differences have some potential
effects on the decision-making process. The responses
and discussion during focus group meetings assisted in

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

5. Evaluative responses: semantic analysis
The association and interrelation of the concepts of
accuracy, abstraction and realism to the method and style
of four sets of representation has been examined using
the semantic differential scale. 18 bipolar Likert-like
semantic differential questions have been answered by
29 respondents Responses to questions are obtained on a
seven-point scale Adjective pairs were selected in a
several ways, from thesaurus, from the literature in this
field and from the spontaneous comments of the
participants in the pilot testing.
The bipolar pairs used were: for accuracy: (vagueprecise),
(incorrect-correct),
(dishonest-honest),
(deceptive-truthful), (ambiguous-clear), (arbitrary-well
considered); for realism: (imitation-authentic), (looking
artificial-looking natural), (illusion-lifelike), (not
convincing-plausible), (dull-vivid), (intuitive-rational);
for abstraction: (symbolic-descriptive), (abbreviatedextended), (simple-ornate), (expanded-dense), (loosecompact), (ordered-chaotic).
Descriptive Statistics
Group

N

Minimum

Maximum

8

2.50

6.50

4.3958

1.23423

Accuracy Representation 4

8

2.33

5.17

3.7708

.92555

Accuracy Representation 4

6

1.00

3.67

2.3333

.97183

Accuracy Representation 4

7

1.67

3.17

2.1429

.56461

Architects >= 15
Years Experience

Accuracy Representation 4

Architects <=5
Years
Experience
Professional
in BE
Councillors

Mean

Std. Deviation

Table 1 Descriptive statistic for Rep. set 4
Inspection of the descriptive statistics suggests the
most significant difference in accuracy scores between
the four groups on Rep. 4 (Tab.1). Application of the
one-way analysis of variance indicates a statistically
significant difference in mean accuracy scores on Rep. 4
between at least two groups of respondents (F(3, 25)=
.41, MSE =0.932, p < 0.001). A post hoc application of
Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference test indicates
that there are two homogeneous groups with the mean
for accuracy on Rep. 4 for the two groups of Architects
not differing (p=0.575) and with the means between
councillors and professionals not differing (p=0.984) but
with architects reporting significantly higher means than
either councillors or professionals in the Built
Environment (Fig.5). Application of Pearson’s test of
linear correlation showed that realism scores in all four
representations are significantly correlated with accuracy

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0
!

Figure 5 The accuracy profile plots
scores in the same representations (Fig.6). They
show a strong relationship between the high level of
detail provided by realism and trust that the information
provided is accurate.
7

6

5

"

4

3

2

1

0
!

Figure 6 The realism profile plots
Descriptive statistics scores for realism for four
representations show that the highest mean is in Rep. 3
followed by Rep. 1 followed by Rep. 2 and then 4. This
suggests two homogeneous groups with very similar
realism means for Representation 1 and 3 and quite
similar sample mean realism scores for Rep. 2 and 4.
The above box-plot summarises the four sample
distributions.
The responses to the semantic pairs relating to
abstraction do not form a consistent set of information.
Because of a low value of Cronbach’s alpha responses on
each of the pairs were analysed descriptively using
simple cross-tabulations. Abstraction as a concept tested
through the questionnaire appears to be a complex and
difficult to assess. The participants judgments show little
structuring– as there was no frame of reference for the
concept or a lack of understanding of the concept itself.

6. Dimensions of Perceptions and Individual
Views
One way in which architects and other professionals
in the field construct authority and credibility is by
displaying expert knowledge. In the study conducted, the
way in which this is done is by explaining why the
information represented can or cannot be considered as
accurate, thus displaying the judge’s statues as someone
with a good knowledge of the techniques and methods of
representations. Architects’ display of the knowledge
how representations communicate information was most
obvious in the case of Rep. 4. This is a particularly
interesting example, for it implicitly demands that the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

observer use her or his knowledge of the method and
familiarity with the technique to imagine how the
development will relate to the existing urban context.
This form of representation appear to address the
observer as an equal, someone who shares in the
architect’s knowledge and expertise, constructs a
relationship of collaboration and solidarity between the
maker and observer, thus maximising, arguably, the
observer’s willingness to accept the lack of information
and ’ fill the gaps’ with information. While this set was
considered by other professionals and the members of
the public as containing insufficient information
architects were sufficiently well informed to recognise
and make sense of the allusions and abstractions
displayed. The groups’ responses here significantly
differ. Architects were willing and able to process the
degree of abstraction while professionals and councillors
were reluctant to trust the information and assessed the
accuracy and credibility of this form as low. In contrast,
Rep. 2 provided the quantity of information that appears
to be overwhelming to the most ‘non expert’ participants
and thus was assessed as less credible too.
The interviews show that an important requirement
from the three-dimensional representations whether they
are static or interactive is the apparent realism of
visualisation. This factor affects people’s perceptions and
judgments in the way that it makes the visualisation
believable and possessing ‘no sense of fudge’. The
provided realistic high level of detail appear to leave the
viewers with the impression that it is the most studied
design that is both technically and accurately
represented.

Conclusions
The first conclusion of this study is the notion that
there is no such thing as accurate and credible
architectural representation; instead it is evident that
representations enter people’s perceptions through a
complex interaction of choice, constraint, and visual
literacy. Concepts, abstraction and realism acted as
criteria for assessing the concept of accuracy, as well as
operating as criteria for assessing the overall credibility
of architectural representations. Secondly, a credible
representation should bear some resemblance to the
photographs –that is, it should be part of an accepted
tradition of what is regarded as true- but if the
resemblance is too great, if it results from mere
beautification of the environment (blue sunny sky), it
may no longer be regarded as credible representation.
Rep. 3 exemplifies this principle; we see the comparison
strategy applied in reverse. One of the criteria on the
Rep.3 judged to be credible and accurate is its lack of
embellishment of the environment.
The third finding from this research is that one way
to make the interaction between architects, other
professionals and lay people in the process of decisionmaking effective and more equal is to present design
proposals in representation forms that are assumed to be

easy to understand and avoid architectural ‘visual
jargon’[23]. Artistic architectural representations in their
traditional forms are the one predicament that most
architects are consciously aware of. It is unfamiliarity
with technical drawings that can make an architectural
representation difficult for two other groups to interpret
and understand. The analysis shows that the Rep. 4
display failed to elicit much useful comments from the
public because the artistic graphic features of the
representations were ‘difficult’ for the average untrained
observer. To an architect, a person familiar with the
visual conventions representations employed much could
be inferred that was not directly communicated. In
contrast the professionals and the public whose views
were allegedly sought did not have access to the relevant
codes. ‘Non expert’ observers were thus compelled to
fall back on impressionistic judgments of the display
boards – representations more appropriate for the
preliminary stage of the process when deciding the
function of the area to be redeveloped than when
evaluating designs for a large and significant piece of
architecture which will permanently change its
surrounding environment. Many experts on architecture
(critics and curators as well as practicing architects) have
expressed the view that if the public were better
informed and more articulate about architectural matters,
the quality of the built environment could only improve
[24]. If a wider section of the population is to engage in
the intelligent criticism of urban development, they will
need a critical understanding of the means of
communication that corresponds–intelligently and
intelligibly –to their concerns. The representations
should support serious, extended discussion of the merits
of the developments to be built. Choosing the right mix
of representation techniques and forms to suit the job in
hand is an important part of the job that can only
improve communication, people’s shared understanding
and the decision making process itself. The overall
results of this study suggest that considerably more work
is needed to establish clear guidance for when a
particular form is to be used so that it is perceived as
credible and reliable form of representation.

[4]

Acknowledgements

[19]

This project is funded by the Economic and Social
Science research council (ESRC), UK. Parts of the work
presented are based on the final draft of the PhD thesis
“Investigating architects’ perceptual responses to
architectural representations of design schemes” by Nada
Bates-Brkljac.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

Danahay, JW, Hoinkes, Schauen, Bewegen and
Verknupfen, Garten +Landschaft 11, pp22-27, 1999
Building Design, 6 October, 2000
Langdorf. The 1990s:information systems and computer
visualisation for urban design, planning management,
Environment and Planning B: vol. 19, pp723-738, 1992

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

Pietch S.M. Computer visualisation in the design control
of urban environments: a literature review, Environment
and Planning: Planning and Design, volume 21, pp 521536, 2000
Day A. Urban visualization and public inquiries: the case
of the Heron Tower, London, Architectural Research
Quarterly, pp363-372, 2002
Orland, B. et al Public perceptions and experts
assessments: the effect of false colour in forest
visulisation, Project report, USDA Forest Service, Forest
Health Technology Enterprise Team, 1997
Sheppard, S. R.J. Guidance for crystal ball gazers:
developing a code of ethics for landscape visualization
in Landscape and Urban Planning Volume 54, Issues 1-4
,pp183-199, 2001
Kalay Y.E., Computational environment to support
design collaboration, Automation in Construction 8,
pp37-42, 1998
Daniel T. and Meitner, M. Representational validity of
landscape visualisations, Final report, USDA Forest
Services, Forest Health Technology, Enterprise Team
,2000
Sheppard, S.R.J. Visual simulation: A User Guide for
Architects, Engineers and Planners, New York:Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1989
Wenger E et al. Cultivating communities of practice,
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, USA, 2002
Radford, et al.: Issues of abstraction, accuracy and
realism in large scale computer urban models in CAAD
futures 1997 Digital Proceedings pp679-690, 1997
Collier, in Van Leewin T. and Jewitt, C. Handbook of
Visual Analysis, Sage Publication, London,2001
Van Leeuwen T. and Jewitt C., (2001), Handbook of
Visual Analysis, Sage Publications, London, 2001
Nasar, J& Purcell T. Beauty and the beast extended in
Pamir. H. et al (Eds) Culture, Space, History, Sevki
Vanh Foundation, Ankara,1990
Morse, J. M. (1994), Design in Funded Qualitative
Research. In Denzin, N. (eds.) Handbook of Qualitative
Research, pp. 220-35. London: Sage, 1994
Bloor M. et al Focus Groups in Social Research, Sage
Publication Ltd, London, 2001
Appleyard, D. (1977), Understanding professional
media: issues, theory and a research agenda in Altman
and J.F. Wohwill (eds.) Human behaviour and
environment Vol. 2 Plenum Press, New York, pp43-88
Mahdjoubi, L and Wiltshire, T 2001 Towards a
framework for evaluation of computer visual simulations
in environmental design in Design Studies, 22, pp193209, 2001
Hershberger R. G. A study of meaning and architecture
in Nasar J.L. (eds) Environmental aesthetics: Theory,
research and applications, Cambridge University press,
Cambridge, pp175-193, 1988
Osgood, C E. et al The Measurement of Meaning,
Urbana, Chicago and London: University of Illinois
Press, 1957
Palmer J. Hoffman R. Rating reliability and
representation validity in scenic landscape assessments in
Landscape and Urban Planning 54 pp149-161, 2001
Wyatt R.The great divide; differences in style between
architects and urban planners in Journal of Architectural
and Planning Research, 21;1 38, pp38-54, 2004
Marcus and Cameron, The Words Between the Spaces,
Routledge, London, 2002

