Virtual Vandalism: The Effect of Physical Incivilities on the Affective
Appraisal of 3D Urban Models.
Joske Houtkamp
Center for Advanced Gaming and
Simulation, Utrecht University
{Joske.Houtkamp@cs.uu.nl}
Abstract
3D models of an urban area were manipulated to
create an impression of neglect and dilapidation. In an
experimental study the affective appraisals of the
original and the manipulated models were compared.
Results demonstrate that unfavourable elements in an
urban environment, that are usually omitted from 3D
models, influence the appraisal of the participants
about the area, but only slightly and less than
expected. Moreover, the judgment of the environment
seems to be influenced by expectations of the
representation. When 3D models are used for decision
making in urban planning, this effect has to be taken
into account. The experiment thus demonstrates that
measuring instruments should be designed in such a
way that the content (the environment) can be
assessed separately from the chosen representation.
Keywords--- 3D models, virtual environments,
affective appraisal.

1. Introduction
3D models of the built environment are widely used
in desktop applications for architecture, education and
simulation. In architecture and civil engineering they
are primarily created to provide spatial understanding
of a building or environment, but are usually enhanced
with high quality textures and complex lighting
models, to produce a realistic or aesthetically pleasing
effect. The models are subsequently used for more
general purposes, that involve the viewer’s affective
appraisal of the environment. Examples are assessing
the aesthetics of a new addition to a building, or
simulating the effect that an ancient monument, such as
a large theatre, may have had on the contemporary
visitor.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Herre van Oostendorp
Center for Content and Knowledge
Engineering, Utrecht University
{Herre@cs.uu.nl}
The appraisal of a real environment and of a 3D
model may differ considerably, as a result of choices
made in the modeling process, the restrictions of
hardware, software and display, and the perception of
the user [1]. In a series of experiments we explore
these differences, and aim to identify the main factors
causing them. One of the purposes is to determine the
validity of 3D models when used for design decisions,
and for the assessment of aesthetic aspects of built
environments; they are expected to present a truthful
representation of the proposed design, and to convey
how the development will look like when it is built [2].
The results of the research may also affect the design
of virtual environments for training and simulation
purposes, where the environment provides the stage
setting for incidents and activities.
In the experiment discussed here, we studied the
effect of manmade nuisance objects and physical
incivilities that in reality have a negative influence on
the appraisal of the environment [3]. These elements
are generally not represented in models for
architectural visualisation, that by style often resemble
the artistic impression.

2. Background
The interest in 3D models, often called virtual
environments, in the last decades has led to extensive
research in the field of graphics, mainly aimed at
increasing realism in every possible aspect, from
lighting and illumination to motion of objects and
avatars.
The effect of these realistically looking
environments on the viewer, as compared to real
environments, has been studied in several experiments.
They reveal that the affective appraisals of viewers in
reality and in the virtual environment show similarities
as well as discrepancies (for instance [4], [5], [6]) but
the exact reasons and mechanisms for these remain
largely unclear.

Affective appraisals are judgments concerning the
capacity of the appraised objects, for instance
buildings, to alter an individuals’ mood, expressed in
terms such as pleasant, repulsive, attractive etc. [7].
The affective appraisal of our environment is important
because it continually, but often unconsciously,
modifies our emotions, mood and behaviour. To assess
the affective appraisal of the built environment,
semantic scales may be used. We have chosen the so
called SMB-scale (Semantic Environmental Scale or,
in Swedish, Semantisk Miljö Beskrivning) developed
by Küller [8]. The scale is relatively unknown and
infrequently used outside Scandinavian countries. It
comprises eight dimensions or factors that describe the
experience of persons in a man-made environment,
namely
Pleasantness,
Complexity,
Unity,
Enclosedness, Potency, Social Status, Affection, and
Originality. By the diversity of the dimensions, it
facilitates the discovery of relations between elements
in the environment and the effects on the viewer’s
judgment.
Many characteristics of the 3D model, display
medium and the viewer may influence the appraisal of
the modeled environment. The factor central to the
current experiment is the style that is often used by
convention by developers. This style is based on the
artistic impression common in architectural
presentations, and is partly imposed by restrictions of
hardware and software. It supports the general purpose
of many models, to inspect sightlines or the position of
buildings in relation to other buildings, understand the
layout of an area, and assess the main visual
characteristics of individual buildings. In this style,
bright, diffuse lighting and advantageous colours are
applied; objects that can block the users view, and
details in facades or street elements are omitted;
indications of use and of the presence of people are
absent or simplified. As a result, the general
appearance of the represented area is orderly,
uncluttered, bright, clean, and impersonal. In a real
environment these visual characteristics would
obviously influence the viewer’s appraisal.
In reality, manmade nuisance objects such as wires,
poles, signs and cars, and signs of dilapidation (litter,
weeds, rubbish) evoke negative affective response [9].
Physical incivilities, either deliberate (graffiti,
vandalism) or inadvertent (litter, unkempt housing), are
symbols of social disorder, and are linked to
perceptions of unsafety [3], [10].
Physical
characteristics alone or together, contain clues for the
interpretation of the content of forms, a style, a type of
building or its function.
These elements, that are so obviously absent in the
models, therefore constitute content attributes as well
as formal attributes of the represented environment

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[11]. Formal attributes relate to the structure of forms
for their own sake and includes shape, scale, etc.
Content variables relate to physical features, but also
reflect the individual’s internal representation of the
building, and meanings associated with that
representation and building.
The style commonly used for 3D models of the built
environment thus may affect several dimensions on the
SMB-scale. In this experiment we try to establish in
which way it influences the viewers’ affective
appraisal of the represented area. Another important
goal of these experiments is to assess the reliability and
suitability of the SMB-scale, and the tasks designed,
for future experiments in this line of research.

3. Research Methodology
3.1. Manipulations
A 3D model of the ‘Kop van Zuid’ district in
Rotterdam, covering ca 200 by 800 m, was provided to
us by VSTEP BV. The Kop van Zuid district is
situated in the Nieuwe Maas river, and was part of an
extensive harbour area. It still features warehouses and
other industrial buildings of ca. 1900 (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Photograph of the Kop van Zuid
area, 2004
The model represents the old harbour area,
including some of the modern buildings that are being
constructed since the beginning of this century, as well
as the prominent Erasmus bridge (1996) and a small
part of a modern business district adjoining it. The
water surrounding the area has a rippling surface, that
reflects the sky. It is a good example of the common
style for this kind of model, showing clean and even
surfaces, pleasant colours, few details and favourable
weather (Figure 2).

Figure 3. Graffiti added to the model
Figure 2. The unmanipulated model of Kop
van Zuid (VSTEP BV)
After visiting and photographing the actual area in
Rotterdam we performed more than 300 manipulations
in the original model. Uniform textures that indicated
clean surfaces of roads, pavements and walls, were
replaced to give an impression of worn down and
stained materials. Many objects were added such as
parked cars, fences, building cranes, piles of building
material, and examples of common street furniture, like
bins, poles, wires, and traffic signs. Moreover, we
introduced clearly negative elements such as graffiti
and vandalized benches (Figure 3, 4). The
manipulations in the part of the model that depicts the
old harbour area were intended to give a strong
impression of dilapidation and neglect. In the second
area, the new business district, the objects added were
more neutral, such as billboards and traffic signs. In
both areas they created a more varied and visually
irregular, less orderly effect. To decrease the
impression of pleasant, sunny weather, the blue sky
was replaced by grey clouds. To match this lighting
condition, the colours of several buildings were
darkened, which also diminished the impression of a
clean and well-kept area.
The manipulations thus represent two clusters of
variables, that oppose the two most obvious
characteristics of unmanipulated model, the orderly
cleanliness and brightness. The manipulated model
shows a more believable, realistic, environment.

3.2. Participants
The participants were 12 women and 12 men,
aged 19 – 55. They were university and college
students or had an academic degree. They had no
experience in creating or manipulating 3D
environments.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4. Vandalized benches and crane added
to the model

3.3. Equipment
The model of the Kop van Zuid Area was created in
Quest 3D and manipulated using Maya and 3DStudio
Max. The experiment was conducted on a desktop
computer with a 17” screen. The computer was a
Pentium 4, running at 2.4 GHz, 512 MB RAM and
supporting a GeForce 6600GT. The participants used
keyboard and mouse to navigate the model. The model
did not include any sounds.

3.4. Materials and procedure
The original and the manipulated versions were
presented to 12 participants in each condition. After a
short exercise to help them get acquainted with
navigating a 3D model, they were given two simple
tasks that included ‘walking’ from one point in the
model to two targets, using an isometric map, with
suggested viewpoints.
The first task led the
participants through the old part of the area, the
second, shorter walk, through the new business area.
On reaching their targets the participants were asked, at
both occasions, to rate the adjectives belonging to the
SMB-scale to determine the affective appraisal of the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

.91
.70
.95
.64
.89
.87

1.57

.06

.06

.48

.52

.30

5.06

1.14

.24

.41

manip.
orig.
manip.
orig.
manip.
orig.

4.94
3.40
3.63
5.02
5.23

1.14
1.09
.82
.75
.74

-.58

.28

-.68

.25

5.11

.90

-1.07

.15

manip.
orig.
manip.
orig.
manip.
orig.

5.50
3.96
3.35
5.46
5.52

.88
.70
.51
.83
.88

2.43

.01

-.18

.43

5.72

.94

-.24

.41

manip.
orig.
manip.

5.81
3.88
4.21

.73
.79
.66

-1.13

.14

Complexity
Unity
Unity adjusted
Enclosedness
Potency
Potency adjusted
Social Status
Affection
Affection adjusted
Originality

t

6

5

4

3

original model
manipulated model
originality

affection

social status

2
potency

The old harbour area. Since the main purpose of this
experiment was to assess the effect of negative
elements in the visualisation, we concentrate our
discussion on the results of the old area, from Hotel
New York to the ‘Nieuwe Luxor’ Theatre, where most
manmade nuisance objects and physical incivilities
were inserted.
Although the SMB-scale is a validated instrument
for the assessment of environments, we performed a
reliability analysis to check the internal consistency of
the items measuring a dimension. Cronbach’s alpha for
Pleasantness (.75), Enclosedness (.60), are not high,
but sufficient. The results for the other dimensions
were however lower, and in some cases so low, that
even removing items did not result in a value higher
than .6. Deleting items provided the following results:
Unity: deleting item ‘functional’, .77; Potency:
deleting item ‘potent’, .71; Affection: deleting item
‘timeless’, .64. The dimensions Complexity and Social
Status, and Originality could not be improved to a
satisfactory level by removing one or even two items.
In 7 dimensions, the reliability was lower for the
manipulated version than the original version.

3.64
3.11
3.46
3.44
5.15
4.96

enclosedness

4.1. Affective appraisal measured by the SMBscale

orig.
manip.
orig.
manip.
orig.
manip.
orig.

unity

4. Results

Pleasantness

complexity

The manipulations performed in the first, old part of
the area, were expected to negatively influence the
SMB-dimensions Pleasantness, Unity, and Social
Status, and to increase the dimension of Complexity,
and Originality, as they would in a real environment.
The manipulations in the second area, the business
area, were expected to decrease the dimension Unity,
and increase Complexity and Originality.

Version

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Sign.
onetailed

SMBDimension

pleasantness

3.5. Hypothesis

Table 1. Results of the SMB-scale for the old
area

SMB-score

area just seen. Also, they were asked to estimate the
time they spent navigating, the distance traversed,
distances between buildings, and building heights. A
longer stay in the model might relate to higher interest
of the participant in the environment. Other questions
concerned the participants’ impression of the area in
their own words, and notions about the probable
function of the area, that might explain the ratings on
the scale. Some questions addressed the represented
time of day and weather, and the perceived quality of
the model.

Figure 5. Mean scores on the adjusted
SMB-scale, old area
The T-test only shows a significant difference for the
dimension Social Status, although it also seems to
confirm our hypothesis for Pleasantness (Social Status
p=0.01, Pleasantness p=0.06, one-tailed).
The results were similar after adjustment of the
scale. A T-test performed for individual adjectives only

show a significant difference between the two versions
of the model for ‘pleasant’ (one of the items in
Pleasantness, p=0.003, one-tailed, mean original
version 3.92, manipulated version 2.33) and ‘wellkept’ (one of the items in Social Status, p=0.00, mean
original version 5.58, manipulated version 3.42).
These adjectives are directly related to the
manipulations performed. The results of the data
analysis for the old part of the area are presented in
Table 1. Figure 5 shows a graph of the scores on the
SMB scale, with adjustments, for the old part of the
area.
The new business area. The elements introduced in the
second part of the area, that has the appearance of a
modern business district, are not so evidently negative,
and consist of some graffiti as well as more neutral
elements such as billboards and traffic signs. Figure 6
shows the means of the SMB-dimensions for this area.
Although the scores do confirm our hypothesis (lower
for Unity, higher for Complexity and Originality), no
significant differences were found on the dimensions.
The T-test showed significant differences for four
individual variables, of the dimensions Pleasantness
and Complexity.
6

4

3

originality

affection

potency

enclosedness

unity

pleasantness

2

complexity

original model
manipulated model
social status

SMB-score

5

Figure 6. Mean scores on the SMB-scale, new
area

4.2. Verbal comments on the areas
Description of the area. In the original version the
most commonly used phrase to describe the
environment was ‘ongezellig’, a Dutch word indicating
‘not cozy’, or ‘not intimate’. (8).
For the manipulated model ‘dull’ was used 7 times, for
the original version 5 times. The number of elements
and details added was obviously not enough to
significantly change the appearance of the rather
desolate area. Words that described the areas as
inanimate or desolate were used 5 times for the
manipulated version, and twice for the original model.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Maybe the traces of human presence makes the
absence of people more noticeable, especially since
they are negative, such as graffiti and vandalism.
Thus, in both versions the areas were considered as
inanimate and rather boring. The additions apparently
did not offer enough visual interest to the viewer, and
the absence of people and movement, apart from the
surface of the river and a car passing by now and then,
is in both versions a dominant feature.
Time of day, weather and season. The models do not
include evident indications of the time of day, weather
and season. This did not bother the participants during
the experiments. When asked, most were able to form
an opinion based on their memories and interpretation
of light, traffic etc.
For the original model (blue sky) most often the
middle of the day was mentioned (7), whereas for the
manipulated model, that shows a grey sky, most
participants suggested daytime in general, or (late) in
the afternoon (9). Some participants interpreted the
quietness in the streets (lack of people and very little
traffic) as an indication of either early morning, early
evening, or a Sunday. Important for the results of the
SMB-scale is, that only one participant (in the
manipulated version) thought an evening situation was
depicted. Therefore the altered sky probably has not
influenced the experience of public safety in the area,
that might affect the outcome on the SMB-scale.
The blue sky of the original model is most often
used to infer spring or summer (5). The grey sky of the
manipulated model is more confusing: 4 participants
thought it represented autumn or winter, and 5
participants answered that the models did not include
information on the season or weather. The blue sky
and supposed pleasant weather might have a positive
effect on the viewer, that influences the affective
appraisal of the area. The effect will be studied
separately in a next experiment.
Quality of the models. The models were considered
convincing: the original model was called realistic or
convincing by 7 participants, the manipulated model
by 9. One would expect that the manipulated model
would score higher on realism, but the number of
participants is too small to be definitive on this point.
The results do show that the manipulations were well
performed and were not conspicuous as elements that
were added separately. In verbal comments,
participants mentioned their appreciation of details in
the manipulated versions such as billboards, specific
car types, and graffiti. A participant even remarked that
she felt curious to inspect these details, such as, for
instance, check the contents of the bins.

Difference

Difference reality –
manip.model

Manip. model

Difference reality–
original model

Original model

The participants were asked to estimate the time
they spent in the model, walking from Hotel New York
to the Luxor Theater, and this was compared with the
actual time they used. Participants navigating the
original model thought they spent more time in the
model than participants navigating the manipulated
model, whereas in fact a shorter period elapsed.
Probably the time seemed to pass slower in the original
version, because there was less to see and to draw the
interest.

Real value (approx.)

Table 3. Distance estimations

4.3. Perception of time and distances

Dist1

454.5

641. 7

187.2

890

435.5

248.3

Dist2

32.9

59.8

26.9

94

61.1

34.2

Dist3

61.4

114.6

53.2

90

28.6

24.6

Dist4

38.4

62.3

23.9

94

55.6

31.7

Table 2. Time spent in the model

Original
model
Manipulated
model

Mean time
in model
(secs)

Mean time
estimated by
participant (secs)

Differ ence

334

528

194

421

450

29

A noticeable difference was also found in the
estimates of distances in the models. Distance
perception in virtual environments has been studied in
several experiments and for different platforms (e.g.
[12]). Table 3 shows the results for both models. Dist1
represents the estimates by the participants for the total
length of their route from Hotel New York to the first
target, the Nieuwe Luxor Theater.
Once an estimate of the distance between two
buildings was asked, from another position (Dist4, an
exocentric distance), twice of the distance between the
viewer and another building (Dist2, Dist3, egocentric
distances). In the manipulated version all estimates
were higher. For Dist4, this difference was significant,
p=0.003. Moreover, the estimates are closer to the
distances in reality. Adding details and objects
obviously provided the participants with more cues for
this task. Whereas dimensions of roads, buildings, and
even elements such as doors and windows may vary
considerably, added elements such as cars, bins, and
traffic signs, were easier to interpret and were used as
an aid for estimating sizes and distances.
Twice a height of a building was estimated, but
there was no signicant difference between the models.
The difference in distance perception does not seem to
have influenced the participants’ experience of space,
openness, etc., in the SMB-scale.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Dist1: distance traversed from starting point to first target
(Hotel New York - Luxor)
Dist2: Luxor Theatre - Toren op Zuid (estimate from position 1)
Dist3: Luxor Theatre - location of participant at target 2.
Dist4: Luxor Theatre –Toren op Zuid (estimate from position 2)

5. Conclusions and Discussion
The manipulations performed were expected to
influence the SMB-dimensions as they would in a real
environment. Viewers who did not partake in the
experiments and to whom the two versions were
presented, considered the visual difference between the
models extensive, obvious, and convincing. However,
the differences in response of the participants, who
only navigated one of the versions, are small. They
show a tendency as expected, but are only significant
on the dimension Social Status. This may be due to the
small number of participants, but it is probable other
factors play a role.
Firstly, the low reliability coefficient for several
dimensions of the SMB-scale indicates problems with
the scale. For the old part of the area, the reliability of
7 dimensions of the scale was much lower for the
manipulated version than the original version.
Participants mentioned that they found some of the
adjectives of the scale difficult to interpret. When
answering the open questions in the experiment, the
participants used terms which were very different, but
suitable for characterizing the environment. It may be
that the scale is less reliable, as a result of changes in
language, which obviously have occurred in 30 years.
Also, preferences may have changed. Participants were

asked to judge an urban, industrial area. Such
environments are now considered attractive and
interesting, especially by young people, but were less
so 30 years ago. This may have an effect on some of
the adjectives of the scale, and on the internal
consistency of the dimensions.
Secondly, the number and strength of the
manipulations may have been too small to override the
style of the artistic impression. The environment in the
manipulated version was still considered dull, and
desolate. The objects and details that were added, were,
however, sufficient in number to influence the
perception of time and distances in the models.
Thirdly, we surmise that the effect of the
representation on the appraisal of the represented
environment is more complex than we hypothesized.
Although the tasks were designed to make the
participants feel involved with the environment, the
participants seemed to confuse their judgment of the
representation and of the represented environment. On
one hand, they used words that describe not only the
actual visual characteristics of the physical structures,
but also the affordance of the area, and associations,
such as empty, impersonal, clean, lifeless, sterile, cold,
etc., and thus seemed to assess the represented
environment. On the other hand, they for instance
showed interest in, and appreciation of, elements in the
manipulated version such as bins, litter, and traces of
vandalism, because for them these were new and
attractive elements in a 3D model, the representation.
Cars deliberately parked on the pavement, which in
reality would form a nuisance to the viewer, aroused
attention, and formed no obstacle because navigating
around the car took no effort. Participants expressed
their interest in these represented elements by
comments during and after the experiment. Their
perception of time spent in the model supports this
observation. The appreciation of these, inherently
negative, elements may well have influenced the
appraisal of the environment. The low reliability of
some of the dimensions in the SMB-scale, especially in
the manipulated version of the old area, may indicate
this (unconscious) confusion.
The aesthetic response to the attractive and unusual
graphic characteristics may thus have influenced the
appraisal of the environment. Moreover, it may have
convinced the viewer that they were offered a faithful
representation of reality, and hence of a realistic
experience. From media history, it is known that
whenever a medium provides a new sensory
stimulation the audience at first is impressed with this
new feature and experiences high perception of realism
[13]. Several other authors have determined that the
confidence of viewers of the accuracy of their own
perceptions, are higher for technologically more

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

advanced techniques, such as animations and 3D
models than for other, more conventional types of
representations [14],[15],[16].
In this experiment most participants considered both
versions of the model convincing and realistic. Their
verbal comments indicate that, although people are
very much aware that they are not seeing a truthful
depiction of an environment, they are not able to
distinguish the representation from the represented
environment, or to assess in what way they are
influenced by the representation. This confirms
remarks by [4] on the interweaving of judgments on
the environment and of judgments on its
representation.
When 3D models are used to inform clients or
citizens of architectural or urban designs, and of the
affective quality of the future buildings, developers
should consider choosing a more abstract or artistic
style, instead of aiming at graphically advanced
models. If realistic models of high graphic quality are
preferred, user testing of the models to assess the
impact of the visual effects on the appraisal of the
represented environment is essential.
Further research. In the manipulated version of the
model of the ‘Kop van Zuid’, two clusters of
information were included, the ‘cleanliness’of the area,
and the weather conditions. In a new study we shall
establish the effect of these types of information
separately, by presenting versions in which only the
cleanliness or the weather is manipulated. Also, a study
is designed to assess the effect of interesting or
surprising elements in the models on the appraisal of
the representation itself, and the represented
environment. An important issue for next studies is to
develop a more reliable instrument for assessing the
affective appraisal of a virtual environment, as well as
a a tool to determine effects of the interface on the
appraisal of the environment. These instruments are
needed to develop and evaluate 3D models that
visualise architectural designs or urban developments
to the general public.

6. Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by the GATE
project, funded by the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO) and the Netherlands ICT
Research and Innovation Authority (ICT Regie).
We are grateful to VSTEP BV for providing us with
the original model of the Kop van Zuid area, and to
Matei Lunca for performing the manipulations in the
model.

7. References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

J.M. Houtkamp, “Engineering the affective appraisal
of 3D models of buildings”. In H. Van Oostendorp, L.
Breure & A. Dillon (Eds.), The creation, use and
deployment of digital information, Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 2004.
N. Bates-Brkljac, “Visualisation of architectural design
schemes through static computer generated and
traditional visual representations: an investigation of
subjective responses”, 337-342, Tenth International
Conference on Information Visualisation (IV'06),
2006.
K. Hanyu, “Visual properties and affective appraisals
in residential areas after dark” Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 17, 1997, 301-315.
I.D. Bishop and B. Rohrmann, “Subjective responses
to simulated and real environments: a comparison”,
Landscape and Urban Planning, 65, 2003, 261-277.
Y.A.W. De Kort, W.A. IJsselsteijn, J. Kooijman, and
Y. Schuurmans. “Virtual Laboratories: Comparability
of Real and Virtual Environments for Environmental
Psychology”, Presence: Teleoperators and virtual
environments. 12 (4), 2003, 360-373.
B. Westerdahl, K. Sunesson, C. Wernemyr, M. Roupé,
M. Johansson and C.M. Allwood. “Users’ evaluation
of a virtual reality architectural model compared with
the experience of the completed building”,
International Journal of Automation in Construction,
15, 2006, 150-165.
J.A. Russell, and J. Snodgrass. “Emotion and the
environment”. In D. Stokols & I. Altman (Eds.),
Handbook of environmental psychology, New York:
Wiley, 1987, 245–280.
R. Küller. “Psycho-physiological conditions in theatre
construction”. In J. F. Arnott, J. Chariau, H.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Huesmann, T. Lawrensen & R. Theobald (Eds),
Theatre Space, München: Prestel Verlag, 1977, 158 –
180.
J.L. Nasar. “The evaluative image of the city”, Journal
of the American Planning Association 56, 1990, 41–
53.
D.M. Austin, L.A. Furr and M. Spine. “The effects of
neighborhood conditions on perceptions of safety”,
Journal of Criminal Justice, 30, 2002, 417-427.
J.L. Nasar. Urban design aesthetics, “The evaluative
qualities of building exteriors”, Environment &
Behavior, 26(3), 1994, 377-401.
D. Waller. “Factors Affecting the Perception of
Interobject Distances in Virtual Environments”,
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 8
(6), 1999, 657-670.
W. IJsselsteijn. “Presence in the past: what can we
learn from media history?”. In G. Riva, F. Davide,
W.A. IJsselsteijn (Eds.), Being There: Concepts,
Effects and Measurement of User Presence in
Synthetic Environments, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2003.
L. Mahdjoubi and
J. Wiltshire. “Towards a
Framework for Evaluation of Computer Visual
Simulations in Environment Design”, Design Studies,
22 (2), 2001, 193-209.
P. Sirikasem and W.L. Shebilske, W.L. “The
perception and metaperception of architectural designs
communicated
by
video-computer
imaging”,
Psychological Research, 53 (2), 1991, 113-126.
D. Skog and M. Söderlund. “Virtual information
representation”, Proceedings of The 22nd Information
Systems Research Seminar in Scandinavia (IRIS 22),
Keuruu, Finland, 1999.

