Imago: An integrated prototyping, evaluation and transitioning environment
for information visualisation
Rudi Vernik1, G Stewart Von Itzstein1, Alain Bouchard2
1DSTO Edinburgh Australia 2DRDC Valcartier, Quebec, Canada
rudi.vernik@dsto.defence.gov.au, stewart@vonitzstein.com, alain.bouchard@drdc-rddc.gc.ca

Abstract
This paper introduces Imago, an environment that
supports the prototyping, evaluation and transitioning
of information visualisation approaches into practice.
The approach is based on the use of an underlying
semantic model of contextual and visualisation
knowledge and integrated evaluation capabilities to aid
the transitioning process. We discuss the use of Imago
in relation to our experiences in researching and
providing information visualisation approaches for
command and control activities.
Keywords: information visualisation,
transitioning, visualization.

evaluation,

1. Introduction
The research literature in the area of information
visualisation provides a rich body of novel approaches
including new types of visual representations, tools,
and interfaces. So, why haven’t more information
visualisation approaches made it into mainstream use?
In this paper, we argue that new approaches are needed
to help capture and validate user needs, support more
effective evaluation of potential solutions and allow
more seamless transitioning into practice.
We use the context of military command and control
to help develop and support our argument. As with
decision-makers in other domains, defence command
staff require information to support activities related to
planning, analysis, and synchronized action. This has
traditionally focused on aspects such as the disposition
and status of force elements such as ships, planes, and
people. However, in the ever more complex world of
networked and asymmetric military operations,
command staff needs to rapidly assimilate and
understand a vast range of additional information
including social and communication networks, agile
resupply and logistics systems, and the relationships
between
multiple
military
and
non-military
contributions. One would imagine that, given the vast
array of visualisation approaches that have been
defined and the criticality and complexity of defence
operations, military decision-makers would be the
early adopters of such technologies. Yet, relatively
few examples from wealth of information visualisation
research reported in the literature have found their way
into actual use.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

This paper introduces Imago, an environment being
developed at the Defence Science and Technology
Organisation (DSTO) to support the prototyping,
evaluation
and
transitioning
of
information
visualisation approaches for military Command and
Control (C2). The project draws from a substantial
research base that has been developed by the DSTO
and through relationships with other research bodies
such as The Technical Cooperation Program [1] which
draws together scientists engaged in Defence-related
work from organisations in Australia, United States,
Canada, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. The
Imago environment discussed in this paper provides a
means of integrating and sharing the output of
visualisation tools; storing, accessing and managing
showcase examples of visual representations via an
underlying visualisation reference model; and
providing access to underlying data sources provided
through simulation, representative data, and
operational data.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2
provides an overview of command and control
visualisation including background work that has been
undertaken along the road to Imago. Section 3
provides an overview of the Reference Model for
Visualisation which provides some of the key concepts
for the Imago knowledge base.
The Imago
environment is then presented in Section 4. Section 5
discusses some of the initial experimentation and usage
activities we have been undertaking with Imago.
Section 6 outlines future directions followed by
conclusions in Section 7.

2. Command and Control Visualisation
Decision-makers need information in an appropriate
form to support their activities. The provision of
information to support situation awareness is of key
concern. Endsley [2] defines situational awareness in
terms of a person’s perception of the critical factors of
importance in an environment, comprehending what
these factors mean in relation to particular goals and
projecting to identify particular courses of action based
on the situation. Military decision-makers such as
commanders, planners, logisticians, and intelligence
analysts need ready access to a broad range of
information to enhance their situational awareness
including the status of their forces, the status of
opposing forces, the possible impacts of environmental

factors such as weather.
The most common
visualisation approaches used to support situational
awareness are based on the use of a geographical
representation of an area of interest together with
various overlays that provide needed information.
Figure 1 provides an example of this type of
visualisation where overlays are provided to show
various entities of interest and to communicate
awareness of intent.

is showing social interactions and relationships
between groups of people and organisational
structures. Various integrated representations are used
including directed graph, iconics, and our own Clovis
views [5]
A major challenge for us has been to draw from and
extend the wealth of information visualisation research
to enhance the awareness, understanding and decisionmaking capabilities of command teams involved in
these complex situations. A significant amount of
work has been done in defining the types of
visualisations that might be of benefit to decisionmakers. Given, the wealth of work done in this area by
the research community, various research laboratories
and by industry, the TTCP community involving
Australia, UK, USA, and Canada established an Action
Group on Information Visualisation (AG-3) in 1999 to
survey national activities and identify where future
R&D should be directed. This work [6] provided the
precursor and impetus for the current Imago work.
.

Figure 1. Traditional Command and Control
Visualisation based on the use of
geographical representations and overlays.
Advanced networking technologies have spawned
new approaches for Defence and National Security.
For example, new concepts such as Network Centric
Warfare (NCW) [3] are based on the notion of
information superiority.
This approach, in part,
focuses on the use of networks to rapidly access, fuse,
and present data which can enhance the awareness and
understanding of decision-makers thereby minimising
the time from data acquisition to response. The advent
of NCW and the ever increasing complexity of various
types of military operations require command staff to
gain rapid insights into very complex situations which
could involve cultural and legal complexities,
coalitions of multiple military and non-military
contributors, asymmetric threats created through
terrorist activities, and the operation of advanced
capabilities such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and
robotics. In addition to understanding the more
traditional situational awareness aspects such as force
disposition, command and control staff must quickly
comprehend a range of complex indicators based on
the data they receive on the status of their supplies,
network intrusions, relationships between adversaries,
the location of non-government organisations, and the
impact that particular actions or effects might have on
the results of an operation. For example, Figure 1
shows a more traditional command and control
visualisation that provides situational awareness
information of own and opposing forces Figure 2
shows the results of some of our research in providing
enhanced situational awareness of NCW where we use
our InVision [4]) composable visualisation system to
rapidly generate visualisations tailored to other types
of command information needs. In this case, InVision

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2. Visualisation showing complex
socio- cultural effects
One of the foundational activities conducted by the
group was the development of a Reference Model for
visualisation (RM-Vis) [6]. This model, discussed in
Section 3, provided the basis for the various surveys,
analysis activities and user inputs. RM-Vis defines the
user context for the application of visualisation
approaches and provides a means of characterising
various approaches in terms of the techniques they use
in representing data, enhancement techniques which
support the more effective presentation through
approaches such as distortion and animation, and the
various ways in which users interact with the
visualisations. An important contribution of this work
was the development of a modelling approach which
supported the capture and analysis of user needs and
allowed a mapping and evaluation of these needs to a
substantial body of knowledge on applicable
visualisation approaches. This background work plays
a large part in the concepts and approaches being
developed as part of Imago.

The group undertook comprehensive surveys of
visualisation approaches that had been developed by
the research community and commercially across a
wide variety of domains including finance, transport,
telecommunications, defence and national security.
Other related sources such as the Olive On-line Library
of Information Visualisation Environments developed
by the University of Maryland [7] were used to support
this activity. This work characterised and showcased
some 350 key visualisation approaches [6]. A toolkit
implementing the main elements the RM-Vis model
was developed to support the characterization,
showcasing and querying of visualisation approaches
within domain usage contexts. Flexible querying
mechanisms were implemented to support analysis
activities. Three RM-Vis databases were developed
using the toolkit: C3I-Vis which characterizes and
showcases visualisation approaches in Command and
Control and Intelligence domains based on a survey of
national programs; Mil-Vis that provided more general
visualisations of military importance; and G-Vis which
characterizes and showcases some of the key
information visualisation contribution in a range of
domains such as transport, finance, medicine,
entertainment, and engineering. The group also
conducted workshops involving command teams and
researchers to help understand visualisation needs,
particularly in relation to coalition operations [8].

showcasing of visualisation approaches within
particular domain contexts. This model has been used
to characterize visualisation solutions in terms of their
context of use, the representation and presentation
techniques used and key features of tool support
provided such as types of user interactions and
deployment support. RM-Vis provides the basis for the
central knowledge repository in Imago (Section 4).

3. Visualisation Reference Model

The Visualisation Approach dimension defines
how the required information can be provided through
computer-based
visualisation.
Approaches
are
characterized in terms of the visual representations
used (e.g. graphs, charts, maps), visual enhancements
(e.g. use of overlays, distortion, animation),
interaction (direct manipulation, drag and drop, haptic
techniques etc), and deployment which includes the
computing environment (display devices, COTS
software) and advanced deployment techniques such as
intelligent user support and enterprise integration.

Various taxonomies and models have been proposed
for the characterization of visualisation approaches [911]. However, most attention has focused on defining
visualisation tools in terms of the types of data that can
be visualized and visual representation techniques
supported. Other taxonomies focus on the particular
domain of interest of the authors, such as software
visualisation [12]. The contexts within which
visualisations are used are often neglected. For
example, it is rare to find taxonomies which
characterize visualisation approaches in terms of
specific tasks that need to be performed by users or the
types of things that need to be described.

Figure 3. Visualisation Reference Model
A Reference Model for the application of
Visualisation approaches (RM-Vis) was defined to
support the characterization, identification and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

As shown in Figure 3, RM-Vis has three key
dimensions:
The Domain Context is a model that defines the
focus for the application of visualisation approaches. It
defines where visualisation approaches will be applied,
who will be supported, and why it is needed. Typically
a domain context is modelled in terms of the roles
being undertaken, the activities being performed and
the tasks or goals that need to be addressed.
Descriptive Aspects (DA) define what needs to be
described for particular domain contexts. For example,
DAs could be defined in terms of the various elements
(or things) that are of importance, the relationships
between those elements and particular attributes that
describe the elements and relationships. These might
include aspects of geography such the relationship
between rivers and roads, people, various assets such
as planes and ships, environmental factors such as
weather, and process descriptions.

Other features of the model are defined on this
dimensional substrate. In RM-Vis, a Viewpoint is
defined in terms of what needs to be described for
particular domain contexts. A viewpoint defines what
needs to be described rather than how it is described
from how it will be described. For example, an
Operations Officer in an Air Defence domain may
require information on the status of fighter and tanker
aircraft to support decisions relating to a task such as
“assign air assets”. Various visualisation approaches
could be used to provide the information required for
this Viewpoint. A View is the definition of the
visualisation approach used to support the
requirements of one or more Viewpoints. A
Viewpoint might be supported by one or more
integrated Views. In the Air Defence example, the
Viewpoint might be met by two integrated views: one
showing the location of air assets on a map and the
other showing a dynamic Gantt chart of flight times
and fuel loadings.
Effectiveness is considered as a fourth dimension of
the model. We argue that effectiveness of particular

approaches can only be considered in terms of their
domain context of use and deployed configuration.
Imago has been designed to support this approach
where evaluations are done within the context of the
various dimensions of the reference model.

4. Imago Environment
As show in Figure 4, the Imago environment
comprises several key features which combine to
support the characterisation, prototyping, evaluation
and transitioning of information visualisation
approaches for particular contexts of use. The main
features of the environment are: the semantic model;
the evaluation framework; integrated instrumentation
capabilities; and a mechanism called the collaboration
bus which supports tool integration, efficient
connectivity to underlying data sources, and distributed
user interaction. The system supports the integrated
use of various forms of instrumentation to aid in both
the analysis of visualisations and the collection of
evaluative information. This could include the capture
of data on how and when various views are used by
users through data provided by biological and neuropsychological sensors.
The Imago environment draws from, extends and
implements RM-Vis concepts. The core element of the
environment is a Semantic Model which provides the
central knowledge base of domain contexts,
descriptive aspects, viewpoints, and visualisation
approaches, as described in Section 3. For example,
the environment supports the modelling and capture of
domain contexts based on the roles and activities
undertaken by users. Support is also provided for
capturing user viewpoints which define what needs to
be described in relation to particular tasks being
undertaken within a domain context.
Given this
knowledge of user requirements, the system is able to
suggest various views that support their specified
viewpoints. User and team characteristics can also
captured in the model. These characteristics include be
physical, cultural, interpersonal and cognitive
attributes. The semantic model also supports the
integration of evaluation and instrumentation data in
relation to user contexts and associated visualisation
approaches.
The semantic model stores the various semantic
relationships between the RM-Vis concepts,
evaluations results, and instrumentation data. This
provides the basis for the intelligence of the system.
The central concept in Imago is the viewpoint which
relates the views to a particular tasks being performed
within a domain context and the aspects that need to be
described. Views are the actual visualisations provided
by the environment. In the initial version of Imago,
views are provided as showcase examples from
existing tools (images, video clips etc.) as well as
concept sketches. In later versions, dynamic views
will be provided by the actual tools using real or
synthetic data. In particular, adaptive and composable
visualisation systems such as DSTO’s InVision [4] and
PNNL’s Starlight [13] will be integrated into the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Imago environment. Tasks are defined according to
activities and roles that they support. The rest of the
imago concepts (roles, activities, descriptive aspects,
enhancements, interactions, representations, users,
teams, evaluation, and domain contexts) serve to
establish relationships between viewpoints and actual
views in order to allow the user to effectively decide
on appropriate visualisations based on their particular
situation.

Figure 4. Imago Environment
Imago provides an integrated evaluation capability
where evaluation results are stored in relation to the
semantic model. In Imago, evaluations form metalinks between particular concepts within the semantic
model or annotations on individual concepts. For
example, an evaluation of the fitness of a view to a
particular user’s viewpoint is presented as a node
connecting the two concepts together. This close
integration means that evaluation is part of the model
rather than additional data that is separate from the
representation. An added bonus of using an integrated
evaluation capability is that future inferencing support
will be able to use the evaluative information in order
to make more accurate predictions on user
requirements.
Workspaces provide the main interaction
mechanism for users of the system. A Workspace
presents the relationship between usage contexts, user
viewpoints and views. Workspaces support various
classes of users including analysts, researchers, and
end users. For example, analysts capture and model
domain contexts and viewpoints within a user
workspace. They can then draw from the knowledge
base of visualisation approaches to identify the
possible candidate views to support a user needs.
Interactive evaluations with the user can then refine
these to the set of views that the user believes would be
most appropriate in meeting viewpoint requirements.
In the end-user mode, provide the user with rapid
access to their particular views and viewpoints in
relation to their activities. In addition to having access
to their own viewpoints and views, users can access
other workspaces. This supports aspects such as
shared awareness with other Imago users. This is

important in that many tasks require a common
understanding across a team of individuals, often
geographically distributed. Workspaces also provide
the means of extending the knowledge base through
the addition and characterisation of additional
visualisation approaches, and contributing additional
knowledge related to domain contexts and descriptive
aspects. An Imago Workspace that was used for the
fieldwork described in Section 5 is show in Figure 5.
The workspace shows a screenshot of an airforce
director of operations user with a task of managing
assigned air assets. You can see in the diagram that the
system based on the descriptive aspects (location A in
diagram) and previously chosen views has list five
different potential views to the user (B). The user has
selected “3D Stealth Viewer” which has three
showcase examples (C), one of which is a video of the
visualisation. This video is running in the example
pane(D).

B

5. Using and Experimenting with Imago
Table 1 provides an overview of the current Imago
knowledge base. Much of current knowledge base was
generated through previous TTCP surveys and
activities.

C

A

Figure 5. Imago Screenshot
The Imago Collaboration Bus is implemented
using LiveSpaces technologies [8]. LiveSpaces
implements a distributed infrastructure based on a
publish/subscribe system that uses content-based
routing [14]. This infrastructure provides a common
platform for supporting data integration, tool
collaboration, and distributed operation. At the people
collaboration level, the collaboration bus supports
shared awareness where users share the same pool of
knowledge, such as workspaces and views, and where
the modification by one user can be reflected in all
users presences immediately. The collaboration bus
also facilitates the other collaboration layers within the
system. The data collaboration layer allows various
data sources such as synthetic data provided through
simulation, and operational data, to be accessed and
structured in a way that will allow effective uploading
into target tools for presentation to user. Tool
integration and collaboration can be a formidable
challenge. Imago supports the concept of allowing the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

generation of different views, derived from various
tools, but based on the same data set.
The
collaboration bus provides a standard mechanism for
controlling tools and so together with standardized
datasets being created by way of the data collaboration
layer, this challenge is significantly simplified.

D

Initial laboratory experimentation with the semantic
model has been undertaken to validate the concept of
rapidly identifying candidate visualisations based on
particular domain contexts and descriptive aspects
being entered into the system. Various scenarios have
been entered into the systems to ascertain how
efficiently the environment can identify candidate
visualisations for particular domain contexts.
For
example, the request “find viewpoints with the
following descriptive aspects order, location,
shipment” returns the viewpoints such as “Monitor
performance of transportation and distribution
systems”. A view returned for this viewpoint was the
“army-logistics-view” produced by the Visage tool
[15]. Further queries provided a description of the
view and the characteristics that describe the
approaches used to represent and interact with the
information provided by the view. For example, this
view allows a logistics analyst to explore the supply
needs of a particular group within the context of an
overall operation.
In terms of RM-Vis the
visualisation approach uses map, tabular, and chart
representations.
In terms of enhancement, view
integration and overlay is provided so that selections
on the tabular representation can be represented on the
map. Interaction is characterised as supporting drag
and drop, and the use of sliders for dynamic queries.
Table Contents
Views
Viewpoints
Descriptive Aspects
Tools
Domain Contexts

No. of Items
500
132
218
360
345

Table 1 Current Imago Knowledge Base
The laboratory experimentation has been a necessary
precursor to field trails to ensure that the knowledge
base and querying mechanisms are satisfactory to
support experimentation in real domains. The current
Imago system has been deployed as part of a field
experimentation activity which was aimed at validating
the concepts of use. The system was deployed within a
Joint Task Force Headquarters to help develop and
validate requirements for the use of information
visualisation to support situational awareness in future
command support systems. Figure 5 provides a
screenshot of the system used for the field study. The
initial field study indicates that the current Imago
approach is effective for capturing user contexts and
visualisation needs. The use of the knowledge base for

rapidly providing candidate visualisation approaches
was investigated. Further studies will be needed to test
the effectiveness of the integrated evaluation
framework in relation to validating user needs and
proposed visualisation solutions. We are also be
conducting field experimentation to help identify the
set of key attributes that need to be evaluated in these
types of scenarios.

6. Future Work
As outlined in Section 5, further field studies will be
undertaken to further validate the concepts and to
capture quantitative data based on actual usage
scenarios. There are a range of enhancements that we
wish to experiment with. For example, the current
version of Imago supports querying of the semantic
model. However, we would like to explore how we
might use and inferencing mechanism to support more
intelligent considerations on what views may be
appropriate for a particular user context and need. The
use of a semantic model with automated analysis
support also shows significant potential for the
prototyping of new visualisation systems. It could
support the designer by allowing the input of domain
context and descriptive aspect information for
particular users and returning potential solutions to be
explored. In the future, one might envisage Imago
extending from being a prototyping and evaluative tool
into providing direct visualisation support for users.
These types of adaptive visualisations systems would
allow the users to craft visualisations on demand.
Advanced features of this type require a significant
supporting infrastructure and knowledge base, much of
which has been developed and investigated as part of
the Imago project
Although Imago is initially being trailed in military
command and control domains, it has been designed to
have much wider applicability. The Imago knowledge
base contains examples of visualisation approaches
from a wide variety of domains such as health, finance,
transport, and telecommunications. The aim is to draw
experiences from other domain and transition relevant
approaches into the target domain.
Similarly,
researchers and analysts who focus on particular
domain contexts of interest can draw from the broader
knowledge base, including the substantial knowledge
being derived from the command and control domain,
to understand and develop solutions for their focus
area.

7. Conclusion
In this paper we argue that new methods are needed
to support more effective and efficient transitioning of
visualisation solutions to users. We have discussed a
new a distributed environment that we are developing
to support the prototyping, evaluation, and
transitioning of visualisation approaches. The Imago
environment uses a semantic model of contextual and
visualisation knowledge and integrated evaluation
capabilities to aid the transitioning process. We have
discussed the use of Imago in relation to our

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

experiences in researching and providing information
visualisation approaches for command and control
activities.

8. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions
of the TTCP community, Peter Evdokiou and Matthew
Phillips for their contributions to Imago.

9. References
1.
TTCP, The Technical Cooperation Program. 2006.
2. Endsley, M.R., Towards a Theory of Situation Awareness
in Dynamic Systems. Human Factors, 1995. 37(1): p.
pages 32-64.
3. Alberts, D., J. Garstka, and F. Stein, Network Centric
Warfare. Second Edition ed. 1999, United States: CCRP.
4. Goodburn, D.P.J. and D.R. Vernik, Deploying Systems
Visualisation Environments: An Agent-Based Approach,
in Third International Conference on Knowledge-Based
Intelligent Information Engineering Systems. 1999, IEEE:
Adelaide, Australia. p. Pages 26-29.
5. Pattison, T., R. Vernik, and M. Phillips, Information
Visualisation using Composable Layouts and Visual Sets
in 2001 Asia-Pacific Symposium on Information
Visualisation (Volume 9) Sydney Australia.
6. Gouin, D., P. Evdokiou, and R. Vernik, A Showcase of
Visualisation Approaches for Military Decision Makers,
in NATO’s Research & Technology Organisation (RTO)
Information Systems Technology panel Halden, Norway.
7. Olive, OLIVE: On-line Library of Visualisation
Environments. 1998.
8. Vernik, R., T. Blackburn, and D. Bright, Extending
Interactive Intelligent Workspace Architectures with
Enterprise Services,
in
Evolve2003 Enterprise
Information Integration. 2003: Sydney, Australia.
9. Shneiderman, B., The Eye Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for Information Visualisation, in IEEE
Symposium on Visual Languages. 1996, IEEE. p. Page
336.
10. Pfitzner, D., V. Hobbs, and D. Powers, A Unified
Taxonomics Framework for Information Visualisation, in
Asia-Pacific Symposium on Information Visualisation.
2003: Darlhinghurst, Australia.
11. Card, S.K. and J.D. Mackinlay, The Structure of the
Information Visualisation Design Space. 1997, Phoenix,
Arizona.
12. Oudshoorn, M.J., H. Didjaja, and S.K. Ellershaw, Aspects
and Taxonomy of Program Visualisation. Software
Visualisation, ed. P. Eades and S.K. Chang. 1996,
Singapore: World Scientific Publishing.
13. Risch, J.S. and e. al., The Starlight Information
Visualisation System., in First International Conference
on Information Visualisation (IV'97). 1997.
14. Segall, B., et al., Content Based Routing with Elvin 4, in
AUUG2K. 2000: Canberra, Australia.
15. Roth, S.F., et al., Visage: A User-Interface Environment
for Exploring Information, in IEEE Information
Visualisation Symposium. 1996, IEEE.

