Viewing the Larger Context of Genomic Data through
Horizontal Integration
Matthew Hibbs1,2, Grant Wallace1, Maitreya Dunham2, Kai Li1, and Olga Troyanskaya1,2
1

Department of Computer Science
Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544
{mhibbs, gwallace, maitreya, li, ogt}@princeton.edu
2

Abstract
Genomics is an important emerging scientific field
that relies on meaningful data visualization as a key step
in analysis. Specifically, most investigation of gene
expression microarray data is performed using
visualization techniques. However, as microarrays
become more ubiquitous, researchers must analyze their
own data within the context of previously published work
in order to gain a more complete understanding. No
current method for microarray visualization and analysis
enables biology researchers to observe the greater
context of data that surrounds their own results, which
severely limits the ability of researchers draw novel
conclusions. Here we present a system, called HIDRA,
that visually integrates the simultaneous display of
multiple microarray datasets to identify important
parallels and dissimilarities. We demonstrate the power
of our approach through examples of real-world
biological insights that can be observed using HIDRA
that are not apparent using other techniques.

1

Introduction

Scientifically meaningful data visualization is vital
for the advancement of knowledge in many fields,
particularly molecular biology. Genomics is one of the
fastest growing modern scientific disciplines, as it
promises a better understanding of the inner workings of
cells, is vital to understand diseases, elaborates our
understanding of evolution, moves towards the era of
personalized medicine, and reveals the root causes of
cancer. One of the most powerful new tools molecular
biologists wield to solve these problems are gene
expression microarrays, and the majority of microarray
analysis is done through visualization techniques[1, 2].
Gene expression microarrays simultaneously measure
the activation or suppression of every gene in a genome
at a particular point in time. These studies result in data
matrices containing hundreds of thousands to millions of
observations, and the majority of researchers rely on
visualization tools to mine these data to discover new

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

biological information. Biologists face the challenges of
understanding not only the data that they generate, but
also of comprehending their results in the broader
context of previous studies. As microarray technology
matures, decreases in cost, and becomes more accessible,
the number of microarray studies produced is growing
exponentially, which further complicates thorough
analysis.
No existing method for microarray visualization
enables researchers to directly understand and analyze
their data within the greater context of previously
published findings.
This severely limits research
capabilities by forcing users to focus on their own data
during the initial analysis phase and to compare with
other studies only at later stages to confirm or contradict
their conclusions. Integrating the vast amount of
available data into the analysis phase as early and
seamlessly as possible will allow researchers to build
upon previous results, observe inconsistencies, and form
more powerful conclusions.
We propose a novel methodology for the analysis and
exploration
of
multiple
microarray
datasets
simultaneously. By leveraging visual paradigms that are
commonly used for small-scale microarray analysis, our
approach remains easily interpretable by researchers.
Due to the sheer size of these datasets, we employ an
“overview + detail” approach on a per-dataset basis to
allow users to view specific genes as well as their
context within the whole genome. However, we extend
this paradigm to include the larger context of additional
available datasets as well, which we call an “overview +
detail + setting” paradigm.
We have implemented our approach into a system
called HIDRA (Horizontally Integrated Dataset
Relationship Analysis), and we have deployed this
system to experimental genomics researchers both for
individual use and for collaborative use on a large-format
display device. In the next section we discuss existing
microarray visualization approaches in more detail. We
then outline our specific visualization goals and what
techniques we use to achieve those goals. And finally
we show two case studies where meaningful biological

observations have been made by researchers using our
system.

2

Related Work

Existing microarray visualization tools focus on the
analysis of single datasets, and many of these tools are
used on a daily basis by the research community[3]. The
majority of visual displays of microarray data fall into
two major categories: heat maps[4-6] and parallel
coordinates[7]. Other approaches are also used, such as
scatterplots, histograms, and spreadsheets, but these are
generally complementary techniques used in conjunction
with a heat map and/or parallel coordinate display[4, 810].
Heat map displays traditionally show a clustered data
matrix of values represented as colors interpolated from
red to green. This type of display allows a user to
quickly identify prevalent patterns among genes in a
dataset by looking for bands of data with similar profiles.
These displays are often accompanied by a dendrogram
created from hierarchical clustering, which dictates the
order in which genes are displayed and visually encodes
a distance metric relationship between genes.
Heat maps have seen near universal adoption
amongst biologists, and their results are the canonical
representation of gene expression used in the majority of
microarray publications. While these displays allow the
full matrix of data values to be viewed, the patterns and
labels of individual genes are only visible by zooming
into more detailed portions of the map. Many tools
support this type of exploration by using an “overview +
detail” paradigm[11], where users see the entire dataset,
but can then select a smaller region to see in greater
detail.
Parallel coordinate systems display genes as a
collection of segmented lines overlaid on a measurement
grid. These displays have the ability to show all of the
available data in a relatively small area. This approach is
also well suited for the identification of desired patterns,
as users are able to select only those genes that pass
through defined portions of the grid.
While parallel coordinate views show all of the
available data, the results can be difficult to interpret.
When viewing a large number of genes simultaneously,
it is difficult to distinguish one expression profile from
another. As with heat maps, this approach suffers from
not being able to label individual genes within the total
plot. The absence of a dendrogram created from
hierarchical clustering presents both benefits and
complications. The dendrogram visually indicates a
quantitative distance metric between two genes in a
dataset, but it also enforces an ordering and structure on
the data that may be somewhat artificial. Parallel
coordinate displays do not suffer from this imposition of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

ordering, but do not visually quantify arbitrary distances
between profiles.
Many of the most successful microarray visualization
approaches combine both heat map displays and parallel
coordinates views, along with several other views of the
same data[3].
We refer to these approaches as
“vertically integrated” as they allow researchers to see
the same data from many complementary angles. These
methods have been very successful and have gained wide
use among the microarray analysis community.
We propose extending the power of multiple
simultaneous views in an orthogonal direction. Rather
than displaying multiple viewpoints of the same data, our
approach displays the same type of viewpoint on
multiple datasets at the same time -- we refer to this
paradigm as a “horizontally integrated” approach. This
expansion of the amount of visualized data enables
researchers to view a broader setting of known biology
and place their own results within this larger context.

3

Design & Implementation

We established several goals for the design of our
microarray visualization methodology that incorporates
broader context. The following goals are a combination
of our initial aspirations and the desires of our research
collaborators that used our system:
• Ease of use. A successful system must be usable
and intuitive for the target audience, in this case
biology researchers.
• Dynamic, consistent interaction. The approach
must be adaptive to user input as their desire to
explore and observe information changes over
time, but these adaptations must feel natural to
the user.
• Scalability. Our approach must scale both with
the amount of data visualized, and with available
screen space.
• Biologically meaningful.
Perhaps the most
important criteria is that a microarray
visualization system must enable researchers to
explore their data in a way that facilitates
biological observations and insights.

3.1 Single dataset visualization
In order to maintain a baseline of usability and
comfort with the microarray analysis community, we
have chosen to adopt the use of heat maps accompanied
by dendrograms as the basis for our methodology. This
approach is by far the most common presentation format
for microarray data in biology literature. For individual
dataset display we leveraged the codebase of the
commonly used, open-source tool, JavaTreeView[5],
which we then modified for our purposes. This provides
the immediate advantage of utilizing pre-existing

abilities and biases of the microarray research
community. On the level of a single dataset we also
utilize the “overview + detail” paradigm to allow users to
view both the entire dataset, as well as a more detailed
view of a subset of that data. An example of this
visualization for a single dataset is shown in Figure 1.

laboratory factors. For this reason, values above/below a
cutoff are saturated out to a maximum intensity, but this
cutoff is not universal, and should thus default to a
reasonable value, but be in the control of the user.
Additionally, the color scheme used for display must be
adjustable by the user. The red/green gradient is
commonly employed because it has a direct link to the
chemical dyes used in microarray experiments, however
such a scheme is clearly unacceptable for color-blind
researchers.

3.2 Multiple dataset visualization

Figure 1 – A single dataset displayed using a heat
map and dendrogram in an overview + detail
format. Rows correspond to genes and columns
to experimental conditions. Each intersection is
colored on a continuous scale from green through
black to red.
The data was hierarchically
clustered in both dimensions. A region of the
dataset was selected in the overview and the
corresponding section is shown in greater detail
below.

Users have several options for interacting with this
display of information. Subsets of genes to view in the
detail portion can be selected by dragging a box on the
heat map, or by choosing branches of the dendrogram.
These selections can be refined by traversing up or down
the dendrogram using the keyboard. This allows users to
isolate particular desired areas of the larger dataset to
view with greater scrutiny.
Due to differences in experimental technologies and
personal preferences/abilities, it is also important for
users to maintain control regarding the parameters of the
heat map coloration. In general, microarray data lies in a
broad, noisy range of values that depends on several

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Several factors are important to consider when
incorporating additional datasets into microarray
visualization. The common features of microarray
datasets are genes, while the experimental conditions
vary between datasets, which indicates that between
dataset comparisons should be visible on a per-gene
basis. However, microarray datasets are often created
using disparate technologies or experimental practices,
and individual datasets are generally targeted to
investigate a specific area or process, which indicates
that information such as clustering and normalization are
appropriate only on a per-dataset basis.
In order to address these biological requirements, we
have developed an approach we refer to as “overview +
detail + setting”. On the level of each dataset it is vital to
observe both the entire dataset (overview) as well as
more specific information (detail). However, for the
larger goal of placing an individual researcher’s data in
the greater context of available data, datasets must be
linked together (setting). In particular, we applied this
approach to microarray data with the goal of making
comparisons between datasets as intuitive as possible,
while maintaining important per-dataset information.
The most common paradigm in microarray literature
is for the expression of genes to correspond to rows of a
visualized data matrix. As genes are the common
element of interest between datasets, we place the
datasets next to each other horizontally to preserve generow orientation across all data. However, the ordering of
genes is determined by clustering, and the clustering
process is biologically meaningful on the level of
individual datasets. To address these issues, we have
synchronized the detail views across all datasets to
facilitate comparisons, while preserving the cluster order
of individual datasets in the overviews.
By synchronizing the detail views, we preserve the
expectation that gene measurements are aligned along
rows, even across multiple datasets. The order of the
genes shown in the detail views corresponds to the order
of those genes in the dataset where the selection was
made. To provide information about the per-dataset
context of the selected genes, a thin line is displayed in

Figure 2 – A selection of disparate datasets viewed in HIDRA. Six different datasets are shown here
tiled horizontally. Each dataset was individually hierarchically clustered in both dimensions. A
selection has been made in the rightmost dataset (from a nutrient limitation study[12]) and the thin
light blue lines in the left five datasets (from a stress response study[13]) indicate where these genes
are located in their overviews. A user can quickly observe that the selected genes are non-randomly
grouped in the clustering of the other datasets. Further inspection of the aligned genes in the detail
views shows cases where these genes are behaving similarly/differently.

each dataset’s overview to indicate where each selected
gene falls within that dataset. An example of this
multiple dataset visualization is shown in Figure 2.
The gene-level synchronization of the detail views
enables low-level comparisons of a gene’s specific
behavior in different datasets; while in the overviews,
the selection highlights indicate a higher-level
comparison of gene group relationships between
datasets.
For example, a user can select a tight group of
genes in one dataset, and immediately observe how
those genes cluster together in every other dataset at a
general level. A researcher can then examine the detail
views to investigate the specific expression levels that
led to the observed global patterns. This type of
exploratory analysis across a large amount of diverse
datasets is impossible with existing tools, but is vital
for experimental microarray analysis, as we
demonstrate in our validation.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

3.3 Scalability, interactions, and interfaces
The inclusion of multiple datasets also requires
addressing scalability, interaction and user interface
concerns[14].
First, as more data is viewed
simultaneously, screen space quickly becomes an issue.
While several datasets can be viewed at once on even
the smallest desktop/laptop displays, users may be in
situations where they still feel limited. By default,
when enough datasets are loaded to overflow the
available display space, a scrollbar becomes active to
pan between datasets. We also provide the ability to
dynamically re-order, remove, and/or add new datasets
as the researcher explores their data. In this manner
users can choose the most relevant datasets to occupy
the visible area as their needs change over time.
Another option to see more data is to move to
large-scale display devices if they are available to the
user[15-17]. Our approach scales very well to largeformat devices by providing control over text size,
column widths, row heights, etc (Figure 3). Using
displays of this magnitude allows users to see as much

as an order of magnitude more data at once. These
very high-resolution displays are also helpful for
collaboration, which is very common among
microarray analysts.
Regarding the user interface, several visualization
choices must be made on a per-dataset basis. In
particular, the desired color scale, saturation cutoffs,
dendrogram widths, etc. often vary greatly from one
dataset to another, due to technological and
experimental differences. We provide controls to alter
all of these parameters for any selected subset of
datasets, including the individual level. Further, we
store these choices on a per-dataset basis, so that as
users re-order, remove, and/or re-load data these perdataset choices remain intact.

their analysis. The Java language also easily permits
future expansion of our approach to include additional
features, which is vital as genomic research is rapidly
evolving.

4

Validation

The ultimate validation of a scientific data
visualization approach is its usefulness and adoption
within the research community. In particular, a
successful approach should aid in the discovery of
novel biology.
We are working with many
collaborators spread across five laboratories to assess
how our multiple dataset visualization approach aids
their research as well as how to improve HIDRA. We
have deployed our system for these users both on their
own desktop/laptop machines and on the large-scale
shared display wall at the Lewis-Sigler Institute for
Integrative Genomics at Princeton. While we are still
receiving feedback from these users, here we discuss
two of the user experiences that led to biological
insights made using our approach. These examples
demonstrate the power of our technique as these
observations could not be easily made using any
previously existing methodology.

4.1 User experience #1 – Stress response
effects in yeast

Figure 3 – A group of collaborators using HIDRA
on the large-scale display wall at the LewisSigler Institute for Integrative Genomics. This
display is capable of simultaneously showing an
order of magnitude more data than traditional
desktop/laptop displays, which is helpful when
dealing with very large data repositories.

Further, some interactions should be consistent
from one dataset to the next. In order to preserve the
gene-row alignment of the detail views, the heights of
each panel are slaved to any panel being resized, such
that all detail views maintain the same height.
Additionally, scrolling in any detail view causes
synchronous scrolls in all detail views to maintain
consistency.

3.4 Implementation
We have implemented these methods into a Javabased system called HIDRA. The use of Java as a
development language allows us to more easily
produce a cross-platform result, which is of particular
importance to the biology community, who use a
variety of operating system platforms. Among our
immediate collaborators, individuals use Windows,
Macintosh, and Linux operating systems to perform

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

One scientist using our system is interested in
studying stress response and growth rate effects in
yeast. By utilizing our multi-dataset visualization
capabilities applied to several existing datasets, she
was able to draw several novel, biologically
meaningful conclusions.
She was able to
simultaneously examine the expression levels of genes
in a set of standard stress response datasets[13] as well
as results from a nutrient limitation study[12] and a
collection of gene knockout experiments[18]. The
biological question this user wished to examine is
whether or not the traditional global stress response
signal is present in other types of data.
Using our approach, she was able to easily find and
select clusters of genes in the nutrient limitation and
knockout studies that she suspected may be the result
of a stress response effect, and then examine how those
genes related to each other within the standard
collection of stress datasets (see Figure 2). Performing
this type of analysis is simple in our multiple dataset
approach; however, using previously existing
techniques we would need to launch over a dozen
independent instances of a program and continually cut
and paste selections between instances, rendering such
analysis practically impossible.
Our collaborator identified several groups of genes
in these datasets that exhibited a strong pattern of

correlation within the stress response datasets as well.
This suggests that the effect on gene expression of
various nutrient limitations and gene knockouts may be
superceded by the more general stress response effect.
Our collaborators are currently performing further
analysis, both in the lab and with our visualization
system to better characterize this phenomenon. Thus,
by observing the relationships between these very
different datasets in HIDRA, this scientist quickly
identified unexpected commonalities that may prove
biologically interesting.

phenomena unique to particular assays. This type of
exploration allows microarray researchers to quickly
make key insights and form hypotheses that would be
difficult to make viewing the data independently.

4.2 User experience #2 – Cell cycle
synchronization effects
A second example of an important observation was
made by another biologist using HIDRA to investigate
disparities among related datasets. In this case the
scientist was examining several datasets all purportedly
studying the same phenomenon, the yeast cell cycle. In
particular, two studies used a variety of means to
synchronize cell populations to create time courses of
gene expression throughout the phases of the cell
cycle[19, 20].
A group of genes in one of these time courses were
tightly clustered with very high over-expression at
early points of the time course. However, using
HIDRA we could quickly see that these genes were
largely unrelated in the other time courses, and during
the early time points they were not over-expressed in
the datasets produced from other means of
synchronization (see Figure 4).
Upon further inspection, a significant number of
these genes are known to be involved in cell
conjugation and mating. The time course where these
genes are tightly clustered was synchronized by
exposing the cell population to a pheromone that
induces a mating response, which halts cell cycle
progression. Our collaborator quickly realized that the
expression response seen in these early time points was
an artifact of the synchronization method, rather than a
change caused by the cell cycle. In this case, observing
differences between datasets studying the same
phenomenon helped focus efforts on important portions
of the datasets.

4.3 Discussion
The two examples described above are
representative of the types of interactions users have
had with HIDRA.
By quickly observing
commonalities among disparate datasets collaborators
have been able to identify common trends that could
indicate
meaningful
relationships
between
experimental conditions. Conversely, by finding key
differences between related datasets users can explore

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4 – Biological exploration of differences
among three cell cycle datasets displayed in
HIDRA.
In this case, three time courses
studying the same phenomenon from two
studies [19, 20] are shown. A group of genes
with very high over-expression at early time
points is selected in the leftmost dataset, but
these genes show little relationship to one
another in the other two time courses. Further
study revealed that the over-expression of these
genes in the left dataset was an experimental
artifact.

5

Conclusions

We have presented a novel methodology for the
concurrent analysis of multiple gene expression
microarray datasets. Our approach allows researchers
to understand how their own data relates to data
previously published in the literature, which is vital for
continued analysis. By exploring the larger context of
available data, users can overcome the limitations of
existing approaches for higher-level analysis of their
own data. Observing a more global view of expression
data allows biologists to make more insights and
formulate novel hypotheses.
Our approach to the inclusion of greater data
context is based on expanding common visualization
practices to create an “overview + detail + setting”
system. We include the concept of the greater
information setting by horizontally integrating and
linking separate overview and detail views for

individual datasets. This type of data integration –
inclusion of multiple parallel views – is in contrast to
the integration of a variety of viewpoints based on the
same underlying data, which we call a vertically
integrated approach.
Although we apply the concepts of including a
broader setting of information through horizontal
integration to a specific solution for microarray
visualization, these principles are much more general.
For example, a system similar to HIDRA for
microarray analysis could be created based on parallel
coordinates, rather than heat maps. Horizontally
incorporating additional datasets into a system based
on vertically integrated multiple views could
potentially provide both the benefits of more complete
understanding of single datasets and the benefits of
understanding the greater information context.
The concept of visualizing the broader setting of
available data is vital for future analysis and
comparisons within the biology community. We have
shown real-world examples of insights that can be
made using our approach for microarray visualization
that are difficult or impossible to discover using
existing techniques. We believe integrating additional
datasets into visualization systems is a powerful
paradigm not only for genomics data, but potentially
for many other disciplines as well.

6

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the members of the
Troyanskaya, Botstein, Coller, Kruglyak, and Dunham
laboratories for using the system and providing
feedback and validations. Matthew Hibbs is supported
by NSF grant DGE-9972930. This work was supported
in part by NSF grants CNS-0406415, EIA-0101247,
and IIS-0513552, by NIH grant R01 GM071966, and
by the NIGMS Center of Excellence grant P50
GM071508.

References
[1] Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D. Cluster
analysis and display of genome-wide expression patterns.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 95(25):14863-8, 1998.
[2] Quackenbush J. Computational analysis of microarray
data. Nat Rev Genet, 2(6):418-27, 2001.
[3] Saraiya P, North C, Duca K. An Evaluation of
Microarray Visualization Tools for Biological Insight.
The IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 1-8,
2004.
[4] Saeed AI, Sharov V, White J, Li J, Liang W, Bhagabati
N, Braisted J, Klapa M, Currier T, Thiagarajan M, Sturn
A, Snuffin M, Rezantsev A, Popov D, Ryltsov A,
Kostukovich E, Borisovsky I, Liu Z, Vinsavich A, Trush
V, Quackenbush J. TM4: a free, open-source system for
microarray
data
management
and
analysis.
Biotechniques, 34(2):374-8, 2003.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[5] Saldanha AJ. Java Treeview--extensible visualization of
microarray data. Bioinformatics, 20(17):3246-8, 2004.
[6] Seo J, Shneiderman B.
Interactively exploring
hierarchical clustering results [geneidentification].
Computer, 35(7):80-86, 2002.
[7] Hochheiser H, Baehrecke EH, Mount SM, Shneiderman
B. Dynamic querying for pattern identification in
microarray and genomic data. Proceedings of the
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, 3,
2003.
[8] Spotfire Decisionsite for functional Genomics.
http://www.spotfire.com.
[9] GeneSpring. http://www.silicongenetics.com.
[10] Hibbs MA, Dirksen NC, Li K, Troyanskaya OG.
Visualization methods for statistical analysis of
microarray clusters. BMC Bioinformatics, 6115, 2005.
[11] Baldonado MQW, Woodruff A, Kuchinsky A.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information
visualization. Proceedings of the working conference on
Advanced visual interfaces, 110-119, 2000.
[12] Saldanha AJ, Brauer MJ, Botstein D. Nutritional
homeostasis in batch and steady-state culture of yeast.
Mol Biol Cell, 15(9):4089-104, 2004.
[13] Gasch AP, Spellman PT, Kao CM, Carmel-Harel O,
Eisen MB, Storz G, Botstein D, Brown PO. Genomic
expression programs in the response of yeast cells to
environmental changes. Mol Biol Cell, 11(12):4241-57,
2000.
[14] North C, Schneiderman B. A Taxonomy of Multiple
Window Coordinations. Technical Report CS-TR-3854, ,
1998.
[15] Li K, Chen H, Clark D, Cook P, Damianakis S, Essl G,
Finkelstein A, Funkhouser T, Klein A, Liu Z, Praun E,
Samanta R, Shedd B, Singh JP, Tzanetakis G, Zheng J.
Building and Using a Scalable Display Wall System.
IEEE Comput Graph Appl, 20(4):29-37, 2000.
[16] Wallace G, Anshus OJ, Bi P, Chen H, Chen Y, Clark D,
Cook P, Finkelstein A, Funkhouser T, Gupta A, Hibbs M,
Li K, Liu Z, Samanta R, Sukthankar R, Troyanskaya O.
Tools and applications for large-scale display walls.
IEEE Comput Graph Appl, 25(4):24-33, 2005.
[17] Wei B, Silva C, Koutsofios E, Krishnan S, North S.
Visualization Research with Large Displays. IEEE
Comput Graph Appl, 20(4):50-54, 2000.
[18] Hughes TR, Marton MJ, Jones AR, Roberts CJ,
Stoughton R, Armour CD, Bennett HA, Coffey E, Dai H,
He YD, Kidd MJ, King AM, Meyer MR, Slade D, Lum
PY, Stepaniants SB, Shoemaker DD, Gachotte D,
Chakraburtty K, Simon J, Bard M, Friend SH.
Functional discovery via a compendium of expression
profiles. Cell, 102(1):109-26, 2000.
[19] Cho RJ, Campbell MJ, Winzeler EA, Steinmetz L,
Conway A, Wodicka L, Wolfsberg TG, Gabrielian AE,
Landsman D, Lockhart DJ, Davis RW. A genome-wide
transcriptional analysis of the mitotic cell cycle. Mol
Cell, 2(1):65-73, 1998.
[20] Spellman PT, Sherlock G, Zhang MQ, Iyer VR, Anders
K, Eisen MB, Brown PO, Botstein D, Futcher B.
Comprehensive identification of cell cycle-regulated
genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by
microarray hybridization. Mol Biol Cell, 9(12):3273-97,
1998.

