An Information Visualization Approach to Retail Space Management (VisMT)
Mikael Jern
NVIS – Norrkoping Visualization and Interaction Studio
Linkoping University, Sweden
mikje@itn.liu.se
Abstract
Retail space management is one of the more crucial
challenges faced by retailers today with an ever everexpanding volume of data to which they must refer when
making decisions. Problems have emerged that are
intractable using traditional means but for which
interactive information visualization shows much
promise. These problems or tasks are exploratory in
nature and use temporal multivariate data. Department
stores must maximize and optimize return on allocated
retail space. Although product sales are readily
available, the missing link for most retailers is a precise
understanding of each store’s layout in relation to its
capacity and performance. This paper introduces a
novel approach Visual Space Management (VSM)
demonstrated with a multiple-linked view application
(VisMT) that explores retail data related to space
performance. VisMT integrates familiar information
visualization representations and a 3D interactive
layout of store floor plans with retail data sources. Parallel coordinates plot serves as a multivariate visual
control panel in the coordinated system. Seasonally
retail data analysis is performed simultaneously in
linked views through time. Visual inquiry methods are
supported for conditioned temporal multivariate data.

1. Introduction
Retail space management is one of the more crucial
challenges faced by retailers today. Retail data is
abstract, complex and temporal, without a natural spatial
dimension. Data is stored in difficult to interpret tabular
or textual formats and is not accessible in a context that
facilitates insight or broad understanding. Every retailer

wants to maximize and optimize return on retail space
e.g. volume of sales per square meter of retail
space. Although product sales are readily available, the
missing link for most retailers is a precise understanding
of each store’s layout in relation to its product
seasonality, capacity and performance. This scenario
also involves analysing retail data fluctuating through
time.
We introduce a novel approach Visual Space
Management (VSM) based on a multiple-linked view
application “VisMT” that explores abstract retail data
related to space performance. Initial discussions and an
early prototype demonstrated to a large department store
indicates a soaring interest for innovative solutions in
this retail VSM domain. The methods and tools we
present can help analyse the following complex and
common retail tasks:
• Massive amounts of sales statistics, flow of
merchandise, product information;
• Products are competing for the same space. Planned
space allocation reflects the sales result;
• Bottlenecks and failed sales planning strategies must
be discovered;
• Floor planning changes through time because of
merchandise seasonality and forecasts;
A planogram shows how and where specific retail
products should be placed on retail shelves or displays in
order to increase customer purchases. VisMT is not a
planogram tool but an interactive retail data explorative
tool that can assist the department store managers and
planners in carrying out analytical reasoning facilitated
by creative 3D space management visualization.

Figure 1:
Visual Space
Management

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2: VisMT visual user interface; (1) Overview store departments map, (2) 3D visual store layout, (3) Parallel coordinates where
each polyline represents a department, (4) Product department bar chart and (5) Seasonally time-step axis view. (A) Highlighted visual
representation of a selected department (Outdoor with three sub departments) – the base area represents allocated space to the
department, height illustrates the variable “sales” and colour (B) the sales margin. (C) Selected store (Stockholm) and current time step
(summer season 2007).

Our approach integrates well-known information
visualization (InfoVis) with a 3D interactive layout to
dynamically and visually explore merchandising
changes and forecasts over time linked to a store’s
layout plan. We believe that this approach makes sense
because around 80% of human decisions are spatialbased and it’s a familiar metaphor to access data. Spatial
layout and position is well-known to be the strongest
perceptual cue. By integrating abstract retail data
sources to a spatial floor plan, our approach could
provide better enterprise-wide knowledge thus
improving performance for retail space management.
We introduce our generic “GeoAnalytics”
visualization (GAV) component toolkit. GAV is based
on the principles behind visual analytics (VA) [10]
although we focus on the explorative data analysis
(EDA) aspect. GAV provides a broad collection of
dynamic visual interaction components familiar from the
InfoVis research domain and hopefully pertinent and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

potentially useful. Our research concentrates on
improving visual user interfaces (VUI) methods. Users
interact directly with the on-screen graphics without
dependence on more traditional and space-consuming
GUI controls and valuable screen area is reserved for
visualization.
Multivariate retail data are not best analysed through
the use of a single type of graph and view. In order to
detect complex patterns it is more convenient to view
data through a number of different visual representation
methods, each of which is best suited to highlight
different patterns and features. GAV provides a
framework for building tailor-made multiple-linked
views applications. We have set the following generic
requirements for the design and implementation of
VisMT:

• 3D graphics that gives the managers a virtual reality
experience of their complex retail data;
• Spatio-temporal and multivariate data exploration;
• Interactive and dynamic performance that gives the
user a sense of immediacy;
• Tailor-made and user-centric application design;
• Shorten development time by utilising already developed and assessed components;
• Dynamic and resizable time-linked views;
• Maximize screen area for visualization;
• Animate linked views simultaneously through time;
• Identify and apply perceptual principles to design;
The next section gives a brief review of related work,
followed by a description of the application including
the variety of visual interactions that VisMT supports.
Next we will discuss the used conceptual data
methodology and organization of retail sales data
followed by a description of the GAV layered
component architecture. We conclude with a discussing
of the advantages and some experiences from user
evaluation and finally ideas for future work.

Figure 3: There are many CAD tools and retail products that
can be used to design the layout of a store floor plan.

2. Related work
A Google search indicates that there has been no
serious research activity in data visualization applied to
the retail space management domain. A commercial UKbased company Advanced Visual Technology [4] has
developed a specialized product called “Retail Focus”.
The approach behind this product is essentially to
integrate computer aided design tools (AutoCAD®) in
store planning, shelf space maintenance, construction,
operation and inventory management. VisMT deviates
from this approach by focusing on sales performance
and strategic forecast planning analysis for department
managers including productivity analysis between
departments.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

A frequently applied method is the “planogram”
[12], a diagram that shows how and where specific retail
products should be placed on retail shelves or displays in
order to increase customer purchases. Attention is given
to adjusting the visibility, appearance and presence of
products to make them look more desirable, or to ensure
sufficient inventory levels on the shelf or display.
Implementing InfoVis multivariate tools, time-linked
coordinated views and visual dynamic queries with
conditioning from scratch is not a simple programming
task. Toolkits such as InfoVis Toolkit [5], GeoVista
studio [11] and Visualization ToolKit (VTK) can ease
this burden. These toolkits are freely available. We
propose a new GAV component toolkit [14] that
integrates with Microsoft .NET and Visual Studio
development tools and also includes support for visual
inquiries [8] based on conditioned space-time and
multivariate patterns.

3. VisMT – a linked view implementation
The development of VisMT follows a user and taskcentric, iterative process [6]. Our first prototype [3] was
developed as part of a master program thesis using a
commercial toolkit OpenViz [13] and introduced the 3D
layout space allocation view of a department floor plan.
The retailers were impressed with our original ideas and
provided valuable feedback for a new improved
prototype. Requested enhancements included exploring
multivariate retail data through time integrated with the
3D layout, visual inquiries and filter operations,
envisage sub-departments in the 3D view.
The second revised version has evolved by means of
our in-house developed GAV component toolkit [14].
VisMT now exploits a linked and coordinated views
methodology [9], where each view performs a specific
task, and applies dynamic interaction to explore
multivariate retail data and patterns from different
perspectives and at different levels-of-details. We
employ parallel coordinates (PC) that serves as a visual
control panel for dynamically linked 3D layout, PC,
overview map and bar graphs in an integrated VDA
system. VisMT supports visual inquiry methods based
on conditioned space-time, multivariate patterns. These,
in research community, well-known InfoVis methods
allows retailers to aggregate their complex temporal data
through a broad range of tools and interactive evaluate
chain, cluster or store-by-store performance based on
seasonal sales and identify opportunities from visual and
cost perspectives. VisMT aims at providing the retailers
with a knowledge discovery system that is able to detect,
visualize and communicate temporal and multivariate
spatial retail patterns.
The following five views are embedded in VisMT:
1. Overview map showing the location of the stores in

2.

3.

4.
5.

Sweden – the user interactively selects the store to be
analysed;
2D or 3D store department floor plan view provides
an overview of the store layout and visualizes
selected attribute retail data about individual
department’s performance. VUI features include pan,
rotate and zoom; User can select a 2D or 3D view
and department cubes can be solid or transparent;
Parallel coordinate (PC) is linked with the 3D layout
view, which gives the user simultaneously insight
from the department “profile” line (A) and position,
colour and size of the department (A). VUI features
include range sliders for defining events such as
exceeding of a given threshold, interactive variable
labels (B) for controlling 3D layouts and dynamic
movable axis. PC is time-linked to the time axis
view. The PC serves as a visual inquire tool in the
integrated VisMT application;
Bar chart view shows the sales data for individual
departments or sub-departments. Sales bars are
activated by direct manipulation in PC or 3D layout;
Time axis controls seasonal performance (temporal
trends) for each department – by moving a time
slider (C), all views are dynamically and
simultaneously updated to reflect the selected time
and focus users to relevant events. Animating is
achieved with special controls;

3.1 Floor plan - 3D store layout view
VisMT fuses abstract retail information (sales,
operational and margin costs) with a scanned floor plan,
department space allocation into a 3D store layout view.
The scanned floor plan (figure 4) is superimposed and
displayed together with 3D representations of individual
departments.

Figure 4: A scanned floor store plan is attached to the bottom
of the 3D graphics view and provides a true visual experience
of a Stadium store.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Each department is represented by a cube, where the
bottom plane represents the assigned space, colour
symbolizes one retail data attribute and height a second
assigned attribute, for example, (margin and sales in
figure 2). Transparency (figure 5) allows the user to see
sub-departments inside a department cube. The 3D
graphics view:
• Connects abstract retail data to a spatial department;
• Exploits perception described by colour, shape, size
and position;
• Gives retailers a sense of virtual reality;
• Animates through time;

Figure 6: VisMT’s 3D store layout view – department
“outdoor” with sub-departments “camping” etc.

3.2 Parallel coordinates (PC)
The PC serves as a control panel and visual inquire
tool to explore spatial, temporal and multivariate retail
data at different level-of-details. Figure 6 shows a PC
view representing the performance of each department
for selected store. A string in the PC forms a visual
representation of the characteristics of one department.
Differences between selected departments can be found
by visually comparing the highlighted strings
representing them. The number of retail variables that
can be simultaneously analysed is restricted only by the
horizontal resolution of the PC view. The highlighted
line in figure 6 represents the picked department
“Outdoor” and passes through 8 parallel axes, where
each axis represents a retail variable such as area,
employees, sales etc. The PC allows the store manager
to see and compare performance for individual stores
through time. (C) in figure 2 shows the assigned
seasonality (time step), where a store in Stockholm and
forecast retail data for summer 2007 is selected.
Dynamic range sliders are integrated in the PC-axes and
control the conditioning that constrains the visualization
to those variables meeting a given threshold and task.

Figure 7: Parallel Coordinates view – The darker polyline represents the selected department “outdoor” - The two dotted lines in green
colour represent the average and median values for all stores and allows a temporal multivariate retail data attribute comparison of the
performance for a selected department with similar departments in other stores. In this snapshot, the user has set a condition with the
range slider that constrains the second attribute “number of Employees” to 3 and above for departments to be explored.

Interactive PC features include coordinated views pick,
embedded range sliders for defining events such as
exceeding of a given threshold, axis labels for
controlling colour assignment in the 3D view and
movable axis. User interaction allows the user to closely
examine individual department’s performance and
observe comparisons through various seasons. For
example, the store manager can gain insights into key
retail issues such as cross-store performance, actual vs.
optimal layout differences, optimal layout effect on
seasonal sales and staff costs.

4 Conceptual data and component
methodology
VisMT utilizes an internal object-oriented database
with a hierarchical class structure. Retail data items
(stores, time-season, department, sub-departments,
products etc.) are defined in an Excel format (suitable

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

for a prototype) and are immediately converted to the
hierarchical data structure. This object-oriented data
approach means that a given data item can be specified
in any order and features an easy implementation of a
retail database. Labelled data items are easy associated
with a specific department or sub-department. The
classification of a data format and retail data items was
implemented in collaboration with staff from a chain
store (Stadium) and an associate consulting firm. The
Excel sheet below shows a snapshot of the hierarchical
structures, levels and formats.
The first column
represents the level of a retail data item:
S-1:S-200501:D-1 is Store S-1, Year 2005 and season
spring, Department D-1;
S-1:S-200501:D-1:S-1:P-1 is Store S-1, Year 2005 and
season spring, Department D-1, Sub Department S-1,
Product P-1;

4.1 GAV component toolkit
A keystone in our applied research projects is the
component thinking. Instead of making large generalpurpose applications, GeoAnalytics Visualization
(GAV) toolkit [14], is based on individual encapsulated
objects and customization exploiting Microsoft’s .NET
Framework, C# and DirectX as the low-level graphics
development platform. Generic basic-atomic and
functional components, each one performing a specific
task in the overall VA process, are put together into
multiple-linked views applications such as VisMT. This
layered component architecture enables broad
applicability, customization, scalability, reusability of
components and shortens the development time.
Interoperability is an idea that is invaluable to our
development of the GAV toolkit. Different developers,
working almost entirely independently, can contribute
VDA components to a common, quality-assured
component repository. Example of available components
are (figure 6): Parallel coordinates, choropleth map, 3D
scatter, ternary, colour legend and several data model
and filter components, etc. Components obtained from
this collection can be combined into larger assemblies
using a variety of interconnection mechanisms and are

readily transferable to most knowledge and decision
support intensive applications. Practical testing in close
collaboration with end users proves the validity,
usability and attractiveness of each individual
component. A developer can easily integrate custommade components.
GAV provides several user-accessible classes that
can be inherited. For example, a data transformation
class can inherit the “abstract data Filter class”. This
inheritance enables the class to be inserted in the data
transformation pipeline.
The same inheritance
requirement is imposed when inserting a custom made
visualization component into the rendering pipeline.
Same advantages of our GAV component approach:
• Reuse of quality-assured and validated components
in new applications;
• Glue user developed components with GAV;
• Suitable for development of multiple-linked and
coordinated application;
• Use Visual Studio for design of the user interface
and integrate GAV components;
• Component linking is easy – means shorter
development time;
• Customization, scalability and reusability;
• Integrates with other systems;

Figure 8:
GAV framework – A
layered components
architecture for Visual
Data Analytics

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

6. Conclusions
Retail space management is one of the more crucial
challenges faced by retailers today. Problems have
emerged that are intractable using traditional means but
for which interactive VA shows much promise. These
problems or tasks are exploratory in nature and use
temporal multivariate data. We introduce a novel
approach to retail space management analysis, which is
a synergy of 3D layout store floor plans, common
interactive information visualization methods and
multiple linked views.
VisMT provides the ability to represent retail
information graphically and make it understandable and
actionable for store and department managers, helping
them to reveal insights and trends. For instance, a
spreadsheet table with data representing massive
amounts of sales statistics, flow of merchandise, product
information, floor planning, forecast etc. may not reveal
much understanding if viewed in a tabular format.
However, if this data is integrated into a 3D graphics
layout of the store department plan, then failed sales
planning strategies could be discovered and managers
can quickly see where their bottlenecks are and how
floor planning changes through time because of
merchandise seasonality.
Usability studies are necessary, but they do not
always address usefulness. For more complex and
application-driven visualizations, evaluation must
encompass task analyses and should involve real users
and domain experts. We have adopted a user-centred
approach with iterative design and development process
of a tailored-made application on the basis of an
understanding of the users and particular their retail
expertise. VisMT has evolved over time as several
prototypes in collaboration with Stadium and IKEA.
We promote the use of a layered component-based
approach to the development and engineering of
applications. Customizable and scalable high-level
application and functional components are designed and
developed from low-level basic components. Our
visualization components are developed for the .NET
framework and based on DirectX library. We believe
that using a layered component approach can potentially
provide better scalability and more customizable
exploratory tools.
GAV has adopted the requirements to visual data
analytics with some of the following visual
representation and interaction schemes:
• Space and time awareness;
• Integrated views of large-scale information spaces,
supporting coordinated viewing of information in
context and provision of both overview and detailed

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

information;
• Schemes for management and exploitation of
multiple views and encourage complementary views
of the same data;
• Visual representations and interactive schemes from
a cognitive perspective;
• Methods for navigation in high-dimensional,
multivariate and temporal data;
• Interactive performance that can support analytic
reasoning;
Our next step includes a more comprehensive user
task analysis [6] based on in-depth interviews with
potential users, a set of focus group assessments of our
proposed visual user interface and achieved interactive
performance, and subsequent controlled experiments to
test selected aspects of used methods, such as the
multiple resizable views, number of attributes and
dynamic range sliders that constrains the animated timeseries.

Acknowledgements
The VSM research project was funded by Norrköping
Municipality Research Foundation (2006-2007). As part
of this research paper we have placed the VisMT
demonstrator application for downloading at our
university web site: http://vita.itn.liu.se/VSM/. I also like
to thank our master program students Svante Erwing and
Daniel Petterson. The Swedish company GAIA has
provided valuable user input and access to Stadium retail
data. IKEA provided important user evaluation.

References
[1] D. Brodbeck and L. Girardin. Design study: Using multiple
coordinated views to analyze geo-referenced highdimensional datasets. In Proceedings of IEEE CMV, 2003.
[2] Andrienko, N. & Andrienko, G. 2003. Informed Spatial
Decisions through Coordinated Views, Information
Visualization, 2 (4), 2003, pp.270-285
[3] Master Diploma work Visual Space Management, Svante
Erwing, LITH-ITN-NM-2-SE
[4] Advance Visual Technology – Retail Focus.
http://www.visual-technology.co.uk/productsdescription.htm.
[5] Jean-Daniel Fekete, The InfoVis Toolkit, in Proceedings of
the 10th IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis'04), IEEE Press, 2004, pp. 167-174.
[6] G. Andrienko et al, Reactions to geovisualization: an
experience from a European project, Int. Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 2006
[7] Muller, W. & Schumann, H. 2003. Visualization methods
for time-dependent data, Proceedings of the 2003 Winter
Simulation Conference, 737-746, 2003.

[8] Hochheiser, H. & Shneiderman, B. 2004. Dynamic query
tools for time series data sets: timebox widgets for
interactive exploration, Information Visualization, Vol.3,
Issue 1, Spring 2004, 1-18.
[9] Roberts, J. C. 2004. Exploratory Visualization with
Multiple Linked Views, Exploring Geovisualization, J.
Dykes, A.M. MacEachren, M.-J. Kraak (Editors)

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[10] Thomas, J & Cook, K. 2005. Illuminating the Path: The
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics,
http://nvac.pnl.gov/
[11] Geovista studio. http://www.geovistastudio.psu.edu.
[12] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planogram
[13] http://www.openviz.com/
[14] http://vita.itn.liu.se/

