Value Lab: Collaboration in Space
Jan Halatsch, Antje Kunze
Information Architecture, ETH Zurich
{halatsch@arch.ethz.ch, kunze@arch.ethz.ch}
Abstract
Visualization of huge data sets for activities in
business worlds, entertainment industries and extended
visualization in sciences are one of the most exciting
chances in architecture. They can result in interweaving
physical spaces - physical architectures - with electronic
data spaces - virtual architectures. Places and localities
with distances in geographical, intercultural and
economic matters do not need to exist separated any
longer. The networking concepts shout for the use of new
architectural languages. Architectural interfaces in
physical and digital spaces deliver associated
communication, collaboration and learning - breaking
up distances in time and geographic spaces.
Inside this paper we will discuss how information
architecture could be set up in existing buildings with the
Value Lab as an example and which methods can be
used to develop and to design physical architecture.
We present the Value Lab as a recent prototype for
Information Architecture.

techniques help to deal with this challenging problem.
Nowadays many experts from the field of Information
Visualization combine information visualization
frameworks and tools together with large high-resolution
displays. We need to interact with these tools in a userfriendly manner. We need to collaborate with others at
the same place or far away, within lectures or within
workshops. Because of these circumstances the ETH
Zurich, the Swiss Institute for Technology, developed a
new concept for collaboration in space: The Value Lab.

2. The Physical and the Digital Space

Keywords: Information Architecture, Information
Visualization Tools, Interactive Visualization techniques,
Large Scale Information Rooms

1. Introduction
Starting with the process of virtualizing structures in
global operating organizations along with the
exponential growth of complex data sets, we like to
provide an integrated approach to get over still existing
dualities between physical and virtual architectures.
We see important chances for the architects in our
time in integrating digital information into physical
architectures. Therefore, we would like to present a
framework, how information visualization can be
integrated within built architecture.
How can architectonic buildings be combined with
information structures? What kind of consequences or
even changes will result to architectural topologies that
have been already built? We like to give answers to the
questions above with actual to be built example. Before
that we like to give an overview onto today's existing or
evolving Information Spaces. We already can access
onto sorted data sets inside the Internet or intranets of
organizations via forward-looking technologies. But the
higher the amount of data sets rises the faster we will
loose our overview. Today's Information Visualization

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Information Spaces can build bridges
between time and space [4].
We found out in discussions with the international
leaders in Information Visualization that there is a strong
demand for visualization rooms, which can be dened as
the crossing space between our data worlds and our built
reality. In these places knowledge should be exchanged
and also evolved together in teams e.g. within
workshops. The generated resources or knowledge
should be shared interactively and in real-time abroad to
distant Locations through distinct interactive computer
display technologies [Figure 1]. These places should be
the architect's answer to the interests of our societies in
order to break through knowledge barriers, no matter to
which nature they do belong. They are not only special
equipped rooms that are connecting digital data to
physical spaces. They belong to a new class of buildings.
Their architectural design establishes the connection
between virtual and physical worlds of work as built
Information Architecture.

Therefore we created a framework that is a key solution
within the creation process of Information Architecture.
Today we have large high-resolution displays where we
use information visualization frameworks and tools. But
where will these displays be placed? How is the direct
interaction being handled between the high-resolution
information visualization on large-scale screens with
diameters lager than 3 meters? Nonetheless, we need to
interact with these displays in a user-friendly manner and
in a user-friendly surrounding. Does this surrounding
provoke a new type of interior architecture? And in
which context we need to place these Information
Spaces?
We need to work with data or information together
with others. We have to present won insights directly
within a short time span because the shorter the gaps
between workshops and discussions are the less will be
the loss of knowledge at the same Information Space or
in an Information Space located far away.
The ETH realized very early the need of answering
the above questions and statements.

2.1. Information Architecture
A group of researchers [1, 2] situated in CAAD
(computer aided architectural design) firstly used the
term with relation to building design. They designed
digital Information Spaces and gave new insights to the
handling of digital information and extended architect's
classical building materials with the new "building
material
information".
The
term
Information
Architecture has different grounds, understandings and
directions. We see Information Architecture as an
interdisciplinary field, where scientists and practitioners
research how information is structured, how it can be
used and communicated to potential recipients. We need
sensitivity for the different meanings of the term
Information Architecture if we want to build
architectural Information Spaces. The ETH decided
therefore to found a new Chair for Information
Architecture at ETH's department of Architecture with
Gerhard Schmitt as the head of the chair. Gerhard
Schmitt has been one of the pioneers in CAAD in Europe
since the 1980s. Remo Burkhard gives deeper insights to
the field of Information Architecture [3] and to the
associated
field
of Knowledge Visualization.
Furthermore he gives helpful suggestions what we can
learn from the complementary thinking practices of
architects. He now works as a senior researcher at the
new founded Chair for Information Architecture. One of
the first tasks of this new Chair for Information
Architecture was the development and the realization of
a new room concept for collaboration in space: The
Value Lab.
Today we had come to the conclusion that we need not
only digital virtual architectural Information Spaces [2]
but also "real built" architectural Information Spaces,
which are representing the borderline to the next-gen
digital information visualization frameworks. Users need
to interact with these information visualization

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

frameworks in a user-friendly manner and in a userfriendly surrounding. This must be one of the businesses
of today's architect. The Chair for Information
Architecture aims to answer actively the present
demands and tries to bring the digital and physical
knowledge together in both digital and physical spaces.

2.2. Establishing the Framework
The ETH Zurich decided strategically to build up
two projects the ETH World and the Science City ETH.
The ETH World represents the digital knowledge of the
ETH and is also the largest wireless campus within
Switzerland. It enables communication and collaboration
nearly fully detached from time and space. Science City
stands for the vision of a university campus and
"Stadtquartier für Denkkultur". The objective is to
transform the ETH Hoenggerberg site into a place with
greater quality of life through a variety of measures. We
found out that it is necessary to localize the thinking in
the physical and the digital networks of the ETH in
certain nodes on the campus. On this campus Science
City ETH represents the architectural built space as a
Location within a worldwide research network. The
Location Science City ETH merges with the digital
Information Space ETH World within nodes. These
nodes are built physical structures from where the
physical and the digital thinking networks can
collaborate in space in all directions. One representative
node of this merging will be the Information Space
Value Lab.
Global acting organizations like the ETH have on
one side digital networks and information storages. On
the other side they have physically built structures. Since
the late nineties insights had been risen that it is
necessary to pair the physical and the virtual together
into a more homogeneous system. So we do not only
need large high-resolution displays and the direct
interaction with visualizations on screen in a userfriendly surrounding, which can present us the results of
information visualization frameworks. What we also
need is the quality of an architectural physical space
framework, which has to establish the delivery of the
visualized information. The framework begins with the
aesthetic integration of computer and display technology
into special equipped rooms within buildings, also pays
attention to the workflow within these physical
Information Spaces and do not end with the topologic
organization of the Information Spaces. This framework
deals with the placement of the Information Spaces
within physical buildings and gives advises for the
integration in branches of organizations within their
global digital and physical networks.

2.2. Global Network
In this paragraph we emphasize the Global Network
part of the framework. The social impact of globalization
within companies or organization is often difficult to
manage. Traditional solutions for that are the branding of

a organization or even the process to establish a
corporate identity. In physical spaces they result in built
architectural topologies similar to those we might know
from flagship stores of fashion labels. There are many
global information networks, which have to be
dynamically linked with one to another in digital or
physical world appearances. What is missing today is the
physical representation of the conjunction between the
physical and the virtual world despite the hype of
upcoming virtual worlds like Second Life. This
conjunction must evolve in special physical spaces
within an architectural context. Companies or
organizations have to know where to place therefore
suitable Information Spaces as a form of conjunction
between the physical and the digital. These Information
Spaces are the physical flagship stores with a full access
to the organization's information and knowledge. The
Information Spaces can be rooms like the ETH’s Value
Lab, which will be detailed in a later section. Information
Spaces should be placed in all main Locations of the
organization. They should especially being integrated in
those Locations where creative and intellectual property
is produced and has to be accessed by others directly
from within the Location or from distant ones. For
example there is a research or a product development
unit at a global organization's Location. This unit
produces knowledge in collaborative workshops with the
use of digital real-time visualization techniques. This
knowledge can be transferred to other Locations of the
organization through digital data. That is not something
special at the moment. But the manner how it will be
done through Information Spaces like the Value Lab
differs totally from the habits to that we are used to
today. Scientists can participate from each other in
different Locations and share their won insights in real
time interactively in such an Information Space.
Information Spaces like the Value Lab will be fully
focused onto the users. They do not have to decide,
which technical protocols they have to use. They can
work interactively on large computer screens using the
host computers or they are simply using their own laptop
computers within the Value Lab. They have centralized
access to sophisticated simulation, data manipulation and
visualization software packages, which are tailored to the
users needs. They can also share created contents to
other Information Spaces in real-time.
The ETH found out through the two projects Science
City and ETH World that it is necessary to built
Information Spaces, which are able to transfer
knowledge from the physical world into digital spaces
and vice versa. As a result to the ongoing realization of
the Value Lab the ETH's elaborates to integrate another
Value Lab within the new Singapore-ETH Centre, which
is an ongoing joint venture between the ETH and with
the Republic of Singapore.

2.3. Locations
Locations for Information Spaces embody the
physical direct surroundings of an Information Space,

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

which do not end at the exterior wall of the building
where the Information Space inserted. They must fulll
characteristic conditions.

Figure 2 Conceptual Image of a possible
Location for an Information Space in a Global
Network of a fictive research organization:
Location Shanghai, Global University [4].
They often are an agglomeration of certain buildings,
which form a campus or a production and development
facility.
The Location Science City ETH merges for example
with the digital Information Space ETH World into a
special built physical structure as Information Space
from where the physical and the digital thinking
networks can collaborate in space in all directions: the
Value Lab.
In our research we come to the conclusion that
Locations for Information Spaces have to be exclusively
situated in environments of urban and global importance
from the organization's point of view. In addition to that
Locations for Information Spaces only make sense in
environments where strategic decisions for the associated
organizations are made. From the architect's point of
view we noticed that the shape of these type of buildings
have to be designed through certain inuences [Figure
2]. The shape of a Location is controlled by the particular
environment's social, topographical, cultural and also
climatic constraints. These constraints can be adhering to
the master planning of the particular building site.
Furthermore the core components of the Location consist
of recurring elements, which appear in different shapes
for each Location due to the impacting influences in the
Global Network as previously stated.
A typical Location consists of different physical
components, like a collective data communication area
and an area for mnemonically orientated concentrated
work. In some areas within the Global Network we can
tie the architecture of a Location directly onto existing
buildings and use existing infrastructures. These can be
for example a campus of an university or a headquarter
of an organization.
Based on analyzing historically grown places and
newly developed knowledge infrastructures, we found

out that it is possible to add modern elements of
Information Spaces to ancient buildings structures as
well as the functional implementation into the structures
of modern buildings [4].

3. Information Spaces

daylight conditions and the display system can be
controlled easily. The used visualization software
packages can be standard applications but also
proprietary software, which is strongly adapted to the
Studio’s hardware.
There is no need to wait for large format printer’s
outputs any longer to bring the information visualizations
of scientists together. They can be discussed and
interactively edited. This type can suit most collaborative
demands and can be connected directly to other Studios
at different Locations. A direct predecessor to this type is
the Roomware system [6].

3.2 The Control Room

Figure 3 The Knowledge Mall: An Information
Space for the AutoUni, Volkswagen AG,
Wolfsburg, Germany [5]
In our development work of the Value Lab we found
out five standard building typologies, which can be
understood as generic solutions for recurring needs of
designing an Information Space and which are suited to
the requirements of a collaborative working with digital
and physical world information. In the following we list
those types and give a short explanation of each type.
Some of these types might be already known. We find it
necessary to give an overview of the most important
types that are available; therefore they are also listed. In
the last chapter we get in detail with the ETH's Value
Lab, which is an Information Space that has been derived
as a conclusion of our framework and is being built at the
moment.

3.1 The Studio
In this type persons can work in groups on solving
different problems in real time. They work together on
large interactive screens, which can be walls or tables. A
new trend is to intergrate technologies like multi-touch
or multi-user capabilities to this type. The main
advantage is that people can come together and work on
a certain problem interactively. They can work on large
interactive screens, which can be walls or tables, and in
groups and solve different problems in real time. They
work together and not along.
The Studio consists out of a room equipped with
several interactive display systems and offers team
cooperation via the use of wall displays and interactive
display tables. Up to 20 participants can work together in
this room and produce in workshops visual solutions.
These solutions can be easily made visible in real-time to
the participants of other groups via large venue displays
like hi-res and large scale LCDs, Plasma displays, or
bright HD projectors. The participants can work under

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The today’s Control Room schema follows a hierarchical
approach. The system’s information is distributed mostly
through a large screen, which is not equipped with
interaction technologies. The users of the Control Room
work mainly on their desktop computers.
There are many examples for actual control rooms,
which are built for the processing of decisions in shortest
time spans for military and police, telecommunications,
public utilities, process control, traffic control, and
surveillance. Most of them consist of large rearprojection screens up to 7 meters or larger in length.
They are mainly composed out of single, compact rear
projection units up to 42 inches or larger in diameter and
with resolutions of 1.4 to 2 mega pixels. The main
advantage is that these units are very simple to combine
into one large screen. The resulting screen itself can be a
high-resolution screen but it can also be set up as a
simple large rear projection screen, which is offering a
standard graphic card's resolution. The resulting screen
has minimal bars of at least 5 millimeters between the
display units. Most of the offered systems deliver high
contrast through the use of DLP technologies compared
to LCD projection systems. A very ambitious solution
can be found at the University of Constance, Germany, at
the department of computer sciences. The so-called
Powerwall [7] delivers a seamless high-resolution picture
without any bars as mentioned above. The screen content
is displayed via an array of professional data projectors,
which calibrate themselves in color and light temperature
automatically. But there are reasons why we find those
technologies mostly in control rooms or in sophisticated
labs. The main disadvantages are the vent noises, the
need for bulb exchanges, the too low contrast and the too
low brightness, which are not useful for daylight
appliances, and also the large depth of the system, which
can easily exceed 1 meter and may be a problem for
integrating those systems into already built
environments. Therefore it has to be checked if the cost
of an associated reconstruction prohibits the use of these
technologies. Another disadvantage is that we often have
to use proprietary software or hardware and we cannot
use all-time our preferred visualization software.
We do not find team spaces in most control rooms where
teams are interacting together with information. Every
teammate processes his own partition of information on

his desktop system. A predefined video layout is often
used to bring this information onto the large screen.
Direct interaction with the displayed information is not
possible. Most of the large display systems are lacking
interaction technology; some of them are simply carrying
a not very nice looking “do not touch” badge in order to
save the contrast coating of the screen.
Although today’s Control Room schema follows a
hierarchical approach and the information is distributed
mostly through a large screen the system is suited to give
the right answer immediately in short time spans. We
suggest that this system should be merged with the
previously visualized type Studio concerning the
elements interactive table and interactive screen. This
should happen especially in environments where
strategic decisions are made in real-time.

3.3 Trading Floor
This type of an Information Space represents the
trading floor of financial institutions like it is in use
within banks or insurance companies, in which users
must separate very fast true from wrong to have success
in trading. Information is passed through large display
panels or via desktop displays in these rooms. A working
trader inside that trading floor has his assigned desk with
his personal computer(s). Traders can come from
different organizations trading together in one and the
same room. They work in parallel and not cooperatively.
The trading floors are integrated in global real-time
networks of stock markets.
Nowadays we have 2 different occurrences for this
type of Information Space. In the first representation we
have large halls with hundreds of installed thin clients
and multiple computer screens per client on top of desks
as previously noted. The whole hall is partitioned in rows
of desks covered with rows of LCDs on top of them.
Another representation of trading floors today is that
people meet in little rooms with two up to ten trading
desks, where each desk belongs exactly to one employee.
These rooms have direct access to the stock markets via
network connections. This concept delivers in theory a
higher degree of freedom in interacting with other
colleagues and a more relaxed working environment.
The trading floor concept prohibits direct
collaboration also from an architectural point of view.
Most of the desks are installed in parallel rows. Direct
eye contact with other competitors is not possible in a
natural way.
The collaborative information inputs we can find in
these rooms are large low-resolution monochromatic
display walls.

3.4 Conference Room
The type Conference Room makes it possible to deal
with meetings and other forms of co-operation over long
distances and time zones. This Information Space type is
equipped with two large mainly front or rear projection
screens or large-scale LCDs and Plasma screens.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Between the screens one or two proprietary video
cameras are placed for videoconferencing needs, which
enable user to stay in contact face-to-face. These rooms
consist very often of a v-formed conference table. The
open side of the v-table is arranged to the video screens.
The main idea behind this arrangement is that the users
are sitting aligned to the video screens along the outline
of the v-table. From there they can present slides or
themselves across network connections to information
spaces in other Locations. This concept of a information
room has to deal with the problematic that users are
aligned against the screens which maybe great for point
to point conferences but maybe also uncomfortable
regarding to work together within the local place. The
constrained arrangement of the solution does not allow
users to work interactively with the large displays. The
interior architectural appearance of conference systems
like the actual Cisco TelePresence 3000 [8], presented in
the first quarter of 2007, maybe better but the use of the
room is also very constrained to a distinct use case.

3.5 Knowledge Mall - the library of future
The system consists out of collaborative teamwork
spaces and also integrates zones for individuals, which
have to work alone highly concentrated. The Knowledge
Mall take up into account many characteristics from the
types stated previously and has furthermore the
conceptual idea of a combining a three-dimensional
cyberspace with methods of Information Visualization
and Data Mining. It has been a conceptual study for the
AutoUni, Volkswagen AG, Wolfburg, Germany [Figure
3].
The inspirational inputs for the Knowledge Mall
concept came from the European monastery libraries of
the Middle Ages on one side. They represent very
interesting patterns for an Information Space and also
sensitive transitions from concentrated to communicative
workspaces [9]. Several zonings within the floor plan of
a typical medieval monastery join or separate
collaborative work from concentrated work. The
Information Space type Knowledge Mall offers
independent concentrated work and also communicative
teamwork.
On the other side there had been major influences
from ancient thinking techniques. They had been
combined to use virtual spaces for a three-dimensional
representation of achieved knowledge. In order to do so
the authors tie up to mnemonic techniques, which have
been massively used in ancient European cultures like
the old Rome: A user of mnemonic thinking technologies
would have translated complex circumstances – his
knowledge or information - into spatial structures in the
form of architectonic “buildings” [10]. Single
information units of a certain scope of interest were
rooms, items and persons, which were immanent in these
buildings. Single embodied information could also
reconstruct lost statements, when the user crossed in
thoughts these architectural spaces. This technology was
necessary, since the resource paper was not available as a

common medium. If Cicero wanted to give a long and
detailed speech, he stored it in his spatially thinking
awareness. From the archaic cultures of Europe up to the
time of old Rome man knew to use mnemonic
techniques.

4. Example Value Lab

Figure 4 Conceptual Image of the Value Lab – a
space for creating Knowledge and Values,
illustration: Michael Meier
The Value Lab [Figure 4] will be an essential part of
the new Information Science Lab building (HIT) within
the Science City ETH and represents the fusion between
built architecture and digital design sciences as a new
Information Space. The Value Lab enables users to work
together in groups interactively in front of one large
venue computer display and on top of two interactive
tables equipped with large computer displays as well as
two HD projectors. It comes as a black-boxed 2d display
system that handles various digital video inputs as well
as various possible on-screen video layouts on different
digital displays at the same time. We resigned the use of
a rear projection system because of its known
disadvantages like daylight sensibility, noise, service
costs for lamps, amount of consumed place and also
because of its depth.
Researches and students will use the Value Lab.
This lab will be integrated in challenging scientific
projects within the ETH and between co-operation
partners of the ETH. It will be used for high-end research
purposes, such as analysis of large data sets, applications
in marketing and monitoring, applications in real-time
visualization, distributed real-time image rendering, and
interactive screen-design. But also common uses such as
presentations, lectures, press and videoconferences are
handled by the system. From a system‘s view there are
two locations for technical devices. The display and
interaction devices are situated within the Value Lab.
Computing and processing must be done within the
basement of the HIT building.
This lab enables users to connect their laptop
computer‘s display adapter or VGA graphics adapter,
video sources as well as to run a real-time graphics
cluster at the same time.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The display surfaces of the Value Lab Display Wall and
the Interactive Table will be equipped with interaction
technologies. These technologies allow several persons
to draw directly and simultaneously on the surface of the
Value Lab Display Wall and the Interactive Tables.

Conclusions
What is missing today is the physical representation
of the conjunction between the physical and the virtual
world. This conjunction must evolve in special physical
spaces within an architectural context. We presented a
framework that helps to establish such a merging through
a physical Information Space. The Value Lab embodies
this new type of Information Space, which fulfill these
special requirements. It made sense to place this
Information Space into the Location Science City ETH,
which merges together with the digital Information
Space ETH World into a special built physical structure.
Within the Value Lab people can collaborate in space in
all directions interactively within physical and digital
thinking networks.
This Information Space represents the physical flagship
store of the ETH equipped with a full access to the
ETH's information and knowledge. These Information
Spaces should be placed in all main Locations of global
acting researching, production and development
organizations. They should especially being integrated in
those Locations where creative and intellectual property
is produced and has to be accessed by others.

References
[1]

Schmitt G, Information Architecture; Basis and Future of
CAAD. Birkhäuser, Basel, 1999.
[2] Engeli M, bits and spaces: architecture and computing
for physical, virtual, hybrid realms. Birkhäuser, Basel,
Boston, Berlin, 2001.
[3] Burkhard R, Learning from Architects: Complementary
Concept
Mapping
Approaches.
Information
Visualization Journal 5, 225-234, 2006.
[4] Kunze A, Halatsch J, Space of Knowledge. Diploma
Thesis, Technical University of Dresden, 2004.
[5] Kunze A, Halatsch J, Architecture of Knowledge.
Semester Thesis, Technical University of Dresden, 2004.
[6] Prante T, Streitz NA, Tandler P, Roomware: Computers
Disappear and Interaction Evolves. IEEE Computer, pp.
47-54, 2004.
[7] Powerwall, University of Konstanz, http://infovis.unikonstanz.de/index.php?region=powerwall,
accessed
April 2007.
[8] Cisco
TelePresence
3000
Meeting
solution,
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/products/ps7087/index.htm
l, accessed April 2007.
[9] Henn G, Meyhöfer D, Architektur des Wissens.
Architecture of Knowledge. Junius Verlag, 2003.
[10] Yates, F, The Art of Memory. University Of Chicago
Press; Reprint edition, 2001.

