Building for Users not for Experts: Designing a Visualization of the
Literature Domain
Sarah Faisal, Paul Cairns, Ann Blandford
University College London Interaction Centre (UCLIC)
Remax House, 31/32 Alfred Place
London WC1 E7DP, UK
+44 (0) 207 679 5225
{s.faisal, p.cairns, a.blandford} @cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
As researchers we are constantly working with
academic literature. Literature data is growing
exponentially. Interacting with this huge amount of
information has been a challenge for the field of HCI for
years. The goal is to assist users in making sense of this
information by producing usable designs. Information
Visualization (InfoVis) augments users’ cognition when
interacting with complex data structures. Although the
use of InfoVis as a tool for representing literature data is
not new, we have found that most of the existing
Literature Knowledge Domain Visualizations (LKDViz)
target specialists known as domain analysts who study
publication patterns. Our goal is to design a LKDViz
tool for academic users. Due to the diversity of academic
literature users we captured their experiences and used
it as the main source for our design. Interestingly, this
method generated design criteria that have not been
applied in most of the academic literature visualizations.
Keywords: Information Visualization, Literature
Knowledge Domain, User Experience.

1. Introduction
As researchers, we are constantly surrounded with
academic literature. Making sense of this exponentially
growing information is a constant challenge. Lots of
work in the field of HCI is being conducted to improve
the design of such complex systems, more specifically
when it comes to digital library design, for example [2].
Information Visualization (InfoVis) applications are
powerful in that they augment cognition by using

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

people’s natural visual perceptions. By the simple action
of looking at visually represented data the user can, at a
glance, extract information that would have taken a long
time to accomplish using, for example, text-based
representations. The use of InfoVis systems as tools to
manage literature data is not new. Literature Knowledge
Domain Visualizations (LKDVis) exist; however these
systems target only expert domain analysts who are
interested in the evolution and publication patterns of
scientific domains [4].
People are different. Designing for a broad user-base
and not the expert increases the variance between users,
so how do we cater for these differences? In other words,
how do we design InfoVis systems for general academic
users and not for experts?
The main challenge behind this work is based
around the fact that working with literature is an
experience that differs from one researcher to the next.
In this paper, we identify a systematic approach for
designing academic literature visualizations which
begins with extracting users’ experiences whilst
interacting with their Literature Knowledge Domains
(LKD). From this a descriptive theory was generated.
Based on this theory we developed a design that would
satisfy the diverse users and their various goals, as
described bellow.

2. The literature domain: an experience
Following are three scenarios of researchers of
varying experiences interacting with their literature data.
These quotations are extracted from the qualitative study
we conducted [5].

First Scenario: First Year PhD student
“finding papers has been a real problem in terms that I
just found too many because you read one and then from
that you read three more and so you get a pyramid effect
in it and you end up collecting so many papers that it is
just impossible to read” – making sense of the domain by
browsing through the literature
Second Scenario: An Experienced Researcher (more
than eight years of experience)
“I would look more at the fine details than I would have
done when I started out but that is because I didn’t know
how much more important they would be whereas now
they are extremely relevant because they are the only
thing that kind of separate one paper by someone from
another” – critical reviewing of the literature
Third Scenario: An Expert Researcher (more than 15
years)
“Um, when I go out to look for stuff to read I must
admit its either because I have realized I have got a
particular question…or most commonly actually is
because I want to write a paper and I am aware that I
don’t know quite enough about what other people have
done before I have done my own work and so I have to
kind of back fill in on the literature” – look for specific
literature
Researchers use academic literature differently at
various stages of their careers. The means with which
researchers interact with literature depends on their
experience, knowledge and goals. We can see that
interacting with the literature domain is an experience
that differs from one person to the next.

3. InfoVis and the literature knowledge
domain
Even though researchers’ literature experiences
differ, their interaction with the literature domain is an
inseparable part of their careers. The academic literature
data is complex with lots of interrelated dependencies,
such as citation and publication links that can be difficult
to follow and make sense of. InfoVis is an ideal means
for representing this information since it augments users’
cognition. By looking at a visual representation of the
data users can easily make inferences and discover
interesting patterns and relationships that would have
been difficult to identify. The use of InfoVis as a
technique for visualizing academic data is not new.
Academic literature has been presented by many
visualization tools. We identified two classes of
academic literature visualization tools: Knowledge
Domain visualization tools (KDViz), these tools paint
generalized pictures of academic domains, and
Information Retrieval tools (IR).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

As indicated, interacting with academic literature is
a subjective experience which differs from one user to
another. In order to cater for such subjectivity we
identified three factors that are essential for designing
academic literature visualizations with a wide user
population. These factors are:
•
•
•

Interactivity
Requirements gathering
Usability studies

Interactivity
Interactivity is one of the core criteria since it allows
for the realization of subjective user experiences [6].
Through the interactivity of the tool, the users are able to
achieve their varying goals by manipulating the
visualization. Users can address these goals through the
use of onscreen widgets; for example: panning the
visualization through the use of a slider; or by interacting
directly via objects of interest; for example: selecting the
object of interest by clicking on it via the mouse.
Requirements
The needs of academic literature users vary greatly,
as we have indicated. As a result, literature visualization
tools must reflect the varying user experiences and
needs. We strongly argue that user requirements must be
gathered. Requirement gathering is standard practice in
HCI. However, when it comes to designing academic
literature visualizations this is not the case, as will be
discussed next. Portraying concepts that do not reflect
user needs will make the visualization tool uninteresting
to the user population and hence little knowledge will be
gained.
Usability
The tool must be usable. This ranges from the clarity
of the visual cues and their ability to portray the domain
concepts, to the usability of the tool in general.
In this section we will discuss the work done in the
areas of KDViz and IR from these three perspectives.

3.1. KDViz: Knowledge Domain Visualizations
Academic literature visualization is a well
established research area that is part of a growing field
known as Knowledge Domain Visualizations (KDViz)
[3]. These tools analyse the data via computationally
intensive algorithms. The generated visualizations satisfy
specific goals of an expert population of users. In fact
most of the work done in KDViz that represents
literature data is designed for specialized expert users
known as domain analysts. Domain analysts have a very
specific goal which is to analyse the development and
evolution of scientific domains. Users of these tools
engage in tasks such as determining the varying trends in
citation and co-citation networks [4]. Generally
speaking, domain analysts seek a representation of the
whole represented in global domain visualization and not

of the specific domain details reflecting individual entity
details.
Interactivity
These visualizations are not interactive in the sense
that we are looking for in an InfoVis tool. Users are only
able to manipulate the visualization through limited
actions such as zooming and panning the interface. This
is due to the goals of these tools in addition to the high
computational power needed to generate these visual
representations.
Requirements
Although there has been no evidence in the literature
of any requirements gathering, users of these
visualizations are expert users, which in most cases
reflect the developers themselves. Hence, we might
deduce that the requirements with which they build the
tools fit their needs.
Usability
Another important factor is the usability of the tools.
From reviewing KDViz literature most of these tools
have not been user tested, hence we can not be sure of
their usability.

domain is not the goal. Hence, it is not always the case
that the requirements around which these tools were built
fit the needs of the academic literature users.
Usability
Most of the systems developed under this category
go through a series of usability studies. However, we
noticed from reviewing literature related to the
development of these tools that these studies concentrate
on the usability of the features of the tools rather than
whether these tools fit within the literature domain’s
requirements per se.

3.2. IR visualization tools

4. Qualitative understanding of the
literature domain

Literature IR visualizations represent the second
category of literature visualizations. The tools in general
assist users in searching for and retrieving literature data.
More precisely the tools assist users in better
understanding and browsing search results. The tools
concentrate more on the details of the literature domain
rather than the ‘whole’. Unlike KDViz, literature per se
is not what the IR developers concentrate on. Literature
in this case is merely a domain that they use to reveal the
ability of the developed visualisation tools, meaning that
there is not a tight coupling between the domain and the
tool. The same visualization can be used for data that is
not necessarily related to academic literature, for
example: Butterfly [9] and GRIDL [11].
From reviewing literature in this category the notion
of the ‘users’ was evident, which was not the case in
KDViz literature. In addition, usability studies hold an
important part in the development process of these tools.
Interactivity
These visualization tools are very interactive. Users
manipulate these visualizations by clicking on on-screen
widget, such as: buttons, sliders, etc. User can perform
actions such as: searching for entities of interest where
they can identify an author or a paper of interest, they
can view specific citation links between entities, and
visualize the same data in multiple forms. What is
important here is that the user can interact with the
specific entities unlike with LKDViz where this type of
interaction is limited.
Requirements
Although in certain systems, such as Envision [10],
requirement gathering is performed, this step is not an
essential step in the development process of these
visualizations since, as indicated, the literature as a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

To summarize the above, we state that the literature
experience is a subjective one. Existing academic
literature visualization tools do not cater for the users’
literature experience diversity. Since researchers’
literature experiences differ we need to design for user
diversity and not for the domain expert. This is where
our challenge lies, since we need to identify a design that
satisfies these users. To do so we need to understand
how researchers work with their literature domains, in
other words capture the user experiences.

In order to capture user experience of the LKD we
conducted a qualitative study [5]. The aim of the study
was to understand how researchers, of differing
experiences and knowledge, make sense of the huge
literature domains at various stages of their careers.
Following is a summary of this qualitative study.

4.1. The study
During the study semi-structured interviewing was
used as the main information gathering technique due to
its flexibility and ability to reveal concepts that were not
previously evident. The interviews were conducted with
researchers of differing experiences ranging from a first
year PhD student to a Professor in the fields of HCI and
psychology. Each interview was fully transcribed and
analysed using the Grounded Theory methodology [12].
Categories and concepts were extracted through open
and axial coding. The analysis of each interview guided
the formation of the next interview. This continued until
a saturation point was reached. The saturation point was
reached after a total of eight interviews. This quick
reaching of the saturation point is unusual for this type of
study, but was quite interesting. We think that it might be
an indicator of the concreteness of the literature domain.
The interviews revealed the subjectivity of the
literature domain. The participants’ literature knowledge
depended heavily on their background, knowledge and
goals at the time of interacting with their LKD. From
these interviews a descriptive theory [5] was generated.

Author View
Publication View

Author
Citation View

Publication
Citation View

Figure 1. LKDVis Primary Prototype
descriptive theory. Hence, the goal is to give the user the
4.2. The LKD descriptive theory
freedom to explore and manipulate the visualization
through multiple interactive activities. In addition, users
The descriptive theory describes how researchers, at
need to be given the ability to personalize their
least across the psychology and HCI domains, make
experiences, and by that we do not mean simply
sense and gain knowledge of their literature domains. It
changing the visual cues such as color or shape in order
can be summarized as follows:
to fit in their aesthetic pleasures. We mean that users
The sense-making activity of the academic literature
need to affect the semantics of the visualization.
domain starts with getting to know who the members of
Furthermore, it is crucial for researchers to visualize
the community are, since they are the creators of the
themselves as part of their research communities and see
knowledge P2:“this [community] is where I look for
how their research evolved within their communities. All
literature”. This knowledge is portrayed in the form of
of these interesting findings differ from existing
literature which is produced by the members. It is
academic literature visualization tools.
through the interaction with such literatures that ideas are
generated and personal knowledge of the domain is
We developed a preliminary prototype (Figure 1) of
gained. The ideas that the papers reflect are what is
a literature domain. The data we visualized was the
important to the researchers, P6:“… I think I would go
dataset used for the InfoVis’04 contest which includes
for ideas… what it means actually it is not the paper but
the complete metadata of 8 years for all InfoVis
the ideas”. The sense-making process of ones’ literature
conference papers and references from 1995 to 2002[8].
domain is based around users’ engagement with a set of
The design decisions were based exclusively on the
activities such as: searching for specific authors, ideas or
results of the descriptive theory.
papers, answering specific questions, and following
citation trails. In most cases the gained knowledge is not
In the above figure, we see the entire domain
intentional but is gained as researchers interact with the
represented on the left. The domain is represented by its
domain. For example: during one of the interviews when
authors, the user in this example clicks on an author for
the participant was asked how s/he determined who the
example, “Ben Shneiderman” as seen in the figure.
influential author in their field was the participant said:
Shneiderman’s papers are displayed on the right hand
“… those people that are really important you can’t miss
side in the articles view. Detailed description of the
the name because they are always cited and they always
layout of
come up”.
our prototype and explanation of the different views in
Following from the descriptive theory we designed
addition to the different functionalities of the tool is
and implemented a visualization prototype of academic
explained next.
literature. The design of our visualization tool was
inspired from our descriptive theory. As a result, when
5.1. Note on design features
we explain the design of the tool we will refer back to
The interviews revealed a concrete set of data
the theory by giving examples of some of the quotations
elements which include: author, article, source (e.g.
our participants gave during the course of the interviews.
journal, conference, workshop, book, etc), in addition to
relationships such as citation, authoring, and
5. From theory to design: developing
collaboration. Lots of guidelines exist in assisting
LKDViz
designers in determining which visual attributes best fit
the intended meanings. In our prototype, for example, we
The system rationale is based upon the
relied on [1] and [13] as a basis of our visual design
individualization of the experience, as revealed by the
decisions.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

5.2. Data layout
The theory revealed that the authors, in other words
the members of the community, are at the center of all
domain sense-making activities. This is due to the fact
that they are the producers of knowledge. Ultimately,
papers are written by them and hence they cannot be
separated, e.g. P2:“It is hard to separate that [articles]
from authors, cause ultimately they were written by
authors”. In addition, during the course of the interviews
it was observed that the interviewees tended to remember
the name of the influential authors better than those of
influential articles. As a result, we decided to make the
authors view the main visualization view with which the
user interacts with the tool, as we will explain next.
From the interviewees’ perspective the authors are
made out of a group of papers, giving the author a
particular status. Hence, each author is represented on
the screen as a square grouping his/her papers (see
Figure 2).
Papers

Author

Figure 2. An Author as a Group of Papers
The color of the paper represents the interest and the
shape of the paper represents the source (e.g. journal,
conference, etc). Merely by looking at the author the
user can identify the interests of the author and the
amount of publications the author produced, since the
size of the author depends on the number of publications.
In order to give the user the freedom to manipulate
both the authors, publications and associated citation
relationships, in addition to keeping the identified
author-paper relationship, we decided to divide the
interface into 4 views (see Figure 1). The main view is
the authors view, which is the bigger view on the top
left. And the details view is the publication view seen on
the top right. As the user selects an author, all the
author’s papers are displayed on the paper view. The
bottom left view represents the citation information
between authors, whereas the bottom right view
represents the citation information between publications.
The layout of the authors view takes the form of a
force-directed layout graph, where nodes by default repel
each other and edges act as springs bringing related
nodes closer to each other. We used the Prefuse
visualization tool- kit [7] to develop this visualization.
The author graph was based on the collaboration
relationship between authors. We chose collaboration as
the clustering parameter because of the results of the
qualitative study we conducted where participants
indicated that authors relate through collaboration links.
For example, during the course of a particular interview
when one participant was asked about how authors
relate, she indicated: “they are co-authors on the same
papers …”.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The details view which represents the publication
view, represented on the right in Figure 1, is organized in
an x-y grid layout, where the x-axis represents the year
of publication and the y-axis represents the citation ratio
of the paper. The more a paper was cited, the higher it is
located on the axis. Like the collaboration layout, this
layout was decided upon based on the results of our
qualitative study.

5.3. Interactive activities
The strength of interaction lies in its power to
manipulate the visualization according to users’ varying
goals. From our descriptive theory we generalized a set
of activities that, when engaged in, would enable users to
gain more insight into their LKDs. These activities
incorporate both an interactive task and visual feedback
by the system revealing additional information.
Collaborations
In addition to the first author the participants
indicated that there was a need to identify the other
authors of the paper.
P5: “I always need to know the second and or third
author“.
In addition to the collaboration graph, our prototype
supports the collaboration relationship via the
combination of the authors and publication view. When
the user clicks on a paper in the publication view the
collaborators will become visually distinguishable on the
authors view.
Citations
Following citation links is an essential part of the
literature sense-making activity since it allows users to
discover hidden information, for example: important
authors or papers that the user was not aware of. E.g. P3:
“I would use his [influential author] paper as a way of
kind of giving me pointers to other people whose work I
might look at”.
Interestingly, the theory revealed that citation links
that are of interest to the users are not just, as we might
assume, between the papers, but also between authors.
Hence, we included the authors citation view which
represents the citation information between authors, and
the publication citation view, which represents citation
information between papers.
In addition, the participants indicated that there was
a need to identify citation links between authors and the
papers, for example to see all the authors that a paper
cited. E.g. P1: “I also look at people who have cited the
paper”.
Users of our system can see the citation
relationships between authors and between papers. For
example, the user can see who cited this author by
simply clicking on the object of interest which is either
the author and inserting it into the corresponding citation
view; as a result all the authors that have papers that
cited the selected author are revealed. The same thing
applies to the articles. In addition, the tool always relates
the information that is displayed in the various views.

For, example when the user click on an author in the
author citation view, all publications that are published
by that author in the publication view and publication
citation view become visually distinguishable. Same
applies when clicking on a particular paper in either the
publication, or publication citation view all authors that
collaborated on that particular publication become
visually distinguishable.
Personalization of Knowledge
It is essential to give the users enough freedom to
customize the visualization by layering their personal
views on top of the original visualization. It was revealed
that when it came to certain concepts, there was some
variance. For example, some interviewees defined
influence as being related to the number of citings an
author has got, whereas others defined it as an author or
a paper that has been influential to their own ideas and
thoughts. E.g. P4: “I suppose when you say influential I
consider it to be influential to my own ideas”. It would
be easy for the tool to calculate the number of citings an
author has; however it would be impossible for the
computer to determine user preference since it will
depend entirely on each user. Therefore, we propose the
idea of overlaying the visualization with the user’s
personal views, allowing the user to add thoughts and
comments to the visualization entities. The means with
which these personalization features will be implemented
into the design of prototype is part of our future work.
In addition to personalizing the visualization, the
qualitative study revealed the ultimate need for users
who, as we indicated, are researchers, to visualize
themselves and their work as part of the community. E.g.
P2: “…you want to know how your work relates to
others…” This will cater for a wider research audience,
since, as the interviews revealed, as researchers become
more and more expert in their fields the need to make
sense of their literature domains decreases; however the
need to understand how their research evolved and is
embedded within the community becomes of
importance.

6. Future work
We will design and explore the personalization
features. Following, detailed user studies will be
conducted on this prototype. Furthermore we will be
altering the appearance of the on-screen widgets to
determine which is preferred by the users. These studies
will also test the findings of our descriptive theory.

researchers work with and make sense of their literature
domains. This assisted us in understanding the variance
and designing for it. We developed a preliminary
prototype that differed greatly from most LKDViz.
In this paper we shed light on a major problem
facing academic literature visualization tools which is to
assist users in making sense of and managing, large
amounts of information by producing usable designs. To
conclude we say that before we can design for a better
user experience this experience should be well
understood.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

7. Conclusion
InfoVis systems that represent academic literature
data exist; however, most of them target expert users.
When designing for experts, little diversity exists since
they have very specific goals. It is when designing for
diverse users that the challenge arises.
In order to address this challenge we captured the
users’ experiences with the goal of understanding how

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[12]

[13]

Bertin, J. Graphics and Graphics Information
Processing. Berlin 1981. Gruyter, W. being a translation
of Bertin, J. La Graphique et le Traitement Graphique de
l’Information, Paris, Flammarion 1977.
Blandford, A., Keith, S., Connell, I. & Edwards, H.
Analytical usability evaluation for Digital Libraries: a
case study. Proc. Joint Conference on Digital Libraries,
ACM/IEEE (2004).
Borner, K., Chen, C. and Boyack, K. Visualizing
Knowledge Domains. Annual Review of Information
Science and Technology 37 (2003), 1-179.
Chen, C. Searching for intellectual turning points:
Progressive Knowledge Domain Visualization. National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
(PNAS), 101, 1 (2004), 5303-5310.
Faisal, S., Cairns, P., and Blandford, A. Developing User
Requirements for Visualizations of Literature
Knowledge Domains. Proc. Information Visualization
2006, IEEE (2006).
Faisal, S., Cairns, P., and Blandford, A. (2006)
Subjective Information Visualizations. V&I workshop on
Combining Visualization and Interaction to Facilitate
Scientific Exploration and Discovery, British HCI.
Heer, J., S.K. Card, J.A. Landay. prefuse: A Toolkit for
Interactive Information Visualization. Proc. CHI’05.
Ke, W., Borner, K. and Viswanath, L. InfoVis04 Contest
MS-Access Database, Indiana University, School of
Library and Information Science and School of
Informatics,
2004.
http://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~lviswana/iv04contest.mdb.
Mackinlay, J. D., Rao, R. and Card, S. K. (1995) An
organic user interface for searching citation links. Proc
CHI’ 95.
Nowell L. T., France, R. K., Hix, D., Heath, L. S. and
Fox, E. A. (1996) Visualizing search results: some
alternatives to query-document similarity. Proc ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and development in
information retrieval.
Shneiderman, B., Feldman, D., Rose, A. and Ferré Grau,
X. (2000) ‘Visualizing digital library search results with
categorical and hierarchical axes’, In Proc ACM
conference on Digital libraries.
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. M. Basics of Qualitative
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications, 1998.
Tufte, E.R. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press,
Cheshire, CT, 1990.

