A Clinical Virtual Reality Rehabilitation System for Phobia Treatment
1

Barnabás Takács1,2, Lajos Simon3
SZTAKI Budapest, Hungary , 2 Digital Elite Inc., Los Angeles, USA
Btakacs@sztaki.hu / www.virmed.net
3
Semmelweis University School of Psychiatry / www.sote.hu
Abstract

This paper describes a unified approach to

applying virtual reality for clinical rehabilitation
and its uses to administer cognitive, mental and
physicals exercises. Our goal is to create a flexible
and reconfigurable VR solution that can be readily
installed in hospitals and serve all needs of a rehabunit with ease. We have successfully used this system
for treating cognitive deficits and phobias and
present details that underline the usability and
importance of our solution.

Cyber Care Clinique (CCC), we describe herein offers all
these three modes in a single unit, i.e. it follows a service
model where a hospital may create a single CCC unit and
share its available resources across multiple departments
of care and research instead of having each buy systems
that can be used to treat only a one or a few disorders, as
it has been the practice for long. We argue that such
model offers a more economical way of utilizing the
power in virtual reality therapy and will create a unified
software platform allowing research results, medical
treatment protocols and practical results to be compared
and disseminated more quickly and easily.

2. The CyberCare Rehabilitation System
1. Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) therapy employs the latest real-time
graphics and imaging technology to place patients in a
computer-generated
virtual
world
where
they
“experience” various visual and auditory stimuli related
to their rehabilitative needs. The use of virtual reality
(VR), as a medical tool, has been receiving increased
attention during the last few decades. Using expensive
and proprietary systems, VR has been successfully
deployed for treating a variety of psychological
conditions including depression and age-related disorders,
anger management, social phobia, fear of driving, height,
public speaking, and even to provide a pain-distraction
and relief for children with severe burn [1,2,5,6].
In this paper, we describe our clinical experiences
with a low-cost, portable virtual reality system that can be
used as a flexible and reconfigurable platform to treat
patients in need across multiple disciplines. Our system
addresses three major aspects of rehabilitation
considering the patient as a whole. The first one of these
is cognitive rehabilitation, whereas visual stimuli and
exercises in the virtual space are carried out in order to
help people regain their cognitive faculties after a stroke
or a series accident.
Second, is psychological
rehabilitation, to help overcome fear, various phobias and
side affects associated with stress. Finally,
physical
rehabilitation designed to interact with virtual objects and
carry out exercises in a virtual space. The system, called

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The power of virtual reality, or CyberCare, systems
stems from is its ability to offer flexibility, repeatability
and a controlled clinical environment to help patients
recover and heal faster. Physical and mental exercises that
are difficult to carry out in the real world and/or require
the cooperation of multiple nurses and doctors with the
patient can be repeated hundreds of times during a VR
session. The virtual environments evoke the same
physiological and psychological reactions and emotions
as in the real world and thus they can be used to modify
the patient’s perceptions and behaviors in real-world
situations. Using VR systems for rehabilitation is also
entertaining making the treatment fun and something to
look forward to. Due to the controlled and repeatable
nature of the VR environment patients recover
measurably faster while, in most cases, also take less
medication.
The CyberCare VR system is comprised of multiple
configurable hardware software components, each
addressing key aspects of the goals of specific
rehabilitative needs. The patient wears a head-mounted
display system (HMD) that delivers visual and auditory
input directly to his or her eyes and ears. Attached to the
HMD is a motion tracker that measures the rotation
parameters (yaw, pitch and roll) of the head. Translation
(i.e. x,y,z motion in 3D space) is controlled via a joystick
device so that patient, if needed, can move freely and
navigate in 3D virtual space. The head motion and
joystick information are relayed to a computer, which in

turn generates the appropriate visual stimulus. This
virtual reality computer is responsible for rendering the
high-resolution scene in photo-realistic quality based on
the patient’s movement information as received from the
sensors. Along with the visual stimulus sent directly back
to the HMD, the VR computer is also responsible for
recording live video data, physiological measurements
and biofeedback from the patient. The video input is used
to support real-time interaction with the virtual
environment. The biofeedback interface allows interactive
recording and analysis of stress levels and helps
maximize the efficiency of the treatment session, but
constantly keeping the patient at the maximal limit of
their capabilities. Thus, this closed-loop feedback allows
the VR computer to deliver a virtual environment in
accordance with the scripts and medical protocols
specifically designed for each rehabilitative application
and adapted to the patient’s own needs as prescribed by
the doctor. This virtual environment itself is comprised of
photo-realistic elements, such as a 360o virtual panorama
as background, and overlaid animated synthetic objects.
Finally, the virtual environment is populated with live
people by means of chroma-key techniques used in virtual
studios and/or digital human models. The chroma-key
module may operate from video or live camera input. It
removes the background and digitally places the live
human, the doctor or nurse in this case, into the virtual
environment and there communicate directly with the
patient. The CyberCare system we describe here was
built upon our core technology, called the Virtual Human
Interface or VHI the detailed features of which are further
discussed in [3,4].
Figure 1 shows the clinical setup we used in our
studies to treat people with cognitive deficits (neglect
syndrome) [4] and various phobias, such as fear of public
transportation, fear of driving or flying. Above a large
scale dual projector solution allows the patient to be
situated right in front of the scene being presented. He sor
she is either sitting in the chair shown in the center or
standing right behind it. When in projection mode, the
head motion of the patient is tracked with the help of an
optical tracker mounted on top of a baseball hat the
patient is wearing. This allows us not only to record
towards which portion of the scene the head is oriented
towards, but also give the patient direct control over the
point of regard. In other words, with a slight turn of the
motion it becomes possible to look around even without
the use of a VR helmet. This feature proved to be very
important for many subjects do not like to put on a VRhelmet where they fell alone and isolated. Another
advantage of using a projection system is that it engulfs
the entire visual field and therefore provides a grandexperience which is emotionally engaging and thus
helpful for therapy.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Cyber Care Rehabilitation system .
Complementary to the projection system, patients may
also wear a virtual reality helmet shown in the figure
below. In this mode of operandi, users perceive only a
limited portion of the visual filed but head motion allows
them to look around and experience a sense of presence.
To deliver immersive audio exepriences a 7.1 channel
sound system is situated on the floor under the projected
images driven by the 3D sound module of the VHI
program allowing us to provide sound cues and realistic
effects in true 3D space, i.e. as a function of how patients
turn their head. Finally, also included in the setup are a
number of stimulators for other senses, such as a
program-controlled fan (ventilator) to provide wind when
on top of a skyscraper or inside an underground station,
or an acoustic vibration device (bass shaker) that makes
the floor and chair tremble.

3. Creating Immersive Situations for Phobia
Treatment
One of the key focuses of the CyberCare system is the
ability to produce virtual scenarios that are not only
highly realistic as much as possible, but more importantly
personalized. While other existing CyberTherapy systems
[2,5-8] rely solely on 3D models delivered by real-time
gaming technology and occasionally include video clips
or photographic elements as well, or solution focuses on
high fidelity to capture the attention of a broader range of

patients. While previously it was argued that even low
quality 3D visual environments have been shown to work
in treatment of people with various phobias, in our own
experience as they fail to capture the true realism and
fidelity of the situations at hand most patients do not feel
the situations they are presented with real-enough to show
physicals reactions of fear. Another problem arises from
the limited ability to change these environments, i.e. they
can be used to treat a generic case, but not to address the
actual symptoms of such patients. Therefore the Cyber
Care Clinique model combines the benefits of high
quality 3D virtual models, such as the virtual metro
station shown in Figure 2 [7,8], with panoramic spherical
video, an example of which is demonstrated later in
Figure 3. In the 3D model shown in Figure 2 the entire
metro station was first built in a 3D professional
modeling package, such as Maya. The wire frame
representation of the entire station is shown in the upper
left hand corner. Building such a model takes many
moths, sometimes years depending in the level of detail
and accuracy required to match fidelity. Next, textures
and lighting are designed to create the most realistic
effect possible. When such a 3D model is presented in
real-time using classical VR techniques, the shader
algorithms responsible for realistic reflections and
material properties have only a limited time to compute a
single frame. Therefore the outputted results are often flat
shaded and look much less realistic than a live image.
This is shown in the lower left corner.
An important realization, however, is that in most VR
administered phobia treatments there is no need for the
patient to move freely around the 3D model environment,
but rather we can place them on an imaginary trolley in
which they have control over how fast they progress or
regress and still able to look around. This seemingly
minor limitation allows us to pre-render the 3D scenery
and use photo-realistic rendering techniques, such as the
one shown on the right side of the image, where a cubic
environment was created to represent the entire
surrounding of the patient. Unfortunately photo-realistic
rendering is also a time consuming process. The cubic
panorama image shown in figure was rendered in 37
minutes on a state-of-the-art, high-power graphics
computer. The entire sequence of entering the metro
station, going down the escalator, boarding a metro and
finally leaving the station thus took several months to
create even without sound effects attached.
Taking the idea of a fixed path further one arrives at
the possibility to record the same situation in a real-life
panoramic video. This method has many advantages.
First, it is a production process where an entire sequence
can be recorded and ready to present to a new patient in a
matter of hours instead of days. Second, sound effects are

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2 Example of a 3D model of an underground
station used in virtual reality phobia treatment.

Figure 3 Example of treating a patient with metrophobia using panoramic video.
recorded at the same time as the visuals, thus they can be
readily synchronized and presented in 3D acoustic
channels. Clearly the level of realism is much higher as
the scene is not only photo-realistic, but also includes
people. Finally, personalization is also possible as the
specific needs of a particular subject may be easily
fulfilled by simply scheduling another recording session.
Of course, like with any video-based solution, the
main problem of interaction need to be addressed by
recording a tree of possible path, where the patient and
doctor may choose at certain points in which direction to

proceed. Another difficulty is that once a video is
recorded, it is hard to change or modify it. While this
remains certainly true in a general sense, the CyberCare
system is capable of introducing 3D synthetic elements
into this mixed virtual reality environment and thereby
masking out certain portions, inserting 3D models
seamlessly integrated and provide touch sensitive areas
for navigation. In summary, our experiences have shown
that using panoramic video with sound effects increased
the level of immersion and a sense of presence multiple
times in patients when compared to the 3D models.

4. Recording Panoramic Surround Video
Since personalization is at the center of our treatment
philosophy we prefer the low-cost of panoramic video
production methodology described in the preceding
section where, as an example, it is possible to visit
patients’ home, film their fears and have them practice in
the safety of virtual reality clinical settings. Therefore we
placed large emphasis on building a specialized spherical
recording system as shown in Figure 4 and 5. This 360o
panoramic solution allows us to produce and create
mixed-reality environments in a matter of hours instead of
the tedious and difficult task of designing and
implementing 3D virtual models for months at a time.
Figure 4 shows the portable recording system. On the
left a macMini computer with a small touch screen for
control is mounted above a large power supply allowing
operation of up to 2 hours. On the right the camera head
is mounted at the end of shoulder-mounted and
stabilized/balanced pole to allow the operator to reach
beyond cliff edges and record any situation where our
tiny camera head fits.

Figure 4 Portable 3600 panoramic video recording
solution for producing photo-realistic environments
for virtual reality phobia treatment.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 5 Panoramic video head and microphone
mounted in a car to record the first person experience
of traveling after an accident.
Figure 5 shows the same camera head and direction
sensitive stereo microphone placed in a car next to the
driver seat (above) and a full panoramic frame from the
recorded video below.
The above recording system was used to create many
immersive situations for patients who wish to face their
fears in a virtual reality setting. For epidemiological
reasons we first focused on travel-related phobias, such as
traveling on a bus, underground (metro), car and even
airplanes. In all of these situations we produced
panoramic virtual reality exercises of up to 30 minutes
each with multiple decision points and possibilities for
different path. All of these environments offer the
flexibility and gradual exposure required to help heal
these patients while presenting them with situations they
can face. During a clinical session we control their
experience with the help of a closed-loop strategy
(discussed in a the next section) and thereby allow the
CyberCare system to maximize the effectiveness of their
treatment procedures. As an example, our fear of flying
solution starts out with walking in front of the Airport
Terminal. While we continuously monitor the patents’
physiological reactions and look for signs of fear and
stress we offer multiple choices, such as continue
walking, entering the building or just spending some time
relaxing. Similarly, while inside the terminal, the patient
may choose to walk to the information board to have a
look at the flights, spend some time in the lounge or walk
to an airline counter directly where a real person will help
them go through the check-in process. The entire process
of boarding the plane as well as the experience of flying
was also recorded making our solution a complete
experience to enjoy.

5. Digital Adrenaline - Closed Loop Control
Strategies for Phobia Treatment
For successful exposure therapy it is necessary to keep
our patients in a state where they experience the most
possible fear in relation to their phobias in order to help
them learn how to face and overcome these situations. To
achieve this in a controlled manner, we developed a
closed-loop control mechanism that allows the presented
stimuli and the resulting stress kept under constant
control while maintaining maximal effectiveness of the
experience.
We call this “digital adrenaline” since the closed-loop
control of fearful stimuli allows the system to guarantee
an experience (as opposed to level of difficulty or time of
exposure) during an exercise. To achieve this goal our
CyberCare system relies on real-time measurements of
the internal state of the user. This internal state is
characterized as levels of stress, attention, fatigue,
interest, etc. The values for these variables are derived
from physical measurements, such as biofeedback (skin
conductance and hear rate variability), or optional visual
sensors that analyze facial expressions, displays of
emotions and affect as possible indicators of emotions,
mood.
The measurements derived directly from the user’s
physical presence and behavior are used to control the
stimuli and close the loop of interaction. This is achieved
by directly controlling the time-line of events as a
function of the real-time measurements in an inverse
relation to the levels of stress the user is experiencing.
To achieve this we consider time as a measure of progress
in an exercise. As an example, most phobias (fear of
driving, height, public transportation, flying, public
speaking, open spaces, social interactions, animals,
PTSD, etc.) may be characterized as a sequence of events
arranged in a panoramic video. The goal of the exercise
is to reach the end point of this sequence while remaining
calm. A panoramic video showing the edge of a tall cliff
as the patient approaches it, an elevator leaving the
ground and reaching floors progressively higher and
higher, or the imagery of a dog as it comes nearer, would
be such representations. These are situations for the
patient that evoke stress.
The control mechanism of the CyberCare system
derives a global measure of fear by combining all
indicators of stress in any given moment and translating it
into a value of normalized time with 0.0 representing the
beginning of the sequence and 1.0 corresponding to the
end.
We employ three different strategies to control the
time line. In the first one (approach-and-backtrack)

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

during the exercise patients progress or regress by
attempting to control their stress levels. The CyberCare
system creates an inverse relationship between progress
in time and global measures of the user’s internal state.
Specifically, when this measure rises, the timeline is
moved backwards, while when it lowers, the timeline
moves forward. Progressing forward creates an increased
level of anxiety in the user due to the nature of the stimuli
described above, while moving backwards in the timeline
eases that tension. The result of this inversely linked
process is that the user is kept always at the optimal point
of stimuli, i.e. just at the bearable levels he or she can
handle. The advantage of this lies in the fact that by
definition, the effectiveness of the process is increased
multiple folds while reducing the need and requirements
for supervision. This first techniques is used when
approaching a fearful situation or backtracking from it
makes sense. Such are fear of height where the edge of a
tall building or cliff needs to be addressed, fear of animals
(dogs, spiders, snakes, etc.) and fear of closed spaces,
elevators, etc.
The second control strategy (timelapse) involves
adjusting the speed events take place. An example of such
a situation is traveling in a car where the vehicle starts out
very slow and gradually increases its speed as a function
of stress in the patient. The goal of the patient is to be as
relaxed as possible when the car travels up to four times
as fast as the speed it started out with. This increase in
speed causes more fear in the patient the result of which
will be the car slowing down or even stopping when
needed. Once the user is more relaxed it starts out again
towards its final destination.
The third and final strategy (stop-and-go), as its name
indicates, simply stops the panoramic video when the
patient passes a preset threshold of fear level and restarts
it when he or she is relaxed enough to proceed. This
mode is often used when synchronized sound effects are
used to increase the level of immersion, such as going
down the escalator in the underground station, waiting on
the platform or approaching the vehicle.
The closed-loop control strategies described in this
section for virtual reality exposure therapy proved to be
effective means of helping patients to overcome their
fears in the CyberCare system. Besides the increased level
of realism, when using the system they soon realize that
they are in control of the situation as well as the
physiological reactions of their own bodies. This
realization and the practice that follows is the first step in
helping them eventually face their fears in the real world
as well.

6. Usability and First Results
The Cyber Care Clinique solution we described above
have been under development and evaluation for over
three years. First, it has been successfully tested under
clinical conditions on patients with stroke and damage
due to trauma of the brain. Using computer generated and
animated low-frequency “sand shadow” letters, words,
and word pairs, we have developed five different sets of
stimuli corresponding to increasing levels of difficulty to
our patients, we have tested 40 subjects 20 of which
belonged to a control group of healthy individuals. We
examined the statistical distributions of recognition
accuracy, and reaction times for each of the five sets of
stimuli. The statistical normality was computed using
non-parametric statistical sampling with the method of
Shaphiro-Wilkinsons’ Matched Pair Test [9]. Our results
show that even on a small patient population statistically
significant differences can be demonstrated in the
measured variables and regular treatment of subject leads
to improvement on these tasks, eventually allowing them
to be able to read again. This demonstrates the
applicability of our method for Neglect rehabilitation
[10]. For phobia-treatment our new and finalized version
of the application is operated clinically and commercially
since Fall 2006. We evaluated its performance on a group
of 20 subjects who were afraid of public transportation
(underground, bus, train, tram, etc.), driving and/or
flying. Using our computer generated spherical video
environments that were augmented with 3D synthetic
elements for interaction and animated content, we
successfully treated them while measuring their reactions
and actions during the entire session. We have also
compared the levels of immersion by placing them into
computer generated 3D worlds of different visual quality
(underground 3D model) as well as matched spherical
videos and evaluated their experiences using the presence
questionnaire. Our results indicate, that our solution [11]
offers not only a high degree of fidelity, but a level of
immersion unmatched by previously employed
techniques, while making it possible to create
personalized environments at a fraction of cost and time
involved. Videos showing the system and its components
in use are available from the following website:
www.VirMED.net [12].

7. Conclusion
In this paper we described a virtual reality
rehabilitation system and its uses for treating various
phobias. We compared the benefits and drawbacks of
using 3D virtual models with a new technique, panoramic
surround video, and presented our arguments why the
later may be more suitable to use in clinical settings. We

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

briefly described our special purpose surround video
recording system and detailed some of the productions
and situations we have successfully deployed it in.
Finally, we presented different control strategies to
present such stimuli to patients by creating a closed-loopmodel, called “digital adrenaline”, designed to maximize
the effectiveness of VR-based exposure treatment. We
currently use our CyberCare system to cure phobias and
collect more data on how patients behave in such settings
for the purpose of developing treatment protocols and
formally evaluate the usability of our method as a clinical
tool for future healthcare.

7. References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

Wiederhold, B.K., D. Jang, S. Kim, and M.D.
Wiederhold, (2003), “Physiological Monitoring as
an Objective Tool in Virtual Reality Therapy”, Proc.
of CyberTherapy Conference, San Diego, CA.
Rizzo, A.A (2003), “Data, Development Issues and
Future Visions from the USC Integrated Media
Systems Center Virtual Environments Laboratory”,
Proc. of CyberTherapy Conference, San Diego, CA.
Takacs B. (2005), “Special Education and
Rehabilitation: Teaching and Healing with
Interactive Graphics”, IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, 25(5): pp.40-48.
Takacs B. (2006), “Cognitive, Mental and Physical
Rehabilitation Using a Configurable Virtual Reality
System”, International Journal of Virtual Reality,
5(4): pp.1-12.
Virtually
Better
Inc
(2007).,
www.virtuallybetter.com.
The Virtual Reality Medical Center (2007),
www.vrphobia.com.
Sik Lányi, C. (2006), “Virtual Reality in
Healthcare” in Intelligent Paradigms for Assistive
and Preventive Healthcare Ichalkaranje, A., et al.
(Eds.), Springer-Verlag, pp. 92-121. ISBN 3-54031762-7.
Sik Lányi, C. (2006), “Multimedia Medical
Informatics System in Healthcare”, in Intelligent
Paradigms for Assistive and Preventive Healthcare,
Ichalkaranje, A., et al. (Eds.), Springer-Verlag, pp.
39-91. ISBN 3-540-31762-7.
J. Pratt and J. Gibbons (1981), Concepts of
Nonparametric Theory, Springer-Verlag.
Donauer, N. , B. Takacs (2007), ”Cognitive
Rehabilitation of Patients with Neglect Syndrome
with CyberTherapy”, CyberTherapy, Washington
D.C.
Simon, L. , B. Takacs (2007), ”Treating Anxiety
Disroders
in
Spherical
Virtual
Video
Environments”, CyberTherapy, Washington D.C.
VirMED (2007), www.VirMED.net

