Comprehensive Astronomical Visualization
for a Multimedia Encyclopedia
Wolfgang Kienreich Mario Zechner Vedran Sabol
Know-Center, Competence Center for Knowledge-Based Applications and Systems
{wkien|mzechner|vsabol}@know-center.at
Abstract
The domain of astronomy contributes a wealth of
knowledge to the corpus of any general encyclopedia.
Modern multimedia encyclopedias are capable of
displaying complex, three-dimensional visualizations
in real-time, enabling the integration of a planetarium,
a virtual theater presenting astronomical facts in an
educational and entertaining way. The manifold
peculiarities of astronomical data sets require careful
balancing of visual means to create representations
comprehensible for a general audience. In this paper
we discuss design and implementation considerations
for a Planetarium integrated with the prevalent
German language multimedia encyclopedia.

1. Introduction
The domain of astronomy contributes a wealth of
knowledge to the corpus of any general encyclopedia.
However, many astronomical phenomena are hard to
explain in textual terms. Modern multimedia
encyclopedias are capable of displaying complex,
three-dimensional visualizations in real-time, enabling
the integration of a planetarium, a virtual theater
presenting astronomical facts for educational purposes
yet in an entertaining way.
Visualization design tends to concentrate on
accurate representation of real-world models in which
a domain of knowledge is structured along an
observable spatial dimension. Unfortunately, models
used in visualization tools are inherently unable to
express the multitude of abstract aspects associated
with entities in most domains. In the area of
architecture, it has been demonstrated that unreflected
use of real-world models actually hides important
aspects of the underlying knowledge spaces from
observation [1]. For the domain of astronomy, similar
phenomena have to be anticipated and considered in
devising appropriate visual representations of
astronomical data sets.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Brockhaus Multimedia Planetarium
In this paper we discuss design considerations and
implementation issues for a planetarium visualization
which has been integrated into the “Brockhaus
Multimedial”, the prevalent multimedia encyclopedia
in the German language domain [2]. Addressing the
challenges outlined, metaphors based on real-world
observer experiences and perceptions have been
applied to convey complex astronomical facts,
supplementing a navigation model based on the actual
spatial dimension.
Section 2 provides a brief outline of the project
environment. Section 3 elaborates on relevant
astronomical entities and their properties, while section
4 describes related applications. Section 5 presents
selected features of the “Brockhaus Multimedial”
planetarium in detail and elaborates on the combination
of metaphors and real-world models used to create a
comprehensive visualization. Section 6 discusses
theoretical considerations backing implementation and
design decisions. We conclude with an outlook
(section 7) and some general conclusions on the
feasibility of the approach (section 8).

2. Environment
The work presented in this publication is based on
the “Brockhaus Multimedial Enzyklopädie” in 2007
edition. This product is considered the prevalent
multimedia encyclopedia in the German-speaking
domain, the famous German Duden lexicon is
published by the same company [3]. With
approximately 240.000 articles and 350.000 mentioned
keywords, the “Brockhaus Multimedial” ranks among
the world’s largest encyclopedias. In the course of the
planetarium project outlined in this paper, an additional
database of 120.000 astronomical entities has been
compiled from various sources, and mapped to relevant
articles in the encyclopedia.

3. Domain
A substantial fraction of the scientific data available
globally has been gathered in the domain of astronomy.
For example, the Sloane digital sky survey [4], one of
many sources of astronomical data, is approximately
40 terabytes in size. In comparison, a digitized version
of the US library of congress is estimated to contain
about 136 terabytes of information [5]. In the context
of an encyclopedia, scientific data only has to be
included in amounts deemed sensible by editors and
domain experts to cover the extent of general
knowledge. Detailed information on astronomical
concepts can be found in standard literature [6].
Traditionally, a planetarium provides observers with
views of the night sky as seen from the surface of
Earth. Modern virtual planetarium systems often
restrict observer location to the confines of the solar
system due to disproportionality in scale and available
information. Under this constraint, astronomical
entities can be categorized into distant, local and
artificial instances. Distant entities are located beyond
the confines of the solar system and can be visualized
independent of observer location. Local entities are
located within the solar system and can be visualized
as distinct three-dimensional objects, depending on
both observer location and orientation. Artificial
entities often do not feature concrete location or
orientation.
Relevant distant entities include stars, galaxies,
clusters and nebulae. For each distant entity,
information on location and brightness is available.
Location is specified using a simple polar coordinate
system, while brightness is provided in the nonlinear
astronomical scale of magnitudes. Stars appear as point
light sources featuring distinct colors which can be

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

classified according to the Morgan-Keenan spectral
scheme. Galaxies display structures which can be
classified morphologically according to the Hubble
sequence. Clusters also display structures which can be
categorized into various morphological schemes. For
nebulae, some rough distinctions can be made, for
example separating planetary and reflection nebulae.
Relevant local entities primarily include planets and
moons. For each of these, more or less precise orbital
data is known and allows prediction of location and
orientation at any given moment. Detailed
photographic maps are also often available. Comets,
asteroids and other minor bodies in the solar system
might also be considered relevant. Abstract entities
include panorama images, coordinate grids and, most
prominently, constellations representing mythological
figures and objects projected onto the night sky as seen
from Earth by connecting arbitrary stars with lines.

4. Systems
Many visualizations have been created to aid
analysis of astronomical data produced by observation
and theoretical models. Most of these systems can be
categorized as scientific visualization, in the sense that
they produce graphic images from complex
computations involving millions of items of numerical
data [7]. Results are usually comprehensible to domain
experts only. However, frequent public interest in
astronomy has also given rise to a number of
visualizations tailored to a general audience. Before the
advent of powerful graphics hardware on desktop
computers, such systems were mainly designed as star
charting tools rendering symbolic maps of the night
sky. Applications like SkyMap [8] remain in use by
amateur astronomers who require precise astrometric
data to locate objects.
Recent advances in graphics hardware have enabled
virtual planetarium systems to provide users with near
photorealistic, interactive representations of the night
sky. StarryNight [9], for example, is a commercial
planetarium product which including scientifically
correct data for millions of astronomical entities and
producing spectacular graphical representations of the
night sky. In the public domain, the Celestia Free
Space Simulation [10] employs a rendering system
based on 3D objects enabling users to observe
astronomical entities from an arbitrary point of view,
including locations outside our own galaxy. Stellarium
[11] is an open source planetarium software generating
photorealistic, interactive views of the night sky from
any given location on earth.

5. Application
The design of the “Brockhaus Multimedial”
planetarium is based on the distinction between distant,
local and artificial entities described in section 3.
Observer location is restricted to the confines of the
solar system. The differentiation between entity types
has been used in visualization, interactivity and
labeling as described in this section.

5.1 Visualization
The “Brockhaus Multimedial” planetarium uses the
OpenGL graphics library [12] to generate real-time
interactive visualizations of astronomical entities.

and transparency of the light cones were used to
express the high dynamic range exhibited by
astronomical entities. The resulting visual appearance
is intuitively comprehensible because it imitates a
natural phenomenon. For any optical system observing
from the surface of Earth, atmospheric turbulence and
diffraction effects spread light emitted by point light
sources over a considerable area. The resulting
disturbances can be computed in some detail [15], yet
appear to an observer as simple halos surrounding
bright objects in the nightsky.
Seen up close, planets and moons are visualized
using textured, lit spheres (compare figure 2). For
many entities in the solar system detailed surface maps
are available from open sources [16]. In cases where

Figure 2 Visualizing Astronomical Entities: Jupiter, Io and the Constellation of Orion
Rendering is fully hardware accelerated on systems
mounting appropriate devices. The Java programming
language [13] was used to produce a solution
executable on Windows, Linux and Mac operating
systems.
Stars, planets, moons and small distant entities
appear as point light sources emanating specific
brightness and color when seen at considerable
distance. In the astronomical domain brightness is
measured on a logarithmical scale of magnitudes in
relative and absolute terms. RGB color pixel values
available on modern displays cannot express brightness
variations on such a scale. To avoid this restraint,
additive alphablending [14] was used to compose light
cones atop pixels representing point light sources. Size

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

no maps could be acquired a featureless standard
texture was substituted. Location and orientation of
planets and moons were computed from standard
astronomical algorithms [17]. Planetary ring systems
were visualized using textured geometry and
transparency (compare figure 3). Distant entities were
rendered as textured, planar objects, projected onto a
background unit sphere, scaled and aligned according
to available entity information. For galaxies and
clusters classification data as described in section 3
was employed to create sets of stock images. These
were rendered in adjustment to known size, alignment
and brightness. The visual result is similar to the views
provided by amateur-level telescopes when the entities
being depicted are comparably small.

Large entities and nebulae can not be visualized using
this approach because they exhibit a significant amount
of individual structure. In these cases, individual
images are assigned to selected entities when available,
and stylized stock images are used in the absence of
such. Constellations provide an important frame of
reference to casual observers. The geometry of official
constellations has been standardized for a long time.
Still, many observers fail to identify the mythological
figures and objects associated with constellation

multiplying entity relevance with maximum namespace
relevance. The labelling algorithm traversed the list of
visible entities in order from highest to lowest total
entity relevance and generated a list of accepted entity
labels. For each entity, a rectangular label area was
created from entity location and text size. This area
was tested for intersection with areas of entity labels
already accepted. Entity labels were only added to the
list of accepted labels if no intersection was detected.
The process was terminated after the list of accepted

Figure 3 Light Cones as Metaphors for Brightness: Saturn’s Moons
geometry. Artistic paintings of the constellations
available in the public domain [18] have been included,
and can be displayed in combination with constellation
geometry. This is ment to aid orientation.

5.2 Labelling
For any visualization system displaying thousands of
visual entities on screen at a time, labeling, the
rendering of explanatory text for relevant entities,
becomes a significant challenge. In the “Brockhaus
Multimedial” planetarium, all astronomical entities
were assigned names in one or more namespaces. The
famous Andromeda galaxy, for example, would appear
under this name in a general namespace, under its
Messier number M31 in the Messier namespace and
under its NGC catalogue number in the NGC
namespace. Each namespace was assigned a relevance
according to user’s familiartiy with it. Each entity was
assigned a relevance based on size and brightness. A
total relevance was computed for each entity by

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

labels reached a size limit. Users were able to
manipulate this limit using a slider control, effectively
controlling the amount of labels visible. This algorithm
never produces label overlap, labels important entities
at lower magnifications yet labels every single entity at
higher magnifications or in situations where there is
enough spacing available between entities.

5.3 Interaction
User interaction with the planetarium is based on the
concept of a virtual observer located at an arbitrary
position within the solar system. The local “up axis” of
the observer is always consistent with the heliocentric
coordinate system, placing the observer approximately
within the plane of the orbits of the planets. Users
manipulate orientation and line of sight by holding the
mouse button while moving the mouse. Dedicated
interface elements and key mappings provide an
alternative. Two interaction modes are supported. User
input is interpreted depending on the active mode.

The “orbital mode” places the observer in orbit around
an entity like a planet or moon. Horizontal mouse
motion rotates the observer’s location around the
vertical axis of the center, while vertical mouse motion
changes observer elevation in the orbital plane. The
observer’s line of sight is always towards the centered
entity. The resulting interaction resembles a walk
around and object in an exhibition. “Orbital mode” is
automatically activated whenever the user selects a
local entity.

class (e.g. star, galaxy, cluster, nebula) and parent
entity (e.g. planet, constellation). Thus, even entities
not meriting an encyclopedia article feature references
to the textual corpus. In reverse, articles within the
encyclopedia display references if any astronomical
entities are related to them. Users can follow references
to seamlessly navigate between planetarium entities
and encyclopedia articles.

In “look mode”, the observer’s location is kept
constant. Horizontal mouse motion rotates the
observer’s line of sight around the vertical axis, while
vertical mouse motion rotates the observer’s line of
sight around the horizontal axis. Gimbal lock, the loss
of interactivity at critical angles, has been avoided by
placing certain limits on rotation in the horizontal axis
and by using quaternions in the underlying
transformations [19]. The resulting interaction
resembles turning one’s head. “Look mode” is
automatically activated whenever the user selects a
distant entity.

Given the amount of hard scientific data available in
the domain of astronomy, it is tempting to aim for the
construction of models visually approximating
physical reality in all relevant areas. However, many
properties of astronomical entities cannot be
comprehensively visualized through models. Technical
limitations as well as considerations of scale and
complexity require the introduction of metaphors and
abstractions to represent the full spectrum of
knowledge associated with such entities. For the
designers of a planetarium, the question remains how
to best integrate the strong inherent spatial orientation
of the astronomical domain with the various abstract
elements to be represented.

Entities are selected by clicking on the appropriate
visual element (or label) in the viewport. When the
user selects a local entity, “orbit mode” is activated and
the selected entity is centered after a brief space flight
animation. Selecting a distant entity activates “look
mode” and centers the distant entity in the viewport. A
suitable magnification is chosen for the viewport to
display structural details for the selected entity. On
leaving “orbit mode”, observer location is adjusted by
moving radially outwards from the currently selected
center entity to avoid blocking the observer’s view.
A third mode, “overview mode”, represents a special
case of “orbit mode” with the sun placed at the center
and the observer positioned far outside the solar
system. In “overview mode”, orbital and planetary
scales are adjusted using a nonlinear factor which
retains basic proportions but compresses locations and
scales. The result is a visualization of the solar system
with all planetary orbits fitting into the viewport and
all planets being visible despite the real-world scale
mismatch (compare figure 1). “Overview mode” is an
essential navigation feature.

5.4. Integration
Astronomical entities in the planetarium are tightly
integrated with textual articles in the encyclopedia. The
primary reference for every astronomical entity is to
the encyclopedia article describing it, if such an article
exists. Secondary refereneces are present for entity

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

6. Discussion

In a general discussion on how to best balance the use
of model, metaphor and abstraction for complex
visualization tasks, it was argued that a spatial
dimension should be exploited for navigation and
interaction if at all possible [20]. We adhered to this
idea in providing users with a virtual observer.
Opposed to a more abstract map view, this observer
features concrete location an orientation and is
controlled by interactions. It was pointed out that
complex aspects of potentially abstract nature should
not be forcibly integrated into real-world models.
Instead, they are realized through metaphors
supplementing such models. We built upon this
scheme by drawing metaphors from the real-world
experiences and perceptions of users.
The visualization metaphor chosen for stars and other
entities so distant that they effectively appear to an
observer as point light sources provides a working
example for this approach. As outlined before, it is
technically not feasible to display the variations in
brightness found in stars and other astronomical point
light sources on available displays. Even if it were
possible to actually render point light sources, an
according visualization would not be comprehensible
to the general public.

Real-world observational experience teaches users that
bright objects in the night sky display distinct halos.
This phenomenon stems solely from the combined
effects of atmosphere and optical apparatus, yet
observer expectations are shaped by it and
visualizations have to incorporate it to provide intuitive
views. Consequentially, such halos have to be included
even in cases when the view provided is not actually
from within a planetary atmosphere. Despite the
physically incorrect rendering of the actual view, in
such situations halos become metaphors enabling users
to visually determine comparative brightness levels of
objects.

7. Future Work
The first version of the “Brockhaus Multimedial”
planetarium has been released to the general public in
autumn 2006 and met critical acclaim especially in the
area of user interface and interaction design [21]. The
next version of the “Brockhaus Multimedial” will be
released in autumn 2007. In reaction to user feedback,
work is underway to extend navigation and
interactivity as described in section 5.3 with an
additional mode placing the observer on arbitrary
locations on the surface of Earth, Moon or Mars.
Comparative user testing has been scheduled to
evaluate effects of the described design decisions in the
areas of metaphors and interactivity on usability of the
resulting system. The number of similar systems
available provides ample opportunity to test various
aspects in detail. We expect to collect valuable input
for the further development of the “Brockhaus
Multimedial” planetarium from such testing activities.

8. Conclusions
In this paper, we discuss design considerations and
implementation issues for a planetarium visualization
which has been integrated into a multimedia
encyclopedia. After outlining relevant aspects of
astronomical knowledge and referencing related
systems, we presented selected features of the
“Brockhaus Multimedial” planetarium. We discussed
considerations underlying the chosen balance of realworld models and metaphors using halos as an
example. We argued that metaphors based on user
experiences and perceptions of domain knowledge are
better suited to provide a comprehensive visualization
than models strictly adhering to physical reality. We
believe that this argument holds true for many domains
of knowledge exhibiting a strong spatial dimension.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

9. Acknowledgements
The Know-Center is a Competence Center funded
within the Austrian Competence Centers Program K
plus under the auspices of the Austrian Ministry of
Transport, Innovation and Technology (www.kplus.at).
We would like to thank Arndt Frederichs, Jürgen
Osterberg and Bernd Kreissig, all of Bibliographisches
Institut & F. A. Brockhaus AG, for their efforts.

10. References
[1] J.Y.Blaise, I.Dudek. From artefact representation to
information visualisation: genesis of informative modelling.
Proceedings SmartGraphics 2005, Springer, Germany, 2005.
[2] Brockhaus Multimedial Enzyklopädie, Germany.
http://www.brockhaus-multimedial.de, 2007
[3] Bibliographisches Institut & F. A. Brockhaus AG
http://www.brockhaus.de, 2007
[4] J.Loveday. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey. Journal
Contemporary Physics 43/6, 437-449. Taylor & Francis,
New York, 2002.
[5] P. Lyman, R. V. Hal. How Much Information. 2003
http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/how-much-info-2003
[6] E. Chaisson, S. McMillan. Astronomy: A Beginner's
Guide to the Universe (5th Ed.) Benjamin Cummings, 2006
[7] R.L.Oakman. The Computer Triangle. John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1996
[8] C.A.Marriott. Skymap star charting software
http://www.skymap.com, 2006
[9] Imaginova, Corp. Starry Nights
http://www.starrynight.com, 2007
[10] C.Laurel. Celestia Free Space Simulation
http://www.shatters.net/celestia, 2007
[11] Stellarium Open Source Planetarium Software
http://www.stellarium.org, 2007
[12] The OpenGL high performance graphics standard
http://www.opengl.org, 2007
[13] Sun Microsystems The Java programming language
http://java.sun.com, 2007
[14] T. Porter, T. Duff Compositing Digital Images
SIGGRAPH 84, p253-259. 1984
[15] R.J.Noll Zernike polynomials and atmospheric
turbulence. J Opt Soc Am 66, 207-211, 1976
[16] NASA JPL, Planetary Textures
http://maps.jpl.nasa.gov, 2007
[17] J.Meeus Astronomical Algorithms. Willmann-Bell,
Inc., Richmond, US, 1999.
[18] J.Meuris Free art licence constellation images
http://users.pandora.be/jomejom, 2007
[19] D.Pletinckx Quaternion calculus as a basic tool in
computer graphics. The Visual Computer,
Vol.5,1-2,
01/1989. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, 1989
[20] W.Kienreich Information Visualisation - An Oblique
View. MIA Journal on Informative Modelling, Marseille,
France, 2006 (ISSN 1951-6363)
[21] Deutscher Preis für Bildungssoftware, 2007

