Towards a Language for Talking about Information Visualization Aimed at
Presentation on the Web

Almira Karabeg

M. Naci Akkøk

Karoline Kristensen

Dept. of Informatics,
University of Oslo,
Norway.
almira@ifi.uio.no

Dept. of Informatics,
University of Oslo,
Norway.
nacia@ifi.uio.no

Dept. of Informatics,
University of Oslo,
Norway.
karolik@ifi.uio.no

Abstract
Considering variety, quantity and quality of information
presentations and representations on the web two research
directions emerge for us: the first one has to do with foundations of visual literacy, development of visual languages
that will facilitate visual reasoning in more general setting
than in problem solving and the other one has to do with
the complexity of design process itself. These two directions
are not separate, as visual reasoning is a fundamental attribute of design, it is a functionality inherent in visual representations, but has to be rendered by design. This implies
a need for design principles whereby visual reasoning can
be built into a visual representation, which in turn requires
the identification of these sound design principles and a
language for talking about them. In this study, we define
some of the basic concepts like visual immediacy, visual
impetus and visual impedance that may form the basis of
the necessary vocabulary. We then discuss types of visual
reasoning, extending the goal of visual reasoning from
problem solving alone to a more generic goal that includes
the kind of reasoning involved in visual metaphors, visual
analogies, and visual associations, which all act as organizers of thinking. We then proceed towards trying to summarize, systematize and add new principles and guidelines
towards better presentation of information for the web.
Keywords
Visual Immediacy – Visual Impetus – Visual Impedance –
Visual Reasoning – Visual Design – Web Design.

1 Introduction
The field of information visualization is in its nature interdisciplinary and this in itself presents a huge challenge.
The authors, as part of the group for information design that
has departed significantly from the perception that information design equates graphic design, face the same challenge
of putting people with different expertise on a very ambitious project – desire to create and establish a language that

will facilitate visual reasoning and related to it, design and
visualization of information.
The views of the role of aesthetics and arts and their
value related to cognition are still split. One of the traditional views is expressed in the following insightful quotation from
Pang’s work where Kuhn is cited [13]:
Kuhn admitted that the history of science and history of
art shared some interests: his own ‘Structure of Scientific Revolutions’ used some of the same tools as art historians, and Kuhn rejected the idea “that art can readily be distinguished from science by application of the
classic dichotomies between, for example, the world of
value and the world of fact,” for artists and scientists
both work in or struggle against traditions, and confront a variety of technical problems in their everyday
work. Still, he maintained that science and art are very
different enterprises. Aesthetics is central in the arts,
but in the sciences it is “seldom an end in itself and
never the primary one,” and scientists’ “aesthetic responses and research styles... are to a considerable degree private and varied.” Each also has a different relationship to past work. Picasso's work cannot be said
to have rendered Rembrandt's obsolete, but Einstein's
work did overthrow Newton's. Further, “there is no scientific avant-garde, and the existence of one would
threaten science.” Finally, illustrations themselves are
marginal to the history of science. Photographs “are at
best by-products of scientific activity,” Kuhn argued.
“Usually they are made and sometimes they are analyzed by technicians rather than the scientist for whose
research they provide data.”
We will argue against some of these stances, in particular
that illustrations are at best by-products of scientific activity
– we will argue for, and in accordance with research in
cognitive science and neuroscience, that visual representations, among them illustrations, play central role in our

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

cognitive perception, conscious and unconscious. Immense
amount of complex information that needs to be processed
on a daily basis has contributed to giving visualization a
central role in modern life. Both the amount of information
and its complexity dictates a culture that is to an ever increasing extent using visuals to simplify information, and to
make it faster and easier to comprehend. As a result, a visual culture is rapidly developing, demanding visual literacy
that in turn implies educated use and profound understanding of visual languages.
Despite this central role of visual representations in representing knowledge and information (see also [16]), there
is little underlying theory and methodology to support the
use of the visual. The reason for this lack is difficulty in the
formalization of reasoning with visual representations, requiring a synthesis of a myriad of professions and fields
addressing the cognitive, representational, artistic, computational, logic, linguistic and psychological aspects of information. In an effort to take a first step in the direction of
defining some characteristics of the visual language, we
propose three terms – visual immediacy, visual impetus and
visual impedance. We have chosen to look at these three
terms or characteristics as we call them, in relation to Web
design because World Wide Web and the supporting technologies have made the problem of visual literacy really
clear and obvious. Anyone who has ever surfed the Web for
some amount of time must have noticed the variety, the
quantity and, unfortunately, the lack of clarity and quality in
all too many visual expressions. This is not unexpected because, while we were trained at school to write, we learned
the grammar and spelling, we did not learn anything about
the impact of the images on us, or how to use them to our
advantage.
At the same time, web pages are representative for general situation: one can find purely artistic sites, full of digitalized art, commercial sites, advertisements of all types,
text, educational sites, scientific publications, entertainment, animations, vides and movies – more or less all types
of visual input, as well as information, that we are exposed
to in our daily lives and more.
Every single web page in itself can be viewed as a visual
representation, composed of variety of other visual representations (including text, hypertext, links, animations,
icons, navigation, pictures, illustrations, video clips etc).
Which representations are used in order to compose a page
is important, but how to make them work together so that
the right message is given to the end user is crucial. In likeness with writing, one needs both theory and practice in
defining and applying visual literacy anywhere, and of
course, on the Web in particular.
In conclusion, we are not going to talk about questions
regarding how to turn information into visual representations, but rather, how to start developing visual literacy as

an aid to visual reasoning and how to use visual reasoning
towards better design of information, for a visual medium
such as Web and using visual elements in appropriate
amounts and form in order to increase quality, clarity, retention and value of information presented. Interesting articles,
with some overlap with our goals and a different methodology are [17, 14].

2 Background: Visual Immediacy, Impetus
and Impedance
2.1 Defining and Exemplifying Visual Immediacy
Originally, visual immediacy is defined in relation to
Diagrammatic Modeling Languages (DMLs) and their design in Akkøk’s previous works [1, 2, 3]. Another excellent
reference for design of DMLs is [6]. Still, visual immediacy
is a visual rather than diagrammatic characteristic, and applies equally well to visual representations in general including Web representations as reported in [11]. But we
will provide a DML example first, as we find it very compelling.
In relation to DMLs, visual immediacy is defined as the
DML characteristic that facilitates production of the kind of
diagram that enables the diagram interpreter (user) to perceive/recognize and cognitively process information embedded in the diagram (or parts of it) ‘at a glance’.
Figure 1b demonstrates a diagram that is the consciously
exaggerated result of using a simplified Flow Chart DML
[5, 8] that does not enforce visual immediacy, characterized
by the decision phrase (the rhombus) in figure 1a that enforces rudimentary layouting and connection rules. Note
that the decision phrase in figure 1a is meant to exemplify
the production rules of this specific version of a Flow Chart
DML.

Figure 1. Flow Chart DML represented by a) a decision
phrase that does not enforce visual immediacy and b)
a diagram representing one possible outcome of using
the DML.

Figure 2b is the result of using an alternative Flow Chart
DML that does enforce visual immediacy through additional production rules (layouting rules, specifically) as
exemplified by the decision phrase in figure 2a.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 2. Modified Flow Chart DML with a) re-designed

“decision” and “task” phrases and b) resulting diagram.
Visual immediacy is a cognitive quality that is often implied in references to a diagram’s intuitiveness and directness. The term is chosen to reflect not only the visual nature
of this diagrammatic quality but also to emphasize its faster
(and sometimes apparently immediate) cognitive processing
when compared with other visual representation forms like
pure text in print. From the cognitive point of view, readers
will most likely process the information presented in the
two figures at different speeds. Clearly, the information in
figure 2b will be recognized faster – almost immediately, or
at a glance – as compared to the information in figure 1b.
Visual immediacy in terms of Web pages can be seen
similarly: depending on how much of it is enforced through
design rules, we will perceive the cognitive context of the
page (or parts of it) at a glance. One can play with this
characteristic by surfing the Web and allowing for accidental landings on sites and then measuring how much of a
context was available after a few (typically 3-7) seconds of
viewing the site.

evaluation of the aesthetic quality of the first impression
upon entering the site. Does it encourage and “draw” one to
explore the site – or does it not?
The following webpage http://www.isn.net/~jypsy/, designed with best intentions, had its visual impetus rated by a
sample of 8 computer science students (thus this is indicative only) as very, very low indeed. Their reaction was that
there are too many visual elements to relate to, the colors
gave the first impression as that of a new age web fleemarket or a site with adult content – none of which actually
correspond to the context of the page.
An example of the page for which the visual impetus was
rated as high is http://mosquito.paregos.com/. This site has
won quite a bit of attention due to its innovative design. It
may or may not be to someone’s liking in the long run, but
it does increase the curiosity and activity: the reader is definitely set on an exploration journey. However, this site is
aimed at entertainment and not at information retrieval.
Some of the ideas though, can be carried to other realms.

2.3 Defining and Exemplifying Visual Impedance
We define visual impedance as the hindrance or (often
unintended) negative implicature in a visual design that
causes the receiver to be less receptive to the visual representation itself, or causes deviance/deterioration in the message communicated trough the visual representation.

2.2 Defining and Exemplifying Visual Impetus
We define visual impetus as an impulse, incentive, stimulus through visual elements of web design whose aim is to
increase activity and curiosity related to the contextual aspect of the design.
Visual impetus is thus related to the aesthetic aspect of
the page under observation, and as such it could be considered to be subjective and thus useless as a design evaluation
tool. However, one can evaluate visual impetus by asking
questions such as: How does our first impression of the
page “feel”? Is it likable? Does the ambience correspond to
the context? Is it stimulating and exciting? Does the first
impression of the page hinder or stimulate further interest?
One can definitely obtain a measure of aesthetic quality
of the page. It will have a subjective flavor, but measured
over certain number of users of the page, answering the
same series of questions, would yield a more objective

Figure 3. Ad from 1959 with the same idea as described above: Gordon’s Gin is associated with the
well-deserved relaxation at the end of a journey.

A good example of visual impedance is in figure 3, which
is also an example of visual association introduced in the
same section. In a very short informal conversation (involv-

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

ing the authors of this paper), following individual impressions of the picture in figure 1 were recounted:
•

Temporal mismatch: “Stage-coach belongs to another era. The message does not address me. So
Gordon’s gin is probably not for me”.

•

Cultural mismatch (with respect to the Norwegian
culture that emphasizes equality of the two sexes):
“Macho. The only woman is being helped, and the
activities implied are largely male/physical. It is a
scene that could be a hunting scene, which is a male
occupation/game also. The era itself is a more maledominant one as well. So, is Gordon’s gin for the
boys?”

•

Contextual mismatch: “What does being stuck in the
snow have to do with a holiday (appearing in the text
below the picture)? Gordon’s gin is not a leisure
drink then, but the strong drink I might need at the
end of a tough day”.

•

Contextual mismatch (a different one): “Holidays
mean children. What does Gordon’s gin have to do
with children?”
According to these accounts, the message that was intended by the ad was deviated through what the visual representation unintentionally implies, which we refer to with
the term negative implicature (see [12]) . Another observation is that the reception of the intended message (gin being
a holiday drink communicated in the text) was resisted.
The misinterpretation/deviation as a result of negative
implicature and inducing resistance to the reception of the
intended message may be seen as two different concepts
requiring two separate terms. The case of negative implicature can be referred to as resulting in impedance mismatch
(a term used in electrical engineering and computing), and
the second case, i.e. resistance, can be referred to as high
impedance as the term impedance literally means. Thus, the
term impedance covers both cases, explaining our choice of
the term visual impedance. More about implicature can be
found in [3, 10].

3 Visual Reasoning
Most of the content of this section and section 3.1 has in
extended form been presented in [10], but we feel that
without exemplifying the use of visual metaphor, analogy
and association, this paper would be incomplete.
In one of his books, Robert Horn refers to the results of a
Wharton study on the benefits of incorporating visual language in presentations [7]: visual language aids decision
making, visual language makes a better impression, shortens meetings, promotes group consensus and is persuasive.
It is obvious from the above (non-exhaustive) list that
visual representations, which may be seen as the productions of visual languages, are multi-functional. As an exam-

ple, visual representations can function as visual reasoning
facilitators. In other words, visual reasoning is one such
functionality visual representations can offer if they are
designed correctly.
This serves as enough of a motivation to start studying
visual reasoning, but what exactly is visual reasoning?
Naturally, we have a basic and intuitive understanding of
the term, and we are able to define it at some rudimentary
level. Still, we do not have a sufficiently developed language for talking about visual reasoning. We do not, for
example, have a language for discussing whether a given
presentation has the necessary constituents for facilitating
reasoning, nor can we say much about the characteristics of
the specific kind of reasoning facilitated by the representation.
In short, we need to start studying visual representations
from the point of view of their characteristics and the functionality they may offer like visual reasoning, establishing a
vocabulary to define the central concepts that help us eventually build a language.
In what follows we will talk about two related but distinct
types of visual reasoning:
1. The type of visual reasoning that helps us comprehend a message through simple inference or recall
aided by various types of visual representations
like visual metaphors, analogies and associations
as defined and exemplified in the next section.
2. Diagrammatic reasoning that allows us to formulate a problem so as to be able to reason through to
a solution as exemplified by example of designing
visual immediacy into DML in section 2.1.

3.1 Visual Reasoning through Visual Metaphors,
Associations and Analogies
This section defines and exemplifies visual metaphors,
analogies and associations that are then discussed from the
point of view of the characteristics described earlier: immediacy, impetus and impedance.
The visual metaphor can be defined as the representation of a new system by means of visual attributes corresponding to a different system, familiar to the user,
which behaves in a similar way.
A typical case is the desktop metaphor. In it the traditional hierarchical tree of directories and subdirectories is
substituted by the graphical interface of folders and files.
Another example is that of a bus, with headlights made of
candle lights. The assumption is that driving in such a bus
during the night is dangerous, as vision is inadequate. The
transfer function to a different system that behaves similarly
is given verbally, as a message: our culture is like the bus,
our informing like candle lights. Implied message is that

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

unless we use better informing (headlights), we are in danger, as our information is inadequate. The bus example is
taken form [9].
Note that without an additional explanatory message, this
metaphor could not be understood correctly.
The visual analogy can be defined as the representation
of a new system by means of visual attributes corresponding to a similar system, familiar to the user.
Anecdotal visual analogy is the one of a chemist Kekule
dreaming of a snake biting its tale. Upon awakening, he
realized that benzene molecule must have circular structure,
just like the snake biting its tail.
The visual association can be defined as the representation of a familiar system by means of visual attributes
corresponding to a different system, in order to make
the user associate the two systems.
An example here would be a picture of a party, lots of
gorgeous young people smiling, having fun etc and then
somewhere visible, let’s say lower left corner, there is a
bottle of the drink, for example Gordon’s gin. The idea is
the obvious association between the gin and the fun.
Concepts of visual metaphor, analogy and association are
similar. The distinction between them becomes apparent
when we evaluate them (or try to design them) in relation to
visual immediacy, impetus and impedance. Their distinction on the basis of their relations to the concepts of visual
immediacy, impetus and impedance are given in the table 1.
Table 1. Relationships between visual representation

forms and visual representation characteristics.
Immediacy

Impetus

Visual
Metaphor

Metaphors
need
cognitive elaboration. Not much
immediacy.

Metaphor
causes curiosity, thus possesses impetus.

Visual
Analogy

Analogies
are
expected to have a
high degree of
immediacy.

Emphasizes the
relations. Have
less
impetus
than the metaphor.

Visual
Association

Associations
should have immediacy.

No impetus.

Impedance

Related to
the design
quality.

3.2 Elemental and Basic Visual Representations
Used for Page Design
The elemental visual representations, EVRs, are the simplest visual building blocks a website is made up of. A typical website contains navigation bar(s), text, buttons, images
etc. But all of those can be viewed as a certain amount of
pixels covering some specific area (region) of the screen

(canvas). Thus the most elemental building blocks are regions and layout (relationships between the regions and
between regions and canvas). Regions and layout must have
content in order to have meaning. Regions are occupied by
buttons, bars/navigation bars, text, background, logos,
ideograms, images, icons, each of which we consider as
basic region types, or as we will call them, basic visual representation types for Web page design, BVRs. Note that for
example icons can be animated, even have text on them (for
example a mail box with a flag that is raised when mail arrives, and on which one may have text of the type: new mail
has arrived), but it is still an icon. Regions can be of three
primary functional types: interactive, informative and decorative.
Some examples of BVRs that may occupy primarily interactive region are buttons, navigation bars, icons, text and
images. Informative regions typically contain text or image.
Decorative regions may contain background, logos or images.
Of course, not all of the BVRs have to be used in a design
of a given page. Note that being basic does not exclude
complexity of design or lack of secondary or ternary functional type (for example, a button is an interactive, but
hopefully it is also informative and aesthetically pleasing).

3.3 Actions/functionalities of EVRs and BVRs
Much has been said about User Interface Design, see for
example [15]. A good summary of Graphic User Interface
design steps is given in Dave Collins’ book on designing
object-oriented user interfaces [4]. When it comes to
Graphic Design the following quote poses a very interesting
question. It is from the page at URL (visited last on 31. 3.
04)
http://lieber.www.media.mit.edu/people/lieber/Lieberary/Gr
aphic-Design/Expert-Design/Expert-Design.html by Henry
Lieberman (MIT media laboratory):
The fact that graphic designers and other people who
do expert problem solving in visual domains have difficulty verbally articulating the basis of their expertise
leaves us with a paradox: How do designers communicate expertise to each other? How then, is it possible for
anyone to learn to become a designer?
To investigate how designers communicate their knowledge, I surveyed how design knowledge is communicated to students in introductory design books. The results of this informal investigation were quite surprising
to me. The books generally present copious selections of
graphic examples of exemplary designs, accompanied
by explanatory text. I was astonished by the difference
in effectiveness of content between the illustrations and
the text.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Most often, the text which is supposed to convey design
principles is vague, confusing, and incomplete. It is
highly unlikely the student can learn an adequate set of
design principles solely by reading the text and following its advice. In contrast, the visual examples are often
succinct and eloquent illustrations which provide essential experience the beginning design student must acquire. The student's ability to learn from the books is
crucially dependent upon his or her skill in abstracting
important lessons directly from the examples. The student applies the knowledge presented in the examples
by solving design problems in ways that are analogous
to the examples presented in the design books.
We still would like to venture into defining what we see
as functionalities/actions leading to a better design practice,
based on our characteristics, visual reasoning and EVRs
and BVRs. Those would be:
i)

informed navigation (this is the opposite of Vincent
Flanders
mystery
meat
navigation,
see
http://www.webpagesthatsuck.com/mysterymeatnavig
ation.html);

ii)

visual/spatial reasoning facilitation, i.e., what enables
visual/spatial reasoning is space (use of regions as entities) and layout (how they are used);

iii)

comprehension facilitation (based upon designing in
visual immediacy both as facilitator of spatial reasoning as in DML example in section 2.1 and into BVRs,
perhaps as visual associations, analogies, metaphors
or appropriately chosen text);

iv)

first impression improvement (based upon designing
in visual impetus);

v)

avoiding unintentional information mediation (using
the lessons form visual impedance and implicatures
like the ones exemplified in 2.3)

two systems (removing parts of the web page design that
stinks and detergent stain remover) as explained in section
3.1. The visual/special reasoning is such that it induces visual immediacy as exemplified also in section 2.1. Some of
the first impression improvement has been introduced
through the use of successful metaphor, at least our limited
sample of test subjects has gotten curios about what the
{{void}} can do and definitely wanted to explore the page
further. Furthermore, the simplicity of the idea has facilitated unintentional information mediation – the metaphor
works well, it is the central theme of the design and therefore impedance is reduced.

The second example is from http://www.visualthesaurus.
com/online/index.html:

3.4 Two Examples
As the first example we use http://www.wayofthevoid.
com/web_check.shtml. The page is reproduced here in order to facilitate discussion. First of all, EVRs are very simple, mostly rectangular, with few exceptions to break the
pattern. The layout is also simple, very few intersections,
and in the areas that are not informative. The BVRs are also
very straightforward: navigation bars, buttons, text, images.
Bars and buttons have a primarily interactive functionality.
The region above the main navigation bar has primarily
decorative function. The main text region is informative.
The informed interactivity is achieved by choosing informative text on buttons and bars. Visual reasoning is facilitated through visual metaphor: we see the image of the
detergent which should remove stains, the name of which is
void – thus enhancing the metaphor by implying disappearance of imperfections in the design via using {{void}}.
Text is informative as to what the transition is between the

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Our discussion of the second example will be limited to
the main point – visual reasoning. The other points are very
much like the ones in the previous example.
The site uses Thinkmap application. More about Thinkmap can be found at http://www.javaworld.com/javaworld/
jw-05-2001/jw-0504-iw-think.html (site last visited on 31.
3. 04). Thinkmap Studio provides three different Thinkmap
display types: spider, bubble, and chronology. A spider
Thinkmap displays data objects with radiating lines connected to related objects; a bubble Thinkmap displays objects as a formatted list. The chronology Thinkmap displays
objects on a timeline; using slider controls, the end user
controls what time period is displayed. In the example
above, we have the spider structure. The word module was
chosen, the other words are related to it in some way, where
the ones close in meaning such as component, element, and
constituent are grouped together at a single node. If one
chooses to click on one of these, it becomes the central
concept, with another set of words related to it. The spider
display, grouping, size of letters all contribute to facilitating
reasoning. Spatial reasoning is clearly in focus, visual immediacy is employed (designed in) through grouping and
layout more generally. There are no superfluous elements
that cause impedance. All the design characteristics are
used appropriately and the thesaurus truly provides for a
pleasurable learning.

4 Conclusion
Our hope is that the reader is convinced that the direction
of consciously developing the language for talking about
visual representations has a huge potential. We refer again
to our quotation in Section 3.3 by Lieberman and claim that
carefully developed visual language can greatly facilitate
both knowledge acquisition and communication abilities
regarding design/evaluation process.

5 References
[1] M.N. Akøk, “Defining Visual Immediacy, the Underused Gift of Diagrammatic Modeling Languages”,
(submitted to) Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 2003.
[2] M.N. Akkøk, “Designing Visual Immediacy into a
Diagrammatic Modeling Language”, Information Design Journal, 2003.
[3] M.N. Akkøk, Towards the Principles of Designing
Diagrammatic Modeling Languages: Some Visual,
Cognitive and Foundational Aspects, PhD Thesis in

Institute of Informatics, Mathematics and Natural Sciences Faculty, University of Oslo, Oslo, 2004.
[4] D. Collins, Designing Object-Oriented User Interfaces, Addison-Wesley Object Technology Series,
Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. (Benjamin/Cummings Pub.
Co., Inc.), 1994.
[5] Flowchart URL, Flow Chart site on Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) Server. 2003:
http://deming.eng.clemson.edu/pub/tutorials/qctools/fl
owm.htm.
[6] C. Gurr, and K. Tourlas, “On the Design and Use of
Diagrams in Software Engineering (AKA Towards the
Principled Design of SE Diagrams)”, in ICSE 2000,
the 22nd International Conference on Software Engineering, Limeric, Ireland: ACM Press, 2000, p. 509518.
[7] R.E. Horn, Visual Language: Global Communication
for the 21st Century, MacroVU, 1999.
[8] Joiner Associates Staff, Flowcharts: Plain & Simple:
Learning and Application Guide, Oriel Inc, 1995.
[9] D. Karabeg, “Ideograms in Polyscopic Modeling”, in
Proceedings of the Infovision 2000 conference, London, England, 2000.
[10] A. Karabeg, M.N. Akkøk, and E. Göktürk, “Towards
a Language for Talking About Visual and Spatial Reasoning”, submitted to IVLA 2004, Pilansberg Game
Park, South Africa, October 4-7, 2004.
[11] A. Karabeg, M.N. Akkøk, “Visual Representations and
the Web”, presented at IVLA 2003, Rhode Island, October 2003 and submitted to IVLA Selected Writings.
[12] J. Oberlander, “Grice for graphics: pragmatic implicature in network diagrams”, Information Design Journal, 1996, 8(2): p. 163-179.
[13] A. S. K. Pang, “Visual Representation and PostConstructivist History of Science”, Historical studies
in the physical and biological sciences, 1997, vol.27,
p. 139-171.
[14] M. Petre, “Why looking isn't always seeing: Readership skills and graphical programming”, Communications of the ACM, 1995, 38(6), p. 33-45.
[15] B. Shneiderman, Designing the User Interface, Third
edition, Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[16] J.F. Sowa, Knowledge Representation - Logical, Philosophical and Computational Foundations,
Brooks/Cole, 2000.
[17] D. Willis, “Effects of Using Enhancing Visual Elements in Web Design”, American Communication
Journal, 1999, 3(1).

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

