Web-Based Collaborative 3D Information Visualization Tool
Bianchi Serique Meiguins

Departamento de Informática
Centro de Exatas e Naturais
Universidade Federal do Pará,
C.P. 8619 CEP 66075-900 Belém - PA – Brasil.

Rosevaldo Dias de
Souza Júnior

Marcelo de Brito Garcia

Aruanda Simões
Gonçalves

Programa de Pós-Graduação - Departamento de Engenharia
Elétrica
Universidade Federal do Pará , C.P. 8619 - CEP 66075-900 Belém - PA – Brasil.

bianchi.serique@terra.com.br

ABSTRACT
The amount of data that must be collected for one to decide
on a course of action, nowadays and in any field, is nothing
if
extraordinary.
The
three-dimensional
graphic
representation of data is a powerful tool for its analysis. And
the possibility for interaction and browsing throughout these
data makes this analysis much more interesting and
productive. Nevertheless, one doesn't usually make a
decision alone, and most tools are of a single-user nature,
which jeopardizes the decision-making process, especially if
those involved are distant from each other, geographically
speaking. With a collaborative information visualization
environment, it is possible to debate over the same data and
change them if necessary, in real time, diminishing time and
avoiding mistakes in the decision-making process.
Therefore, this paper proposes a Web-based collaborative
tool for data visualization using Java, EAI (External
Authoring Interface) and VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling
Language).
Keywords - Collaborative Virtual Environments, Information
Visualization, Java, VRML, EAI.

1. INTRODUCTION
The use of information as differential competitive factor
in any area or field of study is not something new. For a very
long time, people have been trying to make custom made,
varied, grouped, compacted information available, so that
the decision-making process be more efficient, that is,

rosico@amazon.com.br
mbgarcia@amazon.com.br
aruanda@redeinformatica.com.br
diminishing the user perception time over the data.
Tridimensional environments may fulfill these expectations,
not only because they provide an extra dimension for data
presentation, but also because they allow a much greater
interaction level than bidimensional environments.
Many papers and books on visualization about techniques
and tools have been developed [1][2][3][4] [5], but their
most remarkable characteristic is that they allow only a
single user to interact with them. Researches have been
developed in order to adapt single-user visualization tools to
collaborative visualization tools [6]. Others have had
collaborative tools in mind since their conception [7][8][14],
but they're still in small numbers when they're compared to
their single-user counterparts. A Collaborative Virtual
Environment is a virtual space, or a group of spaces, where
people may interact with the environment and among
themselves, in real time, in order to accomplish a particular
task [9][10], that is, the making of decisions. Although there
are certain technology limitations, as bandwidth or lags, not
to take the Internet as an effective means of user interaction
in a shared virtual environment may be construed as a
mistake, once it's already a part in a lot of people's routine
today.
Thus, this paper is aimed at the development of a Webbased, collaborative visualization tool. This tool must permit
in an easy and interactive way, fast changes to the visualized
data, being the knowledge on database consultation
technologies, SQL for example, unnecessary. The
development of this tool was based in an architecture that
eased the construction of collaborative virtual environments
with the use of standard Internet protocols [13], and one of
the implementation examples that used this architecture is an
electric circuit assembling application [15]. The technologies

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

•

employed are free and standardized, like: JAVA, VRML
(Virtual Reality Modeling Language) and EAI (External
Authoring Interface), which allow communication between
Java and VRML, enhancing user interaction with the virtual
environment. The database is public domain, and is made up
of approximately 30 thousand entries, which is the data on
70 insulin dependent patients on diabetes control, including
data on blood glucose levels before and after meals, the use
of insulin, hypoglycemia symptoms, meals and physical
activities all in relation to time and date.
The organization of this paper involves, in a bird's eye
view, concepts on information visualization, collaborative
virtual environments, prototype implementation aspects, and
at last, some considerations over the project are presented.

•

•

2. INFORMATION VISUALIZATION
Information Visualization is the use of a computersupported, interactive visual representation of abstract data
in order to broaden cognition [2][3]. In other words, there's a
transformation from abstract data to a visual representation,
which is rapidly understood by the user. It may be used for a
range of tasks, like identification, correlation among several
figures, pattern searches, consultations, exploration and
communication. The data are typically quantitative or
categorized, but they can also include non-structured text,
different media types and structured objects. Information
Visualization may be used in the observation of: data
tendencies, gaps, maximums and minimums, data group
identification, great amount of data, etc.
With the constant evolution of applied technologies in
interactive interface construction, Virtual Reality (VR)
stands out. It provides better visualization, manipulation,
interaction and user perception in tridimensional (3D)
environments. This way, VR has a prosperous perspective
when utilized for Information Visualization [2]. VR is also a
significant alternative to the information visualization area
for it grants the growth of more appropriate metaphors in
data representation [1][2][3]. Some of them are: cone tree
and perspective wall [1][2][3].
It must also be pointed out that human-computer interface
studies are necessary to give more satisfaction to the users
and improve their productivity when they handle
information visualization tools and techniques.
Some of the techniques found in information visualization
environments are commented on as follows [2][3]:
• Zooming and Filtering: in order to visualize great
amounts of information, means to reduce the bulk of
information to be represented are required: filters;
identification of different levels of interest; reduction
in the number variables to be represented;
elimination and/or grouping of variables; use of
different symbols with detail levels varying
according to the scale factor and/or significance of
the object; data selection mechanisms.

3.

Brushing: it's an interactive technique frequently
used in identification. Typically, the visual object is
pointed at and several of its properties in its
immediate vicinity are exhibited, such as its name
and value.
Small multiple: it's an assembly of graphic objects
that works as a unit to express multiple attributes of
a data object, for example, using different colors and
shapes for the different attributes.
Dynamic queries: it's a technique that supplies the
user with the possibility of parameter changes in the
data visualization and, in real time, allows him to see
them. The necessity to employ this technique comes
from the possibility for the user to rapidly check a
database, in a number of different ways, therefore, he
will be able to have a better perception on anomalies,
patterns, predictions and other characteristics [4].

COLLABORATIVE VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS

One of definitions most currently used in seminars on this
subject is laid out as follows [9]: “A CVE is a computerbased, distributed virtual space, or a group of spaces. In it,
people can meet and interact with other people, with agents
or virtual objects. CVE may vary in their representational
richness, for example, 3D, 2.5D and 2D graphic spaces.”
CVE main characteristics are [9][10]:
• Shared Context is the ability that the users have to
be able to share the environment, objects and
information.
• Awareness of Other Individuals is “the
understanding that other people's activities provide a
context for one's own activity”, synchronously or
asynchronously.
• Negotiation and Communication allow, respectively,
the delegation of tasks to the users of a common
activity and the exchange of information among the
users on the development of those tasks.
• Points-of-view helps the users to make better
decisions about their activities and the activities of
other users.
The use of CVE for information visualization is a
particular case of distributed visualization. The most general
description for distributed visualization is “using one or
more computers to give one or more users an image of a data
set” [11]. There are many ways to do this, an overview is
given in Figure 1.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

exchange is carried out in text-mode. The users are identified
through a login.
The project has as objectives:
• Allow that more than one user examine the data
simultaneously;
• Do away with the geographic barrier when
necessary;
• Do away with the necessity of database access
technology prior knowledge;
• Facilitate the analysis of great amounts of data;
•
Facilitate user collaboration;
•
Etc.

4.2. Technological Aspects
Figure 1. Overview of distributed visualization [11].
The following types of distributed visualization are
common [11]:
• Parallel visualization.
• Visualization is often computationally very
expensive. The time needed for a visualization can
be reduced by using multiple CPU's.
• Collaborative visualization.
• It can be very useful to work with a team on a
visualization. This is facilitated by collaborative
visualization, where every team member is looking
at the same visualization, which is often steered by
one team member.
• Multiple source visualization.
• Visualization can combine results from multiple data
sets in one display.
• Network-oriented visualization.
• Network-oriented visualization enables the user to
create a visualization from data that resides on a
remote server.

For this specific project, the development of a prototype
has required the use of two languages: VRML (Virtual
Reality Modeling Language) [12], a language that is used for
the modeling of three-dimensional virtual environments
construction and JAVA [8][9]. In addition, It was necessary
the use of an interface called External Authoring Interface
[12], which allowed the communication between JAVA and
VRML and optimized the interaction between the user and
the virtual environment. Such system can also be performed
in a HTML page (Hypertext Markup Language).

4.3. Architecture.
In order to enhance the development, especially in the
collaboration part, a middleware was used. It handles all the
communication of a collaborative virtual reality application
[13]. Figure 2 shows a summary of the architecture and how
its main parts communicate.
USER11
USER

4. APPLICATION.

USER22
USER

APPLETJAVA
JAVA
APPLET

4.1. Description and Objectives.
We propose the creation of an environment where the
users are able to share their visions and exchange
information. Data visualization happens in a tridimensional
virtual environment, where the user may perform several
interactions, for example, zoom, rotations, dragging, etc.
Data details are shown upon the placing of the arrow of the
mouse over them. Besides, he will be able to customize his
data vision, choosing the attributes for both axis and the
values for their intervals. After the vision is built, data and/or
attributes may be added or removed. There are two visions,
one shared and another that is individual, where the user
may carry on the aforementioned interactions. Information

...

Shared3D
3D
Shared
Environment
Environment

USERNN
USER

Individual3D
3D
Individual
Environment
Environment
Data
Data
Base
Base

EAI

Server
Server

JDBC//ODBC
ODBC
JDBC

Figure 2. Architecture overview.

4.4. Prototype.
The prototype is characterized by three main parts: two of
them are three-dimensional virtual environments, one for the
shared vision, so that any modification done by a user will

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

be seen by everyone, and the other virtual environment is for
the individual vision, which can be different from the shared
vision. The third part is the applet that allows the user
consultation customization for both the shared environment
and the individual one, as well as the information exchange
among users. The three parts are embedded in a Web page
(Figure 3).

the shape, how this valor is represented, if it's a group of ten
(cone), hundred (cylinder), thousand (parallelepiped), etc.
This was created due to the immense valor difference among
the attributes. To learn the real valor of any attribute just
drag the mouse to the desired data (Figure 4).
Four main areas may be found (Figure 5). The first one
has to do with the visions laid out in the environment, data
frontal vision, aerial visions, etc. It's also possible to move
the plane to a non-specified position through the use of the
scrollbar in this area. The second area deals with the XZ
plane configuration, one may build DAY x TIME, MONTH
x DAY, YEAR x MONTH planes and may even use other
variations with weeks, fortnights, etc. Every new plane
inserted replaces the previous one. The third area is about
information exchange among the text-mode users. Not only
it holds the history of all information exchanges, but also
holds in store the history of all the actions performed by the
user, like data insertion and removal, the creation of planes,
etc. The fourth part deals with data removal or insertions that
are identified by the colors. The insertion of all the data in
the consultation comes by default.

Figure 3. Web-Based Collaborative 3D Information
Visualization Tool
The plane where the data are going to be input is found in
the three-dimensional virtual environment (Figure 4).

Figure 5. Applet Example.
The next figures, figure 6 and figure 7, show the instances
of the application for two users sharing the vision of data
and exchanging information.

Figure 4. Data in Virtual Environment
It is built according to the user's needs, including the
values for the x axis (time interval) and z axis (date interval).
Colors and different geometric shapes are employed to
represent the data, the colors provide the data attributes, and

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 6. User A using the application.

Figure 7. User B using the application.

5. FINAL REMARKS
This paper introduced a tool for the visualization of data in
three-dimensional environments. The prototype sought to
satisfy all the requirements for visualizations and for
collaborative virtual environments. It allowed the user to
have a variety of visualizations, as well as a variety of
interactions due to the three-dimensional virtual
environment. Nevertheless, the prototype, in this first
moment, limited itself to present the data in the most
orthodox way, and didn't add any novel metaphor. It must be
remarked that tests with users have not yet been carried out
due to the particularities of the database domain. At last, as a
strong favoring argument, the fast growth of the application
must be pointed out. This happened because of the
middleware proposed by Meiguins [13], which turned the
application developing time similar to a single-user one.

[6] Marchese, Francis T., Mercado, Jude, Pan, Yi. Adapting
Single-User Visualization Software for Collaborative Use.
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on
Information Visualization (IV’03), July 16 - 18, 2003 London,
England. p. 252.
[7] Brewer, Issac, MacEachren, Alan, Abdo, Hadi, Gundrun, Jack,
Otto, George. Collaborative Geographic Visualization:
Enabling Shared Understanding of Environmental processes,
IEEE Symposium on Information Vizualization 2000, p. 137
[8] Brewer I., MacEachren, A. M., Abdo, H., Gundrum, J., Otto
G., Collaborative Geographic Visualization: Enabling Shared
Understanding of Environmental Processes", IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization (InfoVis 2000), Salt Lake City,
UT, pp. 137-141, 2000.
[9] Churchill, E. F., Snowdon, D. N., Munro, A. J. Collaborative
Virtual Environments: Digital Places and Spaces for
Interaction. Springer. 2001.
[10] Singhal, S. Zyda, M. Network Virtual Environment - Design
and Implementation. Addison Wesley. 1999.
[11] Heijmans, Jan. An Introduction to Distributed Visualization,
http://cg.its.tudelft.nl/~jan/Paper/paper.html, Delft University
of Technology Faculty of Information Technology and
Systems. February, 2002.
[12] Roehl. B.; et al. Late Night VRML 2.0 with Java. ZD Press.
Emeryville, California. 1997.
[13] Meiguins, Bianchi S., Guedes, Luis A., Araújo, Marcos V.,
Garcia, Marcelo B., Souza, Rosevaldo D. A Proposal for
Collaborative Virtual Environments Architecture Using
Internet Patterns. Proceedings of IASTED International
Conference on Software Engineering (SE 2004). Innsbruck,
Austria. 2004.
[14] Gloria Mark, Keri Carpenter, Alfred Kobsa. A Model of
Synchronous Collaborative Information Visualization.
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on
Information Visualization (IV’03), pp. 373, 2003.
[15] B.S. Meiguins, B.S. Meiguins, M. de Brito Garcia, R.D. de
Souza, Jr., and L.A. Guedes. Collaborative Virtual Lab for
Electronic Experience. Proceedings of 3rd IASTED
International Conference on WEB-BASED EDUCATION
(WBE 2004). Innsbruck, Austria. February 2004.

6. REFERENCES.
[1] Herman, Ivan, Melançon, Guy, Marshall, M. Scott. Graph
Visualization and Navigation in Information Visualization: A
Survey. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, Vol. 6, Nº. 1, January-March 2000.
[2] Chen, Chomei. Information Visualization and Virtual
Environments, Springer, 1999.
[3] Spence, Robert. Information Visualization. Addison-Wesley.
2001.
[4] Shneiderman, B., Dynamic queries for visual information
seeking, IEEE Software 11, 6 (1994), 70-77.
[5] Kobsa, Alfred. An Empirical Comparison of Three
Commercial Information Visualization Systems. Proceedings
of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001
(INFOVIS’01), p. 123.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

