The MathSigner: an Interactive Learning Tool for American Sign Language
K-3 Mathematics
Nicoletta Adamo-Villani, John Doublestein, Zachary Martin
Department of Computer Graphics Technology, Purdue University, USA
{nvillani@tech.purdue.edu, jdoubles@purdue.edu, martinzi@purdue.edu}
Abstract
We present a new highly interactive program to
teach American Sign Language (ASL) for K-3
mathematics by 3D animation. We aim at increasing: (1)
the opportunity for deaf children to learn arithmetic via
interactive media; (2) the effectiveness of (hearing)
parents in teaching arithmetic to their deaf children; (3)
the effectiveness of ASL K-8 mathematics teachers.
Using state-of-the-art 3D computer animation
technology we have created a learning tool to be used
for K-8 classroom and home learning, and for closed
captioning in interactive media and internet.

1. Introduction
Research demonstrates that individuals who are
deaf are significantly underrepresented in the fields of
science and engineering [1]. A contributing factor to this
disparity is the difficulty deaf children have acquiring
mathematics concepts early in life.
Deaf education, and specifically math/science
education, is a US national problem [2]. Our program
addresses the need to increase the abilities of deaf
children in mathematics with a unique approach (3D
animated signing) that significantly improves on the state
of the art (SigningAvatar™ by Vcom3d)[3] by creating
fluid 3D signers that are emotionally appealing to deaf
learners. The software is designed to engage deaf
learners and their parents in "hands-on, minds-on"
experiences, leading to deeper understanding of
fundamental ideas in accordance with current
educational guidelines. It paves the way for improved
science/math teaching in public schools, possibly
affecting the whole infrastructure of interpreted teaching
by shifting to interactive media-based instruction. No
other ASL-based program for K-8 mathematics currently
exists.

2. Methods
The program represents math signs selected
among those developed at the National Technical
Institute for the Deaf (NTID-USA), the state of the art in
ASL math. The representations are realized via
Interactive 3D Computer Animation for its advantages
over other media (e.g., video) which are: (1) control over

orientation, location, zoom, and speed of the 3D
animated signer; (2) Control over quality of image (e.g.
realistic or fantasy, characters can be easily
interchanged; (3) Programmability for real-time text to
ASL conversion; generation of random drills; games and
other interactivities; (4) Smooth linking of signs (unlike
the choppiness of combining video clips); (5)Very low
bandwidth--only a few percent of the bandwidth required
by video.
The platform for the project is based on the
highest end in 3D interactive animation. It uses Maya 5.0
(Alias) for character modeling, texturing and rigging,
Filmbox and Motion Builder (Kaydara) for motion
capture and motion cleanup, and Macromedia Director
MX 3D Shockwave Studio for development of interactive
content and internet delivery.

3. Unique and innovative aspects of the
project
The current state of the art in computerized
animation applied to American Sign Language is
represented by the SigningAvatar™ by Vcom3D.
SigningAvatar™ software uses 3D avatars to
communicate in sign language and has a vocabulary of
over 3500 English words / concepts. The fundamental
value of this pioneering technology lies in the fact that
by using computerized animation, it provides a low-cost,
interactive means for adding sign language to media.
Besides Vcom3D, DePaul University is
engaged in computerized animation for the Deaf [4]. De
Paul University researchers have been the first to point
out the importance of the avatar appearance for the user
[5] [6].
We believe that we have significantly improved
on the current state of the art in terms of appearance of
the signers and quality of the signing motion with
consequent impact on deaf children willingness to
engage with the program and therefore learn.
Innovation in appearance of the signers. Using
state-of-the-art modeling and rigging techniques we have
modeled three 3D signers (realistic and fantasy) as
seamless polygonal models. This is a major improvement

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

on the appearance of the avatars currently used in
interactive
applications
for
the
Deaf
(i.e.,
SigningAvatar™). Such signing avatars are segmented or
partially segmented models therefore they do not deform
realistically as they move. The use of continuous
polygonal surfaces, skinned to a skeletal deformation
system that closely resembles the structure of a real
human skeleton, has allowed us to represent organic
deformations of the skin during motion.
In order to achieve portability to Macromedia
Director and high speed of response in a web deliverable
environment, we have kept the polygon count low but we
have utilized advanced mesh optimization techniques to
retain surface detail in areas where it is needed the most:
the hands, the face, and the areas that bend and twist
(i.e., elbows, shoulders, wrists, waist), see figure 1. With
such distribution of detail we were able to represent
realistic hand configurations and facial articulations.

crucial to conveying the realism and structure of the
signed representation. Motion capture technology has
allowed us to produce realistic representations of each
individual sign. A new method of programmable realtime blending of the animation segments [8] has
provided us with an efficient technique of creating fluid
in-between movements between words being signed.

4. The MathSigner
The MathSigner contains two programs:
program (1) is aimed at deaf children and program (2) is
aimed at hearing parents. Each program has two modes
of operation: (1) a learning mode and (2) a practice/drill
mode.

4.1. The Interface
Each screen presents a consistent layout and visual
style. The screen layout consists of two frames: the
frame on the left is used to select the grade and/or the
type of activity. The frame on the right is occupied by
the 3D signer (see figure 1). The upper area of the frame
on the left (in green) is used to give textual feedback on
the current activity, the bottom area contains the
navigational buttons. The frame on the right contains a
white text box, right below the signer, used to show the
answer (in mathematical symbols). Below the answer
box there is a camera icon and a slider represented by an
arrow. The slider is used to control the speed of signing,
the camera button opens a pop-up menu used to zoom
in/out on the 3D signer, change the point of view and pan
to the left or to the right within the 3D signer window.

4.2. The interactive content

Figure 1
To represent natural facial expressions we have
used a new parameterized facial model [7] which makes
use of a 26-parameter set to encode (in real-time) any
significant facial expression with high level of accuracy
and realism. We note that all current 3D signing avatars
convey fairly crude approximations of facial expressions.

We have taken the mathematics vocabulary from the
list of mathematics signs developed by [9] and we have
divided the list in 3 groups in approximately ascending
order of abstraction level corresponding to the grades (K1 to 3). In program (1), for each topic we have designed
a series of interactive activities, based on [10], to help
the child understand the concepts and test her skills.
Every mathematical concept is signed by the 3D
character of choice (the fantasy character is the only one
currently active) and also represented in mathematical
symbols.

Innovation in quality of the signing motion.
The signs for science/mathematics terminology have
been performed by a non-hearing signer and captured
with a state-of-the-art optical motion capture suit and a
pair of 18-sensor Metamotion Cybergloves. Innovative
animation techniques (i.e., constraints and layered nondestructive keyframes) have been used to fine tune the
recorded motion and avoid interpenetration of body
parts.
Realistic appearance of the signs (in terms of
motion, hand shape, and orientation) and natural inbetween movements (movement epenthesis) are both

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 2

For instance, in K-1 learning mode, the child practices
the association between the concept of the number, the
mathematical symbol, and the signed representation.
Using an on-screen iconic representation of the number
concept, the child selects which number (zero to one
thousand) should appear in mathematical symbol(s) and
signed. Figure 2 shows a screen shot of the program. The
three rows of “jewels” in the middle of the left frame are
conceptual representations of the numbers 1 to 1000.
In program (2) (aimed at hearing parents of deaf
children), in learning mode, the user selects a math
concept and the 3D signer signs it. The mathematical
signs can be sorted alphabetically, by category (i.e.,
measure, money, numbers etc) or by grade (see figure 3).
In practice/drill mode the user chooses which category of
math signs to be tested on. The signer signs a
mathematical concept and the program outputs 4 possible
answers. After the user chooses the answer, the 3D
signer gives positive or negative feedback and signs the
answer. In addition, the user can type any word in the
Fingerspelling text box and, by pressing the “Sign it”
button, have the signer fingerspell it.

frame of the sign (see figure 4 in the center). The first
end position (E1) has the signer with the hand(s) in front
of his chest, last frame of the sign, the second end
position (E2) has the signer with the hand(s) in the
neutral pose. For example, when the user asks the avatar
to sign the equation “3 + 5 = 8”, the program uses (S1)
and (E1) for the sign of number 3; (S2) and (E1) for the
signs of +, 5 and =; and (S2) and (E2) for the sign of
number 8.

Figure 4
The technique described above has allowed us, not
only to create smooth transitions between signs, but also
to maintain a consistent signing area throughout the
signing motion.

5. Conclusions
This project addresses the need of increasing the
effectiveness of (hearing) parents in teaching
mathematics to their deaf children and the opportunity of
deaf children to learn arithmetic via interactive media.
We have focused on 3D animation as the technology of
choice for its many advantages over other media.
Figure 3

4.3 The blending of the signs
As mentioned earlier, interactivity and smoothness
of motion have been realized via programmable blending
of the animation clips. In order to blend the animation
segments relative to different signs, each individual sign
has been captured so that it starts and ends with the
signer’s hand(s) in the neutral position (see figure 4 on
the far left and far right). The signs have been organized
in groups (i.e., letters, numbers, arithmetic processes,
etc.) and each group of signs has been saved as a
separate file. We have created an XML file which stores
information about each animated sign. The XML entry
for each sign contains the group name, sign name, start
and end times, grade level, and play rate. Whenever the
avatar is asked to sign a particular math concept, the
program finds the sign’s entry, and retrieves the
corresponding animated segment with its start and end
times. Each sign has two start and two end positions.
The first start position (S1) has the signer with the
hand(s) in the neutral pose, the second start position (S2)
has the signer with the hand(s) in front of his chest, first

The key challenge of this research has been the
realization of a clear and natural gesture language by
computer animation. So far 3D animation technology
applied to the education of the Deaf has been unable to
represent sign language with fluidity and realism so as to
be self-image enhancing rather than emotionally
inhibiting. By using the methods and technologies
described above we have been able to create believable
and fluid 3D signers emotionally engaging to deaf
children.

6. Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the School of
Technology at Purdue University (I3 grant - Proposal
#00006585 - http://www.tech.purdue.edu/cgt/I3/), by the
Envision Center for Data Perceptualization and by gh,
LLC Inc., IN. We thank Professor Ronnie Wilbur from
the Department of Audiology and Speech Sciences at
Purdue University for her valuable contributions to the
project. We also thank Don Herring for performing the
signs and for his continuous help and feedback on the
project. In addition, we would like to thank all the
signers who have tested the program extensively and

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Sabrina Wander from Pierce Downer Elementary School,
IL, for her contribution to the development of the
interactive mathematical content

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

Burgstahler, S. (1994). "Increasing the Representation of
People with Disabilities in Science." Journal of
Information Technology and Disability 24(4).
Preparing our children: Math and science education in
the national interest (1999). Washington, DC, National
Science Foundation, National Science Task Force on
Mathematics and Science Achievement
Vcom3D (2000).. SigningAvatar. [On-line]. Available:
http://www.signingavatar.com/,
De Paul University American Sign Language Project.
[On-line].Available:
http://asl.cs.depaul.edu/project_info.html
Davidson, M. J., K. Alkoby, E. Sedgwick, , R., , J.
Christopher, B. Craft, J. Furst, D. Hinkle, B. Konie, G.
Lancaster, K. Luecking, A. Morris, J. McDonald, N.
Tomuro, J. Toro and R. Wolfe (2001). “Improved Hand
Animation for American Sign Language”. Technology
and Persons with Disabilities Conference, Los Angeles,
CA, California State University at Northridge.

[6]

Sedgwick, E., K. Alkoby, M. J. Davidson, R. Carter, J.
Christopher, B. Craft, J. Furst, D. Hinkle, B. Konie, G.
Lancaster, S. Luecking, A. Morris, J. McDonald, N.
Tomuro, J. Toro ,Wolfe, R. (2001). “Toward the
effective animation of American Sign Language”. 9th
International Conference in Central Europe on Computer
Graphics, Visualization and Interactive Digital Media,
Plzen, Czech Republic.
[7] Adamo-Villani, N., Beni, G. (2004). “Keyboard
Encoding of Facial Expressions”. Proc. of IV04-HCI
Symposium,. London.
[8] Adamo-Villani, N., Doublestein, J., Martin, Z. (2004).
“Sign Language for K-8 Mathematics by 3D Interactive
Animation”. Journal of Educational Technology
Systems. (in press)
[9] Caccamise, F. and H. Lang (1996). “Signs for Science
and Mathematics: A Resource Book for Teachers and
Students”. Rochester, NY, National Technical Institute
for the Deaf, RIT
[10] Everyday Mathematics (2001).The University of
Chicago School Mathematics Project. McGraw-Hill.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

