3D Visualization of Text Collections: An Experimental Study to Assess the
Usefulness of 3D
Cesar Perez, Angelica de Antonio
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid - Spain
{cperezv@computer.org, angelica@fi.upm.es }
Abstract

•

Previous studies about the use of 3D models for
information search have not shown a clear advantage
over 2D or textual user interfaces.
This paper describes an experimental study focused
on initial overview and information browsing tasks, that
we consider to be more adequate to take advantage of 3D
exploration. To this end, a 3D Explorer prototype was
developed and tested by experimental subjects.
The 3D usability evaluation provided interesting
design concepts and feedback, while the statistical
evaluation of results showed significant speed advantages
over a more classic interface, and a good potential for
future improvements.

•

•

Keywords- Information visualization, exploration,
3D, usability, experimental study.

Higher abstraction level tasks, such as to analyse
and understand the topic structure in a new
document corpus, will require support of more
complex tools. The expressive power of a 3D
interface for displaying relationship and structure
may offset the performance penalty for detail
searches.
The high dispersion of the empirical results from
similar studies proves that not only the
dimensionality, but also other factors have a
significant impact on the efficiency as measured
during experimental tests.
Comparison studies of 3D tools show widely
varying levels of performance [10]. The design
concepts both for visualization and user
interaction have an important influence on the
experimental results.

2. Experimental tools
1. Introduction
Three-dimensional user interfaces attract substantial
interest as a possible way to improve the user's ability to
quickly explore large amounts of information, and to
understand its structure.
Several previous studies tried to experimentally
assess the effectiveness of 3D user interfaces compared
with more classic (2D or textual) versions [3][7][9]. In
broad terms, 3D interfaces were appealing to the user and
had better memorability, but were less efficient for detail
level tasks like finding a specific document in a collection.
A frequent interpretation is that the more efficient use of
the display estate by the textual and 2D tools versus the
display clutter and higher perceptual load associated with
the 3D interface create a performance advantage for 2D
and text search tasks in document collections.
However, this result may not be applicable under
specific circumstances:

Our study intends to analyse the 3D visualization
efficiency on promising activities for which it seems to be
best suited; for instance, on browsing tasks to get a global
overview of a previously unknown document collection.
This frequent activity illustrates the potential of analysis
algorithms combined with 3D visualization to improve the
overall efficiency of the information exploration.
To this end, we developed two versions of an
experimental document collection explorer: one of them
has only a text-based interface, while the other includes in
addition a 3D graphic window displaying a spatial model
of the collection.

2.1. Spatialization algorithms
The representation of a textual document collection
by a 3D model requires a spatialization process, usually
performed in two steps: The analysis transforms

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

documents into multi-dimensional vectors, while the
projection maps them onto the 3D space.
Several candidate spatialization algorithms were
analysed in a previous study, looking for those that best
translate the topic classification of documents, as
perceived by human experts, into spatial clusters. This
initial empirical evaluation is described in detail in Perez
and de Antonio (2003) [5] [6].
According to its results, the combination of the Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA) and Cluster Membership
projection brings the best results in terms of fidelity to the
original information structure and process efficiency.
LSA is a classic information retrieval algorithm
described in Berry et al (1995) [1]. A matrix of terms by
documents, containing the frequencies of all terms in each
document, is constructed to represent the collection. The
matrix is decomposed using Singular Value
Decomposition, to derive the principal factors and reduce
dimensionality. As a result, each document is represented
as a multi-dimensional vector.
The Cluster Membership is our proposed projection
method [6]. The cluster analysis, applied to the documents
multi-dimensional vectors, assigns to each document i a
non-negative fractional membership mij to each cluster j,
such that the sum of a document's memberships to all
clusters must be 1.
We need to choose an axis vector bj to represent each
topic in the spatial model, in such a way that the vectors
are easily differentiated visually. In our tool, we have
chosen unit length vectors along the positive and negative
orthogonal semi-axes (+x, +y, +z, -x, -y, -z) for the six
first topics.
In case there are more than six topics, additional

vectors obtained as mean of two semi-axes vectors will
also be used.
The projection algorithm calculates the document
positions yi as linear combinations of the axis vectors bj,
using the cluster memberships mij as coefficients:

[y i ] = [mij ][. b j ]

2.2. 3D Explorer
The 3D Explorer prototype uses LSA and Cluster
Membership algorithms to place documents in a spatial
model. Each topic is represented in it by a line along its
corresponding axis vector and by a list of keywords, while
the documents are displayed as small cubes located at its
projected positions yi.
The 3D Explorer main window displays the spatial
organisation of documents and topics (as shown in Figure
1); a colour code helps to identify the documents
belonging to different topic clusters. The user can rotate
the model or navigate through it, open any document, and
obtain additional details on demand. Optionally, a
coordinated auxiliary text window that lists the structure
of topics, documents, keywords and queries can be
displayed. Topics can be expanded to show the related
documents and queries in alphabetical order, while
documents can be expanded to show its keywords. This
provides an alternative way to access file lists that should
be more effective in terms of reduced clutter and display
space.

Figure 1 3D Explorer windows

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

The prototype allows not only the generation of a
static model, but also some interactive control of the
clustering, spatialization and visualization parameters as
follows:
• User-defined queries may be created and
displayed on the 3D model, following an analysis
and projection, and are located close to the
related topics and documents.
• The user can interactively change and recalculate
the clustering criteria, to adapt the structure
shown to her interests and information needs: a
document or a query may be marked as topic
reference, and will be forced to become a cluster
centroid during the recalculation; topics and
documents may be deactivated, and two topics
may be combined, or a topic may be split in two.
All manipulation of topics and documents can be
performed in the same manner in any of the graphic or
text windows. The situation of the model at a given point
in time can be saved as a view that can later be reloaded
for future reference, or to allow the user to go back to a
previous exploration stage.

2.3. Tree Explorer
As an experimental control, we developed the Tree
Explorer (Figure 2), an alternative tool with the same
functionality that displays the information only in textual
form, to measure the contribution of the 3D view to the
understanding of the information.

Figure 2 The Tree Explorer
The user can perform basically the same actions as
with the 3D Explorer, and will receive information about
clusters, documents and queries, but no details about the

degree of membership, which can only be displayed in
graphical form.
The Tree Explorer is a textual (non-graphic) tool.
However, conceptually it uses two dimensions: the
ordered lists of items, and the depth of the tree containing
clusters, documents or queries, and keywords. It is quite
similar to the most successful classical user interfaces to
explore textual collections: the file explorer found in most
windowing systems (representing trees of folders and
documents), and the list of links sorted by relevance,
generated by search engines. Both are non-graphical, and
conceptually use two and one dimensions, respectively.
The comparison of the 3D explorer and a graphical
bi-dimensional representation with equivalent possibilities
is an open issue that will be addressed in future works.

2.4. Usability features
The effects of the visualization and interaction design
are difficult to foresee, and only the usability evaluation
will provide useful criteria on the best practices. This has
been described by Shneiderman as "inventing new 3D
exploration tools" [8].
The 3D Explorer was used by the authors to
informally evaluate its usability features, and the
techniques that may be applied by the user to find relevant
information. The information obtained was verified and
completed during a later controlled experimental study
described below using the logged activities, the comments
made by the subjects, and the observation of their play
during the experiments.
Even after a thorough analysis of the document
collections during the previous empirical evaluation, the
use of the 3D Explorer provided some additional insight
about its characteristics.
The cluster membership projection has some
interesting graphical properties:
• Documents closely related with one single topic
are located near the end of the axis, whose tip is
the cluster centroid.
• Documents that are closely related to two topics
are located near the plane defined by both axes.
• Outliers that are not clearly related with any topic
lie near the centre of the axes.
As a corollary, some properties of the topics are:
• Pairs of topics closely related are linked by a
bridge of documents with a high membership to
both.
• Clearly defined topics show many documents
near the tip of the axis (with membership close to
one), while few documents populate the farthest
portion of sparse clusters' axes.
Figure 3 illustrates the application of those properties
to a corpus composed by three classic collections
originally used to test the SMART [4] Information

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Retrieval system: CISI (1460 abstracts about digital
libraries), CRANFIELD (1398 aeronautical engineering
abstracts) and MEDLINE (1033 abstracts from medical
journals), organised in six clusters.

Figure 3 Qualitative analysis
The 3D model shows bridged pairs of topics for CISI
(R1 and T2, right) and CRANFIELD (T3 and T4, up),
while MEDLINE is in fact divided in two nearly
independent topics: a sparse cluster on the left, labelled
"T5 patients children treatment group child", and a well
defined topic (down) with keywords "T6 cells cell marrow
lymphocytes dna".

Querying is a well-established technique for finding
relevant documents related to a topic described by terms.
Most search engines use index-based queries, which
retrieve those documents containing some or all of the
terms in the query.
On the other hand, a query in 3D Explorer is
projected on the spatial model (white sphere in Figure 4)
as a document made of the same terms. It is easy to
associate with topics and documents, but also imposes
some limitations, when compared with index-based
queries: the geometric position of the query does not
depend on the terms order; there is no possibility to look
for a complete phrase, and the projection may introduce
misleading artefacts in the geometry of the model. An
open issue for the future is a sound combination of indexand latent semantics-based queries, to combine the best of
both worlds.
The ability of deactivating topics or documents and
recalculating with a different number of clusters can be
used to implement a Scatter/Gather process, as described
in [2]. In this case, the user iteratively selects (gathers)
relevant information by deactivating all topics known not
to be interesting, and scatters it by recalculating with a
higher number of topics, progressively refining the
information structure.

Figure 5 Visual Discovery

Figure 4 Queries, documents and topics

The simplest technique that may be used to find
information is the visual inspection of the model, leading
to the discovery of interesting non-obvious patterns in a
way that is similar to the visual data mining tools.For
instance, in Figure 5 a cluster (up) is mainly populated
with documents whose author is C. Chen. Within it, a

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

document from K. Börner is found; if we open the
document, we will find out that C. Chen is also a coauthor, showing a relationship that may open new ways to
further explore the topic.
Another potential way to find relevant information is
to choose interesting documents or queries, and to mark
them as topic references, forcing the cluster algorithm to
use those as topic centroids. This technique provides
strong user relevance feedback, and allows a very direct
manipulation of the clustering analysis by the user.

3. Empirical study
A controlled experiment was performed with
independent subjects, using the 3D and Tree Explorers to
look for information within the same document sets.
The study has been designed to minimise the impact
of external factors, other than the dimensionality. Those
that most likely would influence the experimental results
are: the algorithms used to create a spatial model from the
textual collection, users learning effects, document
collection peculiarities, individual differences, and design
of the 3D visualization and user interaction.
The experimental plan will take into account the
effects of the learning curve, document collection
complexity and user profile differences.

3.1. Experimental design
We used for this study three document collections
selected from the six corpora we used for the initial
algorithm evaluation [5]:
• 78 scientific papers, taken from the reference
bibliography of a Ph.D. dissertation, manually
classified in six topics.
• 400 documents from the Microsoft Knowledge
Base, belonging to eight different product
threads.
• 3891 abstracts from the collections CISI,
MEDLINE and CRANFIELD, already described.
The selected collections cover a wide range of
situations, concerning the number of documents, total
number of different terms, and number and structure of
topics.
For each collection, we defined five tasks requiring
the user to select at least a given number of documents
related to a specific subject, described by phrases; e.g.
"Select at least five documents related to boundary layer,
heat transfer and laminar flow". All user actions, time to
complete tasks and correctness of the selected documents
were logged by the tools.
Twelve subjects were requested to perform two
experiments each, using the 3D and the Tree Explorers
with different collections. A complete factorial design was
used, with 2 explorers (the 3D Explorer and the Tree

Explorer) x 6 combinations of collections x 2 possible
sequential orders of explorers, requiring 24 experiments,
with a total of 120 tasks. Nine subjects were voluntary
undergraduate or graduate Computer Science students,
and three were other (non-CS) professionals that normally
use computers daily for their work.
The users were asked to fill-in a questionnaire before
taking part in the experiment, describing their selfassessed experience with computers, spatial ability,
preference to try new programs and experience in
information search.
The subjects had a tool familiarisation session of 25
minutes in average and then -usually one or two days
later- performed the experiments with both explorers in
sequence. They were told to find the most promising
documents in relation to the given tasks, and that both the
speed and precision of results would be taken into
account.
The total and net (excluding cluster recalculation and
3D model generation) times to perform each task were
recorded. Average recalculation times for the three
collections were 0.7, 1.2 and 72 seconds on a 750 MHz
computer with 256 MB of RAM. The analyses for total
and net times showed similar trends; thus, net times were
preferred, to limit the influence of the processing power
and algorithm implementation on the results.
A post-experiment questionnaire evaluated the
subject rating of the 3D tool as appealing, disorienting,
useful or requiring more learning time. The questionnaires
are based on a 5-point Likert scale, where the subjects
were required to choose a position for each statement in
the questionnaire from five possibilities ranging from
'Strongly disagree' to 'Strongly agree'.

3.2. Statistical analysis
In total, 116 tasks were successfully measured, after
discarding those that could not be completed and logged
for prototype problems or subject errors.
The results measured from all tasks were subject to
one- and two-way Analysis of Variance with a confidence
level of 95% (p=0.05), to identify the factors that
significantly influence the speed and precision of the
information exploration. Individual task results were
divided by the mean of the same task across all
experiments with both explorers, to allow normalised
comparisons of different tasks, in adimensional units
(Tables 1 and 2).
Measure
Net Time/task
Net T/Correct doc.
Correct docs./task
Correct docs. ratio

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

3D
0.904
0.882
1.053
1.023

Text
1.096
1.118
0.947
0.978

F (1,114)
4.332
4.363
2.091
1.201

p
0.040
0.039
0.151
0.275

Table 1 Results and Analysis of Variance

As shown in Table 1, net times and the time required
per correctly retrieved document were significantly faster
for 3D Explorer experimental tasks. The precision
measured by the number of correct documents per task,
and the fraction of correct documents from the total of
documents selected, was slightly better for 3D Explorer,
but not significantly so.
The most important block factor was the learning
effect, measured by the difference in results of the tools
during the first or the second user session. Measured times
were shorter on the second session, while the precision
measures were not significantly different (Table 2).
Measure
Net Time/task
Net T/Correct doc.
Correct docs./task
Correct docs. ratio

1st Sess.
1.107
1.092
1.025
1.000

2nd Sess.
0.844
0.856
0.961
1.006

F (1,106)
8.190
4.335
0.846
0.017

p
0.005
0.040
0.360
0.898

Table 2 Learning effects
The influence of the individual subject speed
approaches significance. The normalised time measures
(means for all tasks from each subject) ranged between
0.4 and 1.4; the analysis of variance gives F(11, 23) =
2.639, and p=0.055. On the other hand, the influence on
the precision measures, e.g. correct documents ratio, was
not significant, giving F(11,23)=1.011, p=0.489.
For all measures, the Pearson's correlation r between
users results and questionnaire answers was analysed as a
two-tailed Student's t test, to identify possible reasons for
differences between users.
The only significant correlations found were:
• Users that said they like to try new programs
were faster with both explorer tools (r=0.548,
p=0.052), and showed a higher learning effect
(2.56 versus 1.73). The likely reason is a steeper
learning curve for subjects more accustomed to
learn how to use new software products.
• Users that found the 3D explorer useful and
practical were faster when using it (r=0.586,
p=0.035). The subjects that find quickly the
information they are looking for are immediately
rewarded with a feeling of accomplishment that
may increase the perception of tool usefulness.
The 3D Explorer log was reviewed, to find user
actions that can be performed on the graphical window as
well as on the textual. On average, the subjects used the
graphical window 93% of the times, for only 7% the
textual, showing that they interpret the 3D model as the
main reference for the user interaction.
The use of exploration techniques logged during the
controlled study was not sufficient to extract statistically
significant information, but the initial indications seem to
point out that:
• Most users prefer visual inspection, as the easiest
technique.

•

•

The use of documents or queries as topic
references is likely to be the fastest way to find a
few relevant documents with good precision, i.e.
fraction of the retrieved documents that are
actually relevant.
Scatter/Gather provides a good coverage, or
fraction of relevant documents in the collection
that are actually retrieved; and it is the best
procedure to find as many relevant documents as
possible.

4. Discussion and conclusions
The results of the experimental study are very
promising, as they show a significant advantage in time
for the three-dimensional version of the explorer. In fact,
it was faster for 11 out of the 12 experimental subjects,
despite individual differences and the learning effect,
which was in favour of the Tree Explorer in six cases.
In addition, the importance of the learning factor
suggests that there are still more efficiency improvements
to be expected from the users, if allowed to spend more
time getting experience with a three-dimensional tool.
On the other hand, there are virtually no advantages
in the precision of the chosen documents for the 3D over
the Tree Explorer; this is probably related to the more
immediate feedback perceived by the user about the speed
than about the precision of the results.
While the 3D visualization has performed fairly, the
user interaction as implemented in the 3D Explorer is less
mature, as the main design concern has been to include
enough flexibility to allow the exploration of a wide range
of possibilities.
A clear conclusion is that most actions that the user
can currently perform with the 3D Explorer are too
directly related with the spatialization details (e.g. choose
a document as a cluster centroid), and require some
knowledge about the internals of the tool and the
algorithms. A better exploration tool should be based on
higher-level options, functionally oriented towards an
information exploration goal, and automatically
combining a number of internal algorithm actions when
necessary.

5. Future work
In order to get a more realistic assessment for the
potential of the 3D Explorer, longer-term experimental
studies will be necessary, allowing enough time for the
users to develop experience until the learning curve
stabilizes near its final level.
The analysis algorithm based on the pure vector
space model suffers from some limitations; e.g. the order
of the words in a document is not significant, and it gets
confused by polysemic words (i.e. words with more than

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

one meaning). Its use as the basis for the spatialization
process has delivered good visualization results, but also
some negative aspects like the limitations in query
functionality. Further progress probably will require the
integration of additional techniques, like term indexing, or
the application of more complex algorithms, such as those
related with data mining.
The prototype fulfilled an important role, as a test bed
to evaluate practical guidelines for the design of the
human-computer interaction in the information
exploration process. However, 3D Explorer in its current
shape is not mature enough to warrant the time and
resources required by such studies.
The intended way ahead is to continue the
development and evaluation of additional capabilities,
interaction concepts and algorithms on this prototype,
while this is feasible. After this phase, a decision will be
made about the possibility of more extensive user testing
for longer periods.

References
[1]

[2]

Berry, M.W., Dumais, S.T., O'Brien, G.W. Using Linear
Algebra for Intelligent Information Retrieval. SIAM
Review, 37. 573-595. 1995.
Cutting, D.R., Karger, D.R., Pedersen, J.O., Tukey, J.W.
Scatter/Gather: A Cluster-Based Approach to Browsing
Large Document Collections. In Proceedings of SIGIR'92.
ACM Press, 318-329. June 1992.

[3]

Cockburn, A., McKenzie, B. 3D or not 3D? Evaluating the
Effect of the Third Dimension in a Document
Management System. In Proceedings of Human Factors
in Computer Systems CHI'01. ACM Press, 434-441. April
2001.
[4] Lesk, M., Harman, D., Fox, E.A., Wu, H., Buckley, C.
The SMART lab report. ACM SIGIR Forum, Vol.31-1, 222. Spring 1997.
[5] Perez, C., de Antonio, A. Spatialization Algorithms for
Text Document Set Visualisation. Technical Report CP03-01. URL: http://cesarperez.net/Preprint. April 2003.
[6] Perez, C., de Antonio, A. An Experimental Evaluation of
Spatialization Algorithms for Visualising Text Corpora. In
Proceedings of Knowledge Management I-KNOW'03.
J.UCS, 103-108. July 2003.
[7] Sebrechts, M.M., Vasilakis, J., Miller, M.S., Cugini, J.V.,
Laskowski, S.J. Visualization of Search Results: A
Comparative Evaluation of Text, 2D and 3D Interfaces. In
Proceedings of SIGIR'99. ACM Press, 3-10. August 1999.
[8] Shneiderman, B. Inventing Discovery Tools: Combining
Information Visualization with Data Mining. Information
Visualization, Vol.1-1, 5-12. 2002.
[9] Tavanti, M., Lind, M. 2D vs 3D, Implications on Spatial
Memory. In Proceedings of Information Visualization
INFOVIS'01. IEEE. 139-148. October 2001.
[10] Wiss, U., Carr, D. An Empirical Study of Task Support in
3D Information Visualizations. In Proceedings of
Information Visualization IV'99. IEEE, 392-399. July
1999.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

