A Usability Framework for the Design and Evaluation of an Exploratory
Geovisualization Environment
Etien L. Koua; Menno-Jan Kraak
International Institute for Geoinformation Science and Earth Observation (ITC), P.O. Box 6
7500 AA Enschede, The Netherlands
Email: koua@itc.nl; kraak@itc.nl

Abstract
The exploration of large geospatial data for finding
patterns and understanding underlying processes is one
of the challenges in geovisualization research. New
methods are needed for effective extraction of patterns
and appropriate visualization tools are necessary to
support knowledge construction throughout the
exploration process. Based on an approach to combine
visual and computational methods, a visualization
environment has been developed to support visual data
mining and knowledge discovery tasks. This environment
integrates non-geographic information spaces with maps
and other graphics that allow users to explore patterns
and attribute relationships. The development of the tool
intends to facilitate knowledge construction using a
number of steps that underline data mining and
knowledge discovery methodology. In order to investigate
the effectiveness of the design concept, an empirical
usability testing is planed to assess the tool’s ability to
meet user performance and satisfaction. In this test,
different options of map-based and interactive
visualizations of the output of a Self-Organizing Map
(SOM) are used to explore a socio-demographic dataset.
The study emphasizes the knowledge discovery process
based on exploratory tasks and visualization operations.
This paper describes the usability framework used to
guide the design, and examines key aspects of the
evaluation of such visual-computational environment.
Keywords: Exploratory visualization, Visual data mining,
Knowledge discovery, Self-Organizing Map.

1. Introduction
Information visualization techniques are increasingly
used in combination with exploratory data analysis
techniques to explore large geospatial data. The

integration of feature extraction tools with appropriate
user interfaces, is important to support user’s
understanding of underlying structures and processes in
the data. However the design of such interactive
representation forms still lacks a delineation of
fundamental operations that user might apply to an
interactive map or related graphic, and guidelines for their
appropriate application [1]. Design and usability issues
for such integrated geovisualization tools are an important
step to their success.
Usability of GIS products and specifically
geovisualization tools has received considerable attention
in recent years. The need to assess the usefulness and
usability of geovisualization tools is increasing as new
types of interactions emerge [9]. This interest has recently
linked the HCI field, cognitive science and information
science in a number of studies [4-7]. There is however a
lack of evaluation methodologies and particularly task
specifications for user based testing in exploratory
geovisualization tool [8]. The map use studies [10]
usually conducted in the field of cartography are not
necessary fully applicable in new interactive
visualizations that involve new representational spaces
and advanced user interfaces. Information visualization
techniques are often applied in dynamic and interactive
maps designed in cartography [11]. These interactive
visual geospatial displays allow to explore data, generate
hypotheses, develop problem solutions and construct
knowledge [12]. This is by definition what
geovisualization is all about; an active process that uses
advanced user interfaces to allow users to highlight, filter,
and sort data as they search for patterns and relationships.
We present a usability framework for design and
evaluation
of
an
exploratory
geovisualization
environment based on an approach to combine visual and
computational methods for knowledge discovery. The
design integrates non-geographic information spaces with
maps and other graphics that allow exploring patterns and

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

attribute relationships. The tool intends to facilitate
knowledge construction using a number of steps provided
in data mining and knowledge discovery methodology.
The development of the tool is based on the SelfOrganizing Map (SOM) neural network algorithm, and
relates data mining and knowledge discovery methods for
the extraction of patterns. Some graphical representations
are used to portray extracted patterns in a visual form in
order to support the understanding of the structures and
the geographical processes. In order to investigate the
effectiveness of the design concept, an empirical usability
testing is planed to assess the tool’s ability to meet user
performance and satisfaction. The evaluation involves
different options of map-based and interactive
visualizations of the output of the SOM for the
exploration of a socio-demographic dataset. The
evaluation study emphasizes the knowledge discovery
process based on exploratory tasks and visualization
operations. In this paper, we describe the usability
framework for design as well as the evaluation
methodology structured to investigate the effectiveness of
the design concept, by examining visual exploration tasks.
The methodology is based on an understanding of a
number of knowledge discovery activities, visualization
operations and a number of steps in computational
analysis used to visualize patterns in the data.

2. A framework to support exploratory
visualization
The proposed framework explores ways to effectively
extract patterns in the data using data mining techniques
and to represent the results using graphical
representations for visual exploration. This framework is
based on current understanding of effective application of
visual variables for cartographic and information design,
developing theories of interface metaphors for geospatial
information displays, and previous empirical studies of
map and information visualization effectiveness [7]. The
framework guided initial design decisions presented here
and is used to structure subsequent user studies. In the
next sub section, we outline the main components of the
approach including a description of the computational
analysis step (data mining), and an examination of tasks
and operations that can suggest requirements for design.

2.1. Visual data mining and knowledge discovery
for understanding geographical processes
One approach to analysis of large amount of data is by
using data mining and knowledge discovery methods. The
algorithms used in data mining are often integrated into
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD), a larger
framework that aims at finding new knowledge from large
databases. Recent effort in data mining and knowledge

discovery in databases (KDD) has provided a window for
geographic knowledge discovery. This framework has
been used in geospatial data exploration [13-17] to
discover and understand structures and patterns in
complex geographical data. The main goal of data mining
is identifying valid, novel, potentially useful and
ultimately understanding patterns in data [18]. A number
of applications of data mining in spatial and spatiotemporal research was summarized in a survey by
Roddick and Lees [19]. The promises inherent in the
development of data mining and knowledge discovery
processes for geospatial analysis include the ability to
yield unexpected correlation and causal relationships.
Since the dimensionality of the dataset is very high, it
is often ineffective to work in such high dimension space
to search for patterns. Because the SOM adapts its
internal structures to structural properties of the
multidimensional input such as regularities, similarities,
and frequencies, it can be used to search for structures in
the multidimensional input. We use the SOM algorithm as
a data mining tool to project input data into an alternative
measurement space based on similarities and relationships
in the input data that can aid the search for patterns. It
becomes possible to achieve better results in such
similarity space rather than the original attribute space
[20]. Graphical representations are then used to enable
visual data exploration allowing the user to get insight
into the data, evaluate, filter, and map outputs. This
allows several variables and their interactions to be
inspected simultaneously, and receive feedback from the
knowledge discovery process [21] by means of interaction
techniques that support the process.

2.2. Integrating computational analysis and
visualization
The first level of the computation analysis described
above provides a mechanism for extracting patterns from
the data. The output of this process is depicted using
graphical representations (information spaces) to facilitate
human perception and cognitive processes [10, 22], by
offering visualizations of the general structure of the
dataset (clustering), as well as the exploration of
relationships among attributes. The design of the
visualization environment incorporates several graphical
representations that provide ways for representing
similarity (patterns), relationships, including a distance
matrix representation, 2D and 3D projections, 2D and 3D
surfaces, and component planes visualization. They
highlight different characteristics of the computational
solution and integrate them with other graphics into
multiple views to allow brushing, linking, zooming, and
rotation for exploratory analysis and knowledge discovery
purposes, and to enhance exploration (see figure 1). These
multiple views are used to present interactions between
several variables over the space of the SOM, maps and

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 1. The user interface for the exploratory geovisualization environment in multiple views with the visualization of
component planes (bottom left) and map unit labels (bottom right)

parallel coordinate plots, and to emphasize visual change
detection and the monitoring of the variability through the
attribute space. These alternative and different views on
the data can help stimulate the visual thinking process,
which is characteristic for visual exploration. The
component planes show the values of the map elements
for different attributes and how each input vector varies
over the space of the SOM units. Comparatively with the
maps, patterns and relationships among all the attributes
can be easily examined in a single view. Since the SOM
represents the spatial clustering of the multivariate
attributes, the visual representation becomes more
accessible and easy for exploratory analyses to help in
identifying causes and correlates. Such map overlays have
been important hypothesis-generating tools in research
and policy-making [23]. We base the exploratory
visualization and knowledge discovery process on four
aspects:
- Patterns discovery (through similarity representations)
- Correlations and relationships exploration for hypothesis
generation
- Exploration of the distribution in the dataset, on the map
- And the detection of irregularities in the data.

2.3. General requirements for geovisualization
design
Based on the analytical aspect of spatial analysis, some

general requirements were identified for the design such
geovisualization. They include accuracy in results,
flexibility in use (scaling, rotation, querying, brushing,
browsing, effective navigational tools), adaptability
(appropriate for the task and applicable for different
situations), exploratory, multiple (alternative) views to
consolidate knowledge construction (with maps and other
graphics). Other issues such as detection of irregularities
(unusual and predictable behavior), and knowledge
discovery can also be included.

3. Usability evaluation methodology for
geovisualization
Usability evaluation is central in Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI), to ensure that the design of a user
interface meets the user requirements. HCI has a strong
emphasis on User-Centered Design, a design approach
that views knowledge about users and their involvement
in the design as a central concern, and includes users in
testing and evaluations in an interactive design process. In
new designs of interfaces for geovisualization, this link
between usability testing and user-centered design is
becoming more prominent [5-7]. Choosing a usability
evaluation method requires consideration of methodology
issues and the objectives of the evaluation. In early design
stages, inspection techniques such as cognitive
walkthrough [24], and usability review or heuristic

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

evaluation [25, 26] are often used for identifying usability
issues, for the validation of design decisions, and to get
feedback on key aspects of the functionality, interface,
and the overall navigation. Given the exploratory nature
of geovisualization environments, particularly the visualcomputational environment for which this assessment
methodology is developed, a user-based evaluation
(usability testing) is certainly the most suitable approach
to assess usability and usefulness. Usability testing
involves assessing the tool’s ability to meet user
performance and satisfaction objectives, and is conducted
based on a number of representative user tasks, for which
a certain number of usability factors are measured. Since
the design of the tool is based on a user-centered approach
early involvement of users was made in a preliminary
interface feature inspection [7], in which several aspects
of the representation forms, graphics, and color schemes,
were presented to users for analysis.
3.1. Conceptual goals, exploration tasks and
visualization operators
One way to examine exploration and knowledge
discovery support in the visualization environment is by
assessing user performance for a number of defined tasks
and goals. The main goal of geospatial data analysis is to
find patterns and relationships in the data that can help
answer questions about a geographic phenomenon or
process. The geographical analysis process can be viewed
as a set of tasks and operations, needed to meet the goals
of the data exploration. Examples of basic tasks in this
process include examining spatial positioning of elements
of interest, in order to verify spatial proximity amongst
different elements, verifying their spatial density, and
obtaining an overview of how a target value measured at
one particular spatial location, or at various neighboring
locations, varies for different attributes. These tasks
involve a number of activities and operations that users
will perform during the exploration process described in
figure 2. Several authors have suggested taxonomies of
visualization operations [2, 3, 27, 28]. The most
comprehensive list [2, 29] includes: identify, locate,
distinguish, categorize, cluster, distribution, rank,
compare, associate, and correlate. A delineation of some
of these operations for visualization and analysis of
spatial data was provided by [3], and include selection,
association, and grouping. From these taxonomies of
visualization goals described above, three key exploratory
tasks for knowledge construction can be identified:
1. Categorize and classify: users must be aware of the
different clusters that were found in the data. The
different clusters can be viewed in different
perspectives, 2D and 3D space, rotation, …
2. Compare: Users can categorize and review
relationships,
perceive
commonalities
and
distinctions.

3.

Reflect (evaluate, integrate, generalize): after
completing most activities, users can reflect on the
patterns they observe, and the general rules that can
be constructed.

3.2. Defining user tasks for usability evaluation
The evaluation of the graphical representations and
interfaces needs to be grounded in a task model that can
focus more on the user’s goals and the tasks he needs to
perform, than the interface side. The task model intends to
support the development of the experimental setup for the
evaluation to cover the different levels of analysis
included in the use of visualization tools. A task be can be
seen as a sequence of necessary steps and is comprised of
objectives, the definition of the problem, and methods
necessary for the resolution of the problem. The
conceptual goals, the different steps of the exploration
and knowledge discovery process, and the key
visualization tasks and operators described above, are
used as the basis for defining a low level taxonomy of
operational tasks that users need to perform to meet the
conceptual goals. This is achieved by a decomposition of
the basic visualization operators: analyzing task structures
of real world visualization problems, representing the
collection of subtasks, corresponding taxonomic or
classification as well as a set of semantic relationships
among these concepts, and other entities necessary to
perform the task. A set of representative tasks are derived
and structured in a task scenario for the evaluation study.
Task scenarios provide a task-oriented perspective on the
interface and represent a structure and flow of goals and
actions that participants are supposed to evaluate. Such
scenarios ensure that certain interface features are
evaluated. Our view of exploration is based on the fact
that users have initial access to the global views or results
from the data mining process. The tasks of exploration are
then based on the following goals: selection of objectives,
data, views and tools for completing the required tasks,
and finally interpretation and evaluation of the results of
the exploration.

3.3. Evaluation plan
The usability evaluation proposed here is goal-oriented.
Appropriate usability indicators are drawn from the goals
and corresponding measurements are set from the goals
described above. The objectives of the usability
evaluation need to be clearly defined as well methods that
are best suited for capturing the necessary data. The
evaluation intends to assess the visualization tool’s ability
to meet user performance and satisfaction, with regards to
the general goal of exploring patterns and relationships in
data. For example the percentage of users that will be able
to complete representative tasks within a certain time or

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Filter, evaluate, map outputs (Visual data mining)

Exploration steps

Computational analysis (Data mining and Knowledge Discovery steps)
Selection

Pre-processing

Transformation

Preprocessed
data

Data

Data mining

Transformed
data

Patterns

Target data
Visualization Visualization

Visualization

Representational
Spaces: Geographic
and non-geographic /
attribute spaces
(SOMs, maps, PCP)

Visualization
Tasks
/operators

Visualization
Visual exploration

4. Selection of
relevant attributes
3. Exploration
of patterns

5. Evaluation/
Interpretation

Knowledge

2. Hypothesis
formulation
1. Define
problem

Interaction

Figure 2. Data mining, exploratory visualization and knowledge discovery processes. The first part of this process consists
of the general data mining and knowledge discovery steps (computational analysis). Each of the steps of the computational
analysis can allow for visualization. Patterns extracted as a result of the computational process can be explored using
graphical representations (geographic and non-geographic information spaces).

without requiring assistance, or the percentage of users
that will be satisfied with the usability of the tool. The
evaluation is designed to assess the tool’s functionality,
flexibility for exploratory tasks, and most importantly the
ability to support knowledge construction process.
Participants are selected to represent the target population
of people who are the likely users. The user group
includes geographers, demographers, environmental
scientists, epidemiologists, and others who have
experience in data analysis and the use of GIS. They are
domain specialists who have knowledge about the data
and have both the motivation and qualifications to do
proper interpretation of the analysis. Test participants are
involved in the evaluation of the different graphical
representations in terms of specific end-user tasks related
to the operational visualization tasks described above.
They are encouraged to interact with the interface. While
completing a number of tasks, users are asked to visually
examine the representations, respond to questions, and
report their preferences and viewpoints about the
representation forms. The objective is to measure and
compare their performance scores and the user’s level of
understanding for the different representation forms and
tasks. The kind of evidence the evaluation intends to
provide includes responses to specific questions focused
on use of features and representations to perform specific
tasks, and how users interpret and understand and use the
basic visualization features and representation forms. The
proposed assessment methodology includes three criteria:
1. Effectiveness focuses on the tool functionality and
examines the user’s performance for the tasks. This can
be measured by the time spent for completing tasks,
percentage of completed tasks [30-32], correctness of
outcome of task performance and response, the success
and accuracy (error rate and error types), duration of
time spent for help and questions, frequency of
documents access, range of function used and the level
of success, the ease of use or level of difficulty, level of
user guidance and support.

2. Usefulness refers to appropriateness of the tool’s
functionality and assesses whether the tool meets the
needs and requirements of the users when carrying
tasks, the extend to which users view the tools as
supportive for their goals and tasks, user’s level of
understanding and interpretation of the tool’s results
and processes. It includes, flexibility, compatibility in
relation to user’s expectations. This is gathered through
task performance, verbal protocols, post-hoc comments
and responses on questionnaire.
3. User reactions refer to user’s attitude, opinions,
subjective views, and preferences. It can be measured
using questionnaires and survey responses, comments
from interviews and ratings.

4. Conclusion
In this paper we have presented an evaluation strategy
for assessing the usability and usefulness of a visualcomputational analysis environment designed to
contribute to the analysis of large volumes of geospatial
data. The design of the tool focuses on the effective
application of computational algorithms to extract
patterns and relationships in geospatial data, and visual
representation of derived information to facilitate
knowledge construction. The evaluation method
emphasizes exploratory tasks and knowledge discovery
support. New representation forms used to visualize
geospatial data such as the Self-Organizing Map use new
alternative techniques to represent the attribute spaces. An
important step in the design of such visualization tools
will rely on understanding the way users make
interpretations of the information spaces. The choice for a
representation metaphor is crucial for successful use of
the tool. The link between the attribute space visualization
tools and maps, in multiple views can provide multiple
perspectives for exploration, evaluation and interpretation
of patterns and ultimately support for knowledge
construction. The methodology presented here will be

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

used for the usability testing of the visual-computational
environment, to examine the effectiveness of the
representations for exploratory tasks and knowledge
discovery support.

5. References
1. MacEachren, A.M., An evolving cognitive-semiotic
approach to geographic visualization and knowledge
construction. Information Design Journal, 2000. 10(1): p.
26–36.
2. Keller, P. and M. Keller, Visual clues: Practical Data
Visualization. 1992, Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer
Scociety Press.
3. Qian, L., M. Wachowicz, D.J. Peuquet, and A.M.
MacEachren. Delineating operations for visualization and
analysis of space-time data in GIS. in GIS / LIS. 1997.
Cincinnati.
4. MacEachren, A.M. and M.J. Kraak, Research challenges in
geovisualization. Cartography and Geoinformation science,
2001. 28(1).
5. Haklay, M. and C. Tobon, Usability evaluation and PPGIS:
toward a user-centered design approach. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 2003. 17(6):
p. 577-592.
6. Fuhrmann, S., P. Ahonen-Rainio, R. Edsall, S.I. Fabricant,
E.L. Koua, C. Tolon, C. Ware, and S. Wilson, Making useful
and useable Geovisualization: design and evaluation issues,
in Exploring Geovisualization, J. Dykes, A.M. MacEachren,
and M.J. Kraak, Editors. 2004, Elsevier: Amsterdam.
7. Koua, E.L. and M.J. Kraak, Evaluating Self-organizing
Maps for Geovisualization, in Exploring Geovisualization, J.
Dykes, A.M. MacEachren, and M.J. Kraak, Editors. 2004,
Elsevier: Amsterdam.
8. Slocum, T.A., C. Blok, B. Jiang, A. Koussoulakou, D.R.
Montello, S. Fuhrmann, and N.R. Hedley, Cognitive and
usability issues in geovisualization: a research agenda.
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 2001.
28(1): p. 61-76.
9. Muntz, R.R., T. Barclay, J. Dozier, C. Faloutsos, A.M.
MacEachren, J.L. Martin, C.M. Pancake, and M.
Satyanarayanan, IT road map to a Geospatial Future, report
of the Committee on Intersections Between Geospatial
Information and Information Technology. 2003, National
Academics Press: Washington, D C.
10. MacEachren, A.M., How maps work: representation,
visualization, and design. 1995, New York: The Guilford
Press.
11. Kraak, M.J., About maps, cartography, geovisualization and
other graphics. Geoinformatics journal, 2000. 3.
12. MacEachren, A.M., Visualization in modern cartography:
setting the agenda, in Visualization in modern cartography,
D.R.F. Taylor, Editor. 1994, Pergamon: Oxford, UK. p.1-12.
13. Openshaw, S., A. Cross, and M. Charlton, Building a
prototype geographical correlates machine. International
Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 1990. 4(4): p.
297-312.
14. MacEachren, A.M., M. Wachowicz, R. Edsall, D. Haug, and
R. Masters, Constructing knowledge from multivariate
spatiotemporal data: integrating geographical visualization
with knowledge discovery in databases methods.

International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
1999. 13(4): p. 311-334.
15. Miller, H.J. and J. Han, Geographic data mining and
knowledge discovery. 2001, London: Taylor and Francis.
16. Wachowicz, M., The role of geographic visualization and
knowledge discovery in spatio-temporal modeling.
Publications on Geodesy, 2000. 47: p. 27-35.
17. Gahegan, M., M. Harrover, T.M. Rhyne, and M.
Wachowicz, The integration of geographic visualization
with Databases, Data mining, Knowledge Discovery
Construction and Geocomputation. Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, 2001. 28(1): p. 29-44.
18. Fayyad, U., G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, From data
mining to knowledge discovery in databases, in Artificial
Intelligence Magazine. 1996. p. 37-54.
19. Roddick, J.F. and B.G. Lees, Paradigms for Spatial and
Spatio-Temporal Data Mining, in Geographic Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, H.J. Miller and J. Han, Editors.
2001, Taylor and Francis: London. p. 33-49.
20. Strehl, A. and J. Ghosh, Relationship-based clustering and
visualization for multidimensional data mining. INFOMS
Journal on Computing, 2002. 00(0): p. 1-23.
21. Keim, D.A., Information Visualization and Visual Data
Mining. IEEE transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 2002. 7(1): p. 100-107.
22. Card, S.K., J.D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings
in Information Visualization. Using Vision to Think. 1999,
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
23. Croner, C., L. Pickle, D. Wolf, and A. White, A GIS
approach to hypothesis generation in epidemiology, in
ASPRS/ACSM technical papers, A.W. Voss, Editor. 1992,
ASPRS/ACSM: Washinton, DC. p. 275-283.
24. Polson, P.G., C. Lewis, J. Rieman, and C. Wharton,
Cognitive walkthroughs: A method for theory- based
evaluation of user interfaces. International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 1992. 36: p. 741-773.
25. Nielsen, J., Heuristic evaluation, in Usability Inspection
Methods, J. Nielsen and R.L. Mack, Editors. 1994, John
Wiley & Sons: New York, NY.
26. Nielsen, J. and R. Molich. Heuristic evaluation of user
interfaces. in ACM CHI'90. 1990. Seattle, WA.
27. Zhou, M.X. and S.K. Feiner. Visual task characterization
for automated visual discourse synthesis. in Computer
Human Interaction. 1998. Los Angeles, CA.
28. Ogao, P.J. and M.J. Kraak, Defining visualization operations
for temporal cartographic animation design. International
Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation,
2002. 4: p. 11-22.
29. Wehrend, S. and C. Lewis. A problem-oriented
classification of visualization techniques. in IEEE
Visualization. 2000.
30. Sweeney, M., M. Maguire, and B. Shackel, Evaluating usercomputer interaction: a framework. International Journal of
Man-Machine Studies, 1993. 38.
31. Fabricant, S.I., Evaluating the usability of the scale
metaphor for querying semantic information spaces, in
Spatial Information Theory: Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, D.R. Montello, Editor. 2001, Springer
Verlag: Berlin, Germany. p. 156-171.
32. Rubin, J., Handbook of usability testing: How to plan,
design, and conduct effective tests. 1994, New York: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

