CoEx Communication Suite: Investigation into the Sensation of Coexistence
through Network-enhanced Tangible Media
Yasu Santo, Francis Lam
School of Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
sdyasu@polyu.edu.hk, francis@db-db.com
Abstract
This paper discusses our project, which focuses on the
new possibilities of methods of communication enhanced
by digital networks. The aim of the project is to develop
prototypes for a system with which the sense of existence
of a person and others can be digitally shared and
experienced (or digitally coexist) through tangible devices
without the need to actively engage in the operation of
such devices. While studies of ambient intelligence
generally focus on the visualization or experience of everchanging customized information, this project is more
specific and looks closely at how one can recognize the
existence of other humans in digitally networked remote
places. The paper covers the conceptual and technical
development of the project by demonstrating a number of
prototype developments and a range of development tools
utilized including a combination of Macromedia Flash
and Director and Parallax’s Basic stamp, which are
easily available and accessible even for people with no
technical background, such as the author himself.

1. Introduction
Communication is usually active behaviour. It involves
more than one person committed to exchanging emotions,
thoughts, ideas, and information. A sense of coexistence,
however, is something far more subtle, passive, and
subconscious. It requires more than one person to be in a
physical or digital space and to have the means to
recognize the others, but does not, at least in a
conventional sense, require a person to react or interact for
the sense of coexistence to be sustained. In a physical
space, one simply needs to exist with others to achieve a
sense of coexistence. In digitally networked spaces, one
often needs to do much more simply to exist.
Technology has made various means of communication
available, and has enabled us to interact in various new
conditions and circumstances. While this allowed us to
obtain great deal of information from each other, the same

Figure 1. Kinetic Cube interface
technologies have created environments where one is
forced to interact simply in order not to lose one’s social
existence. In many circumstances, in order to coexist in
digitally networked environments, it is necessary for
participants to put time and effort in presenting their
statements. In other words, in a digital community we are
often required to have something to say simply in order to
exist.
CoEx project is an attempt to look for a means of
communication that is just sufficient to bring a sense of
coexistence to digitally networked spaces without
requiring one or expecting others to actively contribute
statements to maintain their presence in their community.
This is achieved by a combination of inter-networked
tangible interfaces to provide a space that is sensitive to
the presence of humans, instead of providing tools to
exchange their statements. By simply existing in an
environment with one or more of these devices, all of the
participants can share a sense of coexistence, just as we all
do when we are in a single physical space.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

The CoEx communication suite attempts to introduce a
sense of real-time ‘coexistence’ to people who exist in
different locations. The suite consists of a series of
‘tangible’ interfaces, for those who have access to the
tangible CoEx devices, and ‘online’ interfaces, for those
who only have access to the internet.

2. Background
2.1. Kinetic Cube
This project originally began as a short exercise for
students in the School of Design (SD), The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, to design kinetic sculptures and
study the possibilities of users interacting with the
sculpture. This exercise was organized with Michael A.
Fox, a founding partner of Kinetic Design Group at MIT
[1] and a founding partner of ODESCO in Los Angels [ 2],
who was with us as a visiting lecturer in Spring 2002. One
idea developed by students was to construct a grid of
platforms immersed in a pond. By standing in front of the
pond, sensors sense the person. A platform then rises to
the ground level and provides a means for the person to
stand above the water. As the person steps on the
platform, the adjacent platforms rise to the same level and
thus provide a plane for one to walk further to the other
side of the pond or, to be more precise, to walk around as
though the water did not exist. We called this idea the
Kinetic Bridge. As the exercise was short, they never
managed to produce anything beyond a concept and a
series of simple diagrammes, but we found the concept
interesting and tried to make a working prototype to
demonstrate the idea. The original study model was
constructed with Lego Mindstorm, but over time each
component was slowly replaced by custom-made or more
appropriate parts (Figure 2). The final version still has
some Lego components, but these are completely hidden
from the view of the users (Figure 1). The prototype of the
Kinetic Bridge turned out to be much more interesting
than intended and I realized that this could be used as a
tangible interface on its own, rather than as a mere
prototype of an idea. We then started to call this interface
the Kinetic Cube.

Figure 2. Construction of the Kinetic Cube

2.2. Kinetic Chair
M. A. Fox, Catherine Hu, one of my colleagues at SD,
and I also examined the possibility of creating an ‘Online
Kinetic Chair’. (Figure 3) The plan was to construct a
chair with a mechanism to lower the chair down by a
fraction when senses a person sitting on it, just as many
ordinary office chairs with springs will do when a person
sits on it. The sensor also sends a signal to other Online
Kinetic Chairs in other locations via the internet, and these
chairs will also move down if a person is already sitting
on the one that has received a signal. People on other
Kinetic Chairs will feel their chair move down by a
fraction and recognize someone somewhere has sat on a
chair. This in effect gives everyone a sense of sharing a
chair with other people in remote places. This idea of
sharing a certain environment intrigued me and I began to
look into the idea of tangibly sensing and sharing the
existence of people in digitally networked places. This
idea, together with the CoEx Camera introduced next, led
me to the CoEx communication project.

2.3. CoEx Camera

Figure 3. Kinetic Chair (under construction)
I started to look into the possibility of how to bring
physical devices to work on a digital network. As I had no
background in this field, I had to begin with what I
already knew – a combination of a Basic Stamp
microcontroller from Parallax Inc. [3] to detect and
influence the physical world and a Macromedia Director
[4], coupled with a Director
Xtra to introduce a serial
communication channel to physical devices. A Director’s
Multi-User Server was also used to introduce multi-user
interaction. This turned out not to be a difficult task, as
both systems gave me a high-level programming
environment for the development. As an initial
experiment, a Director interface was made to control the
position of a web-cam with a Shockwave movie
embedded in a web-page. (Figure 4a) The web-cam was
attached to a pair of servomotors connected to a Basic
Stamp microcontroller to achieve horizontal and vertical
movements (Figure 4b). An inspiration came one day after
announcing the existence of the CoEx Camera to my

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

friends. I was working at my office desk late at night all
on my own, and had completely forgotten about the fact
that the camera was set right beside the desk. I suddenly
noticed that the camera had started to move. This did not
surprise me, but somehow gave me a very strong sense of
someone’s presence. It did not actually matter who the
person was, but just being able to sense that someone I
knew cared to look at my web-page late at night somehow
left me with a good impression.
This was a special moment for me, first of all because
someone had moved my online-device for the first time
ever; but, besides this, this was the first time something
had given me a very tactile sense of someone sharing time
with me. This gave me a clue to what had been missing in
most online interfaces; a sense of coexistence achieved
online without anyone having had to exchange
information or to say anything. This sense of coexistence
is quite similar to the feeling a person is likely to get
when, for example, he is studying at a desk all alone in a
house he shares with others and hears someone slamming
the door to the house. He can recognize that someone is
back home, but the recognition will simply remain a
subtle sense of understanding that someone he knows (a
member of his family or his house mate) is within the
same physical environment. He has the option of standing
up and greeting the person or continuing with his study
without taking any special action to recognize the
presence of the person. The movement of the camera
made me realize that this idea can be studied further to
develop a tangible interface that is just enough to help
people maintain a sense of coexistence with others across
digitally networked spaces.

participation in the CoEx project as an online screen
interface designer was extremely important.
The Magic Cube is an online interactive project
exploring the possibilities of expressing art and
technology in the digital media. In general, a magic cube
is formed by a matrix (10x10) of stretchable blocks. Each
block is translated vertically, and its length and colour can
be altered. It also represents a musical note for which the
length determines the beat and the colour, the tone. By
modifying the attributes of each block, interesting visuals,
forms, and music can be created.
This project uses the magic cube mechanism as a
medium to create online applications and perform visual
experiments. The MAGIC CUBE CREATOR allows users
to manipulate the cube and save their own cubes in a
sequence of animations. All of their work can be viewed
and shared in a MAGIC CUBE GALLERY.
MC Amazing World is an online installation that
merges current interactions with recorded memories. All
of the participants logged-in to the world can manipulate
the magic cube with one another simultaneously. At the
same time, the movements of the last ten participants who
log-out will still be looping in the world. This installation
demonstrates a scene that merges past and current
interactions within the same object.
The MC Community turns the magic cube into an
online application. Each magic cube represents a forum
whose blocks are message lists on the same topic. When a
user posts a message in the forum, the block representing
it will increase its height by one unit.
The Lab is where more experiments on the magic cube
continue. Current experiments in the Lab include the
Game Cube, the Image Cube, and the use of sound and
motion to create a cube re-action. (Figure 5)

Figures 4a & 4b. Online interface and CoEx camera

2.4. Magic Cube
My CoEx communication suite project partner, Francis
Lam, contacted me after he saw my Kinetic Cube. He had
been developing an online communication platform,
called ‘Magic Cube’, [5] and contacted me to see if he
could work with me to combine the two projects. As the
concept for the CoEx project environment should be
accessible by as many participants as possible, his

Figures 5a & 5b. Magic Cube interfaces

3. Other related works
The idea of online tangible interfaces to visualize or
experience certain information, events, and/or human
existence is nothing new. Various art projects explored

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

the idea of Tele-presence, including those by Eduardo
Kac. In his series of projects from 1989, Kac tried to
understand the relationship between humans, animals, and
machines through telephone and computer networks by
providing spaces where people in different locations could
share experiences or the existence of each other. [6]

To summarize, we look at the works of the Tangible
Media Group as conceptual references, products of
Ambient Technologies as references of strategies for
commercializing such devices, and works by Assocreation
as providing technical and aesthetic directions for each of
our products in future.

Jaron Lanier [7], the computer scientist and artist who
coined the term ‘Virtual Reality’ and developed a series of
VR products and environments, has used the term ‘Post
Symbolic Communication’ to suggest the next step for
machine-mediated human communication to free people
from the need to use methods of communication based on
symbols (language). In an interview with Scientific
America, he said ‘… what if we can communicate without
symbols by directly creating shared objective reality in
real time?’ [8] Although this was said to describe a new
possibility for an online VR system, the term can be used
also to describe the new possibility of utilizing physical
objects shared across a digital network.

4. Development

The Tangible Media Group at Media Lab,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, lead by Hiroshi
Ishii has been dealing with a vast range of tangible
interfaces, including some that engage digital networks as
a critical factor in their operations. [9] One of the best
examples describing their effort to introduce tangible
devices in everyday context is their ‘ambientRoom’
project. The room is augmented with MIDI-controllable
facilities called ‘‘ambient media’ – ambient light, sound,
airflow, and physical motion – as a means for
communicating information at the periphery of human
perception.’ [10]
Ambient Devices, a company founded by graduates of
Media Lab, MIT, and others successfully launched their
first product, called ‘Ambient Orb’, in May 2003. The
company provides hardware, infrastructure for devices to
operate, and services; while the system delivers
customizable data via a cellular phone network and
displays it as ambient information to the periphery of
human perception. It is significant and quite encouraging
that ways have been found for a rather abstract and
subjective concept such as Ambient Media to be
successfully implemented as a core element of lifestyle
products.
Assocreation, an organization of artists in Germany,
successfully developed online tangible interfaces to share
the presence of people across digital networks. Bump, a
series of networked catwalks produced in 1999, is a very
simple but very powerful interface to share the presence of
people in remote places synchronously and tangibly. [11]

To study the technologies, methodologies, and
effective working environment required to develop the
CoEx communication system, we used BasicStamp from
Parallax to sense and influence the real world, RFID to
sense objects with ID tags, Macromedia Director with
SerialXtra developed by Geoff Smith at PhysicalBits [12]
to synchronize a screen-based interface to a BasicStamp
through a serial port, and Macromedia Flash for building
online interfaces and
connecting the director to
the Flash Communication
Server to offer a multiuser environment to the
project. This combination
of a software and
hardware environment is
ideal for experiments and
prototyping, as it offers a
very flexible and easy-toset-up environment for
Figure 6. CoEx
studying and developing
communication
physical
various combinations of
device
development
tangible and digital
interfaces (Figure 6).
The current physical devices make use of infrared
proximity sensors, passive infrared movement detection
modules from Kitsrus [13], light-dependent resistors
(LDR) as photo sensors to sense human activities, RFID
to sense tagged objects, and LED and servo motors to
influence the real world. BasicStamp 2 microcontrollers
are used to receive and send data to physical devices and
to a computer.
In order to effectively share data across various types
of physical and screen interfaces, Basic Stamp is
programmed to send and receive a set of 8 bits of data for
all communications. This works as a simple protocol for
anyone who wants to participate to develop his or her own
device or interface for the CoEx environment.
To achieve physical-to-computer communication, a
Director Projector movie is created to act as a bridge for
exchanging data between a Basic Stamp and a computer.
This movie needs to be run on the computer directly
connected to the Basic Stamp. The Director movie

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

exchanges 8 bits of data with Basic Stamp with the aid of
Serial Xtra, while also receiving and broadcasting the data
from and to the internet through a Flash movie embedded
within the Director movie as a cast member. The
embedded Flash cast member is designed to forward and
receive the data to and from a Flash Communication
Server, so that any other computer with another Director
movie or Flash-based screen interface can receive the set
of 8 bits data across the internet. When the Flash cast
member receives data from the FlashCom server, the
Director movie picks it up and forwards it to the Basic
Stamp (Figure 7).

Everyone who may be working on CoEx project simply
needs to agree with what a combination of 8 bits data that
BasicStamp sends and receives represents and does. They
never need to understand or configure the Director-Flash
movie running on the computer that hosts the physical
devices. For example, if a physical device consists of 16
LEDs as outputs, and BasicStamp is programmed so that
each bit of the 2x8 incoming bits changes the state of each
LED, anyone who is developing a Flash interface simply
needs to know how to send a string of binary data to the
Flash Communication Server to turn any of the LEDs on
and off.
All physical output devices made so far can be
controlled by the set of 8 bits data, and all physical
sensors are connected so that the behaviour of all sensor
can be represented as a set of 8 bits of data (except for the
RFID reader). This allows everyone with Flash or Director

skills to participate in our development environment. For
example, any of my collaborators, including my students,
can create a simple Flash interface that has any numbers
of ons and offs, and that interface will be ready to work
with any of the physical and screen based interfaces.

5. Applications
Within the CoEx environment, many users can be
unconscious participants in the environment. When one
walks into the environment, he or she is already a part of
the system, in which the existence of others can be felt
and your existence can be experienced by others. In order
to understand the modes of communication achieved by
the CoEx environment, one’s experience in recognizing
the existence of others is categorized into three categories,
while the conditions for broadcasting one’s existence is
categorized into two. The three categories for perceiving
existence are: 1) active reception, 2) passive reception,
and 3) ambient reception. The two categories for
broadcasting your existence are: 1) conscious and 2)
unconscious.

5.1. Active reception
This is a condition where one actively waits for an
event or information. In a physical world, this could mean
going to a certain location to look for friends, and so forth.
In the CoEx environment, this is mainly offered by
screen-based interfaces (Figure 8b). This is a condition
where one expects to gain specific information or data.
One can also try to achieve this through any of the

Figure 7. CoEx communication network

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

physical CoEx devices, but this is very likely to require
that a specific agreement be made between the sender and
receiver or that a receiver have specific knowledge of
what the behaviour of the output devices represents. For
example, if a viewer knows that cube movements
represent a traffic condition in front of a sensor wall
(Figure 12) at a remote location, it is possible for a user to
read specific information from the pattern of movements
of a row of cubes (Figure 8a). It is not within our scope to
offer any specific rule for users to utilize any CoEx
devices, because this very often restricts the imaginations
of users.

Figures 8a & 8b. Physical and online Cubes

5.2. Passive reception

more specific by offering a sense of ‘Coexistence’ to the
participants. In other words, the information that CoEx
devices introduce to the users’ environment brings an
anonymous and less specific sense of existence of people
who are within other CoEx environments. (Figures 9&10)

5.4. Active broadcasting
This is a condition where a person actively participates
to let others know that he or she exists. This happens very
naturally in physical public spaces, where one inevitably
needs to be conscious about one’s exposure to everyone
else in the same space. In other words, a person is capable
of actively broadcasting his existence as soon as he leaves
his private space. It also happens in online spaces when
one wants to participate in a certain community. In order
for a person to exist, he has to very actively promote his
existence, often in writing, by demonstrating ideas,
thoughts, opinions, emotions, etc. We do not intend to
offer the means to offer language-based tools of
communication, but instead to offer more tangible means
just sufficient to let everyone knows that someone is
actively participating. For example, CoEx Cubes has an
Infrared Sensor pointing upwards for people to
intentionally send signals to others (Figure 11).

5.5. Unconscious broadcasting
This is a condition where a certain event interrupts or
disturbs people with a certain device or within a certain
environment and forces one to respond. Mobile Phones
can be considered one of the most typical examples today.
As this type of environment can be offered by various
types of technologies today, we have no intention of
actively providing this with our devices.

5.3. Ambient reception
This is a condition where a person is in a state to
understand information in the periphery of his or her
consciousness, which is just what Ishii’s ‘ambientRoom’
and devices provided by Ambient Technologies attempt to
offer. This also is our main focus, but we are trying to be

Figure 9. Ambient
reception

This is where one unconsciously broadcasts one’s
existence with certain devices. One traditional example of
this is surveillance cameras. Unconscious broadcasting
have given rise to various debates over privacy, but some
have made creative use of it to introduce a unique
combination of physical and networked environments to
encourage communications with the aid of web-cams. A
New York-based bar called Remote Lounge [14] is one
good example. In the CoEx environment, everyone who is
unconsciously participating in the environment will
simply contribute their presence anonymously to the
community to give all participants a sense of coexistence.
(Figure. 12)

Figures 10. CoEx
Cam Version 02

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 11. Active
broadcasting

Figure 12. Unconscious
broadcasting

All of the events described above can happen in
various combinations. For example, one can be
broadcasting one’s existence actively while receiving
someone else’s existence in a more ambient manner. It is
also very likely that when one is using existing
technologies such telephones or email, one also
broadcasting one’s existence and receiving the existence
of others in a tactile but less active manner. (Figures
13&14)

6.1. Keywords
[CO-] cognitive, coherent, coinciding, collaborative,
collection, common, communal, comprehensive,
conceivable, concurrent, conjunctive, conscious,
contiguous, continuous
[EX-] excitement, excursion, execution, exercise,
existence, expectation, experience, experiment,
exploration, expression, extension

7. Reference

Figure 13. Combination
of physical and screen
interfaces

Figure 14. Sensor
Wall

6. Future development and conclusion
This project by no means attempts to challenge the
limitations of current technologies or to suggest an
alternative method to replace existing methods. It is more
appropriate to say, at least at this stage, that the current
goal of this project is to rethink and reorganize the
technologies available to us to enrich our everyday lives.
Our other goal is to encourage more people, including
designers and students, to understand how to design and
develop means of communications that do not use
language as the key element.

[1] http://kdg.mit.edu/
[2] http://www.odesco.net/
[3] http://www.parallax.com
[4] http://www.macromedia.com/software/director/
[5] http://magiccube.db-db.com/mc.shtml
[6] http://www.ekac.org/interactive.html
[7] http://www.well.com/user/jaron/
[8] Interview with Jaron Lanier, Science America, (September
15 1996),
http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?articleID=00070110-E9C11CD9-B4A8809EC588EEDF&pageNumber=1&catID=4
[9] http://tangible.media.mit.edu/
[10] Ishii H., Ullmer B. (1997). Tangible Bits: Towards
Seamless Interfaces between People, Bits and Atoms.
Proceedings of CHI ’97 (March 1997), ACM Press, 234-241.
[11] http://www.bump.at/
[12] http://www.physicalbits.com
[13] http://www.kitsrus.com
[14] http://www.remotelounge.com/

In general, we make intensive use of screen-languagebased interfaces to interact with each other. Although this
method is efficient, we do not need to be confined to using
tools that only support a limited use of our senses, but can
also consider tools and methods that enhance our other
ability to communicate. Writers are the masters of
language, while many of us, non-writers, are becoming
more and more handicapped in the heavily language-based
world of communication today.
We hope our development and communication
environments will attract a wide range of people to
become interested in the pursuit of alternative means of
communicating and provide more people with ideas on
how to devise with richer and more comfortable
environments in which to live.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

