A suggestion concerning parameters of evaluation methods of obtaining
information about 3D objects on the basis of their digital pictures
Krzysztof T. TYTKOWSKI
Geometry and Engineering Graphics Centre, Silesian University of Technology, POLAND
{kttytkow@polsl.gliwice.pl}
Abstract
The paper presents the suggestion of comparative
methods for different ways of obtaining information
about 3D models on the basis of their pictures as well as
possibilities of comparison of various solutions. These
parameters are to facilitate the choice of proper method
and a given technical solution.

•

Keywords-- 3D model, reconstruction, restitution.

2
Introduction
New technical solutions connected with more and
more common application of computers result in the
necessity of comparison of various methods of obtaining
information about 3D objects and evaluation of particular
technical solutions. Some of the parameters for
evaluation of theses methods and technical solutions can
be adopted from other technical fields. However, some
issues require parameters’ defining which allow their
comparison. These issues include e.g. reconstruction of
shape of 3D models on the basis of a picture or pictures.
In case of using only one picture there is too little
data for univocal restoration of a model and therefore,
with only one picture other information is necessary too
[9] [11].
The methods based on stereography constitute very
common technique of obtaining information. Just two
pictures are sufficient for univocal (to a certain degree)
restoration of 3D object. Other methods are based on
specific data e.g. object illumination (the shade on the
object is analysed) or special illumination in a form of a
net which gives possibilities of surface recognition etc
[17].

1

Stereographics

For a very long time man tried to record pictures
which would give spatial image [1]. With time and
photography development various cameras have been
invented which allowed taking stereographic pictures
[Fig.1].

Figure 1 Kodak Stereo and RBT 109 Series
Various modifications have been introduced by
taking pictures with a special optical nozzle for
stereographic pictures with one lens [Fig.2].

Notions used in the paper

The paper uses notions which can be understood in
different ways and therefore they need to be stated
precisely. They are the following
• restitution – restoration of the idealised object,
excluding physical parameters of the accepted
solution. Thanks to that it is possible to restore

objects and make choice of the method (with
two pictures it can be e.g. axle base of optical
objects, the angle which they create etc.)
reconstruction – restoration including physical
parameters of the accepted solution e.g. sensors
for obtaining the picture. Thanks to that it is
possible to compare different technical solutions
and choose the proper one for a given technical
application

Figure 2 Loreo Photokit MK II Camera and
Stereographic nozzle SKF-1

2.1 Digital stereographics
Application of digital cameras in stereography has
become ordinary. These are sometimes amateur
constructions (created for the purpose of a given user) as

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

•

well as special cameras. These solutions have different
resolution [Fig.3].
Apart from the picture which can be seen in

•
Figure 3 3-D Digital Stereo and 2xKodak EZ 200

•

stereographic browsers or with the help of special glasses
it can form a basis for creation of 3D object based on
these pictures.

3

•

Multi lens systems

5

Figure 4 Digiclops (3 lens) and Burglo 3D (12
lens)
For picture restoration, systems based on more than
two pictures are also used. The amount of data from a
few pictures is greater than from two pictures. However,
that data requires a little different restoration algorithms.

4

Comparative parameters

The following parameters have been introduced for
comparison of different methods of reconstruction and
restitution:
• revoxel – volume corresponding to one pixel of
picture. In case of reconstruction on the basis of
a few pictures it is mutual part of space
corresponding to these pixels (one pixel per
each picture). Occurrence of information in
given pixels of different pictures results from
the occurrence of ‘a point’ in a specified part of
space. This part of space is limited by surfaces
connected with picture pixels. [Fig.5].

revoxelmax – mean maximum revoxel.
Arithmetic mean from a set number of
maximum revoxels. It can be a given percentage
or a number connected with sensor’s resolution.
For the purpose of this parameter calculation it
is necessary to order revoxels depending on
their size.
Vr – volume of reconstructed or restituted space
which can be analysed, giving univocal solution
on the basis of obtained pictures.
revoxelm – arithmetic mean of revoxel value. In
order to determine this value it is necessary to
have the volume of reconstructed or restituted
volume (Vr) and the number of revoxels.
revoxeld – value directly proportional to the
value of revoxel and inversly proportional to
value of the distance from a given point. In case
of one obtained picture it is the centre of the
picture, whereas with two or more pictures it is
the centre of one of them or e.g. the middle of
the segment connecting the centres of two
pictures.

Characteristics of parameters

The suggested evaluation parameters should show
certain important differences and facilitate evaluation of
different methods. Each of them serves different purpose.

5.1 Revoxel
This parameter allows to determine with what
accuracy in a given method or technical solution it is
possible to determine the location of a point.
Reconstructed or restituted point can be found with that
accuracy. For two pictures revoxel can be determined
according to the rule presented in Fig.6. It should be

Figure 6 Possible R_voxels with 2 and 3
pictures
noted that the value of revoxel depends on its location in
space. For different methods it can be different, as
opposed to traditional voxel. Generally, the closer is
revoxel located to sensor the greater accuracy. Revoxel is
made of the restrictions of space with minimum 3
surfaces. The maximum number of surfaces depends on
the method. For methods based on 2,3,4 pictures data on
maximum number of surfaces is presented in [Table 1]

Figure 5 Restitution based on 2 pictures

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

n

Table 1
Number of pictures
used (sensors)
2
3
4
Number of surfaces
8
12
16
The number of surfaces determines the maximum
number of walls of a solid constituting revoxel. This
information is necessary to calculate the volume of
revoxel.

5.2 Vr
This volume clarifies the possibilities of
reconstruction and restitution of a given solution. If we
want to reconstruct or restitute a given object it must be
smaller than this volume. Additionally, revoxels value
must be taken into account so that reconstruction or
restitution was properly accurate.

5.3 Revoxelmax
This value explains the smallest accuracy with
which the elements could be restored. Determination of a
group of revoxels for which arithmetical mean will be
calculated is connected with the method of restitution. It
is suggested to accept this number as 5% or 10% of the
overall number of R voxels. Fig.7 presents change of

revoxelmax =

revoxelm =

¦ revoxel(i)

i =1

(2)
n
where: revoxel(i) – revoxel no and
n – number of revoxels
its disadvantage. If this difference is small then the
accuracy in the whole analysed area will be similar.

5.5 Revoxeld
Owing to that parameter it is possible to determine
how the value of revoxel changes depending on the
distance from sensors, which serve for picture
acquisition. The most favourable solution would be if
this value, of a tested space, approached the constant
value. It would mean low sensitivity of the accepted
solution to the change in distance. Then, e.g. double
increase in distance would lead to double increase in
revoxel, which after taking into consideration that
revoxel equals its volume would lead to a little distortion
in accuracy.

revoxeld (i ) = revoxel (i ) l (i )
where: revoxel(s) – revoxel no and
l(i) – distance from base point revoxel (s)

6

(3)

Conclusions

max

¦ revoxel (i)

(1)

i = 0.95 max

*1 0 0 %

where: revoxel(s) – revoxel no and
max – number of revoxels
revoxels ordered according to the value of accepted test
solution. Axis x gives the number of revoxel as referred
to the overall n number in percentage. Axis y presents
percentage of the value of revoxel(s) as a ratio to revoxel
max.

The suggested comparative parameters for different
methods of reconstruction and restitution should
facilitate evaluation of the existing methods as well as
the constructor’s choice. They also allow to lower the
costs of this construction by using already existing
methods.

7

Future work

m a x

r_ v o x e l/r_ v o x e l

The author is going to test usefulness of the
suggested comparative parameters. For that purpose
selected methods of reconstruction and restitution will be
compared, based on the solutions presented in this paper.
The results should answer the question if the accepted
parameters are sufficient for comparison of different
methods of reconstruction and restitution. It may appear
necessary to modify the accepted solutions or introduce
new parameters.
Figure 7 Change of revoxelmax

8

References

Other solutions are also possible but it is difficult to
give details at this stage. This value allows to estimate
the accuracy of a part of a solid in places where this
accuracy is the smallest. In other parts of the object this
accuracy will be certainly greater.

[1]

C. Wheatstone. Contributions to the Physiology of
Vision.—Part the First. On some remarkable, and
hitherto unobserved, Phenomena of Binocular Vision,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Vol. 128, pp. 371 – 394. 1838
Point Grey Research Inc url: http://www.ptgrey.com/
products/digiclops/index.html
J.J. Baracs. Exploring the Cube, Proceeding of 8th
ICECCDG, 1998, VOL. 1, Austin, 6-24
R. Benosman, S. Bing Kang. Panoramic Vision Sensor,
Theory, and Application, Springer, (2000)

[2]

5.4 Revoxelm
[3]

Mean revoxel is calculated. Thanks to that value it is
possible to compare and in comparison with revoxel it
can be determined how the value of revoxel changes into

[4]

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

Z. Brzosko. WykreĞlna restytucja perspektywy, WNT,
Warszawa 1995
E.B. Corrochano. Geometric Computing for Perception
Action Systems, Concept, Algorithms, and Scientific
Applications, Springer (2001)
G. O. Head, J. D. Head. 1000 AutoCAD Tips and Tricks,
Ventana Press,1993.
G. O. Head. AutoLISP, Ventana Press,1992
A. Khattab, W.N. Hana. A Geometrical treatment for
establishment of Panoramic Perspective from Successive
Photographs, Proceeding of 10th ICGG VOL. 1, (2002),
Kyiv, 274-278
E. Knoll. Developing A Procedure To Transfer
Geometrical Constraints From the Plane Into Space,
Proceeding of 8th ICECCDG VOL. 1, (1998), Austin, 6367
A. Kulig. Measuring Techniques Applied In
Conservation and Reconstruction of Monuments of Art,
Proceeding of 10th ICGG VOL. 1, (2002), Kiev, 300-303
Z. Lewandowski. Geometria wykreĞlna 1987
K Nishihara, M. Onishi, M. Yasutomi, S. Nishihara.
Measuring Method of Tree Dimension Object through
Descriptive Geometry, Proceeding of 10th ICGG VOL. 1,
(2002), Kyiv, 123-126
M. Onischi. A Photographic Method for Panoramic
Sequence With A Regular Camera, Part 3 Application to
Sky Photographs, Proceeding of 9th ICGG, (2000),
Johannesburg, 353-356
E. Sojka. Reconstructing Three-Dimensional Objects
From The Images Produced by Moving Camera,
Proceeding of 8th ICECCDG VOL. 1, (1998), Austin,
160-164
S. SzerszeĔ. Nauka o rzutach WNT, Warszawa,1978
F, Taillandier, R, Derich. Reconstruction of 3D Linear
Primitives From Multiple Views For Urban Areas,
Proceedings Photogrammetric Computer Vision,
Symposium 2002, September 9 - 13, 2002, Graz, 91-96.
K.T. Tytkowski. 3D Scanner Based on Multi Perspective
Projection, Proceeding of 9th ICGG, (2000),
Johannesburg, 204-209
Y. Yamaguch. A Basic Evaluation Method of
Subdivision Surfaces Journal for Geometry and Graphics
Vol. 5 (2001) no. 2, 145-155

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

