E-participation in the Planning Process
Christopher Lamb
University of Greenwich
chris.a.lamb@btinternet.com

Duncan Berntsen
University of Greenwich
d.berntsen@btinternet.com

Abstract
Public engagement in the planning process in the UK is
undergoing rapid change, due to the introduction of
revised government legislation and the general migration
to e-services. In this paper we present a research
proposal for the development of the next-generation of
public engagement systems based on an understanding of
these legislative requirements and the opportunities
afforded by emerging methodologies and enabling
technologies. We start by outlining the development and
current state of public engagement. We then provide an
overview of current practice, discuss the factors leading
to the current pressures for changes in practice and
outline the issues to be addressed. Finally we review
current research in the area and provide an outline of our
proposal.

Stefan Kueppers
CSM, The London Institute
s.kueppers@csm.linst.ac.uk

It is therefore reasonable to ask the question: To what
extent are the current methodologies, tools and channels
currently used in public engagement capable of delivering
the outcomes that this shift demands?
Based on our research to date, we propose that the
processes of public engagement can be improved by the
development and systematisation of best-practice
methodologies, to the benefit of society, government
(central and local) and the development industry. This
requires an investigation into the development of
technologies to enable emerging electronic channels to be
used effectively.
This places the research work under the domain of eservices and specifically of e-government services related
to urban development. Within this area the domain is that
of e-participation, in terms of methodology and enabling
technology.

2. An overview of public engagement practice
1. Introduction
2.1 Methodologies
Public engagement, of various types, is an intrinsic
part of the UK planning process, having been
encapsulated within the Town & Country Planning Act
1947. As such, it has been a significant feature of a wide
range of land and property development propositions by
local government, the private sector and, increasingly,
registered social landlords. Since 1947 its importance
within the town and country planning process has
gradually increased, primarily as a result of successive
government legislation, but also as a result of the
organisational agendas involved.
Due to the conjunction of a number of factors, the
development of the process of public engagement in this
area in the UK is undergoing fundamental and rapid
change. These factors include the government’s social
sustainability agenda, the recognition of the importance of
social and economic sustainability and the increased
importance of corporate social responsibility. There is
also a greater interest in best practice based on the work
of successive generations of practitioners who have
refined the system through practice-based learning.

The methodologies used in public engagement can be
broadly categorised as information, consultation and
participation. The first refers to the one-way process of
information publishing. With consultation, the emphasis
is on obtaining ‘feedback’ on a framework or proposition
that has been developed. Participation requires inclusion
in the conception, and visioning, of that framework or
proposition followed by continued inclusion in its
development. In the UK, consultation rather than
participation remains the predominant methodology, not
least because there is often political, commercial or
political advantage in keeping control in the hands of the
few ‘qualified’ actors. However, participation-based
methodologies have been relatively widely used within
one particular sector, social housing.

2.2 Channels
In most cases, the various public engagement
processes are delivered through face-to-face events to
which the public, residents or otherwise, are invited.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

These events include meetings, exhibitions and
workshops. Usually a range of these events will be
planned at key stages in the process, and may also
include design festivals and ‘site visits’ to other similar,
completed, developments.

2.3 Tools
The tools that represent the proposed development,
the ‘subject’ of the public engagement process, are
drawings, physical models and reports.
These are accompanied by another range of tools that
provide a means of generating and recording dialogue
between the public and those proposing change. These
include questionnaires, canvass cards, route mapping
exercises, games and diagrams. They are used during
events and during interviews carried out in the street or
through door-to-door visits. Questionnaires, newsletters
and other printed documents are also delivered by post.

2.4 The consultation industry
Public engagement in planning in the UK is
supported by a substantial service industry. The industry
consists of a number of specialist companies and a
variety of individual subject specialists, acting as
consultants or employed within PR, planning or
architecture companies. For example, in urban
regeneration a specialist within a planning consultancy
may carry out the statutory consultation, while specialists
within a PR company may carry out the non-statutory
consultation with the public, usually in the service of
identifying commercial advantage or communicating
value and worth. Similarly, specialists can be found in
firms of architects, urban designers and government
funded architecture centres, all with their own particular
focuses.

2.5 Methods of service delivery
In most cases, the specialist will plan a ‘bespoke’
public engagement process drawing on his or her
knowledge and experience. However there are also a
number of approaches that combine methodology, tools
and means of delivery into a recognisable system. These
include established processes such as ‘Planning for Real’
and ‘Enquiry by Design’, which have become
recognisable brands of face-to-face activity, protected in
use.

2.6 The development in the use of e-services
Increasingly, e-consultation tools are being integrated
into existing consultation and participation processes.
Many face-to-face processes are now accompanied by

websites that inform the public of events and progress.
They also enable a level of engagement through the use
of proprietary discussion forums, e-questionnaires and evoting tools.

3. The rapidly
framework

changing

context

and

3.1 Understanding apathy
Recent research (1) and government working papers,
including
‘Participation
in
Development
Plan
Preparation’ (2) question why so few citizens engage in
consultation processes, despite many local authorities
commitment to it, the proliferation of specialists and the
development over the years of considerable knowledge
and know how.
A number of causes have been identified, the most
prevalent of which is public apathy, which appears to be
a result of society’s attitude and understanding of:
• The government and the political system
• Local government (viewed as inefficient and
often inappropriate)
• The planning system (viewed as centralised,
complicated and intimidating) and particularly
the complexities of the varying scales of
development that the planning system has to
address
• The consultation processes (not trusted and
regarded as ‘tokenistic’)
• The available channels for dialogue

3.2 Introduction of new planning legislation
The forthcoming reform of the planning system by
the government, which it sees as essential to the
realisation of its objective of ‘sustainable communities',
will have a far-reaching impact on the way in which
engagement is carried out. Implementation of the
legislation will start this year, based on working papers
published during 2003 and early 2004 by the Office of
the Deputy Prime Minister (2). Reviewing current
consultation processes, the government contends that
those that are based entirely on consultation, which it
refers to as ‘decide-announce-defend’, are wasteful and
adversarial, frequently contributing to apathy or protest.
The new legislation will therefore require a
fundamental change in the methodology used in public
engagement from primarily one of consultation to one of
participation.
The Government’s aims are best understood by
reference to a quote from one of the working papers:
“We want to empower people to feel that they can
participate in a system that is really interested in their

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

views. We want to change the culture of planning from
one of objecting, to one of constructive participation”.

3.2 Industry recognition of the problem
Whilst legislation will include enforcement measures,
there is considerable evidence that the property industry
itself now recognises the need for change. As the British
Council for Offices states “the question is no longer one
of ‘Why should I engage?’ It is ‘How do I engage?’” (4).
Increasingly it recognises that inclusion offers the
benefits of demonstrating corporate social responsibility
and of reduced risk.

3.4 Migration to e-services and e-government
An emerging agenda for e-government, and a
pressure towards the use of e-services accompany these
changes in society, legislation and industry. Central
government is imposing e-service delivery targets on
local government, requiring them to offer all services to
the public electronically. This is being supported by
central government; London has been recently awarded
£2.48million of government funding to develop a single
web-based access point to the capital’s public services by
2005.

4. Issues emerging from this new context
There are a number of issues that must be addressed
in order to respond to this new context:
• Scalability of processes in order to deal with a
higher volume participation
• Ease of access to the process by the public
• Speed of the process
• Trust in and accountability of the process,
particularly in relation to management
accountability, impartiality of gatekeepers to the
process and control of abuse
• Independence and neutrality of the process
• Cost control for both local authorities and the
public, particularly important in a climate of
ever tighter development margins, exacerbated
by greater transparency of development drivers
and expected profits
• The principles of transparency and reciprocity
within the knowledge gathering process
• Ease of financing of the process
These issues provide the basis for the ‘feature-set’ of
the next generation of public engagement systems

5. A review of current practice relative to
these issues

3.5 Emergence and use of new channels
5.1 Methodology
Clearly the rapid development digital infrastructure
has an ability to facilitate the government’s objective for
a greater bandwidth of public participation. 11.9 million
or 48% of UK of households can now access the Internet
at home (Source: Office of National Statistics), compared
with just 2.3 million in 1998. Figures released by the ITC
show that Digital Television penetration reached 47.1%
of UK households in September 2003. Another 10
million homes will be receiving Digital TV by 2007.
70% of the UK population – around 40 million people –
now use a mobile phone.
Likewise, figures for polling, voting and the use of eservices indicate that current trends for the take-up of
digital channels are on the increase and gaining
momentum.
However, we should not get carried away with the
notion that digital tools can or will give all the answers.
Ultimately, the measure of success will lie in the
intelligibility of any participation framework and the
clarity of its interface with planning legislation. Its ability
to tangibly facilitate project outcomes and the confidence
that communities and the public have in them, whether
built or not, will likewise be under close scrutiny.

In order to effectively intervene and reconfigure
participation methodologies, the identification of the
effects that current processes have upon project outcomes
is critical. As such the ‘decide-announce-defend’ model
needs to be adequately scrutinised ahead of its demise,
not least because the next generation of participation
processes will be initially understood and used through
this filter of understanding during the process of change.

5.2 Channels and tools
The use of face-to-face processes has made
considerable headway over recent years in proving the
case for greater engagement in helping to configure our
environment. This type of public engagement has been
proven to not only help facilitate wholesome community
and more sustainable and environmentally sensitive
outcomes, but also to quicken the pace of development
for large regeneration projects, where the scales of
impacts are great.
However there are a number of foreseeable problems
associated with the continued use of face-to-face
processes alone. Firstly, they are labour intensive
processes in which costs rise with the numbers
participating due to the face time or unit-charging basis

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

of most consultants. Secondly, engagement is limited to
events at specific times, locations and numbers,
excluding many who are unable to, or do not want to
attend public meetings.
The continued use of paper-based tools and channels
also presents a number of problems. It not only restricts
transparency and accountability but also requires timeconsuming and costly translation of information into
understandable and distributable forms.

5.3 Knowledge management
Public consultation and participation processes
generate a significant amount and range of information
from the local population and stakeholders; they are
contributing factual information and knowledge to the
process. At present it is difficult to demonstrate
accountability and transparency in the use of this
acquired information or to address and measure the
quality of information maintained. It is also difficult to
adequately store and manage it, so that it can be assessed
and used effectively during the current process, or reused as a basis for subsequent processes.
Participation needs to move into a more structured
collaborative model in which ‘ownership’ of facts and
knowledge is granted and consistency of it maintained
for all participants in the process by the use of a
supporting knowledge management infrastructure.
Evolving new technologies such as the ‘semantic web’
and ‘peer to peer’ networks can provide strategies and
implementation routes for this to take place.

6. Working
participation

towards

next

generation

6.1 Emerging methodologies
The Participation Group at the Institute of
Development Studies, Sussex (UK) is undertaking
research into the methodology of participation, in various
fields. Research concentrates on four areas: Participation
and policy, citizenship and participation, the theory and
practice of participation and organisational learning and
change.
There has also been a range of research on the subject
of public consultation and participation in the UK in the
specific context of urban planning by several universities
including Oxford Brookes University and University
College London.

6.2 Emerging channels and tools
In the area of e-government, UK local government
has recently been awarded £6.2 million of funding from

the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister’s e-innovations
fund, which provides match funding for new ideas in
local e-government.
In the specific area of e-consultation, the Queen's
University Belfast E-Consultation Study Group, in
collaboration with the National Institute for Regional and
Spatial Analysis and Letterkenny Institute of Technology
has started a major e-consultation research project.
The EDEN project aims to increase participation in
the decision-making process, specifically in the area of
urban planning, through the development of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tools. It is being developed
by Omega Generation, PVL, Telepolis. YANA Research,
University of Bremen and the Napier University (ITC)
The Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (CASA),
University College London, is carrying out research on econsultation and e-government within planning. It has a
number of research projects ongoing including Virtual
London, Online Planning (including the Woodberry
Down Regeneration Project), Wired Whitehall and
Shared Architecture. Research includes the use of econsultation tools, GIS and 3d modelling. CASA also
publishes the journal ‘Online Planning’ [4].

6.3 Emerging
management

approaches

to

knowledge

Developments over the last five years in commercial
knowledge management systems have changed business
practice in several industries. In addition, online
communities have for some time been moving away from
news lists and websites to a variety of more collaborative
modes of dialogue with new models of communication
such as ‘tikis’ and online games.
In information science research, a large body of
CSCW (computer-supported cooperative work) activity
has involved collaborative working practice using the
Internet, providing new models and technology
infrastructures for distributed online work and play
spaces. They have demonstrated how dialogue can be
facilitated, documented, visualised and also made
transparent and accountable.

7. Our approach
7.1 Concept
Our premise is that the convergence of the changes in
society, industry and legislation, together with the
development of the digital infrastructure and consumer
use of technology, provide an opportunity for an eparticipation system that can address the issues outlined
above. Our approach is to:

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

•

•
•
•

Understand the new context for public
engagement, the issues involved and respond by
developing a best practice based methodology
of participation
Investigate the opportunities for the augmenting
of existing face-to-face and paper based
processes
Investigate the opportunities for systemisation
where this addresses issues that methodology
alone cannot address
Investigate the potential that lie within such
systemisation for knowledge structures that can
deliver public and commercial advantage for all
stakeholders within the process.

7.2 Research methodology
Our research into the methodology of participation
and systemisation will concentrate on:
• Identifying the conditions and particular impacts
of new planning legislation upon stakeholders,
stakeholder expectations and processes
• Identifying the critical stakeholder drivers for
participants to such processes and the optimal
conditions for participatory activity
• Identifying the roles, relationships and
intervention points for all stakeholders to the
process
• Identifying a structured methodology of
intervention either as a new or augmented
process of participatory action and delivery
• Embedding the methodology, roles and
relationships within an information system.
• Developing the next generation of participation
tools and a fully integrated toolset that will
enable the public to participate in the process
remotely
• Developing a knowledge model that collects,
stores, processes and distributes information
generated during the process.

7.3 Research focus
In addition to our research on methodologies, tools
and channels, we intend to also focus on two types of
knowledge.
One objective is to develop a model of compliant,
best-practice public participation. We will therefore
investigate how knowledge aggregated during the
process can be captured with a consistent, verifiable
methodology and can be shaped in ways to provide rich
resources for future processes. The means of quantifying
and assessing relevance and trustworthiness of acquired
knowledge will be critical to the value gained from such

an effort. This will be addressed by a strategy of
structured criticism from on-the-ground experience. This
is in direct opposition to many existing methods where
content would have been primarily mediated and
influenced by gatekeepers of knowledge and decisions.
We will also investigate the dialogue between
stakeholders and the public over time, its outcomes and
associated interpersonal and organisational networks that
have the potential to be mapped onto an ontological
framework in the planning and sustainability domains.
Such an evolving framework will highlight critical
issues, relations, and decision milestones in a formal way
supporting efforts of accountability in the process.
Beyond the obvious citizenship and society benefits and
the limits of the planning process itself, such
participation (and the informational gathering that
naturally springs from it), can be cross-referenced and
managed as a knowledge system to considerable effect.
The identification of opportunities for both private and
public sectors would be possible, with considerable
commercial benefit to those within the process and to the
public at large. Such opportunities might manifest simply
as transparent opportunities for monetary gain, yet may
just as easily be leveraged in support of closer fit and
creativity within project solutions, tighter risk
management, more appropriate risk mitigation measures
and clearer identification of the potentials and
opportunities within existing communities and their
fabrics.

8. Research carried out to date
Research carried out to date has been undertaken
independently.
We intend to now coordinate this with Architecture
Diploma Atelier 8 and the MA Urban Design Programme
within the School of Architecture and Construction at the
University of Greenwich. Parallel tasks to date carried
out within the University have had the ambition of way
finding for the subject matter and later research, in order
to navigate the issues lying within the participation,
planning and development discourse. This has taken the
shape of a series of community and stakeholder
investigations undertaken by 25 students in the Medway
Towns within the Thames Gateway since September
2003. These have then been accompanied by an informed
speculation, relating participation models to urban
programmes.
Such informed speculations have manifest as clues to
new participatory processes, which are now being used
as the basis for the first pilot studies between the School
of Architecture and Construction and the School of
Computing and Mathematical Sciences. This pilot will
take the shape of a combined project over the next four
months, between Masters students on the University MA

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Urban Design and MSc Computing and Mathematical
Sciences Programmes, reflecting for the first time the
cross-discipline complexity and opportunities outlined
within this paper.

9. The Current Phase of Research
The first cross discipline phase of the research is
currently being configured. It will once again be in the
form of an informed speculation and as such will form
the second pilot in this journey. It is expected to give new
insights into the most appropriate basis of collaboration,
the structure and focus of the research thrust and the
individual territories of subject focuses. Crucially it will
focus upon a ‘Proof of Concept’ for identified process
components. This is expected to facilitate a more
differentiated and empirical research phase, commencing
September 2004 within both Schools. In broad terms, the
research and development phases are envisaged as
follows:
• Identification of the conditions, relationships,
impacts and drivers as outlined above
• Development of concept models
• Identification of the most appropriate form for
data management and data-tool development
• Development and testing of a software
prototype

10. Conclusion
It is clear from our activities to date, that the world of
public engagement within the planning system in the UK
is entering a period of significant and, some would say,
well overdue, change. Likewise, the climate for
significantly greater participatory activity in service of
the built environment is growing in all sectors of
industry, finance and politics. As in other segments of the
economy, this is profoundly altering the way in which the
built environment professions manage risk, do business
and hold a mantle for quality and justice within what is
after all, our world. E-participation can greatly facilitate
this and may, as some would predict, become the way to
greater speed, efficiency, quality, value and social justice
within our built environment.
We are at the beginning of an important, relevant and
exciting journey into the possibilities of this new reality
and would like to make this call for interested individuals
and institutions, to join us in what is indeed an ambitious
and multivalent quest.
Please refer to contact details at the head of this paper
for more information.

References
1. Jenkins, Dr. P, Kirk K and Smith, Dr. H. Getting Involved
in Planning: Perceptions of the Wider Public, Centre for
Environment and Human Settlements, School of Planning and
Housing, Edinburgh College of Art/Heriot-Watt University
2. Various authors, Working Papers published by the Office of
the Deputy Prime Minister including:
•
Local Development Frameworks. Guide to
Procedures and Code of Practice.
•
Participation in Development Plan Preparation
•
Best Value Indicators and performance Indicators
2004/05
•
Sustainable Communities
•
Developing Good Practice in Tenant Participation
•
Draft policy statements including Draft policy
Statement 6: Planning for Town Centres
3 Hunt Dobson Ltd, Social Engagement, September 2003,
British Council for Offices,
4. Hudson-Smith, A, Online Planning Journal Centre for
Advanced Spatial Analysis, University College London.
http://www.onlineplanning.org.uk/
Prinz, W., Mark, G. and Pankoke-Babatz, U. Designing
Groupware for Congruency in Use. CSCW `98, 373-382.
Godefroid P. Herbsleb, J.D. Jagadeesan, L.J and Du Li.
Ensuring Privacy in Presence Awareness Systems: An
Automated Verification Approach. Proceedings of ACM
2000 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work,
December, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, 2000.
Fonseca F, Egenhofer M, Davis C, and Borges K. Ontologies
and Knowledge Sharing in Urban GIS. Computer,
Environment and Urban Systems
Prinz, W. NESSIE: An Awareness Environment for
Cooperative Settings. In Proceedings of the Sixth European
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work ECSCW'99 (Sept. 12-16, Copenhagen, Denmark). Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dortrecht, NL, 1999. pp. 391-410.
Erickson, T., Smith, D.N., Kellogg, W.A., Laff, M. and
Richards, J.T. Socially Translucent Systems: Social Proxies,
Persistent Conversation, and the Design of Babble. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - CHI'99 (May 15-20, Philadelphia, PE).
ACM, 1999. pp. 72 -79.
Schaefer L. and Kueppers S. Camera Agents in a Theatre of
Work Proceedings of the 7th international conference on
Intelligent user Interfaces 2002, San Francisco, California,
USA, ACM ISBN 1-58113-382-0 pp.218--219

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

