A New Visualization Approach for Supporting Knowledge Management and
Collaboration in E-Learning
Quang Vinh Nguyen, Mao Lin Huang, and Igor Hawryszkiewycz
Faculty of Information Technology
University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
quvnguye@it.uts.edu.au, maolin@it.uts.edu.au, igorh@it.uts.edu.au

Abstract
This paper introduces an information visualization
component that appears as an additional window in an
online collaborative e-learning environment, and can
be used for viewing, browsing, editing and
manipulating knowledge-based learning information
through the LiveNet [9] - a knowledge management
and enterprise collaboration tool. This visual
component employs a new visualization technique,
called ENCCON [7], which uses a connection +
enclosure layout method and a semi-transparency
navigation mechanism to handle large scale of
hierarchical learning information and it aims to
provide a better assistance to the users of LiveNet for
visual manipulation and navigation of knowledgebased data objects. The use of visualization techniques
in LiveNet provides users with not only a 2D graphical
visual interface for direct data manipulation, but also
a set of clear views, the focus+context views, of the
interrelations among the data objects which enhances
the understanding of relational information that the
users want to see. Although the proposed visualization
technique ENCCON can be applied in many domains,
we only concern its application in the domain of
collaborative e-learning through the LiveNet.

1. Introduction
With the fast growth of the modern Internet and
WWW technologies, many new forms of learning
communities, such as work based learning, distance
learning, and just-in-time learning in business
processes, have been developed besides the
conventional classroom learning approach. These new
learning methods have become more and more popular
in many educational institutions and universities.
Harasim et al. [4] has pointed out that there are three

objectives of using web based learning technologies as
a supplementary to the education in universities. The
first objective is to use them as an enhancement to
traditional courses such as supplemental information
that is exchanged via emails, bulletin board systems, or
available on the Internet. The second objective is to
further develop a portion or entire course that can be
replaced with computer-based instructions. In this
system, students are able to monitor their activities,
register, and also administer basically their private
domains. The final objective is to use computer-based
education technologies to support learning activities
with forums for knowledge networking, discussion
groups, or information exchange [4]. The overall aim
of using web-based learning is to facilitate studentcentred learning and to support the flexibility of
students’time.
The application of visual collaborative work
environment for e-learning has received relatively little
research attention. Most of the current systems use
traditional textual interfaces. Biuk-Aghai [1, 2] has
implemented a visualization of structures and
behaviour
aspects
of
virtual
collaboration
environments. This technique employed the forcedirected animated visualization algorithm to show the
structures and node colouring to indicate the
workspace’s density. However, Biuk-Aghai does not
present the logical relations among the information,
and his technique is unable to visualize very large and
complex collaboration environments. Harrison and
Coplient [5] proposed a visualized collaboration for
software organization. However, the research was
about face-to-face collaboration, and data was
manually collected and input into the computer for
subsequent analysis. Oeiras et al. developed the
InterMap tool to support social aspects and facilitate
interaction in order to improve the educational process
of TelEduc [3]. However, this tool can only be used to

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

represent the email data, discussion group, and chart
tools, and it uses graphs to show courses interactions.

1.1. The LiveNet system
We have implemented a system, LiveNet, to
provide learning environment. It allows users to create
digital workspaces for their activities. The LiveNet
system also provides the flexibility to customize
workspaces by adding roles and artifacts, assigning
permissions, adding actions and so on. The LiveNet
system is based on a meta-model that is stored as a
relational database and provides the flexibility needed
to setup workspaces to satisfy a large number of
collaborative needs. The system is developed using the
Java 2 Enterprise Edition (J2EE) platform, which
provides the flexibility to both easily add new
components as well as developing specialized
interfaces.
Although LiveNet [9] is an excellent tool for
knowledge
management
and
collaborative
environment, its text-oriented interfaces are not
comprehensible to the user and cost extra cognitive

overhead in understanding the underlying structures
and interrelations behind the data sets that the LiveNet
is manipulating. With textual user interfaces, the users
(experts, instructors, and students) of LiveNet are
hardly able to see the relationships among data
structures which are not appearing in the textual
interface. One of the major limitations of current
LiveNet interfaces is the lack of the meaningful visual
presentation of various types of the logical
relationships among data objects which are involved in
a collaborative learning environment. Thus, it would be
very difficult for non-expert users to understand the
logical relationships among objects in a workingwindow of the learning environment and the logical
relationships among data objects across different
working-windows by using the traditional textual
interface. In addition, current interfaces provided in
LiveNet are unable to display large scale information
because of their limited display space in a frame.
Figure 1 shows an example of the current LiveNet’s
interface. It shows a workspace used by a lecturer to set
up a case study guide for groups of students.

)LJXUH  $Q H[DPSOH RI WKH FXUUHQW /LYH1HW¶V LQWHUIDFH

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

As a general rule each workspace in LiveNet
supports only one activity and users can only see the
context of the activity, but can not see how it fits in
with other activities in a system. In most cases, a
management process (e.g. a case study) involves many
activities need to be carried out by different team
members. However, the textual interface shows at any
time only one activity on the screen, and it does not
show the interrelations among these activities.

In order to understand how the layout algorithm
and navigation/interaction mechanism can help users to
find out particular data items they want and to improve
their perceptions of the data and associated properties,
structures and interrelationships, it is necessary to
understand some basic features of the visualization
techniques that we used to implement the visualization
component in LiveNet.

2.1. The layout algorithm
1.2. The ENCCON visualization component
To overcome the above limitations and to explore
internal structure of workspace, we developed a new
visualization component that appears as an additional
window embedded in the LiveNet, and can be used for
viewing, browsing, editing and manipulating
knowledge-based learning information. This visual
component employs a new Enclosure + Connection
(ENCCON) visualization technique [7] which uses the
connection + enclosure layout method and semitransparency navigation mechanism to handle large
scale of learning information and it aims to provide a
better assistance to the users of LiveNet for visual
manipulation and navigation of objects stored in a
relational database. The use of visualization techniques
in LiveNet provides users with not only a 2D graphical
visual interface for direct data manipulation, but also a
set of clear views, the focus+context views, of the
interrelations among the data objects which enhances
the understanding of relational information that the
users want to see. Although the proposed visualization
technique ENCCON can be applied in many domains,
in this paper we only concern its application in the
domain of collaborative e-learning through the
LiveNet.

The layout algorithm used in this system is based on
a new ENCCON visualization technique [7] that is
capable to visualize large hierarchical data sets. This
technique inherits the advantages of Space-Optimized
Tree technique [8] that enhances the usability of
display space by using area division. This technique is
more straightforward, which uses rectangles for the
area division, rather than polygons used in SpaceOptimized tree. The use of rectangles can not only
decrease the computation cost in recursive calculation
of geometrical local regions, but also greatly reduces
the perceptual and cognitive loads spent on
understanding and perception of the underlying
hierarchical structure. The layout aims to utilize the
display space to display the entire or a portion of the
hierarchy. Figure 2 shows an example of the layout of a
large data set drawn by ENCCON’s layout algorithm.

2. Technical specifications
In the design of visualization component, the
following objectives need to be achieved. The expected
visualization component should:
• Provide an optimised interactive graphic from
where users can interactively view, navigate and
manipulate the entire information.
• Improve the user understanding of the underlying
structure and internal relationships of the
information.
• Provide the overall context view of the data
structure.
• Be able to handle large amount of information.

)LJXUH  $Q H[DPSOH RI WKH OD\RXW RI WKH HQWLUH
-DYD 'RFXPHQWDWLRQ¶V ILOH V\VWHP XVLQJ WKH
LPSURYHG (1&&21 DOJRULWKP DSSUR[LPDWHO\
 QRGHV UXQQLQJ WLPH DSSUR[LPDWHO\ 
VHFRQGV RQ D 3HQWLXP ,,,  0K] XVLQJ -DYD
$SSOHW

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

2.2. The navigation strategy
In our implementation, we use a new focus+context
viewing approach, semi-transparency, for the
navigation of hierarchical data, that is the global-view
(or context-view) is overlapped with and detail-view
(or focus-view) and they are both displayed in the same
display area in a semi-transparent manner. The globalview displays the overall hierarchy of the information
while the detail-view shows a portion of a particular
focused sub-hierarchy. At the default mode, the detailview occupies the entire display area with highlighted
full colours, while the global-view is displayed within a
smaller rectangle area at the centre in semitransparency manner (see Figure 5). The purpose of
this arrangement is to reduce the distraction between
two views. The distraction might happen when too
much overlaps among nodes between the context-view
and the focus-view. The size of context-view area can
interactively be adjusted to suit the user’s preference.
There are two states of the visualization: normal
and history. In the normal state, the user’s attention is
on the content of the detail-view, and when the history
state turns on, the user’s attention moves to the content
of the global-view. At the normal state, the selected
sub-hierarchy is displayed in with full colour and no
transparency, while the context is partly transparent
and is displayed in lighter colour (see Figure 5). At the
history state, the context is brought from the back to the
front and displayed with full colour and no
transparency, while the detail view is sent from the
front to the back and displayed with brighter and partly
transparent colour (see Figure 6). These two views can
be shifted interactively by using left mouse-click on the
background of each layer.
In our technique, the selection of a visual object is
the main interaction taken by the users during the
navigation. This interaction can be applied to any
visible nodes at the detail view or context view in order
to zoom in the sub-hierarchy of the selected nodes. The
system can also bring back the context hierarchy to the
front with a highlighted view when a right mouse click
occurs on the display area of the detail view. All of the
interactions are accommodated with animations
(including smooth moving, fade in, and fade out) in
order to preserve the mental map during the navigation.

2.3. LiveNet’s visual interface
The client-side visual interface of LiveNet is
implemented using Java Applet. We apply 3 tiers J2EE
technology to control the interaction between the applet
and the database. With this dynamic data retrieval, the

system is able to reflex the changes from the data
source which makes it be valuable for collaborative
environments. This applet window does not aim to
replace entirely the traditional text-based interface, but
it provides extra assistance to the users.
We use ENCCON to represent the structure of
collaborative workspace and logical relationships
among the objects (e.g. learning elements). In the
visual interface, nodes represent the objects (i.e.
activities, artefacts, groups, events, agents, profiles,
etc), while edges are used to present relationships
among
the
objects.
Although the current
implementation is restricted to relational hierarchies (a
tree-based hierarchy), this technique can be expanded
to handle non-tree structures. With none-tree graphs,
the additional edges might be used to present the links
between external or logical relationships of the objects.
Figure 3 shows an example of a visual Interface in
LiveNet.

)LJXUH 
/LYH1HW

$Q H[DPSOH RI D YLVXDO LQWHUIDFH LQ

The ENCCON layout algorithm was chosen and
used in our implementation to take advantages of its
geometric space efficiency, fast calculation, and
aesthetical niceness. The properties of the chosen
techniques ensure the capability of handling large or
very large amount of information, with several levels of
hierarchical visualization, i.e. a deep structure with
thousands of elements. In other words, this improves
the scalability of the traditional interface. This

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

technique also provides an overall view of the entire
information of LiveNet’s workspace which is
associated to the users. This helps users to achieve
better understanding of the overall structure of the
workspaces or learning environments that they are
working with.
As mentioned in section 2.2, we use a semitransparency viewing technique to support fast
navigation of large hierarchy in which a focused subhierarchy is displayed as the detail-view and the
context of the hierarchy is displayed as the global-view.
This allows users to explore through entire hierarchy
quickly by moving around the sub-hierarchies. Each
visual interaction is accommodated by an animation in
order to preserve the cognitive-map of the user during
the navigation. Figure 4 shows a global view of the
workspace in LiveNet from a particular user. This
figure also indicates that the user is focusing on the
node “My Activities”. Figure 5 shows the next display
when the node “My Activities” is selected. You can see
from the display of Figure 5 that the sub-tree of the
node “My Activities” is smoothly enlarged and
occupying the entire screen, while the previous context
view in Figure 4 is reduced and sent to the background
with semi-transparency. Figure 6 is the display when
the global-view active state is selected. You can see
that the display is reversed so that the context is
brought from the background to the front and displayed
with full colours, and the detail-view is sent to the back
and displayed with partly transparency.
In our system, the user can pop up a menu over a
particular node which shows all actions, properties and
associated attributes of the corresponding object. This
operation menu is activated when the user right-clicks
on a particular node, and then the system will send a
corresponding request to server in order to execute the
instruction (see Figure 7). This provides users with the
facility of direct manipulation of objects of all kinds
through the interactive visualization.
This visualization uses different colours for
presenting each sub-domain of the hierarchy which
aims to improve the clarity of the visualization. Deeper
level nodes are displayed at smaller size in order to
identify from their ancestors. We also provide an
interactive menu allowing users to adjust the display to
their preferred styles.
In this case of learning workspace, we also provide
a facility for the teachers and administrators to view
and analyse the structure of the LiveNet system. This
aims to improve the users’ understanding of their work
environment. In our current implementation, the system
only supports the overall visualization of all members,
activities and groups which are available in the LiveNet

server. Figure 8 shows an example of this
administrative visualization, in which all activities and
sub-activities involved in the learning process are listed
through the visualization in LiveNet.

3. Conclusions and future works
We have presented our information visualization
component that appears as an additional window, and
can be used for viewing, browsing, editing and
manipulating knowledge-based information that are
used in e-learning through a virtual learning
environment created by LiveNet. We employed an
optimised visualization technique called ENCCON to
handle the visualization of large scale hierarchical
information and aim to provide the users with a better
assistance of using LiveNet for the visual manipulation
and navigation of objects involved in the process of elearning.
Our visualization technique can provide a better
graphical visual interface for faster navigation, and
improve the understanding of the teachers and students
who might not be computing experts. Although this
project is at its early stage, we believe that it is a
valuable tool for the knowledge management and
collaboration in virtual learning environments. This
tool is particularly valuable to be used for large
domains that the traditional interfaces are unable to
handle.
Next step, we will implement the function which
shows both logical relations and the current structural
relations. We will also improve the interactions
between visualization applet and server enabling the
applet to refresh the content of display dynamically
from the LiveNet database. More functionality will be
created and added to enhance the administration, which
gives system administrators and teachers more control
over the system. The future visualization component
also displays types, attributes and more properties
associated to learning-elements. In addition, we will
work on usability test to demonstrate the benefits of
using our technique over the current traditional
collaborative workspace models.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Distributed
Systems Technology Centre (DSTC) at the University
of Technology, Sydney, Australia for providing
funding for the research described in this paper. The
authors would also like to thank Dongbai Xue for his
help.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

)LJXUH  $ JOREDO YLHZ RI WKH ZRUNVSDFH LQ /LYH1HW¶ IURP D SDUWLFXODU XVHU

)LJXUH  $ GLVSOD\ ZKHQ WKH QRGH ³0\ $FWLYLWLHV´ LV VHOHFWHG <RX FDQ VHH WKDW WKH VXEWUHH RI ³0\
$FWLYLWLHV´ GLVSOD\HG LQ )LJXUH  LV QRZ RFFXS\LQJ WKH ZKROH ZLQGRZ DQG WKH JOREDOYLHZ LQ )LJXUH  LV
QRZ VHQW WR WKH EDFNJURXQG DQG UHGXFHG ZLWK VHPLWUDQVSDUHQF\ PDQQHU

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

)LJXUH  $Q H[DPSOH GLVSOD\ ZKHQ WKH JOREDOYLHZ DFWLYH VWDWH LV VHOHFWHG ZKHUH WKH GLVSOD\ LV UHYHUVHG
WKDW WKH JOREDOYLHZ LQ )LJXUH  LV QRZ EURXJKW IURP WKH EDFNJURXQG WR WKH IURQW DQG GLVSOD\HG ZLWK IXOO
FRORXUV DQG WKH GHWDLOYLHZ WKH VXEWUHH RI ³0\ $FWLYLWLHV´ LV QRZ VHQW IURP WKH IURQW WR WKH EDFN DQG
GLVSOD\HG ZLWK VHPLWUDQVSDUHQW FRORXU

)LJXUH  $Q H[DPSOH RI SRSSLQJ XS DQ RSHUDWLRQ PHQX RYHU D SDUWLFXODU QRGH ZKLFK VKRZV DOO DFWLRQV
SURSHUWLHV DQG DVVRFLDWHG DWWULEXWHV RI WKH FRUUHVSRQGLQJ REMHFW

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

)LJXUH  $Q H[DPSOH RI WKH YLVXDOL]DWLRQ ZLQGRZ RI DGPLQLVWUDWLYH VHFWLRQ

4. References
[1] R.P. Biuk-Aghai. Visualization of Web-Based
Workspace
Structures.
In
Proceedings
First
International Conference on Web Information Systems
Engineering (WISE’00). 302-309. 2000.
[2] R.P.
Biuk-Aghai.
Visualizing Structural
and
Behavioural Aspects of Virtual Collaboration. In
th
Proceedings 10 IEEE International Workshops on
Enabling
Technologies:
Infrastructure
for
Collaborative Enterprises. USA, pp. 279-284. 2001.

[3] J.Y.Y Oeiras, L.A.S. Romani, H.V. da Rocha.
Communication, Visualization and Social Aspects
Involved on a Virtual Collaborative Learning
Environment. Journal of Three Dimensional Images,
Vol 1. Tokyo, 122-126. 2001.
[4] L. Harasim, S. Hiltz, L. Teles, M. Turoff. Learning
Networks: A Field Guide to Teaching and Learning
Online, Cambridge: MIT Press. 1995.

[5] N.B. Harrison, J.O. Coplien. Patterns of Productive
Software Organizations. Bell Labs Technical Journal.
1(1), 138-145. 1996.
[6] I.T. Hawryszkiewycz. Supporting Integrated Learning
Processes. In Proceedings Eighth Australian World
Wide Web Conference. Australia, 321-335. 2002.
[7] Q.V. Nguyen, M.L. Huang. Hierarchical Information
Visualization Using ENCCON Model. In Proceedings
the IASTED International Conference on Software
Engineering – SE 2004. Austria, 129-135. 2004.
[8] Q.V. Nguyen, M.L. Huang. Space-Optimized Tree: A
Connection + Enclosure Approach for the Visualization
of Large Hierarchies. Information Visualization Journal,
Palgrave, 2(1), pp. 3-15. 2003.
[9] Livenet
development
http://138.25.13.210:8000/ln4-1.

Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

server,

url:

