From Ethno-mathematics to Generative Design:
Metapatterns and Interactive Methods for the Creation of Decorative Art
Dr. Cheryl Kolak Dudek, Dr. Lydia Sharman, Dr. Fred E. Szabo,
Sushil Bhakar, Eric Hortop, Yun Li, Wumo Pan
Concordia University, Montreal
cdudek@sympatico.ca, lydia@alcor.concordia.ca, fred.szabo@concordia.ca,
sushi_bh@cs.concordia.ca, ehortop@metawidget.net, yun_li@cs.concordia.ca,
wumo_pan@cs.concordia.ca
recognition software. At the same time, we contribute to
the understanding of two different cultures through our
study of the different geometric patterns that adorn their
daily environments.
The research is undertaken at the Concordia
University, Montreal, Canada. The principal researchers
are Dr. Cheryl Kolak Dudek, an artist, Dr. Lydia
Sharman, a designer, Dr. Fred Szabo, a mathematician,
and Dr. Sudhir Mudur, a specialist in computational
mathematics and visualization. The research assistants are
drawn from complementary disciplines. Eric Hortop has a
background in mathematics, computing, communications
and print media, Sushil Bhakar is doctoral student
working in 2D and 3D graphics under the supervision of
Dr. Mudur, and Yun Li and Wumo Pan are both doctoral
students specializing in pattern recognition. Their work is
supervised by Dr. Ching Suen, Director of the Concordia
Centre for Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence.
Our work has three main facets: (1) The description
of the geometric content of ethno-mathematical artifacts.
At present, this aspect of our research is limited to the
study of Kuba cloth and Zillij mosaics. (2) The
algorithmic characterization of this content; and (3) The
implementation of the formulated algorithms as tool for
the generation of new designs based on the studied
artifacts.

Abstract
The research discussed in this paper focuses on the
development of interactive methods to image and analyze
the surface designs of cultural artifacts and the
generation of new designs. The project is interdisciplinary
and uses methodologies from aesthetic and cultural
inquiry, mathematics and computer science. The results of
the research are obtained by using a combination of tools,
such as neural networks, pattern recognition techniques
including edge detection, and pattern generating
techniques such as shape grammars.
The first phase of this research focuses on the
analysis of Congolese Kuba cloth and Moroccan Zillij
mosaics because each has a complete and complex
surface pattern with very different characteristics. Our
work has three main facets: the description of the
geometric content of ethno-mathematical artifacts; the
classification of this content; and the generation of
grammatical rules for the creation of new designs based
on the studied artifacts.

1. Introduction
The research is a collaborative inquiry using
information technologies to analyze the relationship of
art, design, and mathematics in the visual expression of
diverse cultures [1,2]. Based on the qualitative and
quantitative analysis of artifacts, this inter-disciplinary
research project assists in integrating cultural and
aesthetic narratives with algorithmic compositions to
create
new
experimental,
interactive
designs.
Computational, grammar-based methodologies are being
used to image and analyze the surface designs of cultural
artifacts. Shape grammar inference systems undertake the
analysis of the pattern and the recognition of it in different
applications. We are extending this repertoire of
analytical tools by using other mathematical and
statistical techniques, implemented in interactive pattern

2. Early analysis of Congolese Kuba cloth
and Moroccan Zillij mosaics
In the first phase of this research, the analysis of
Kuba cloth (Figure 1) has been undertaken by Dr Kolak
Dudek, and Dr. Sharman has continued her study and
analysis of Zillij mosaics (Figure 2). Kuba cloth and Zillij
mosaics are well-suited to mesh-based methods, making
them ideal subjects for the computational study of
interactive, grammatical systems and generative design.
Kuba cloth and Zillij mosaics seem to be on opposite ends

1
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

of a design spectrum from the apparently arbitrary
deviations within Kuba motifs to the predictability of the
layered and dense Zillij pattern. The comparison between
the highly structured, elegant designs of the Zillij mosaics
and the apparently more arbitrary, improvisational Kuba
cloth suggests opportunities for modifying rule sets to
accommodate a diverse range of information content.
Explorations are being undertaken to create a less dense
application of the Zillij rule set, possibly by using random
processes to generate designs, and creating a more
deterministic, regular analogue for understanding the
geometry of the Kuba cloth patterns. Dr. Sharman is also
researching the intrinsic relationship between patterns
created by audio frequencies in a liquid medium and the
geometric patterns of traditional Morocco Zillij mosaics.
A liquid medium, animated by a single frequency and lit
from underneath, is then photographed from above [3].
When this sound pattern is overlaid on a Zillij mosaic, the
progressions within each of the patterns correspond very
closely (Figure 3).
These patterns, which display
symmetry and mathematical order, have a relationship to
quantum physics, group theory, and the geometric
structures and progressions found in the traditional
mandala, tessellations and art of many cultures [4].

Figure 2 Zillij Mosaics, Fez, Morocco using
twelve-fold symmetry. Photo: Lydia Sharman

Figure 3: Grey image of sound pattern overlaid
on a Zillij mosaic.

3. Extraction of metapatterns
Figure 1 Kuba cloth from the collection of Cheryl
Kolak Dudek

In the case of Zillij mosaics, the geometric content is
complex, but relatively easy to described because of the
regularity of the designs. We are therefore able to move
directly to the second phase, the algorithmic
characterization. Our main tool for this work are formal
systems know as shape grammars. We refer to the
patterns which can be generated with these grammars as
metapatterns, i.e., families of patterns sharing a common
form, but possibly differing on content.

2
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

In the case of Kuba cloth, our work is more difficult.
These artifacts have geometric irregularities and
“improvisational features” which we must classify before
being able to attempt an algorithmic characterization. For
this purpose we are using pattern classification tools
known as neural networks implemented in Mathematica,
a well-known symbolic computation system, as well as a
variety of standard pattern recognition methods
customized for our purposes. We then develop shape
grammars for Kuba cloth, based on the geometric content
extracted with these tools.
Methods being explored in this research are: edge
detection, spectrum analysis and grayscale clustering,
binarization and neural networks. With the exception of
binarization for feature extraction, these methods have
been applied to the analysis of both Kuba cloth and Zillij
mosaics.
Edge detection (Figures 3, 4, 5) is the most common
method for detecting meaningful discontinuities in gray
levels. An edge is a set of connected pixels that lie on the
boundary between two regions. By edge detection, we can
segment the different objects apart. Once the objects
being separated, it is possible to find the pattern of the
whole image. Six edge detection methods have been
implemented and compared. These are Sobel operator,
Prewitt operator, Robert operator, Laplacian operator,
Zero-crossing operator and Canny operator. The Canny
operator was found to be the most robust. It includes four
stages, image smoothing, differentiation, non-maximum
suppression, and edge thresholding.

Figure 4 Automatic edge detection on a ten-fold
mosaic: the three bars on the right dynamically
adjust Canny algorithm paramater values. The
first bar modifies the degree of smoothing in
preprocessing, the second and third bars set the
sharpness of change in luminosity required to
start and continue tracing an edge.

Figure 5 Edge detection of Zillij image using the
zero-cross Algorithm

3
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

Figure 6 Zero-cross (Marr) edge detection has
only one parameter, sigma, which, by adjusting
smoothing in preprocessing, determines the
desired edge size in its search.
It is clear from contemplating a number of Zillij
mosaics that they are transformations of few basic
patterns using translation, rotation and repetition, and that
these are composed of certain discrete geometric shapes
such as stars, bullets, and hexagons. The challenge is to
automate as much as possible the task of identifying these
objects. In Zillij images, patterns are built up from a
group of basic objects of similar shape using certain rules
of composition based on five-, six-, or eight-fold
symmetry or multiples of them. By treating the basic
objects as the foreground and the remaining components
as the background'` of an image, we can use the
binarization methods to extract objects from an image. An
intuitive method is to first identify the objects in a given
image and group them into clusters using their geometric
similarity (Figure 7). Each “cluster” then corresponds to a
potential pattern. The next step is to find the rules of
construction. The local binarization method [5] turned out
to be an effective method. By treating the basic objects as
the foreground and remaining components as the
background of an image, we can use the binarization
methods to extract objects from an image. In the case of
Zillij mosaics, the local binarization method achieved
better results than the global approach (Figure 6).

Figure 7 Local binarization, applied to the Zillij
image in Figure 3

Figure 8 Clusters by vectors of
parameters of black forms from Figure 6

shape

Neural networks are a group of computer techniques
which can deal well with noisy, incomplete data. The
feed-forward and radial basis function networks we have
been using [6], take image data and assign them with
varying degrees of certainty to categories that they have

4
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

acceptable matches between similar shapes. Computers
tend to have problems with this and need domain-specific
hints, limitations on input types, and idealizations of
pattern to be able to execute, let alone extract, shape
grammars. The extra effort of making the computer work
in a somewhat awkward format brings us to a process a
little closer to how people approach designs, not as pixels,
but as shapes, and is intended to return results that are
usable by designers and easily converted into digital
design tools. As computers become more powerful, they
enable faster and a more thorough analysis of patterns,
and provide more computing power to accommodating
lay users. Shape grammars are therefore poised to become
practical computer-assisted design tools for a larger
audience.
In our approach, the shape grammar inference
systems undertake the analysis of the pattern and the
recognition of it in different applications. The
computational approach is one of automated,
progressively improved of both a proposed grammar and
of the methods used to extract rules for it. Initially, the
general direction of the system research was to traverse
the lines in the given pattern repeatedly in different
arbitrary paths, picking up repeating elements, and then to
continue traversal until the pattern can be expressed
entirely in terms of repeating elements. This may require
a trivial element or two, or the system may have to settle
and take a unique element as a seed or an infrequent
terminal rule.
Once recurring patterns are identified, constructing a
shape grammar from them requires the final rules to be
non-trivial, yet not overly complex and to link together in
such a way that the original designs and other designs
may be recreated using the grammar. A shape grammar is
a set of rules that gives us a way of generating new
patterns from old ones, starting with given shapes
(patterns). In the present context, we are interested in
grammars that allow us to represent and generate artifacts
with optimal sets of initial patterns and plausible rules of
construction.
A set of heuristic rules that constitute a good
grammar rule are developed and implemented in the
software. Shape grammars have a number of advantages.
They are user friendly and readable, scale and rotation
independent and readily express growth and emergent
behavior.
The ideas behind the algorithm devised for
discovering shape grammars for Kuba cloths and Zillij
mosaics consists of four distinct phases applied to a given
artifact: preprocessing, recognition, replacement, and
knowledge enhancement. Preprocessing is needed
because many images have redundant and unnecessary
information and small errors. We therefore transform the
images into a format convenient for purposes. The
recognition phase involves the discovery of recurring

been trained to discern. Up till now, our network is able to
distinguish fairly reliably between Kuba cloths and Zillij
mosaics. All patterns which the network fails to classify
are assigned to a third category. In building and
expanding our database, trained neural networks will be
able to perform initial sorts and provide additional
measures of similarity between groups of patterns for
shape grammar analysis and other purposes.

4. Development of interactive methods
Shape grammar inference systems contribute to an
understanding of the designs being studied, and provide
an artist or designer with a set of rules based on the source
material. These rules can then be used to create new
designs, and new recursive structures for new grammars
and languages of design. The grammars can also aid
curatorial and conservation efforts to preserve and
classify pattern-bearing objects, to fill in gaps or damaged
areas in an original design with plausible interpolations,
and to aid in judging relatedness, identification and
location of designs. In this way the grammars can aid
curatorial and conservation efforts to preserve and
classify pattern-bearing objects.
This research into the development and application of
shape grammars is an extension of earlier studies by
George Stiny and James Gips [7, 8], and especially Terry
W. Knight [9, 10] who, with her students, analyzed
designs such as Mughul gardens, Palladian villas,
Japanese tea rooms, and ancient Greek meanders. In the
earlier studies the design analysis was completed by the
researchers and entered into the computer that could then
partially or completely automate the generation of the
designs.
Gips' and Stiny's papers were among the first to start
with very simple patterns and recursively apply
transformation rules to obtain more and more complex
designs. They referred to these new systems as shape
grammar. In addition, M. Tapia [11] proposes a visual
technique which helps in the creation and application of
shape grammars. Some researchers have also used shapegrammar techniques in other fields. For example, Dinesh
Shikare's work [12] on compression of three-dimensional
objects is similar in spirit to the shape-grammar approach.
The Concordia University project is an extension and
generalization of these methods. While Gips and Tapia
assume that basic patterns are given, we make no such
assumption. Instead, we perform pattern analysis
techniques on existing works of art to discover the basic
patterns and hidden shape grammar rules, and then
provide visual tools to synthesize the new shape
grammars from these basic patterns and rules.
Shape grammars are designed to be easy for people to
use. People are able to identify shapes from noisy
backgrounds, ignoring scale and orientation, and judging

5
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

patterns in an artifact. Replacement involves the
discovery of rules for transforming the discovered simple
patterns into more complex ones. Knowledge
enhancement, finally, completes the process and updates
our database with new patterns and rules.

References
[1]

Kolak Dudek, Cheryl, Lydia Sharman, and Fred
Szabo. “Grammatical, Interactive Systems for
Generative Design”, paper given at 9th
International Conference, Virtual Systems and
Multi-Media (VSMM) 2003.

[2]

Bhakar, Sushil, Eric Hortop, Cheryl Kolak Dudek,
Sylvain Muise, Lydia Sharman and Fred E. Szabo,
“Textiles, Patterns, and Technology.” Textiles:
Cloth and Culture. Berg Publishing Company,
2004. (Submitted)

[3]

Jenny, Hans, Cymatics. Vol.2, Basilius Presse AG,
Basil, 1974.

[4]

Sharman, Lydia. “Visualizing Sound Patterns in a
Liquid Medium”, paper given at the International
Conference on Information Visualization (IV00),
July 2000.

[5]

Niblack, Wayne. An Introduction to Digital Image
Processing. Prentice Hall, 1986.

[6]

Wolfram Research. Neural Networks package for
Mathematica. Champaign, Illinois, 1999.

[7]

Stiny, George. Pictorial and Formal Aspects of Shape
and Shape Grammars: On Computer Generation of
Aesthetic Objects. Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1975.

[8]

Stiny, George and James Gips. Algorithmic Aesthetics:
Computer Models for Criticism and Design in the Arts.
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1978.

[9]

Knight, Terry W. Transformations In Design.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

[10]

Knight, Terry W. “Shape Grammars: Six Types.”
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design
Volume 26, 1999: 15-31.

[11]

Tapia, M. “A Visual Implementation Of A Shape
Grammar System.” Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design Vol.26, 1999: 59-73.

[12]

Shikhare, Dinesh, Sushil Bhakar and S. P. Mudur.
“Compression of large 3D engineering models using
automatic discovery of repeating geometric features.”
6th International Fall Workshop on Vision, Modeling
and Visualization, Stuttgart, Germany, 2001.

Conclusions
Current work is focusing on the development of a
rule-extraction algorithm to a point where it works
reliably on manually supplied pattern data and can
provide meaningful rule sets for individual patterns.
Cross-platform software development is also including
the construction of a graphical pattern input interface that
will integrate error checking and constraint solving tools,
and help increase the tractability of the rule extraction
problem when it is passed to the main algorithm. The rule
extraction algorithm is focusing on speed and robustness
rather than exhaustive enumeration of all possible rules.
An interface is being developed to allow access to
important process controls without programmer
assistance.
The next phase of our work will take two directions:
The construction of an interactive database of existing
artifacts as a visual resource for the scientific and artistic
communities, and the development of user-friendly digital
tools for the study of these and other resources. The
system will also provide additional tools for the
generation of new works of art, based on the models in
the database. We envisage these activities as culminating
in the creation of a visual studio for the artistic, cultural,
and scientific exploration of geometry-based objects of
our human heritage, expressed through regional cultures.
Researchers are analyzing different classifications of
patterns to establish a databank of shape grammar
inference systems, starting with Congolese Kuba textiles
and Moroccan Zillij mosaics. They are also investigating
the complexities of interactivity, which are defined, in this
project, as a process of significant creative interchange
between users and artist/designers. An interactive, real
time web site is being implemented to develop and test
interactivity with a databank of images, and to accumulate
a critical mass of information, which can be expanded by
user participation and contribution. The interactivity will
include the user's participation in creating or influencing
the rule sets that result in generative designs. Users will
have the option to browse by complexity, recursion
structure or similarity of mathematical rules, and to
develop new patterns based on the last few viewed or on
their own specifications. Browsing by the complexity of
the extracted grammars or their recursion structures
allows users to explore familiar and unfamiliar patterns
and gain an understanding of the enormous variety of
patterns created from simple rules.

6
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’04)
1093-9547/04 $ 20.00 IEEE

