Capstone Address
Visualization of High Dimensional Data in Brain and
Information Sciences
Masato Okada

The University of Tokyo and RIKEN Brain Science Institute

Abstract
Research field of my laboratory includes statistical mechanics especially for random magnetic systems, brain and information sciences. These three research areas share common
mathematical structure. Their common feature is that they
commonly treat very large freedom systems, that is, magnetism which originates from cooperative phenomena of
O(1023) spins, brain functions carried by the large number
of neuron activities, digital information represented by
the large number of bit sequences. The statistical mechanics plays an important role to treat such large freedom
systems because it can deduce macroscopic and low dimensional descriptions like the Boyle-Charle’s law from microscopic and high dimensional descriptions of Newtonian or
quantum mechanics. Since the statistical mechanics is considered as a systematic tool for the dimension reduction,
it can be applicable to the brain and information systems.
Since the dimension reduction is a common feature between
the visualization and the statistical mechanics, the visualization also plays an important role to treat these systems. The
visualization offers effective and essential low dimensional
visual representations which help us to intuitively understand these systems. In this talk, I will present two examples
regarding the visualization of high dimensional data in the
brain and information sciences where the principal component analysis (PCA) and the mixture of Gaussian analysis
(MGA) are employed.
Sugase et al. performed single unit recordings in the
inferior temporal (IT) cortex in the monkey’s brain which
is one of crucial areas regarding the pattern recognition.
They presented 38 images to the monkey. The 38 images
are divided into three groups, that is, a group with monkey
faces, a group with human faces, and a group with simple
shapes. The group with human faces can be further divided
into three individual human faces with four facial expressions. The group with monkey faces can be further divided
into four individual monkey faces with four facial expressions. There is a hierarchical structure in the set of the
images. In this presentation, I will visualize how this hierarchical structure is encoded in neuronal population in the
IT cortex. We picked up the recorded 45 neurons and calculated temporal evolutions of their neural firing rates. It
means that the 38 images are mapped to 38 neural population vectors in a 45 dimensional space. In order to explore

neural information representation of the hierarchical structure in the set of the images, we visualized temporal evolutions of the 38 neural population vectors using the PCA and
a clustering based on the MGA. We found that the neural
population vectors split into three clusters corresponding to
human faces, monkey faces and other simple shapes in the
early phase (90-140msec), and that these three clusters split
into sub-clusters corresponding to finer categorizations in
the later phase (140-190msec) . This finding strongly suggests that the hierarchical structure embedded in the set of
the images is encoded in the temporal evolutions of neuron
activities in the IT cortex.
Next I will show visualization of the low-density paritycheck (LDPC) code using the same technique as an example
in the information science. The LDPC has recently become
of great interest because it saturates the Shannon’s bound.
We numerically obtained the posterior distribution of transmitted bits using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
method and extracted the first and second principal components (PC) by using the covariance matrix of the MCMC
simulation. The static and dynamic properties of the LDPC
are visualized and could be discussed intuitively on the two
dimensional space spanned by the two PCs.

Bio
Masato Okada received the B.Sc. degree in physics from
Osaka City University in 1985, M.Sc. degree in physics and
the Ph.D. degree in science from Osaka University in 1987
and 1997, respectively. From 1987 to 1989, he worked at
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation. From 1989 to 1991, he
was a student of the Graduate School of Engineering Science,
Osaka University, and from 1991 to 1996 he was a research
associate at Osaka University. From 1991 to 1996, he was a
researcher in the Kawato Dynamic Brain Project, JST. From
2001 to 2004, he was a deputy laboratory head in the laboratory for mathematical neuroscience, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute and a researcher of intelligent cooperation and
control, PRESTO, JST from 2002 to 2004. From 2004, he
is a professor at the department of complexity science and
engineering, the Graduate School of Frontier Science, the
University of Tokyo.

xi

