VDQAM: A Toolkit for Database Quality Evaluation based on Visual
Morphology
Dongxing Teng, Haiyan Yang, Cuixia Ma, Hongan Wang
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

ABSTRACT
Data quality evaluation is one of the most critical steps during the
data mining processes. Data with poor quality often leads to poor
performance in data mining, low efficiency in data analysis,
wrong decision which bring great economic loss to users and
organizations further. Although many researches have been
carried out from various aspects of the extracting, transforming,
and loading processes in data mining, most researches pay more
attention to analysis automation than to data quality evaluation.
To address the data quality evaluation issues, we propose an
approach to combine human beings' powerful cognitive abilities in
data quality evaluation with the high efficiency ability of
computer, and develop a visual analysis method for data quality
evaluation based on visual morphology.
Keywords: Visual Analysis, Interactive Visualization, Database
Quality.
Index Terms: K.6.1 [Management of Computing and Information
Systems]: Project and People Management—Life Cycle; K.7.m
[The Computing Profession]: Miscellaneous—Ethics
1

INTRODUCTION

Data quality evaluation plays an important role in the process of
data mining, aiming at ensuring accuracy, completeness,
consistency, validity, uniqueness, timeliness, and stability etc of
data. Many researchers prefer to study methods of data conversion
automation and cleansing from the perspective of schema and
integration [1], and build a series of ETL tools to assist data
quality analysis and evaluation. Because appropriate analysis
strategies should be chosen for different kinds of data quality
problems, it is insufficient to rely solely on machine learning and
intelligent automatic algorithms without getting users involved.
Existing data quality evaluation researchers pay more attention to
supporting automatic analysis than to using human beings'
cognitive abilities to analyze data quality.
In real-world application, when coping with complex and
massive datasets, analysts usually face so-called “information
overloads” and “turn a blind eye to the data” problems due to their
limited cognitive abilities. Researchers have realized that
information visualization plays a key role in large-scale data
analysis. Existing visual analysis technologies, such as visual data
mining, visual OLAP, data reduction based on information
visualization [2], focus on data mining processes and visual
z
z
z
z

Dongxing Teng: dongxing@iscas.ac.cn
Haiyan Yang: haiyan@iscas.ac.cn
Cuixia Ma : cuixia@iscas.ac.cn
Hongan Wang: hongan@iscas.ac.cn

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

display of decision results and ignore data quality analysis.
Practice shows us that poor quality data often leads to low
efficiency of data analysis, inaccurate analysis result, wrong
decision, and further severe economic losses.
To solve the problems described above, we propose a visual
data quality analysis method based on visual morphology and
build an efficient toolkit which applies visual analysis techniques
based on a series of visual morphologies to database data quality
evaluation.
2

RELATED WORK

Researchers have done much work on different fields of data
quality including detection of duplicate records, examination of
data integrity, verification of data validation, integration between
heterogeneous data sources and design of ETL tools for data
extraction etc[3,4,5]. Nowadays, visualization techniques have
also been applied in databases. Delaunay [6], a tool for database
visualization, supports visualization-based data retrieval and
allows users to use object-oriented database visualization.
NakeDB [7] is a tool for database schema visualization, in which
database data models are represented as visual graphs with colorcoded objects and shapes.
3

VDQAM

Data quality problems are related to many factors, such as
multiple data sources, design defects of data schema, subjective
judgement in data production, limited data source conflict
between security and availability and upgrade lags of information
systems. It can be divided into two categories: problems in single
data source and problems in multiple data sources. In general, data
quality analysis includes data supplement, data cleansing, data
modification, and data integration.
We developed an interactive visual analysis toolkit for data
quality analysis and then applied it in one information
management system of a municipal department. The system is
used to analyze business information gathered from sub-branches,
including production costs, profits, and corporate assets. The
enterprise managers analyze business situation of the whole
enterprise to make appropriate decisions according to the analysis
results. As for such cases, the data quality management is
crucial to decision-making.
During the process of decision making, analysts usually take the
top-down strategy to evaluate database quality. First, decisionmakers grasp the database schema according to its E-R diagram
and determine what kind of strategies analysis is needed. Then
decision-makers will choose appropriate evaluation indicators and
algorithms according to the corresponding business rules. Finally
analysis results are expressed using the indicators and algorithms
according to which the decisions are made.
Based on traditional data quality analysis, a series of interactive
visual morphologies are built to assist data quality analysis and
evaluation.

245

3.1 Grasping the Database Schema
Grasping the database schema is the premise of database quality
analysis. Visualization of database schema can assist users in
grasping overall sense-making and finding key data in the
database although it cannot be used into the analysis process
directly. The visual analysis toolkit can provide appropriate
interfaces for different data sources, obtain the database schema
and represent it. In figure 1, the visual view for the database
schema provides operations such as translation and scaling for
analysts. Therefore, they can grasp the whole schema directly:
a) Subject domains, including the enterprise indicator
information domain, the enterprise document management
domain, and the system maintenance information domain.
b) The bigger the nodes which represent entities in the view,
the larger the amount of data is.
c) Users can obtain structure information of data tables
through retrievals and the ring diagrams to get appropriate
data tables for database quality analysis.

Figure 1: Database schema view.

After obtaining information of the database schema, users can
get an overview of information of inner data in the database. As
shown in Figure 2, the columns represent the entities and the
higher the columns the larger the amount of data. Connections
between them represent primary key and foreign key relations of
data records among which blue represents that the data are normal
and red represents that there exist abnormal data, such as missing
foreign keys or replicated foreign keys.

Data Missing Chart
Number

n
m
u
l
o
C

a)

Data missing

b)

Data conflicts

Figure 3: basic structures, data missing, and data conflicts analysis
of the table.

4

CONCLUSION

In this paper we presented a novel visual analysis approach for
data quality evaluation based on visual morphologies. It enables
users to analysis data quality by using kinds of visual
representation of indicator data coupled with schema overviews.
We also build a visual analysis toolkit, apply it into a real-world
application, and gather feedbacks to improve our framework and
design. The practice of the government department case show that
users can get the overall sense-making of the database schema and
complex relations between entities more effectively with the help
of VDQAM compared with traditional tools.
For future work, we intend to extend the existing set of visual
morphologies to further improve the design of VDQAM and put
the tool into more application.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the National Basic Research Program
of China under Grant No. 2011CB302205, the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61173057, Grant
No. 61100162, the National High Technology Research and
Development Program of China under Grant No.
SS2012AA022808, the Innovation Foundation of Grand Project
under Grant No. ISCAS-2010-01.
REFERENCES
[1]

Figure 2: Data overview in 3D

3.2 Database quality analysis
As demonstrated above, the “Enterprise information management
system” example mainly includes three subjects: the enterprise
indicator information subject, the enterprise document
management subject, and the system maintenance subject. The
toolkit first carries out a series of analysis on the enterprise
indicator information including analysis of inner data missing and
detection of relational data in the tables. The figures below
represent basic structures, data missing, and data conflicts of the
tables respectively. In Figure 3 a), the view on the left represents
amount of data in the tables in which red and blue represents
existing data and missing data respectively. The right one shows
missing contents of data. To find abnormal data, the view in
Figure 3 b) is used to analyze primary keys and foreign keys to
obtain relations between data tables and relational data.

246

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

Carlo Batini, Cinzia Cappiello, Chiara Francalanci, Andrea Maurino.
Methodologies for data quality assessment and improvement.
Journal ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR). 41( 3), July 2009.
Daniel Keim, Jörn Kohlhammer, Georey Ellis. Mastering the
Information Age Solving Problems with Visual Analytics Goslar:
Eurographics. 2010.
Felix Naumann, Melanie Herschel. An Introduction to Duplicate
Detection. User-Centered Data Management. Synthesis Lectures on
Data Management 2010.
Cho, J., and Garcia-molina, H. 2000. Synchronizing a database to
improve freshness. In Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Management of Data, New York, NY, USA, 2000,
117-128
WilliamWright, DavidSchroh, PascaleProulx, AlexSkaburskis, Brian
Cort. Advances in nSpace-The Sandbox for Analysis. Poster at
Conference on Intelligence Analysis. 2005.
Wendy TLucas, Melissa R adzyminski, Kirby Zhang. Delaunay: a
Database Visualization System. Proceedings ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data:ACM Press,
pp.510-513,1997.
Luis Miguel Cortes-Pena, Yi Han, Neil Pradhan, Romain Rigaux.
NakeDB: Database Schema Visualization.
http://users.ece.gatech.edu/cortes/projects.html.

