Matrix-Based Visual Correlation Analysis on Large Timeseries Data
Michael Behrisch∗

James Davey†

Tobias Schreck‡

Daniel Keim§

¨ Kohlhammer¶
Jorn

¨ Konstanz
Universitat

Fraunhofer IGD

¨ Konstanz
Universitat

¨ Konstanz
Universitat

Fraunhofer IGD

A BSTRACT
In recent years, the quantity of time series data generated in a wide
variety of domains grown consistently. Thus, it is difficult for analysts to process and understand this overwhelming amount of data.
In the specific case of time series data another problem arises: time
series can be highly interrelated. This problem becomes even more
challenging when a set of parameters influences the progression of
a time series. However, while most visual analysis techniques support the analysis of short time periods, e.g. one day or one week,
they fail to visualize large-scale time series, ranging over one year
or more. In our approach we present a time series matrix visualization that tackles this problem. Its primary advantages are that it
scales to a large number of time series with different start and end
points and allows for the visual comparison / correlation analysis of
a set of influencing factors. To evaluate our approach, we applied
our technique to a real-world data set, showing the impact of local
weather conditions on the efficiency of photovoltaic power plants.
Index Terms: H.3.3 [Information Search and Retrieval Design
Tools and Techniques]: Information filtering—
1

I NTRODUCTION

Large amounts of time series data are produced in a wide variety of
domains, and their visual analysis is an important problem. A common analysis task is the comparison of measurements over time,
with the aim of discovering meaningful correlations between measurements. An example is the correlation of temperature and power
consumption measurements in an energy supply / consumption context. Many existing visual analytics techniques are restricted to the
comparison of short time periods (e.g. weeks or days) and do not
scale well for longer time series. We present a technique for the visual correlation analysis of numerous, potentially interrelated time
series datasets. Our technique centers on a matrix representation
and allows for the simultaneous comparison of multiple, overlapping time series of varying length. We illustrate the principle of our
technique by applying it to a real-world data set, including measurements of weather conditions and performance parameters of nodes
in a power grid. We also discuss interesting options for future work.
2

R ELATED W ORK

The analysis of time series data is a common problem in many application domains. Basic analysis goals include finding the minimum, maximum and average values in a specific time series, and
the identification outliers. More complex analysis goals include
clustering large sets of time series, extracting frequent time series
patterns, and similarity searches with the help of user specified time
series. Fundamental analysis techniques for representing, indexing
and correlating time series data are discussed in [4]. Time series
∗ e-mail:

michael.behrisch@uni-konstanz.de
james.davey@igd.fraunhofer.de
‡ e-mail: tobias.schreck@uni-konstanz.de
§ e-mail: daniel.keim@uni-konstanz.de
¶ e-mail: joern.kohlhammer@igd.fraunhofer.de
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

clustering techniques are surveyed in [6]. Visualization of a set of
time series data is another field of research, surveyed in [1]. It requires a scalable representation that (1) supports a large number of
potentially correlating time series datasets and (2) takes the length
of time-and-sampling-resolution-dependent vectors into account.
Our work is also related to interactive matrix visualization, as a
promising approach for scalable representation of large-scale network relationships. A large-scale, interactive graph visualization is
presented by Elmqvist et al. in [2]. It provides a zoomable interface
for an overview first / detail on demand [5] approach. In addition,
every cell of the matrix contains an adaptive glyph representation,
showing statistical features of the underlying network. Ziegler presented in [7] a financial performance chart growth matrix with the
goal of identifying the best entry and holding times of unrelated /
independent financial bonds.
Our time series matrix visualization differs from related work in
two main points. Firstly, we visualize a large number of time series
with different start and end points in one matrix. Secondly, it allows for a visual comparison / correlation analysis of different time
series datasets in a comprehensive zoomable interface that enables
the exploration of underlying correlation effects.
3

P OWER G RID DATASET

AND

A NALYSIS P ROBLEM

In collaboration with a German national energy provider, we considered two real world data sets obtained from the town of Freiamt,
Germany [3]. Freiamt is home to a large number of regenerative
power sources, including 160 small, roof-mounted photovoltaic, 3
biomass, and 3 small hydroelectric power plants. Up to 11 photovoltaic plants are connected to one substation, acting as a gateway
to the power grid. In total, 29 substations and a weather observation station in Freiamt provide the measurement readings. The
substation measurements are aggregations of the power generation
and -consumption of multiple households and regenerative power
plants. The weather station delivers a large number of weather parameters, e.g. rain fall rate, sunshine duration, temperature- and
wind measurements, and visibility ranges (fog). In total, we consider nine weather parameters. The measurements span a duration
from 2010-12-15 to 2011-12-17, and are taken at intervals ranging
between 10 and 30 minutes.
The goal of the analysis is to understand the interaction (correlation) between the state of the power grid and weather conditions.
From a large number of potentially dependent measurement parameters, we want to find the parameter subset which is most useful for
the analysis. While this is a problem in itself, it becomes even more
challenging due to the fact that the correlations are inherently local
with respect to scale and the time interval. These factors need to be
considered in the visual analysis. Accordingly, one can find timecorrelating predicate conditions, such as high temperature and long
sunshine duration, that could lead to a drop or rise in the efficiency
of the power grid.
The following data analysis questions arise: (1) Which parameters lead to a correlation between the reference and other time series
datasets? (2) Can we show the parameter’s impact on a reference
dataset? (3) Which large-scale trends can be determined in long
time series (e.g. in one year with more than 365 × 24 × 4 sampling
points)?

209

(a) Matrix Overview

(b) Transformer Substation 56: MW/h

(c) Sun Solar Radiation: Joule/cm2

(d) Temperature in ◦ C

Figure 1: (a) shows an overview of all time series matrices. (b) shows the efficiency of substation 56 in the selected time period. (c) and (d)
reveal the impact of the sun’s solar radiation and temperature on the substation’s efficiency.

4

T IMESERIES M ATRIX V ISUALIZATION

Our approach centers on a matrix visualization, as it can represent
large numbers of time series in a pixel-oriented way, mapping each
value to the color of a pixel. In this triangular matrix representation,
the horizontal and vertical axes describe the start and endpoints of
a specific time interval in the overall time series. Accordingly, each
matrix point x(i, j) , i > j refers to a time series interval starting at
time t(i) and ending at time t( j). To foster correlation analysis in
the matrix we show statistics computed over the respective time series intervals, thus providing a tool for the screening of correlations
at different intervals and offsets. The statistic values are presented
in a mouseover tooltip.
The color of each data point represents a statistical measure f(i, j)
computed over the interval [t(i),t( j)]. The measure, f , can be set
by the user on-demand. Example measures include the trend (slope
of the regression line), the standard deviation, average, or the geometric mean. Minimum, maximum, variance, sum and squared
sum statistics can also be computed. The time series can be resampled on demand to set hours, days, months, etc. as the base unit of
measurement.
The color map is an important design factor for the comparability
of the matrices. Since, the transformer stations can have a positive
or negative net output to the energy grid, depending on whether
power is consumed or produced, we chose a bipolar red to blue
color map. As Figure 1 (b) depicts, negative net outputs (power
production states) are visually outstanding, due to their red color.
Other measurement parameters are shown by additional triangular
matrices in a small-multiples display. They represent the available
weather information (e.g. air temperature 5 cm above ground level
in ◦ C, sunshine duration and rainfall rate) over the available time
period. A local (per matrix) color map can be applied on demand to
reveal the feature’s special characteristics. A semantic zoom interface lets the user explore the correlations between the matrices in an
overview or inspect the data characteristics in an emphasized time
span. For the lowest semantic zoom level a line chart representation
of the corresponding time span is planned.
5

U SE C ASE

Figure 1 showcases one of the findings we made using our approach
on the Freiamt dataset. Figure 1 (a) shows an overview over six
transformer substations and nine weather parameters. Figure 1 (b)
represents the positive and negative megawatt consumption rate of
substation 56 in a larger view. This substation is especially interesting, since eleven photovoltaic power plants are connected to it. The
visual task is to find power injection phases represented by a dark
red color. Two visually outstanding areas exist in the one year time
period. The first ranges from 2010-12-24 to 2010-12-26 and the
second from 2011-02-22 to 2011-02-24. Here the substation fed on
average 0.167 and 0.122 megawatts per hour respectively into the

210

power grid.
The weather factors corresponding to this effective power production can be seen in Figure 1 (c). Here, the temperatures were on
average −4.60 and −2.11◦ C respectively. Figure 1 (d) reveals that
the global solar radiation, measured in Joules/cm2 , averaged 5.154
in December and 4.483 in February. This leads to the hypothesis
that photovoltaic power plants work most efficiently in temperature
ranges between −5◦ C and −1◦ C and lose efficiency in temperature
ranges above and below, even if the sun duration and solar radiation
is high.
6 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
We proposed a matrix-oriented approach to time series analysis.
The central idea is the representation of all time series intervals with
user-chosen statistical measures. Time series data can be compared
and correlated across different parameters (by small multiples) and
intervals (by the mapping to a matrix). We applied our idea to a
comprehensive data set to increase understanding of the impact of
weather parameters on the effectiveness of power generation. Our
approach allows the visual correlation of thousands of time series
with millions of measurement values. We plan to augment our approach with additional semantic zoom capabilities, showing time
series charts for chosen matrix values at the lowest zoom level.
Furthermore, we plan to incorporate a drag-and-drop window for
an automatic correlation analysis of selected time series portions.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski. Visualization
of Time-Oriented Data. Human-Computer Interaction Series. Springer,
2011.
[2] N. Elmqvist, T.-N. Do, H. Goodell, N. Henry, and J.-D. Fekete. ZAME:
Interactive Large-Scale Graph Visualization. 2008 IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium, pages 215–222, Mar. 2008.
[3] Energie Baden-W¨urttemberg AG. Intelligent grid project (in german).
http://www.enbw.com/content/de/der_konzern/
enbw_gesellschaften/regionalgesellschaft/
aktuell/smartgrid/projekt_freiamt/index.jsp.
Online; accessed 26th June 2012.
[4] E. Keogh. A decade of progress in indexing and mining large time
series databases. In Proceedings of the 32nd international conference
on Very large data bases, pages 1268–1268. VLDB Endowment, 2006.
[5] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations. In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, VL ’96, pages 336–, Washington, DC, USA,
1996. IEEE Computer Society.
[6] T. Warren Liao. Clustering of time series data-a survey. Pattern
Recogn., 38(11):1857–1874, Nov. 2005.
[7] H. Ziegler, T. Nietzschmann, and D. A. Keim. Relevance driven visualization of financial performance measures. In EuroVis, pages 19–26,
2007.

