Priming Locus of Control to Affect Performance
Alvitta Ottley∗

R. Jordan Crouser†

Caroline Ziemkiewicz‡

Remco Chang §

Tufts University

Tufts University

Brown University

Tufts University

A BSTRACT
Recent research suggests that the personality trait Locus of Control (LOC) can be a reliable predictor of performance when learning a new visualization tool. While these results are compelling
and have direct implications to visualization design, the relationship between a user’s LOC measure and their performance is not
well understood. We hypothesize that there is a dependent relationship between LOC and performance; specifically, a person’s orientation on the LOC scale directly influences their performance when
learning new visualizations. To test this hypothesis, we conduct
an experiment with 300 subjects using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.
We adapt techniques from personality psychology to manipulate a
user’s LOC so that users are either primed to be more internally or
externally oriented on the LOC scale. Replicating previous studies
investigating the effect of LOC on performance, we measure users’
speed and accuracy as they use visualizations with varying visual
metaphors. Our findings demonstrate that changing a user’s LOC
impacts their performance. We find that a change in users’ LOC
results in performance changes.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Effective visualizations serve as an extension to a user’s cognition
and aids complex thinking. As a result, it is widely accepted that
understanding a user’s cognitive processes is integral to the effective design and evaluation of visualizations. Due to the inherent
relationship between a user’s cognitive processes and their personality, there has been a recent emergence of research into the impact
of a user’s personality on their performance when using visualizations [2, 4]. While several personality traits [2] have been shown to
affect performance, the most compelling evidence is in support of
the personality trait Locus of Control (LOC).
LOC measures the extent to which someone believes that events
are determined by their actions or by external forces. Persons who
are categorized as having internal LOC (internals), believe that
events are contingent on their actions and those who have external LOC (externals) believe that events are controlled by outside
forces. In recent studies, this personality trait has been shown to
correlate well with performance on visualizations with varying visual metaphors [2, 4].
While these studies observed a relationship between a user’s
LOC and their performance, it remains unclear whether changes in
LOC affect performance on visualizations. Research suggests that
an individual’s LOC score varies and can even be intentionally manipulated [1]. We propose that a user’s LOC when using a visualization may not always be stable and can be altered using a process
similar to previous studies in personality psychology. We hypothesize that a change in LOC will result in a predictable change in their
performance. Specifically, we posit that there is a dependent relationship between LOC and performance, i.e. users who are primed
∗ e-mail:

alvittao@cs.tufts.edu
rcrous01@cs.tufts.edu
‡ e-mail: cziemki@cs.brown.edu
§ email: remco@cs.tufts.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

to be internal, external or average, will demonstrate performance
measures similar to the respective groups of the previous studies.
To test our hypotheses, we replicated the experiment design of
Ziemkiewicz et al. [4], keeping constant the views, dataset and
tasks, while using existing priming techniques [1] to manipulate
LOC. Three hundred online subjects with varying LOC scores
were recruited via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service. Our findings show that priming users to be internal, external or average,
elicits performance measures similar to the respective group from
Ziemkiewicz et al. This provides evidence of a dependent relationship between LOC and performance.
2 R ELATED W ORK
Recent studies have found a correlation between LOC and performance on visualization interfaces. Green et al. reported this in their
study [2] on the effect of personality dimensions on learning two
dissimilar visualization tools. In their work, the source of the distinction between the two interfaces was ambiguous. There were
a large number of design differences between the two visualization
systems that may have interacted with LOC to produce performance
differences. Ziemkiewicz et al. [4] extended this work by simplifying the visualizations studied in order to isolate the variable of
layout design. They found a significant trend that suggests that
Green et al.’s results were likely due to the visualizations’ layout
style, rather than to other factors.
While these studies demonstrate that there is a correlation between LOC and visual layout style in this type of hierarchical visualization, it is unclear from existing work what the nature of this
relationship is. It is possible that there is a dependent relationship
between the factors, such that a user’s LOC directly affects a user’s
ability to work with these interfaces. In the current work, we examine this question through a targeted study that uses priming to
manipulate the variable of LOC.
2.1 Priming Locus of Control
Fisher et al. [1] investigated how manipulating LOC through psychological intervention affects their disability. The study was performed on patients with chronic lower back pain who were randomly assigned to one of two groups; those who are either nudged
to measure more internal or external on the LOC scale. LOC was
manipulated by asking experience recall questions, where patients
of the internally-primed group were asked to describe times when
they felt in control (increase LOC) and patients in the externallyprimed group were asked to give times when they did not feel in
control (decrease LOC). They found that there was a significant difference in LOC scores before and after priming. They also assessed
patients disability by using a lifting task and found that patients
who were primed to be more internal on the LOC scale, on average
spent more time performing the task and chose heavier weights than
the externally-primed group. Patients who were externally-primed
were more likely to give up or not try at all.
The results of Fisher et al. not only demonstrate that LOC can
be altered through experience recall, but it also implies that this
change in LOC can affect behavior and approach to solving a given
problem. We propose that this result also extends to other tasks
and we hypothesize that a change in users’ LOC will affect a user’s
approach to problem solving and performance when using visualizations.

237

Figure 1: Mean correct response times in inferential task questions across the two views for each of the four priming groups. The average
participants were successfully primed to behave as internal participants, while the internal and external participants were successfully primed to
be more average.

3 E XPERIMENT
To test our hypotheses we replicated the study by Ziemkiewicz et
al., holding constant the views, datasets, and questions to enable us
to make accurate comparisons between the two results. Like Fisher
et al., [1] we used an experience recall task to manipulate LOC.
Since this was an online study, we provided text fields and required
users to enter no less than three examples of 100 words each, to
better ensure that the priming was effective.
We measured participants’ LOC prior to and after the study to
verify whether the recall task affected their LOC score. We used a
29-question Rotter LOC Scale [3] which is comprised of 23 forcedchoice questions and 6 filler questions instead of the shorter LOC
inventory used by Ziemkiewicz et al. The same questionnaire was
used twice to maintain consistency between the measures, and we
counterbalanced learning effects by altering the order in which the
questions were presented and substituting the filler questions.
For this study, we used only the two most extreme views used
by Ziemkiewicz et al., V1 and V4. Each participant then completed
the tasks using each of the two views, of which the orders were
randomized.
4 R ESULTS
We recruited 300 participants via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service and of the 300, we discarded the results of 71 participants for
failure to complete the task as required. Data were also discarded if
their interaction times were impractical (less than 10 seconds) and
they also had no correct responses. The average LOC was 12 on
a 23-point scale and there were 59 externals , 106 averages and 36
internals.
In our analysis, we split the participants into four priming
groups based on their original LOC scores and the priming stimuli
they received: internal-primed-external, external-primed-internal,
average-primed-internal, and average-primed-external.
For all but one group (average-primed-internal), the priming
prompts were successful at influencing the participants’ LOC
scores in the desired direction. We ran t-tests on pre-test and posttest LOC scores for each of the priming groups, and in each case
the change was significant at a p < .01 level. The group averagesprimed-internal was not significant with p = .3. Although we observed the statistically significant changes with the other groups,
on average the mean difference was small in each case, with the
mean magnitude of difference being M = 1.69 in the average group,
M = 1.45 in the internal group, and M = 1.37 in the external group.
Feedback from participants suggests this may be partly due to the
fact that some users remembered their responses from earlier and
tried to answer consistently.
Although the change in LOC score was not dramatic, we did
find evidence that priming caused the expected behavior on visualization tasks. To test our main hypothesis, we performed a repeated measures ANOVA on Correct Response Time using a 2x4

238

mixed design of Visual Layout (within-subjects) by Priming Group
(between-subjects). The ANOVA uncovered no significant main
effect of Visual Layout, perhaps because the differences in performance across priming groups counteracted the overall differences in the effectiveness of each layout type. More relevant to
our hypothesis is that this test revealed a significant interaction between Visual Layout and Priming Group, F(3, 57) = 2.85, p < .05.
This finding demonstrates that participants in the different priming
groups showed significantly different patterns of performance between the two views. These results are summarized in Figure 1.
5 D ISCUSSION
The finding that priming LOC can cause a change in their performance on a visualization task has significant implications for visualization evaluation and research as a whole. For this particular
visualization and task, a short priming exercise appears to be sufficient to erase individual differences or create them where they did
not exist before. For example, by simply asking users to recall times
when they didn’t feel in control, the performance difference between the two views for internals change from about 2 minutes (110
seconds) to just 20 seconds. Such significant changes add nuance
to previous findings on personality-based individual differences and
suggests that subtle differences in a user’s frame of mind may make
a major difference in how they approach visualization use.
What this and previous studies ultimately highlight is that designing interfaces to help people think is a complicated endeavor.
People think in different ways, and how they think is often
situation-dependent. Visualization evaluation needs methods to analyze what frame of mind a visualization is best suited for. It is
possible that personality factors such as LOC could be used to test
this. Knowing, for example, that nested boxes are less suited to an
internal frame tells us some information about nested boxes as a
design.
R EFERENCES
[1] K. Fisher and M. Johnston. Experimental manipulation of perceived
control and its effect on disability. Psychology and Health, 11(5):657–
669, 1996.
[2] T. M. Green and B. Fisher. Towards the personal equation of interaction: The impact of personality factors on visual analytics interface
interaction. In IEEE Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),
2010.
[3] J. B. Rotter. Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80(609), 1966.
[4] C. Ziemkiewicz, R. Crouser, A. Yauilla, S. Su, W. Ribarsky, and
R. Chang. How locus of control influences compatibility with visualization style. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),
2011 IEEE Conference on, pages 81–90. IEEE, 2011.

