Visualising Variations in Household Energy Consumption
Sarah Goodwin∗

Jason Dykes†

giCentre, City University London, UK

A BSTRACT
There is limited understanding of the relationship between neighbourhoods, demographic characteristics and domestic energy consumption habits. We report upon research that combines datasets
relating to household energy use with geodemographics to enable
better understanding of UK energy user types. A novel interactive
interface is planned to evaluate the performance of specifically created energy-based data classifications. The research aims to help
local governments and the energy industry in targeting households
and populations for new energy saving schemes and in improving efforts to promote sustainable energy consumption. The new
classifications may also stimulate consumption awareness amongst
domestic users. This poster reports on initial visual findings and
describes the research methodology, data sources and future visualisation requirements.
Index Terms:
I.3.8 [Computing Methodologies]: Computer
Graphics—Applications; H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces; H.2.8 [Information Systems ]: Database Management—Database Applications;
1

I NTRODUCTION

Energy consumption and carbon footprint reduction is of growing
interest to individuals, organisations and government. Added pressure of EU carbon and emission targets set for 2020 and 2050 has
meant that tackling energy consumption in the UK is of major concern. Reducing domestic energy consumption in particular is challenging due to large variations in household energy use. Patterns
and trends in consumption levels in relation to housing, population,
lifestyle and behaviours must be better understood in order to implement successful strategies in a movement to achieve efficient,
sustainable and low carbon residential living environments.
Over recent years there has been a growing amount of academic
and government-led research focused on energy consumption, carbon reduction and potential energy saving schemes; however, there
is still limited knowledge of the relationship between consumption
and measurable characteristics of the population. It is reported that
UK domestic fuel consumption is strongly related to disposable
income levels with other highly influential factors being dwelling
type, household composition, property tenure and rural/urban location [4]. These findings, along with other research in the field, indicate that energy consumption patterns correlate to socio-economic
and geographic characteristics and continued research in this area is
needed in order to better understand the complex variations, allow
for realistic comparisons amongst neighbours and facilitate better
targeting of services and schemes. In this research we use data
classification methods, analytical techniques and data visualisation
to aid the interpretation and discovery of geographic and demographic variations in UK domestic energy consumption.
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

sarah.goodwin.1@city.ac.uk
j.dykes@city.ac.uk

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

2 G EODEMOGRAPHICS
Despite there being a body of relevant research correlating energy
consumption with household or population variables, little research
directly investigates the classification and evaluation of energy related variables with geodemographics. Geodemographic classification systems are used by geographers, policy makers and market analysts alike to segment the general population and identify
trends and patterns based on typical user traits. Geodemographic
data products such as Experian’s Mosaic [6] or the free and open
alternative Output Area Classification (OAC) [10], based entirely
on the UK Census output, can greatly enrich consumer databases.
Large multi-variate dataset classification is ideal for residential
energy consumption as previous research shows that human populations with similar characteristics and behaviours tend to cluster together. A research study [4] comparing consumption data with the
7 OAC Supergroups reveals variations between groups and clear
correlations to household disposable income, property tenure and
rural/urban location. We identify similar patterns when combining average electricity consumption data [3] with the 15 Mosaic
Groups; Figure 1 reveals that the groups labelled ‘Affluent’ or ‘Rural’ display a higher average consumption (darker orange) than the
others. The spatial variation of consumption within these groups
is of particular interest as it highlights that energy use also varies
geographically within these demographic clusters.
The selected datasets, weightings and methodology used for the
classification process can all contribute to bias during data clustering. To reduce this bias it is necessary to use variables known to be
relevant to the specific domain. As a correlation has been identified
when combining geodemographics with energy consumption data,
we propose that the geographical clustered of energy consumption
data together with relevant variables of household and population
characteristics could greatly improve the interpretation of both demographic and geographic variations in household energy usage.
Such a energy-specific classification follows a recent call for geodemographics to be brought into the current data and technical era and
follow more domain specific, problem centred approaches utilising
the advances in visualisation and data exploration techniques [8].
3 S MARTER T ECHNOLOGIES AND F EEDBACK
Within the energy industry there is already a substantial amount of
household consumption data suitable for building an energy-based
classification. The introduction of modern smart meters will; however, increase this data quantity exponentially. Smart meter technology allows for consumption to be recorded at frequent intervals
and communicates this information to both consumer and energy
supplier allowing for near real-time feedback of energy use. The
introduction of smart meter technologies is expected to improve
household consumption awareness as well as allow for better regulation of household energy demand. Smart meters form a major
component of Smart Grids, which are estimated to reduce annual
EU household consumption by 10% and carbon dioxide emissions
by 9% [5]. Smart meter data could potentially improve our energybased classifications for example introducing clusters related to
high demand at certain times of the day or days of the week. In order to assess the potential for this granular dataset we are currently
working in collaboration with the energy utility company E.ON on
a project entitled ‘Visualising the Smart Home’.

217

Figure 1: Mosaic Groups mapping English government regions sized by number of electricity meters, coloured by average electricity consumption

Increased pressure to reduce consumption combined with advances in meter technology has seen a growing need and demand
for householders to be provided with more transparent and detailed understanding of energy use within their home. A significant
amount of research is available evaluating alternative methods of
consumer feedback. Relatively recent research identifies that social
norms can be used effectively in the case of energy consumption
reduction [1]. The research investigates the campaigns by oPower
in the US, which compare households to a collection of neighbours
with similar characteristics, and concludes that a small but continuous and sustained consumption reduction is achieved. These findings suggest that neighbourhood level comparisons based on geodemographic energy classifications could offer consumers a more reliable, understandable and concrete reasoning for saving energy.
4

V ISUALISATION

AND

A NALYTICS

Energy management is one of the key domains where visual analytics can make an important contribution. With the introduction
of smart meter technologies this statement applies as much to the
high level energy demand and supply monitoring as to smarter controls and visual aids for householders. Technological advances in
data visualisation offer real opportunities for research into energy
consumption awareness with techniques that may provide personal
views and interactive exploration of data. Rodgers and Bartram [7]
encourage awareness and behavioural changes through tools and
visualisations designed to make users aware of their energy use
through non-intrusive and subtle visual stimuli.
Our research argues that the classification of energy-based variables could allow for variations in domestic energy consumption
to be better understood. While data classification radically reduces
data volumes and enables trends and clusters in large datasets to be
identified with greater ease, they can also easily be misinterpreted.
Some recent visual analytics research shows how exploratory data
visualisation can be effective both during the clustering process
and cluster decision stages (iVisCluster [2]) as well as for improving end-user understanding and overall comprehension (OAC Explorer [9]). This research highlights the benefits associated with
classifying large datasets as well as taking steps to visualise the uncertainties that result from the clustering processes.
In our research we will use exploratory visualisation techniques
to evaluate the use and benefits of our energy-based classifications.
Requirements for the visualisations will be gathered at creativ-

218

ity workshops with E.ON staff during the ‘Visualising the Smart
Home’ project.
5 R ESEARCH S TATUS
Having established a need for a geodemographic energy profile
geovisualisation we are currently in the process of defining the classification system to be used, collecting datasets that may contribute
and establishing visualisation requirements. Our poster will present
some visual stimuli from the E.ON project as well as a description
of our classifier and datasources to be used.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This PhD research is funded by a Vice Chancellor’s Scholarship
from City University London and Betternest Ltd UK. We would
also like to thank the contributors to the E.ON funded project.
R EFERENCES
[1] H. Allcott. Social Norms and Energy Conservation. Journal of Public
Economics, 95(9–10):1082–1095, 2011.
[2] J. Choo, H. Lee, J. Kihm, and H. Park. iVisClassifier: An Interactive
VA System for Classification based on Supervised Dimension Reduction. In VAST, 2010 IEEE Symposium on, pages 27 –34, Oct. 2010.
[3] DECC. Average Household Electricity Consumption Data for the
Standard Meter at LSOA level. (Available via decc.gov.uk), 2008.
[4] A. Druckman and T. Jackson. Household Energy Consumption in the
UK: A Highly Geographically and Socio-economically Disaggregated
Model. Energy Policy, 36:3177–3192, 2008.
[5] European Commission. Next Steps for Smart Grids: Europe’s Future
Electricity System will Save Money and Energy. Technical report,
Brussels, Apr. 2011.
[6] Experian. Mosaic Public Sector. (Available via mimas.ac.uk), 2010.
[7] J. Rodgers and L. Bartram. Exploring Ambient and Artistic Visualization for Residential Energy Use Feedback. IEEE TVCG, 17(12):2489–
2497, Dec. 2011.
[8] A. D. Singleton and P. A. Longley. Geodemographics, Visualisation and Social Networks in Applied Geography. Applied Geography,
29(3):289–298, July 2009.
[9] A. Slingsby, J. Dykes, and J. Wood. Exploring Uncertainty in Geodemographics with Interactive Graphics. IEEE TVCG, 17(12):2545 –
2554, Dec. 2011.
[10] D. Vickers and P. Rees. Creating the UK National Statistics 2001
Output Area Classification. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series A (Statistics in Society), 170(2):379–403, 2007.

