Using Visual Analytics to Detect Problems in Datasets
Collected From Photo-Sharing Services
Alexander Kachkaev∗

Jo Wood, Member, IEEE†

giCentre, City University London

giCentre, City University London

Figure 1: Distributions of geotagged photographs in Central London taken by users of three photo-sharing services between January 1st ,
2008 and December 31st , 2011 and collected by means of APIs provided. Left to right: Picasa Web Albums, Panoramio, Flickr, Geograph.

A BSTRACT
Datasets that are collected for research often contain millions of
records and may carry hidden pitfalls that are hard to detect. This
work demonstrates how visual analytics can be used for identifying
problems in the spatial distribution of crawled photographic data
in different datasets: Picasa Web Albums, Panoramio, Flickr and
Geograph, chosen to be potential data sources for ongoing doctoral
research.
This poster summary describes a number of problems found in
the datasets using visual analytics and suggests that greater attention should be paid to assessing the quality of data gathered from
user-generated photographic content.
This work is the first part of a three-year PhD project aimed at
producing a pedestrian-routing system that can suggest attractive
pathways extracted from user-generated photographic content.
1 I NTRODUCTION
The quantity of user-generated content on photo-sharing websites
and its availability has been given rise to various research studies
for several years. The richness of the information that can be obtained from such services by means of their APIs encourage usage
of photo-data as an input for a wide range of analysis, from examining contributors’ behaviour [1] to measuring popularity and
semantics of landmarks [2][4] or developing innovative trip planners for tourists [3][5][6]. The last group of projects is based on the
ability of geotagged photo-content to measure place attractiveness
and popularity and consider space as a set of spatially distributed
points of interest.
Ongoing PhD research aims to construct a routing system based
on user-generated photo content considering city space as continuos environment, and for this reason the accuracy, cleanness and
representativeness of the input data is extremely important. Thus,
more attention must be paid to potential sources and filtering, as
there can be errors and bias in the contributors and spatial patterns
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

alexander.kachkaev.1@city.ac.uk
j.d.wood@city.ac.uk

of such data [7]. Picasa Web Albums1 , Flickr2 , Panoramio3 and
Geograph4 were chosen as the candidate sources and were assessed
for being suitable for the ongoing research by means of visual analytics.
The purpose of this work is to demonstrate the findings discovered when using visual analytics to examine the distributions of
collected photo metadata.
2

E XPOSITION

Interactive visual analytics software has been developed in order to
explore collected sets and look for potential problems within them.
Written using Processing and Java, it keeps metadata for hundreds
of thousands entries in memory and allows panning, zooming, toggling layers, changing data representation, displaying statistics, etc.
in real time. The tool helped to assess the datasets for the purpose
of the research and detect a number of problems with the data.
Overall Density Evaluation The photo density view, where
each item is represented by a semi-transparent circle and coloured
by its source, is shown in Figure 1. In spite of the view’s simplicity, it was found to be a useful instrument for assessing unexpected
geographic patterns of photo density. For instance, with such visualisation it is clear that the street network is well-seen in case of
Flickr and Panoramio, while barely apparent in Geograph, making
it less attractive for this PhD research.
API Failure Detection Because service APIs are not necessarily designed for collecting vast numbers of photographs, they may
fail in returning all of them for a requested geographic region. Such
issues are normally fixed by splitting an area into smaller spatial
units, but may not always succeed. Visualisations of the dataset itself and one of the API responses (Figure 2) helped to establish that
Picasa caches results and returns photographs outside the requested
bounding boxes in case if they are too small. This fact combined
with an API limit of 1000 metadata entries per query made it impossible to get a representative distribution of photographs for the
most popular places with Picasa API.
1 http://picasaweb.google.com/

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

2 http://www.flickr.com/
3 http://www.panoramio.com/
4 http://www.geograph.org.uk/

231

Figure 2: Detection of a possible problem with Picasa API and its
confirmation by means of visualising results of a single API request.
Photos taken between January 1st , 2008 and December 31st , 2011
are orange, the rest (generally, most recent) are gray. Right: The
server returned photographs outside the requested area.

Figure 4: Photographs collected from Flickr (with the minimum
edge of a bounding box ≈100m) using left: photographs only returned when using spatiotemporal requests and right: photographs
only returned when using user-content requests (data kindly provided by Gennady Andrienko, Fraunhofer Institute, Germany).

Misplaced Photographs Detection The interfaces provided
to users of photo-sharing services allow searching for a place and
thus automatically put a photo on the map. According to the EXIF
data attached to each photograph, at least 70% stored in Flickr
have been geotagged manually rather than using GPS. Because the
search queries can be inexact, some spots like the one in Figure 3
end up containing hundreds of photographs, not related to the local
areas where they are placed. Such anomalies can negatively influence the results of a research and are easily discovered with visual
analytics.

image processing. This can give an idea of the amount of private photographs in the dataset, which are not useful in some
cases.

Figure 3: Anomaly containing unreasonably large numbers of photographs with the same coordinates. Right: Adding a randomly
generated offset (standardised to fit a normal distribution) to photo
coordinates and reducing alpha helps to find and see such places.
Background: c CC BY-SA OpenStreetMap and contributors.
Comparison of Crawling Methods The visual analytics tool
can be also used to compare various datasets, or even the same data
collected differently. Figure 4 demonstrates that the choice of a
crawling approach can significantly influence the distribution of the
photographs.
Other Implications of the VA Approach Use of visual analytics to assess photo sets is not limited to the cases mentioned above.
Other possibilities may include:
• Visualisation of distribution of photo illuminance based on
EXIF data. This can help to see if a dataset contains significant numbers of photos taken indoors or overnight, which are
not wanted for some analysis.
• Time filtering in order to observe dynamics in spatialtemporal distribution of the photographs. Such visualisation
can help estimating the robustness of the dataset to events and
seasonal changes.
• View of allocations of photographs with faces in them, with
information obtained by means of service APIs or by doing

232

3 C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper demonstrates that a number of factors such as the nature of data, peculiarities of service APIs and even the interfaces
users are dealing with when sharing their photographs can negatively affect the distribution of someone’s input data and may lead
to inaccurate research results. The work does not aim to provide
a ready-to-use methodology to assess collected photographic information, but proposes paying greater attention to initial data analysis, problem detection and filtering before doing further analytical
research. While the definition of a ‘problem’ in a photographic
dataset will vary depending on the purpose of the research, the approach demonstrated here helps in understanding the effects of the
data generation and collection process.
After potential concerns are detected, data filtering should take
place. Visual analytics can be very useful during this stage too by
helping to see the effectiveness of chosen filtering methods, thus
playing a role of a feedback function. In future work in this project,
the VA system will be developed to assess the effect of automatic
filtering operations such as the removal of nighttime photography
and photos of people.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Clements, P. Serdyukov, A. P. de Vries, and M. J. Reinders. Using
flickr geotags to predict user travel behaviour. In Proceeding of the 33rd
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in
information retrieval, page 851–852, 2010.
[2] D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg. Mapping the world’s photos. In Proceedings of the 18th international conference on World wide web, WWW ’09, page 761–770, New York, NY,
USA, 2009. ACM.
[3] M. De Choudhury, M. Feldman, S. Amer-Yahia, N. Golbandi, R. Lempel, and C. Yu. Constructing travel itineraries from tagged geo-temporal
breadcrumbs. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
World wide web, page 1083–1084, 2010.
[4] S. Kisilevich, D. Keim, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko. Towards acquisition of semantics of places and events by multi-perspective analysis of geotagged photo collections. GeoCart, 2010.
[5] T. Kurashima, T. Iwata, G. Irie, and K. Fujimura. Travel route recommendation using geotags in photo sharing sites. In Proceedings of
the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge
management, page 579–588, 2010.
[6] X. Lu, C. Wang, J.-M. Yang, Y. Pang, and L. Zhang. Photo2Trip: generating travel routes from geo-tagged photos for trip planning. page
143. ACM Press, 2010.
[7] Purves, R., Edwardes, A., and Wood, J. Describing place through user
generated content. First Monday, 16(9), Sept. 2011.

