Opportunities & Challenges in Computer Graphics: Turning Scientific Tools
to Successful Real-Life Applications
Dr Barnabas Takacs
Digital Elite Inc., USA

Computer graphics technology has made considerable progress during the past decades, yet to date it frequently
remains in the realm of science and technology practically inaccessible to most consumers. On the other hand, the
recent rapid evolution of the computer gaming industry has created a “left over” computer graphics infrastructure
available in almost every home. This revolution, pushed by strong market forces and competition of another
industry, offers a unique opportunity for furthering computer graphics solutions and use them to create main stream,
consumer oriented services and applications. These new application areas will go beyond the traditional outlets such
as film or gaming and revolutionarize practically all aspects of life, art & science including health care, education,
rehabilitation, and many more.
Today the field of computer graphics is a diverse and eclectic collection of fascinating, yet highly secluded
application areas. It is no longer a “pure” science, but rather it includes many interdisciplinary elements that ranges
from physical simulations and parallel computing, to computer vision and human-computer interaction or interface
techniques, even practical research on psychology. Thus, the challenge we face today is how to turn this vast body
of cumulative knowledge into an industrial process and consequently eliminate the hurdles standing in our way to
lay the foundation for a brand new and dynamic, growing industry.
This keynote discusses the many factors needed to transition the field of computer graphics into a productive
industry. The lecture will sketch the state-of-the art in CG applications and outline the economics, business
environment and application areas that will provide the forces to create a unified, open platform for interdisciplinary
applications. Special emphasis is given to real-time techniques and how they will effect our industry. Examples and
case studies from such diverse fields as virtual reality, next generation medical applications, film and game
development will be discussed as well as new challenges including tele-rehabilitation, cyber-therapy, clinical
psychology, brain research, virtual patients will be introduced.
The lecture will demonstrate the above principles by means of a novel, real-time interactive CG system, called the
Virtual Human Interface (VHI). The VHI is the first system ever created to service the needs of many industries in
parallel without any modification to its architecture. The key to its success lies in its open architecture and the
integration of a large number of multi-disciplinary tools and solutions. It also features a high fidelity, virtual human
that lays the foundation to implement applications never before possible. The VHI has been successfully used in
many practical scenarios for the military, medical community, HCI, marketing and entertainment.
In summary, this keynote lecture will support the argument that due to the rapid advances in computer hardware and
display technology, computer graphics has come of age. It will become the technological foundation of many new
human-centered applications and as such it will play a key role in transforming our society.
Dr. Takács is an internationally recognized computer scientist working in the fields of computer graphics, virtual
reality, human animation, real-time systems, computer vision, face recognition and security systems. He published
over 50 technical papers, he regularly speaks on prestigious scientific forums and conferences, and delivers lectures
on various institutional forums (for more details on his recent and upcoming lectures please visit
http://www.digitalelite.net/Pages/DigitalElite/DEE_PressPapers.html)
As a consultant, he worked with many
prestigious firms including projects for McKinsey&Co Consulting, Fox Interactive, and government agencies both
in the U.S. (Washington D.C) and the E.U. (Brussels).

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

Dr. Takács is the Founder/President of Digital Elite (Los Angeles) and co-founder/CTO of Digital Custom (San
Francisco). These two companies each focus on different aspects of digital media production, advertisement and
animation technology.
(1) Digital Elite Inc. (www.digitalElite.net ) is a Los Angeles-based software production company that develops a
high performance virtual human modeling and animation platform for the new communication age. Dr. Takács
serves as the company’s President & CTO. The system called, Virtual Human Interface (VHI) represents the
cutting edge of computer graphics research.
Classical applications of the technology include film, games and digital entertainment, broadcast, broadband or low-bandwidth Internet solutions.
Recently the company started adapting its core technology for a variety of novel niche markets where
facial modeling and virtual humans play a significant role. Examples include digital plastic surgery, virtual reality
therapy, clinical psychology, and interactive information kiosks for trade shows, information services and
education.
(2) Digital Custom Group Inc. (www.digitalcustom.com), based in San Francisco. Dr. Takács serves as the
company’s CTO & Director of European Operations. The company offers comprehensive digital image
editing/manipulation of still images to approved clients in the advertising, marketing and media industries, including
photo agencies, publication firms, professional photographers, and catalog companies. DigitalCustom Group uses a
raster of computer graphics and computer vision techniques to provide the highest fidelity service for its digital
imaging clients. DCG is also the leading developer of outsourced custom digital image editing service systems at all
market levels.
Dr. Takács spent many years in developing cutting-edge technologies and has a long history of bringing novel
solutions to the market place. As part of his film carrier in Hollywood Dr. Takács was the Director of R&D for
Virtual Celebrity Productions (Los Angeles, CA) where he was responsible for the design and implementation of
the Digital Cloning System (DCS). The DCS was created in 1999 with the aim of producing photo-realistic human
actors for movies and television commercials. This system was used in producing VCP’s critically acclaimed digital
Marlene Dietrich that brought the “Blue Angel” back to life for a brief 30 seconds in August,1999
(http://www.moves.com/film/vcp/latimes.html ). Dr. Takacs’s current company, Digital Elite was set up in 2000 to
continue the research and development started at VCP and develop the tools and techniques necessary to turn the art
of photo-realistic virtual humans from a multi-million dollar production into a simple tool accessible for many
people around the world.
Apart from working in Hollywood and digital entertainment Dr. Takács also spent many years in consulting and
high-tech development. As an example, in 1999 he helped developing a “smart” running shoe for the consumer
market that measures all physical characteristics of a runner (speed, calories burnt, heart beat, etc.) and transmits
this information via a wireless communication link to a personal computer for real-time analysis. Since 1996 he
also works with WaveBand Corporation (Irvine, CA), where he helped develop a number of proprietary radar and
image processing technologies used by the U.S. Airforce, Navy and commercial entities. Examples include 3D
object recognition for automatic target recognition (ATR), millimeter-wave radar landing systems, collision
avoidance radars, and 3D radar imaging. He also worked on developing novel concealed weapon detection systems
for increased airport security. In 1995 he designed an innovative image compression algorithm that is capable of
encoding a complete face photograph in a single barcode. The system was demonstrated to INS and the U.S. Armed
forces. In 1994 he was part of the team who contracted the U.S government to create a large and standardized facial
data set (FERET project) for testing face recognition systems, the resulting database was the first of its kind and
helped develop the testing standards in use today. In 1990 he was co-founder of Telemedia LLC. (Hungary) and
designed the first speaker-independent voice recognition solution for interactive voice response (IVR) applications.
Dr. Takacs is member of ACM SIGGRAPH Los Angeles Chapter, former member of IEEE, the New York
Academy of Sciences, and professional organizations in Hungary

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

