Geometric Design : A Complex Systems Approach
Dr Keith Unsworth
Lincoln University, New Zealand

It is common in engineering practice to first design a mathematical model of a physical object using geometric
constructs such as splines, surface patches and subdivision schemes, and then to render the model on a computer
display device. Typically the rendering process involves projecting the object’s model onto a plane that has been
overlaid with an array of cells (pixels), then algorithmically determining which cell to turn on. Thus the displayed
image aids in perception but is not essential for analysis. Supporting the image there is a mathematical model that
may be used for analysis.
In nature, geometric form emerges as a consequence of growth and evolution, not as the output of a design process.
Nature does not use an exact mathematical model as a guide for a growth process in the sense that a human designer
does.
We therefore suggest an alternative approach to geometric design, by modelling geometry as a consequence of
growth or evolutionary processes based upon biological systems. This approach has led to the study of complex
adaptive systems and how they may be used to model geometry in this way.
In this talk, we will introduce the notion of a complex adaptive system, in particular the complex social behaviours
of ants. It will be noted that the study of ant behaviour patterns can provide models for solving optimisation
problems: indeed ant colony optimisation (an example of swarm intelligence) has been adopted for a wide range of
shortest path problems.
We will show how we may use ant colony optimisation to generate a cellular line whereby the line evolves
according to the behaviour of a virtual ant colony. In order to achieve this we need to have a definition of what is
meant by a line in our cellular world: this will also be presented in the talk.
An overview of related studies in this area will also be given.
Keith Unsworth is a senior lecturer of applied computing at Lincoln University, New Zealand. He has a BSc and
PhD in mathematics from the University of London, UK. He spent 3 years as a lecturer in the School of
Mathematical Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, before moving to the University of Dundee, Scotland, in 1979.
In 1995, he moved to Lincoln University. His research interests are in computer graphics, geometric design, image
processing and complex systems. He is a member of Eurographics and ACM Siggraph.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

