Generation of Geometrical Patterns Based on Coloured
Pixels Using Computer Graphics
Dr. Amer Salman, Mrs Rula Salman
Thames Valley University, Course Leader for Research Degrees, London
College of Music Media and Creative Technology, Grove House, 1 The
Grove, Ealing
amer.salman@tvu.ac.uk
http://www.tvu.ac.uk
ABC Europe Ltd, I.T. Assessor, 86 Edgware Road, London, W1
rula-salman@yahoo.co.uk
Abstract
Graphic primitives were looked at as a base to create
geometrical patterns. For the last few years the authors
have used computer graphics to generate, study and
analyse a very large collection of geometrical patterns.
The paper is based on this experience. First, a
classification system was developed for the existing
patterns based on graphic primitives. All patterns
generated by this system have been based upon polyline,
curve, calligraphy, tile or a mixture of these elements.
Secondly, a new recipe was developed using pixels
associated with colours. This is called Coloured Pixel,
which is the new element that we have used to develop
our geometric patterns. The final art product will have a
new look that is different from the others. It is interesting
to say that the produced image could be classified to any
one of the seventeen crystallographic patterns.
Keywords: graphics primitive and
geometrical patterns, coloured pixel, elements.

attribute,

1. Introduction:
Geometric patterns occur in rich profusion and are
explored in all civilisations. For example the Romans,
Chinese, Islamic and Celts, have employed them
extensively in their artistic creation. Few even favoured
patterns that are different to other cultures choice as found
by Crowe and Washburn [2,22]. Also, in the early part of
this century that Polya [12] and Speiser [19] instigated
group theory based analysis of decorations and designs of
various cultures.
These patterns offer a rich source for exploration not
only by artists but also of interest to mathematicians,
crystallographers, architects and others. "Geometry has
more value than simply as a means of acquiring a grasp of

mathematical concepts. The applications of a disciplined
spatial intuition to art and design, and to the study of
morphologies in every conceivable science is so great that
perhaps we might think of geometry as a semiautonomous department of mathematics with different as
well as overlapping purposes to abstract mathematics"
said Robert Dixon [4]. They can serve as an elegant test
bed for research into hierarchical programming and
texture mapping. Patterns are found on a diversity of
materials such as tiles, bricks, wood, brass, paper, plaster,
glass, jewellery and carpets.
Colour is another dimension that has been
systematically explored by artists. "When we examine the
system of colouring adopted by the Moors, we find that as
with form, so with colour, they followed certain fixed
principle, founded on observations of nature's laws…"
said Owen Jones [10]. When we investigate the system of
colouring, utilised by different cultures, we find that
colour and patterns follow certain fixed principles to
reflect dissimilar ideas and to create the final feeling of
colour and cultures [22].
A Geometrical pattern or periodic pattern, also
called a crystallographic pattern, is produced when a
region of some sort is copied onto the nodes of a net
constructed from two sets of parallel lines. This has led
into geometrical exploration of patterns, an enterprise that
results in an extra-ordinarily large, complex and elegant
collection of geometrical patterns [5,6,15].

2. Classical Methods
In this secession we try to answer how to create
images of a perfect paradise on a very imperfect earth?
How patterns evolve from the simple to the complex?
How have they been transmitted widely? The questions
were tailored to focus on finding the original techniques
that were used to create such patterns. No author so far

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

has been able to offer an answer or a solution to these
questions. We are not intending to repeat what others
have done previously, i.e. to offer individual constructions
for large number of patterns [15].
For centuries the methods of creating geometric
patterns and design has been kept a close secret only to
those who practice the usage of the designs and those
closest to them. Very few have managed to sneak to the
surface of publicity and be displayed at museums and
libraries. One of those notes and methods on display is
the work of Mirza Akbar at the Victoria and Albert
Museum in London. However, no records have been
found of any earlier formula or methods.
Prisse D’Avennes [3] published an opulent and
grand work of 4 volumes in the 19th century using Colour
Lithography. This work attracted many artists and
architects of the time to admire and become fascinated by
the exquisite geometrical designs presented in this
publication. Nevertheless, D’Avennes did not pay much
attention and detail in this publication to how patterns are
constructed.
Some contemporary authors have paid attention and
detail to methods used in creating such patterns; they even
went as far as giving their personal resolution on how an
image is produced. Critchlow [1], El-Said and Parman
[5], Wade [21] and Paccard [11] are some of those
authors. The only author to publish a similar book whilst
giving a computer graphic algorithms is Lavlani [9].

3. Analysis and Classification
We can classify patterns by pointing out all the
graphics primitives used to produce a pattern. On
examining hundreds of patterns the reader will see that
any pattern can be classified as polyline based patterns,
curve based patterns, calligraphy based patterns, tilling
based patterns or mixed based patterns. Below we will
explain what each one means.

3.1 Polyline Based Patterns
This type of pattern is very popular amongst
scientists and artists wanting to examine or find out how
these patterns are constructed or created. Example can be
seen in Fig (1).

3.2 Curve Based Patterns
Many curve based patterns can be made quite easily
by replacing polyline with curve in any polyline based
pattern. The interested reader will find that some of these
patterns are generated mainly by an influence of leaves
and flowers. In Fig (2) we show example of such a
pattern.

All previous publications mentioned addressed the
issue of colour and design as separate individual subjects.
In this paper we have shown how this combination of dot
colour and computer graphics can produce patterns that
are beautiful and pleasing to the eye.

Figure 2: Curve based pattern

3.3 Calligraphy Based Patterns
Calligraphy is a very important feature in different
cultures. Artists have produced many calligraphic scripts
and symmetrical calligraphic patterns from the earliest
times and continue to do so to this day. In our experience
we found that very sophisticated and complex nonperiodic patterns are very popular.

Figure 1: Polyline based pattern

Fig (3) shows an example of a more complex
pattern, which is a recent piece of work by one of the
authors. The reader is invited to try and work out the way
the pattern was created.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

3.4 Tile based patterns
Many popular and interesting tile based patterns are
to be found and discovered in different parts of the world.
Zalij or Fill area based patterns are other names for these
patterns. The interested reader should refer to a book by
Hedgeco and Damluji [8] to enjoy a feast of Zalij.

3.5 Mixed Based Patterns
A considerable number of patterns can be derived or
created easily if we combine more than one element. For
example, we have used polyline and tile as main elements
to obtain a very common pattern as shown in Fig (4). For
more of such examples patterns the reader should refer to
[15].

4. Techniques of Previous Studies

Fig (3) Calligraphy based pattern

We have looked at the elements (graphic primitives)
that can be used to create patterns, but we have not
discussed how these elements are used to create patterns.
There are different elements to creating a pattern and two
techniques to apply those elements.

4.1 Compass/Ruler Techniques
This technique is closely guarded as a traditional and
classical way. Many geometrical patterns created by
simply arranging single shaped tiles. Some very
interesting and beautiful patterns are produced from
overlapping tiles or multiple shaped tiles in different
ways. A further developing stage to this is known as Zalij.
Zalij is another type of pattern, which partially on
the usage of typical tiles and sub-tiles [8,11].
Many simple and complex patterns have been raised
using different nets, such as squares net, isometric
triangular net, multiple net, circle nets and others. Artists
have used these nets to produce interlaced patterns,
calligraphy patterns and many more patterns.

4.2 Group theory Techniques
Group theory shows that in two dimensions,
geometrical patterns can be analysed into seventeen
different types and provide the insight required to identify
the amount of information needed to generate a particular
pattern type. Clearly, this technique is based on
mathematics. More than three hundred examples can be
found in reference [6,15].

Figure 4: Mixed based pattern

In this section we are not looking in depth into
different techniques used to generate geometrical patterns.
If the reader wishes to see such details please refer to
[13,14,16].

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

5. The Investigation
Our previous work and work by other researchers
and scientists had been carried out to produce images
through the use of the above (Analysis & Classification
and Technique) sections [20]. Is there a way where we
can produce patterns laying beyond the steps of producing
traditional images?

The process of producing geometrical patterns went
through several stages in order to reach the final
presentation. And for this we followed specific steps and
instructions.
♦

Start with selecting the type of Region Area that we
would like to fill with pixels. The Region Area could
be parallelogram, rectangle, rhombus, square or
hexagonal.

We wanted to develop a method to be used, by a
different variety of people in order to produce images.
One does not have to have full knowledge or a
background of mathematical methods, or to have used
computer graphics beforehand. Although the title of the
paper hints that this technique can only be achieved
through the use of a computer, in fact, it can be
implemented through the use of a large number of
coloured squares.
The aim was to make the artist able to simply tweak
things and get different patterns.

6. Generation of Geometrical Patterns by
Coloured Pixels
Pixel is a dot area that has location (x,y). Therefor a
given x and y location to a pixel P, it can be represented
by P = L(x,y). Each pixel should be associated with a
colour. Therefore coloured pixel CP can be represented
by CP = (C,L) where C can be different colour.

Fig (7) P4mm pattern type

Figure 6: P4mm pattern type

Refer to Fig (5.b) and Fig (6.b) Coloured Region
Area R constructed of a set of pixels associated randomly
with a different set of colours.
n,m

R=SUM C iP j
i=1,j=1
Note: We could have the coloured pixels for subset
of the coloured Region Area, then repeat the subset in
order to complete the set.

♦ Having implemented the first two steps we then
repeated the coloured Region Area into multiple
numbers until we had complete Geometrical Patterns
GP, Fig (5.a) and Fig (6.a).
n

GP= SUM Rk
k=1

♦ The outcome of the first three steps would be an
infinite possibility of shapes, which at this stage
Proceedings of the International
Conference
on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
Figure 5: Pmm
pattern type
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

♦

Fig (5.b) and Fig (6.b) are zoom out version of the
one used to produce Fig (5.a) and Fig (6.a).

When looking at a pattern we usually look at the
overall presentation of it, such as colour, inscriptions,
interlacing, and other beautification aspects.
Still,
inspecting a pattern and describing its type would require
the investigation of the patterns’ blueprint “ground
symmetry” [15]. In this case Fig (5.b) is Pmm pattern
type and Fig (6.b) is P4mm pattern type. We invite the
reader to find out the pattern types for Fig (7) and Fig (8).

7. Conclusion

Figure 7: Geometrical Pattern

The paper established the unity between coloured
pixel and pattern. We know that random shapes of
patterns have no base for its creation e.g. clouds, trees etc.
where as geometrical patterns do. Where there is a base
there is a method and with this method comes a tool.
Classical (compass/ruler) or mathematically modern
(group theory), these tools have been the ultimate answer
to creating the base. We have managed to create a method
that would associate colour to pixel in a unique way that
has not been explored before.
This new method can be used to generate an infinite
number of pattern possibilities. In our case, the
combination was achieved through the use of computer
graphics. The revolution lies within the fact that in the
past there were a limited number of pattern outcomes all
similar in look and style. However, now the number of
possibilities is countless and has distinctive look, which
gives the unique style as one of its main characteristics.
Upon analysing hundreds of the patterns presented we
have found that all patterns generated may be classified to
the existing seventeen distinct crystallographic patterns.
We found pattern types P4m, Pm, P2m, Cmm and P1 are
very popular amongst these patterns. Pg, Pgg, P4gm and
Pmg patterns types are very rare and continue to be so
amid these patterns.
This shows that no matter how much we investigate
patterns or colour discoveries are found more each day.
The development of science and technology is non-stop
and without the use of computer technology non-of this
developments could have been possible to achieve.

8. Further Study
Figure 8: Another geometrical pattern

♦

enables the creator to design and alter the pattern to
individual taste.
Generating such patterns by using one of the
following;
a) Writing simple programme in any program
language.
b) Using of shelf graphics software like
PhotoShop.
d) Manually by using small coloured square
paper.

Some of the future developments on these findings
may be;
•

♦

We aim to generate patterns based on musical notes
combined with dot colour pixels. This would then
open a door to different issues including comparison
of patterns from one style of music to the other or
from one country's' to another.

Using this method combined with specific
technology to improve security systems in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
conjunction(CGIV’04)
with current finger printing technique.
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

The end result would be a beautifully presented
security tool.
♦

A psychological analysis of the colours and styles of
patterns generated by this method combined with a
comparison of patterns resulting from cultural
background or geographical location.

[14]

Salman, A., Abas S. J., Geometric and Grouptheoretic Methods for Computer Graphic Studies of
Islamic Symmetric Patterns, Computer Graphics
forum volume 11, number 1, 43-53,1992.

[15]

Salman, A., Abas, S.J., Symmetries of Islamic
Geometrical Patterns. World Scientific1998.

[16]

Salman A., Salman R., Love, E., Generation of
Symmetrical Patterns Based on Text and Colour,
Computational Science and Its Applications, ICCSA
Part 3, p609-619, 2003.

[17]

Schattschneizsder, D., The Plane Symmetry Groups:
Their Recognition and Notation, The American
Mathematical Monthly, p85, p 439-450, 1978

[18]

Shubnikov, A.V., Koptsik, V.A., Symmetry in Science
and Art, Nauka, Moscow, 1972, Plenum Press, New
York, 1974.

[19]

Speiser, A., Die theorie der Gruppen von endicher
Ordnung, Second Edn. Springer, Berlin 1972; third
Edn. Springer, Berlin 1937; Dover, New York 1943;
Fourth Edn. Birkhauser, Basel 1956.

[20]

Valor, M., Albert, F., Analysis Tool for Cataloguing
Textile and Tile Pattern Designs. Computational
Science and Its Applications, ICCSA Part 3, p568578, 2003.

[21]

Wade, D., Pattern in Islamic Art, Cassell & Collier
Macmillan, London 1976.

[22]

Washburn, W., Crowe, D., Symmetries of Culture,
University of Washington Press, 1982.

9. Acknowledgement
We wish to express our appreciation to Mr Edwin
Love for providing us with images from his program, and
to the LCMM.

10. References
[1]

Critchlow, K., Islamic Patterns An Analytical and
Cosmological Approach., Thames and Hudson,
London, 1976, paperback edition 1983.

[2]

Crowe W. D., Washburn K. D., The Geometry of
Decoration on Historic San Ildefonso Puebo Pottery,
In Native American Mathematics. Michael Closs,
1983.

[3]

D’Avennes, P., L’Art Arabe d’Apr`es Les Monument
do Kaire depois le VII e si`ecle jusqua’` la fin du
XVIIIe si`ecle, Vve.Amorel et Cie., Paris 1869-1877.
Reprint ed. Arabic art in colour, Dover Publications,
New York 1978.
Dixon, R., Geometry Comes Up To Date, New
Sientist, 5 May 1983.

[4]

[5]

El-Said, I., Parman, A., Geometrical Concepts in
Islamic Art, World of Islam Festival Publ. Co.,
London 1976.

[6]

Grunbaum,B., Grkunbaum,Z., Shephard, G.C.,
Symmetry in Moorish and other Ornaments, Comp. &
Math. With appls. Vol 12B, 641-653, 1986.

[7]

Grunbaum. B., & Shephard.G.C., Tiling and patterns,
Editor by Zdenka & Helen, W.H.Freeman, 1987.

[8]

Hedgecoe,H. J., Damluji, S.S., Zilij: The Art of
Moroccan Ceramics, Eds., Garnet Publishing Ltd.,
reading, 1992.

[9]

Lavani, H., Coding and Generating Complex Periodic
Patterns, The Visual Computer, 5, p. 180-202, 1989.

[10]

Jones, O., The Grammer of Ornament, Day and Son,
London 1856, recent reprint Studio Editions, London
1988.

[11]

Paccard, A., Traditional Islamic Craft in Moroccan
Architecture, Published by Editions ateliers 74, 74410
Sain-Jorioz, France vols. 1 and 2, 1980.
Polya, G., Uber die Analogie der Kristallsymmetrie in
der Ebene, Zeitschrift fur Kristallographie, 60, 278282 1924.

[12]

[13]

Salman, A., Methods for the Seventeen Distinct Types
of Two Colour Frieze Patterns, Leonardo, p324, April
1992.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

