DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2010.01647.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 29 (2010), number 6 pp. 1770–1782

Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes
H. Li1 , W. K. Leow1 and I.-S. Chiu2
1 Department

of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

2 Department

Abstract
The Cosserat theory of elastic rods has been used in a wide range of application domains to model and simulate
the elastic deformation of thin rods. It is physically accurate and its implementations are efficient for interactive
simulation. However, one requirement of using Cosserat rod theory is that the tubular object must have rigid
cross-sections that are small compared to its length. This requirement make it difficult for the approach to model
elastic deformation of rods with large, non-rigid cross-sections that can change shape during rod deformation,
in particular, hollow tubes. Our approach achieves this task using a hybrid model that binds a mesh elastically
to a reference Cosserat rod. The mesh represents the surface of the hollow tube while the reference rod models
bending, twisting, shearing and stretching of the tube. The cross-sections of the tube may take on any arbitrary
shape. The binding is established by a mapping between mesh vertices and the rod’s directors. Deformation of
the elastic tube is accomplished in two phases. First, the reference rod is deformed according to Cosserat theory.
Next, the mesh is deformed using Laplacian deformation according to its mapping to the rod and its surface
elastic energy. This hybrid approach allows the tube to deform in a physically correct manner in relation to the
bending, twisting, shearing, and stretching of the reference rod. It also allows the surface to deform realistically
and efficiently according to surface elastic energy and the shape of the reference rod. In this way, the deformation
of elastic hollow tubes with large, non-rigid cross-sections can be simulated accurately and efficiently.
Keywords: physics-based modeling, elastic tubes, Cosserat rod theory, Laplacian deformation
ACM CCS: I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Computational Geometry and Object Modeling

1. Introduction
Modeling of elastic tubular objects has been an active research area in recent years. Its application domains range
from computer graphics and animation [BWR∗ 08, BAC∗ 06,
ST07, ST08], computer aided design [GS07, TGAB08], mechanical engineering [GB06, LPY04, LCW04], DNA simulation [HMM03, GPL05], to surgical simulation [Pai02,
CDL∗ 05, LCDN06]. General physics-based deformable
models such as 3D finite elements (FEM) and thin shell models can be applied to the modeling of thin rods and/or hollow
tubes [NMK∗ 05, TPBF87]. However, they are in general
computationally expensive. Moreover, they do not explicitly model global bending and twisting, which are important
characteristics of tubular objects.

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main
Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

In contrast, the Cosserat theory [Ant95, Rub00] has been
developed to elegantly model bending and twisting, as well
as shearing and stretching, of elastic rods. It represents a
3D tubular object using a 1D centerline and orthonormal
directors associated with the centerline (Figure 2). Due to its
physical accuracy and computational efficiency, it has been
applied to a wide range of application domains including the
simulation of surgical threads and catheters [Pai02, CDL∗ 05,
LCDN06], hair strands [BAQ∗ 05, BAC∗ 06], ropes and knots
[ST07, ST08], cables [GS07], DNA [HMM03, GPL05], and
scoliotic spine [LLHH09]. Cosserat rod theory makes the
assumption that the rod has rigid cross-sections that are small
compared to its length. Thus, it is not suitable for modeling
elastic deformation of hollow tubes with large, non-rigid
cross-sections.

1770

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

1771

To simulate hollow tubes with deformable cross-sections,
Gould and Burton [GB06] presented a model that uses a sequence of Cosserat rings (rods whose two ends are joined) to
represent the tube’s cross-sections, and assembles the crosssectional rings to form the tube. This approach is physically
accurate. However, the model is very complex and computationally very expensive.
In this paper, we propose an efficient approach for simulating hollow tubes with large and deformable cross-sections.
Our approach uses a hybrid model that binds a surface mesh
model elastically to a reference Cosserat rod. The mesh
model represents the surface of the hollow tube while the
reference rod models global bending, twisting, shearing and
stretching of the tube. The cross-sections of the tube may
take on any arbitrary shape. Binding between the mesh and
the rod is established by a mapping between mesh vertices
and the rod’s directors.
Our hybrid model deforms the surface mesh according
to Laplacian deformation method [BS08, MYF06, Sor05],
which is a computationally efficient approximation of thin
shell model. Like thin shell model, it computes the mesh
configuration that minimizes local surface bending and
stretching. However, local surface bending is modeled using
Laplacians (i.e., linear approximation of curvature normals),
which are rotation-variant. Masuda et al. [MYF06] proposed
a method to compute rotation-invariant Laplacians by approximating the rotations of the normals at the mesh vertices.
In our model, rotation-invariance is achieved by measuring
the Laplacians with respect to the directors of the reference
rod, which are intrinsic properties of the rod. This is a more
natural approach to achieving rotation invariance of Laplacian for tubular objects. Therefore, the reference Cosserat
rod serves the important roles of modeling global bending, twisting, shearing, and stretching of the tube, as well
as providing reference frames (i.e., directors) for achieving
rotation-invariant Laplacian deformation. Explicit modeling
of bending and twisting also allows these properties to be
easily visualized, if necessary.
Our method deforms an elastic tube model in two phases.
First, the reference rod is deformed according to Cosserat
theory and user-specified boundary conditions. Next, the
mesh is deformed using Laplacian deformation according
to its mapping to the rod and its surface elastic energy.
This hybrid approach allows the tube to deform in a physically correct manner in relation to the bending, twisting,
shearing, and stretching of the reference rod. It also allows
the surface to deform realistically and efficiently according to surface elastic energy and the shape of the reference
rod. In this way, the deformation of elastic hollow tubes
with large, non-rigid cross-sections can be simulated accurately and efficiently. Compared to existing work, we apply
Cosserat rod theory to model all the strain variables of a
rod, namely bending, twisting, shearing and stretching. In
addition, direction is represented using Rodrigue’s rotation

Figure 1: Manipulation of aorta model. (a) Initial configuration. The lower end is fixed both in position and orientation.
The other end is displaced (b) and then intentionally rotated,
causing twisting of the aorta (c) for comparison.

formula which has a minimum degree of freedom and is
constraint-free.
Compared to FEM and thin shell model, our hybrid model
trades physical correctness of surface modeling for computational efficiency. Nevertheless, the hybrid model can still
deform in a physically realistic manner. Experimental tests
(Section 6) show that the deformation of the hybrid model
resembles those of real tubular objects.
Our target application is to model the deformation of great
arteries (i.e., aorta and pulmonary trunk) in a predictive
cardiac surgery simulation and planning system [LLQC09]
(Figure 1). The system allows a surgeon to explore various surgical options by providing minimum amounts of user
inputs. For instance, if the surgeon wants to join a blood vessel to another, he only needs to specify the joining ends of
the two vessels. The system will efficiently predict the best
configurations of the blood vessels, which have minimum
deformation in terms of stretching, bending and twisting, to
achieve the join. In this application, real-time response is not
crucial but the deformation has to be sufficiently fast and
accurate in order to allow the surgeon to efficiently explore
various surgical options to determine the best ones. Furthermore, dynamic deformation of the blood vessels in response
to interaction with surgical tools is not necessary as well.
In general, our hybrid model can be formulated to bind
any surface model to the Cosserat rod. This general formulation will be presented in a continuous coordinate system
(Section 3). In practice, for convenience and computational
efficiency, the hybrid model is constructed from a triangular
mesh that represents the tube’s surface (Section 4), and is
deformed based on the discrete elastic energy of the Cosserat
rod and the surface mesh (Section 5). Experimental tests
(Section 6) show that the simulation results are realistic. Before presenting the details of our hybrid model, let us first
discuss existing related work.

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1772

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

2. Related Work
There are several models of elastic rods that are not based
on Cosserat theory. Theetten et al. [TGAB08] presented a
considerably accurate model for cable positioning simulation. The model expresses stretching, bending, and torsion
energies in continuous form. In addition, it also accounts
for the plasticity of material, which can result in irreversible
deformation. The numerical scheme for simulating deformation can switch between dynamic and quasistatic modes to
balance between animation accuracy and computational efficiency [TGDM07]. Bergou et al. [BWR∗ 08] presented an
elastic rod model for computer animation. The model represents material torsion using rotation angles with respect to
the Bishop frame [Bis75] of its centerline. Its simulation efficiency is achieved using dynamic simulation of centerline
and quasistatic simulation of material frame. In [Had06],
Hadap developed a linear time, implicit and fully recursive
scheme of rigid-body chains for dynamic simulation of ears,
braids, hairs, and foliage.
Cosserat theory [Ant95, Rub00] formulates a more general
model of physics-based elastic rods. It was first introduced
to the computer graphics community by Pai [Pai02] for interactive simulation of suture strands in laparoscopic surgery.
He applied quasistatic simulation to the surgical thread based
on user-specified fixed position of one end of the thread and
stress at the other end. Bertails et al. used a similar approach
to predict static states of hair styles [BAQ∗ 05]. They further
extended the approach to a super-helices model for dynamic
simulation of hair motion [BAC∗ 06]. A hair strand is modeled as a sequence of smooth helix segments, where each
segment has constant curvature and torsion. Gr´egoire et al.
applied quasistatic simulation of Cosserat rod to cable routing and assembly [GS07]. In modeling torsion, they used
quaternions to represent the orientation of each discrete segment of the rod. Spillmann and Teschner [ST07, ST08] used
a similar rod representation for interactive simulation of dynamic ropes and knots. Their method allows the user to easily
manipulate any portion of the rope.
Most of the existing methods focus on simulating thin rods
with small and rigid cross-sections. According to the application requirements, some of them also assume that the rod
is inextensible or unshearable. These conditions are not valid
for hollow tubes with large and deformable cross-sections.
Therefore, existing rod simulation methods cannot be directly used for simulating hollow tubes. So far, the simulation
of hollow tubes with large and deformable cross-sections has
not been sufficiently studied in the literature.
To simulate hollow tubes with deformable cross-sections
for studying the mechanics of carbon nanotubes, Gould and
Burton [GB06] presented a model that uses a sequence of
Cosserat rings to represent the tube’s cross-sections. The
rings are assumed to be planar, and are assembled to represent the bending, shearing and twisting of the tube. This
approach is physically accurate but is very complex and com-

Figure 2: A Cosserat rod. Arrows depict the directors.

putationally expensive. In comparison, our model of hollow
tube is easier to implement and computationally less expensive than that of Gould and Burton. Simulation tests show
that our approach can produce realistic results for the deformation of various kinds of elastic hollow tubes.
It is interesting to note that the binding of mesh surface
to the reference Cosserat rod in our hybrid model is similar
in nature to the skinning of animated characters, i.e., the
binding of skin to bones [AS07, JZvdP∗ 08]. The difference
is that our reference rod is a deformable curve whereas the
bones in the animated characters are rigid objects connected
by articulated joints.

3. Hybrid Model of Elastic Tubes
Our hybrid model of a hollow tube consists of a reference
Cosserat rod (Section 3.1) and the surface of the tube. For a
given surface model of a tubular object, we first construct the
hybrid model by fitting a reference rod to the centerline of
the surface (Section 4). A binding relationship between the
surface model and the reference rod is then established. The
deformation of the tube is achieved by first deforming the reference rod according to Cosserat theory and the user specified boundary conditions (Section 5.1). Then, the surface
model is deformed according to the surface elastic energy
and the established binding relationship to the reference rod
(Section 5.2).

3.1. Cosserat rod
A Cosserat rod C [Ant95, LCW04] is described by a 3D curve
r(s, t), directors dk (s, t) with k ∈ {1, 2, 3}, the arc length
parameter s ∈ [0, L], and the time parameter t (Figure 2).
The directors dk (s, t) are orthonormal vectors following the
right-handed rule, i.e., (d1 × d2 ) · d3 > 0. They are defined
as follows. d3 (s, t) is normal to the cross-sectional plane Xs of
the rod at s. d1 (s, t) is in Xs and points at a material point ps
on the rod’s surface. d2 = d3 × d1 points to another material
point. dk must be differentiable such that the material points
represented by d1 and d2 form continuous material lines.

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1773

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

The reference configuration of a Cosserat rod, C =
{r0 (s), d0k (s)}, is the initial state of the rod at time t = 0:
0

r (s) ≡ r(s, 0),
0

d0k (s)

≡ dk (s, 0).

The deformed configuration, C T = {rT (s), dTk (s)}, is the
equilibrium state of the rod at time t = T :
dTk (s) ≡ dk (s, T ).

I1 (s) = I2 (s) = π Ro4 (s) − Ri4 (s) /4,
I3 (s) = π Ro4 (s) − Ri4 (s) /2,

(1)

Typically in mechanical engineering, C 0 is considered as a
straight rod for analytical simplicity. But, it can also be a
naturally curved rod [Lov27, Vil98].

rT (s) ≡ r(s, T ),

cross-sections with inner and outer radii Ri (s) and Ro (s),

(2)

A(s) = π Ro2 (s) − Ri2 (s) .

(9)

The potential energy at point s of the rod is [Ant95]:
E(s) =

1
[(u(s) − u0 (s)) m(s) + (v(s) − v0 (s)) n(s)]
2
(10)

and the total potential energy of the rod is:
L

The strains of a Cosserat rod are classified into linear strain
vector v(s) and angular strain vector u(s) [Ant95] such that
∂s dk (s) = u(s) × dk (s).

(3)

The strain vectors u(s) and v(s) can be resolved into three
components by the directors dk :
u=

uk dk ,
k

v=

vk dk ,

(4)

k

where uk and vk are the strain variables. The components u1
and u2 of the curvature along d1 and d2 measure bending,
while u3 measures torsion. The components v1 and v2 measure shear, and v3 measures stretching or elongation. Let us
denote
u ≡ [u1 , u2 , u3 ] ,

v ≡ [v1 , v2 , v3 ] .

(5)

Note that the vectors u and v should be distinguished from u
and v. The former is defined in the global coordinate system,
whereas the latter is defined according to the directors.
Assuming the Kirchhoff constitutive relations [GB06,
Lov27, Vil98], the couple (i.e., inner torque) m(s) and stress
n(s) experienced by the rod are
m(s) = J(s)(u(s) − u0 (s)),

(11)

0

The final configuration C T = {rT , dTk } is the equilibrium
state of the rod, with minimum potential energy E that minimizes the difference between uT , vT and u0 , v0 .

3.2. Stress, strain and potential energy

v(s) = ∂s r(s),

E(s) ds.

E=

For notational simplicity, we ignore the parameter t when
there is no confusion.

n(s) = K(s)(v(s) − v0 (s)).
(6)

J(s) and K(s) are stiffness matrices that depend on the geometric shape and material properties of the rod:
J(s) = diag{Y I1 (s), Y I2 (s), GI3 (s)},

(7)

K(s) = diag{GA(s), GA(s), Y A(s)},

(8)

where Y is the Young’s modulus, G the shear modulus, A(s)
the cross-sectional area, and Ik (s) the geometric moments of
inertia of the cross-section at s. For a hollow tube of circular

3.3. Representation of directors
A Cosserat rod is represented by the tuple {r(s), dk (s)}. This
representation has a total of 12 variables for each s, subject to
the orthonormal constraints of the directors (6 constraints).
Thus, there are only 6 independent variables, 3 for position
rs and 3 for orientation of dk (s).
The director frame can be regarded as a rotation R with
respect to a global reference frame (dX , dY , dZ ) such as the
world coordinate frame:
d1 (s) = R(s)dX ,

d2 (s) = R(s)dY ,

d3 (s) = R(s)dZ ,
(12)

where dX , dY , and dZ are unit vectors along the X-, Y-, Zaxes. The most straightforward way to represent the rotation
R is to use rotation matrix. But it requires 6 orthonormal
constraints. So, it has no advantage over the direct use of dk
as variables.
To reduce redundant variables and constraints, one possible method is to use Euler angles, which represent 3D
rotation using only 3 variables. However, they are not natural
and continuous for interpolation and differentiation, and they
have the classical Gimbal lock problem.
Another popular method is to use quaternions. A quaternion represents 3D rotation using 4 variables and 1 constraint:
it has unit length. Quaternion has been used in elastic rod simulation (e.g., [GS07, ST07]). However, it has limitations too.
First, a quaternion and its negative vector represent the same
rotation, which may cause ambiguity when computing the
strain variables. Second, it still comes with one constraint,
which has to be either explicitly or implicitly enforced in the
energy term.
In our model, we adopt Rodrigues’ rotation formula to
represent the directors. This formula represents 3D rotation

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1774

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

by a rotation axis nˆ and a rotation angle θ. The rotation R(s)
can be expressed by a vector q(s) = [q1 (s), q2 (s), q3 (s)]
such that:
ˆ
q(s) = θ (s)n(s).

(13)

In contrast to the other representations, this method is
constraint-free, continuous for interpolation and differentiation, and does not have ambiguity problem.
At first sight, it seems that this rotation vector q has a simiˆ with
lar ambiguity problem as quaternions, i.e., (θ + 2kπ )n,
k an arbitrary integer, represent the same director. However,
it turns out that this property is beneficial to our model. If
the rod is discretized to a sequence of points, there can be
situations in which the directors of two consecutive points
are the same, but in between the two points, the rod actually
experiences a rotation of 2π . The discrete directors cannot
capture the rotation in the middle. They will only generate
zero torsion because the changes of directors of the two consecutive points are zero. However, our rotation vector can
capture the correct strain values in this situation: the two
consecutive points have rotation θ nˆ and (θ + 2π )nˆ respectively. In this case, the resulting directors are the same, but
the torsion values are non-zero.
With the rotation vector q and the global reference frame
(dX , dY , dZ ), the directors can then be expressed as:
1
q
1
d2 =
q
1
d3 =
q
d1 =

2

1 − b q22 + q32 , bq1 q2 + aq3 , bq1 q3 − aq2

,

2

bq1 q2 − aq3 , 1 − b q12 + q32 , bq2 q3 + aq1

,

2

bq1 q3 + aq2 , bq2 q3 − aq1 , 1 − b q12 + q22

,
(14)

where a = sin q / q , and b = (1 − cos q )/ q 2 . Now
we have 6 variables {r(s), q(s)} for each s.
The strain variables uk and vk and the potential energy E
can also be expressed in terms of {r(s), q(s)}. The variables
vk are relatively easy to compute from (4):
vk = dk · v = dk · ∂s r.

(15)

The derivation of variables uk is mathematically more involved. It is similar to the one presented in [ST07], except
that Rodrigues’ formula is used instead of quaternions to represent rotation. For completeness, we derive the expressions
of uk in Appendix A and refer to [ST07] for details.

3.4. Binding surface model to cosserat rod
The continuous surface of a tube can be considered as a
shape function defined by the rod. For each point p on the
surface, there exists an s such that p is on the cross-section
Xs of the tube at s. A one-to-one binding function f can then

be established between the local coordinates (x, y, z) in the
directors dk at s and the global coordinates p:
p = f(s, x, y, z)
= r(s) + x d1 (s) + y d2 (s) + z d3 (s).

(16)

We say that mesh vertex p is mapped to r(s) and dk (s) of
the reference rod. Since p is on the cross-section Xs and d3
is the normal of Xs , z is usually 0 in continuous case, and
close to zero in discrete case. Given any configuration of
the rod and the binding function f, the tube’s surface can be
reconstructed.
When an elastic tube deforms, its surface stretches and
bends. The continuous formulation of surface deformation is
thus founded on the measure of stretching and bending energies. Stretching and bending can be measured by the changes
of first and second fundamental forms [BS08] respectively.
For discrete mesh models, various techniques have been presented to correctly estimate the energies (e.g., [GB06]). Since
stretching and bending are essentially non-linear characteristics, the resulting deformable model are usually non-linear,
which can be computationally expensive. For efficient and
realistic deformation of surface mesh models, a popular approach is Laplacian deformation [BS08, MYF06, MDSB02,
SLCO∗ 04], which approximates the surface elastic energy
use linear Laplacian operators. Details of the method are
discussed in Section 5.2.
4. Construction of Hybrid Model
Our method requires only the surface mesh model of an
elastic tube as the input. Given the mesh, a hybrid model is
constructed. The construction of the hybrid model proceeds
in two stages, given the initial configuration of the mesh.
First, a generalized cylinder defined by the centerline and
cross-sectional radii of the tube is computed (Section 4.1).
The reference rod for C 0 is defined to coincide with the
centerline, and its geometric moments of inertia are approximated using the cross-sectional radii and (9). Then, rotation
minimizing frames (RMFs) [Klo86, WJZL08] are used to
generate the directors in C 0 (Section 4.2), which yield the
initial strain variables u0 and v0 . For simplicity, we assume
that the initial configuration C 0 of the tube is not sheared and
is minimally twisted.
4.1. Fitting generalized cylinder
Let pi denote a surface point that is in the cross-section Xs
at point s on the centerline. Then, the coordinate r(s) of the
point s on the centerline would be the centroid of such pi ’s:
r(s) =

1
Ns

pi

(17)

pi ∈Xs

where Ns is the number of points in Xs . In the case of a
discrete 3D mesh model, the points pi are taken as the mesh
vertices. Then, the centerline cannot be defined using (17)

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1775

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

After fitting the centerline, the radius at each cross-section
is computed so as to derive the stiffness matrices J and K
in (7) and (8). The cost function E(R) for fitting the radius
function R(s) is given by:
E(R) =

1
2
+

Figure 3: Hybrid model construction. (a) Fitting the centerline of the mesh model. The fitting algorithm starts from a
straight line connecting the centers of the tube’s two ends,
and computes the curve that matches the centerline. (b) Texture mapping the mesh surface according to the binding facilitates visualization of bending and torsion.
because for each s, the number of mesh vertices that exactly
lie on the cross-section Xs may be limited and unbalanced.
Instead, the centerline is defined in terms of the mesh vertices
pi whose normal projections on the centerline are close to
r(s):
−1

r(s) =

wi (s)pi
i

wi (s)

.

(18)

i

The weights wi (s) are inversely related to the distance between r(s) and the projection of pi . In the implementation,
the weights are defined in terms of a Gaussian function. Note
that this definition of centerline is implicit because the corresponding s of a mesh vertex pi is not known in advance.
Thus, a fitting algorithm is needed to find the centerline of
the mesh model.
The fitting algorithm defines a cost function to evaluate
the goodness of fit and applies gradient decent to optimize
the cost function [KWL06] starting from a straight line connecting the centers of the tube’s two ends (Figure 3). The
cost E(r) of fitting is derived from (18):
E(r) =

1
2

L

r(s) −
0

i wi (s)pi
i wi (s)

2

ds +

λ
2

L

r (s) 2 ds,
0

(19)

where r (s) is the first derivative of r(s). The second term is
a regularization term that enforces smoothness of the fitted
curve and λ is the regularization parameter.
Applying variational calculus to (19) yields the following
iterative update formula for r(s):
⎤
⎡
−1

r = η ⎣−

wi (s)[r(s) − pi ]
i

wi (s)

+ λ r (s)⎦

L

R(s) −

i

0

μ
2

r(s) − pi
Ns

2

ds

L

R (s)2 ds,

(21)

0

where the first term approximates the radius and the second
term regularize the radius function R(s) with μ the regularization parameter.
Applying variational calculus to (21) yields
R = η −R(s) +

1
Ns

r(s) − pi + μR (s) .
i

(22)
4.2. Deriving directors and binding function
The initial configuration C 0 is the rest state of the tubular
object. We assume there is no shearing, twisting, and elongation at the rest state, i.e., d3 aligns with the tangent of the
centerline. Note that the object may be naturally curved (e.g,
blood vessel and hair), so the directors should be defined to
represent the natural bending and torsion, but nothing extra.
One way to define the directors for the natural state of a
curve is to use the Frenet frame, whose three axis vectors are
the tangent, principle normal and bi-normal of the centerline
at s. However, Frenet scheme is ill-defined at an inflection
point, where the curvature and normal change sign. This
results in the undesirable flipping of the directions of the
Frenet frames.
Another way to define the initial directors is to use RMF
[Bis75, Klo86, WJZL08]. A RMF is a moving frame along
the centerline that minimizes the amount of rotation of the
frame. RMF has desirable properties for describing torsion
and bending in the initial state. So, we use RMF to define the
initial directors in C 0 .
It is very difficult to compute the exact RMF for a general
spline curve [WJZL08]. A projection method [Klo86] and a
rotation method [Blo90] can be used to approximate discrete
RMF. These methods have second-order global approximation error [CW96]. Wang et al. [WJZL08] presented a simple
and efficient algorithm to approximate RMF, namely double
reflection method. Their method has fourth-order global approximation error, and is thus more accurate than the first
two. In this paper, we adopt the double reflection method to
generate the directors in the initial configuration.

i

(20)
where r (s) is the second derivative of r(s), and η is a constant
step size.

The mapping function f that binds the mesh vertices to the
rod is determined according to (16):
pi = r(s) + xi d1 (s) + yi d2 (s) + zi d3 (s).

(23)

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1776

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

where s is pi ’s corresponding parameter on the reference
rod.

5. Discrete Implementation of Elastic Tubes
An elastic hollow tube behaves globally like a rod even if its
deformation undergoes cross-sectional changes. So, global
deformation and cross-sectional deformation can be decoupled into two phases. First, the reference rod is deformed
according to Cosserat theory and user-specified boundary
conditions (Section 5.1). Next, the mesh is deformed using
Laplacian deformation according to its elastic binding to the
rod and its surface elastic energy (Section 5.2).

5.1. Discretization of cosserat potential energy

qi − qi−1
,
li

∂s ri =

ri − ri−1
,
li

(24)

with ∂s q1 ≡ ∂s q2 and ∂s r1 ≡ ∂s r2 . The discrete potential energy can be written as:
N−1

E=

li
(Ei + Ei+1 ) =
2

Laplacian method [BS08, MYF06, MDSB02, SLCO∗ 04] deforms a mesh model by minimizing the change of mean
curvature normals of the surface points. Other geometric conditions can be easily added to constrain the deformation. In
our model, surface bending (Section 5.2.1), surface stretching (Section 5.2.2), and surface binding (Section 5.2.3) are
formulated to constrain the Laplacian deformation.

5.2.1. Surface bending
Surface bending can be measured by the change of curvature
at each point p on the surface. Curvature is estimated by the
Laplacian operator l(p):
l(p) =

Let us discretize the reference rod parameterized by s ∈
[0, L] into N − 1 segments, and ri denote the starting point
of segment i, i = 1, 2, . . . , N − 1, and i = N denote the end
point of segment N − 1. The model’s configuration is now
given by (ri , qi ). The first derivatives of qi and ri are estimated by backward finite difference:
∂s qi =

5.2. Laplacian surface deformation

wi (p − pi )

(27)

pi ∈N(p)

where N (p) is the set of neighboring points connected to p in
the mesh. The magnitude of l(p) approximates the mean curvature at p, and the direction of l(p) approximates its normal.
The weight wi can be either uniform weight or cotangent
weight [MDSB02]. In our case, we adopt the former for simplicity, i.e., wi = 1/|N (p)|, where |N (p)| is the number of
neighboring points connected to p.
Surface bending energy is defined as the change of Laplacian before and after deformation:
Eb (p) = kb l(p) − l0 (p) 22 ,

(28)

N

l¯i Ei

(25)

where l0 (p) is the Laplacian of p at the initial configuration
of the surface and kb is the bending stiffness.

where li is the segment length at rest state, l¯i = (li−1 + li )/2
(we define l0 = lN = 0 to make l¯i valid for every i), and

The formulation of (28) suffers from the shortcoming that
l0 (p) is defined in the world coordinate system. By minimizing Eb (p), the Laplacian method requires the new l(p)
to be close to l0 (p), which creates undesirable distortion
of the object’s shape when the object deformation causes
a change of orientation of a local patch (Figure 4). To handle this problem, rotation-invariant Laplacian methods have
been proposed [BS08, MYF06]. For example, the method of
Masuda et al. computes rotation-invariant Laplacians by approximating the rotations of the normals at the mesh vertices.
In our model, rotation-invariance is achieved by measuring
the Laplacians with respect to the directors of the reference
rod, which are intrinsic properties of the rod. This is a more
natural approach to achieving rotation invariance of Laplacian for tubular objects.

i=1

Ei =

1
2

ui − u0i

i=1

Ki ui − u0i + vi − v0i

Ji vi − v0i
(26)

To manipulate the reference rod, we can specify boundary
conditions on the rod. There are three types of boundary
conditions for manipulating the rod:
Type 1. Specify the position ri .
Type 2. Specify the orientation qi .
Type 3. Specify the orientation of one of the three directors.
Under the specified boundary conditions, quasi-Newton
algorithm [PTVF02] is applied to minimize the total potential
energy, which yields the deformed configuration of the rod
that satisfies the boundary conditions.

For each point p, the rotation of its local patch can be
considered as the rotation of p’s associated directors, which
can be directly approximated from the reference rod. Let us
denote as R(p) the rotation of p’s associated directors. The
bending energy can then be expressed as:
Eb (p) = kb l(p) − R(p) l0 (p) 22 ,

(29)

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1777

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

This energy term is non-linear because of the Euclidean distances. In order to facilitate the optimization
(Section 5.2.4), we write it in its equivalent form:
Es (e) = ks dij − sij

2
2

(32)

where
dij = pi − pj ,

p0i − p0j

sij = dij

pi − p j

.

(33)

Assembling the edge stretching energy together gives the
total stretching energy Es to be minimized:
Es = D x − s(x)

2
2

(34)

where D x contains dij terms and s(x) contains sij terms. Note
that in this case D is a fixed matrix.
5.2.3. Surface binding
Figure 4: Rotation-invariant Laplacian deformation. (a)
Non-rotation-invariant Laplacian deformation distorts surface details. (b) Rotation-invariant Laplacian deformation
produces no distortion. The lighter model denotes the initial
configuration, and the brighter model denotes the deformed
configuration.

In this way, the rotated Laplacian operator is invariant to rotation of local patches (Figure 4). This method of computing
rotation-invariant Laplacian is accurate as long as the rotation
of the local patch is close to the rotation of the associated directors, regardless of the complexity of the surface geometry.
Empirical test shows that this condition is met in our application domain. Nevertheless, for more general cases where
the rotation of local patches differs a lot from that of the
rod segments, further investigation is necessary for a more
precise evaluation of the local rotation.
Assembling (29) for each point gives the total bending
energy Eb :
Eb = L x − u 22 .

(30)

The term L x contains l(p), u contains R(p) l0 (p), and x is the
vector of coordinates of all the mesh points.

The deformed reference rod obtained in the first phase of the
algorithm defines a corresponding mesh surface according to
the binding function (23). This mesh surface cannot be used
directly as the deformed surface of the elastic tube because it
does not account for elastic surface deformation. Nevertheless, the vertices of the mesh can be used as soft constraints
for applying Laplacian deformation on the initial mesh to
generate realistic deformed surface. We denote the vertices
of this corresponding mesh as p1 . The surface binding energy
is thus:
Ex (p) = kx p − p1

2
2

(35)

where kx is the corresponding binding coefficient. Assembling (35) for all the points generates:
Ex = kx Fx − w

2
2

(36)

where F x contains p terms and w contains p1 terms. The
value of binding coefficient kx determines the amount of
cross-sectional change allowed. If kx is very large, the crosssections of the tube will not change too much, and the overall
behaviour of the tube will be like a Cosserat rod. The effect
of the binding coefficient will be discussed in Section 6.
5.2.4. Surface deformation
The total energy E to be minimized is:

5.2.2. Surface stretching

E = Eb + Es + Ex

Surface stretching energy is measured by the change of edge
lengths similar to [Gri06]. For every edge e that connects
points pi and pj in the mesh, the stretching energy is formulated as
Es (e) = ks

pi − pj − p0i − p0j

2

,

(31)

where ks is the stretching stiffness and is related to the
Young’s modulus Y by the formula ks = Y /(2 p0i − p0j ).

(37)

which is equivalent to minimizing
K x − z(x)

2
2

(38)

where K = (L D F ) and z(x) = (u (s(x)) w ) .
This is a non-linear optimization problem. However, the
matrix K is a fixed sparse matrix during the whole simulation process. So, its pseudo-inverse can be precomputed

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1778

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

before simulation. During the optimization process, backward substitution is applied to solve the system as demonstrated in [WXW∗ 06]. In this way, surface deformation can
be efficiently solved even though (37) contains non-linear
stretching energy.

5.3. Quasistatic simulation
There are two current approaches for simulating deformation
of elastic objects: dynamic simulation and quasistatic simulation [TGDM07]. Dynamic simulation models object motion
based on Newtonian or Lagrangian equation of motion. It
generates dynamic transition between the object’s rest states.
On the other hand, quasistatic simulation assumes that the
system goes through a sequence of states that are infinitesimally close to equilibrium. Given the boundary conditions
specified by the user, quasistatic simulation minimizes the
object’s energy function to generate a sequence of equilibrium states.
Dynamic simulation can generate physically accurate motion if the time step and time integration scheme are properly chosen. However, it is computationally more expensive
than quasistatic simulation for generating static solutions
[TGDM07]. Quasistatic simulation provides accurate simulation results at equilibrium states, but does not guarantee
smoothness and correctness in state transition. For example, it does not simulate oscillation. In interactive design and
modeling of complex objects, where the response speed and
accurate final states are more important than state transitions,
quasistatic simulation is preferred. In our simulation, since
our target problems are static problems, we apply quasistatic
simulation for its simplicity and efficiency.
Our quasistatic simulation algorithm works as follows.
Given the user specified boundary conditions that defines the
deformation of the tube, the algorithm first interpolates the
boundary conditions for the intermediate simulation steps.
Then, for each simulation step, the static solution of the
reference Cosserat rod is computed using quasi-Newton optimization algorithm in [PTVF02]. After that, the surface
deformation energy is optimized to generate the deformed
tube at the current simulation step.

6. Experimental Results and Discussions
Experiments were performed to evaluate the performance of
our proposed hybrid model. Figure 1 illustrates the manipulation of an aorta model, which is naturally curved. The
lower end of the aorta model (descending aorta) was fixed
in both position and orientation. The upper end (ascending
aorta) was moved to a lower position. In this case, there
were Type 1 boundary conditions (Section 5.1) at both ends,
and Type 2 boundary condition at the lower end of aorta.
Our algorithm produced the configuration with minimum
amount of torsion that satisfied the boundary condition at

Figure 5: Deformation and joining of vena cava model. (a)
Initial configuration. (b) Vena cava is deformed and joined
to another fixed blood vessel with minimum twisting.

Figure 6: Shearing of elastic tubes. (a) Initial configuration.
The left end (red) is fixed in both position and orientation.
The right end (yellow) is moved. (b–d) Deformation results
of elastic tube with different material properties. (b) Y = 0.1,
G = 0.1. (c) Y = 0.1, G = 10. (d) Y = 0.1, G = 120.

the two ends (Figure 1(b)). For comparison, another configuration was produced by intentionally rotating the upper
end about its director d3 , which caused twisting of the aorta
(Figure 1(c)). This illustrates the difference from a minimum
torsion configuration.
In Figure 5, the curved vena cava model was deformed
to join with another fixed blood vessel model. As the two
joining shapes of the boundaries were different, the crosssections of the vena cava model changed after joining. The
joining was achieved by imposing positional and orientation constraints onto the joining boundary of the vena
cava. The shape of the fixed blood vessel was regarded as
unchanged.
Figure 6 evaluates shearing of elastic tubes with different material properties. In this test, the left end of the tube
was fixed in both position and orientation. The right end was
moved. All the three rods had the same value for Young’s
modulus, while their shear moduli were different. For the rod
with low shear modulus (Figure 6(b)), bending and stretching were resisted, while shearing was allowed. For the rod
with higher shear modulus (Figure 6(c)), the resistance to

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

1779

Figure 7: Deformation of elastic tube, compared with a real tube (upper parts of the pictures). (a) Initial configuration. (b, c)
Slight bending and different amount of twisting. (d–g) Different types of bending.
the shark toy shown in the upper row. Thus, their geometric structures were different such that the deformed shapes
did not look the same. However, our simulation results still
correctly produced the folding effects on the model surface
when it is bent. For objects that are too far from a tube-like
object, the hybrid model becomes infeasible as the reference
rod is not physically meaningful.

Figure 8: Deformation of a hollow shark toy modeled by
our hybrid model. (a) Initial configuration. (b) Deformed
configuration.
shearing increased. For the rod with very high shear modulus (Figure 6(d)), it was hard to shear. So, it had to bend and
stretch.
Figure 7 compares our model with a real elastic tube. Both
the real tube and our tube model were manipulated on their
two ends. They were bent and twisted in various ways. The
similarity of our tube model to the real one shows that our
method can produce physically correct behaviors of the tube
in various conditions, even if it undergoes large amount of
cross-sectional changes.
Figure 8 illustrates that our hybrid model can also be used
to model hollow objects with non-circular cross-sections. In
this case, the reference rod is a straight rod connecting the
head and the tail of the shark in the initial configuration.
Note that the surface mesh was not acquired from scanning

In addition to simulating the deformation of hollow elastic tube, our model can also be used to produce the effect
of pressurized tubes. This is achieved through tuning the
binding stiffness kx in (35). Small kx means the deformation
depends more on the surface elastic energy, in which case the
cross sections are more “hollow”, corresponding to slight or
no pressure. Large kx means the deformation depends more
on the reference rod, in which case the cross sections are
more “solid”, analogous to water running through the tube
and producing high pressure. We evaluated this effect in comparison with a real water hose. Various amount of water was
running through the water hose (Figure 9). In the simulation,
we started with a straight tube and bent it to approximate
the hand-held water hose. The test results show the contribution of the surface binding energy to the final deformation. It
also shows that even though our method does not explicitly
model pressure, it can produce physically plausible results
that correspond to deformation due to water pressure in the
hose. The simulation results are similar to the real water hose
both in the shape of the tube, and in the surface details. The
potential benefit of this effect is the possibility of simulating
blood vessels with and without blood passing through them.
Nevertheless, for more accurate simulation, pressure should
be modeled explicitly.

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1780

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

deformed shape (e.g., surgical planning), Laplacian surface
deformation does not have to be computed for each simulation step because it can be directly solved from the initial
configuration of the surface. This can save a lot of computational time especially when the mesh model contains a large
number of vertices.

7. Conclusion and Future Work

Figure 9: Simulation of pressurized tubes. Tuning the binding stiffness kx simulates the effects of pressurized tube. (a)
kx = 0.01, (b) kx = 0.2, (c) kx = 0.5, (d) kx = 2. Dashed
lines indicates material lines on the tubes’ surfaces. For all
the four cases, the reference rods are the same, which indicates that the reference rod does not necessarily lie inside
the mesh. The smaller pictures show the real water hose.
Table 1: Average execution time for one simulation step.

Fig. # Rod elems. # Mesh verts. Rod def. (s) Surface def. (s)
1
5
7
8
9

40
30
30
20
56

14148
17944
4588
7351
2368

0.58
0.30
0.32
0.21
1.01

1.42
1.94
0.51
0.89
0.24

All the experiments were carried out on a 2.33 GHz Core
2 Duo PC. The execution time for one step in the quasistatic
simulation is summarized in Table 1. Normally 10 steps were
performed to generate a deformed configuration. For larger
amount of deformation, the number of steps were larger. For
example, 20 steps were used for the deformation shown in
Figure 9. Note that for applications that require only the final

This paper presented a hybrid model for simulating the elastic deformation of hollow tubes with large, non-rigid crosssections. For achieving accurate and efficient deformation of
the elastic tube, our model binds a mesh elastically to a reference Cosserat rod. The mesh represents the surface of the
hollow tube while the reference rod models bending, twisting, shearing and stretching of the tube. The deformation of
the elastic tubes is accomplished in two phases. First, the reference rod is deformed according to Cosserat theory. Next,
the mesh is deformed using Laplacian deformation according
to the reference rod and its surface elastic energy. This hybrid
approach allows the hollow tube to deform in a physically
correct manner in relation to the bending, twisting, shearing,
and stretching of the reference rod. It also allows the surface
to deform realistically and efficiently according to surface
elastic energy and the shape of the reference rod. Test results
show that our model is effective in simulating the elastic deformation of hollow tubes with various shapes and material
properties. In addition, it can also be used to produce realistic
deformation results of pressurized tubes.
In the current implementation, quasistatic simulation is
adopted because it is suitable for our target application
of predictive surgical simulation. However, it should be
noted that quasistatic simulation can naturally lead to discontinuities in the movement as shown in the video demo
(http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/∼leowwk/heart-surgery/). For
general applications such as animation, our current method
needs to be extended to perform dynamic simulation. In that
case, the internal force functionals can be obtained by differentiating the energy functionals (26) and (37), while the
handling of contact and external forces requires further investigation because there is a need for some bilateral feedback
between the rod and the surface in order to handle contact
properly.
Self-collision of mesh surfaces can occur when the tubular object bends or twists sharply. In our target application
of predictive surgical simulation, sharp bending and twisting
of blood vessels should be avoided. Therefore, self-collision
does not occur, and collision detection and handling is omitted in the current implementation. In the future, detection
and handling of collisions between two or more blood vessels would be required. This may be achieved by first handling the collision of their reference rods using the method
in [ST08], followed by handling the collision of their mesh
surfaces using the methods in [TKZ∗ 05].

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes

References
[Ant95] ANTMAN S. S.: Nonlinear Problems of Elasticity.
Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[AS07] ANGELIDIS A., SINGH K.: Kinodynamic skinning using volume-preserving deformations. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation (2007), pp. 129–140.
[BAC∗ 06] BERTAILS F., AUDOLY B., CANI M.-P., QUERLEUX B.,
LEROY F., L´EVEˆ QUE J.-L.: Super-helices for predicting the
dynamics of natural hair. In Proc. SIGGRAPH’06 (2006),
pp. 1180–1187.
[BAQ∗ 05] BERTAILS F., AUDOLY B., QUERLEUX B., LEROY F.,
L´EVEˆ QUE J.-L., CANI M.-P.: Predicting natural hair shapes
by solving the statics of flexible rods. In Proc. Eurographics’05 (short papers) (2005).
[Bis75] BISHOP R. L.: There is more than one way to frame
a curve. American Mathematics Monthly 82, 3 (1975),
245–251.
[Blo90] BLOOMENTHAL J.: Calculation of reference frames
along a space curve. In Graphics Gems (1990), Academic
Press, pp. 567–571.
[BS08] BOTSCH M., SORKINE O.: On linear variational surface
deformation methods. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 14, 1 (2008), 213–230.
[BWR∗ 08] BERGOU M., WARDETZKY M., ROBINSON S.,
AUDOLY B., GRINSPUN E.: Discrete elastic rods. In Proc.
SIGGRAPH’08 (2008), pp. 1–12.

1781

[Had06] HADAP S.: Oriented strands: dynamics of stiff multibody system. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics
Symposium on Computer Animation (2006), pp. 91–100.
[HMM03] HOFFMAN K. A., MANNING R. S., MADDOCKS J. H.:
Link, twist, energy, and the stability of DNA minicircles.
Biopolymers 70, 2 (2003), 145–157.
[JZvdP∗ 08] JU T., ZHOU Q.-Y., VAN DE PANNE M., COHEN-OR
D., NEUMANN U.: Reusable skinning templates using cagebased deformations. ACM Trans. Graph. 27, 5 (2008),
1–10.
[Klo86] KLOK F.: Two moving coordinate frames for sweeping along a 3D trajectory. Comput. Aided Geom. Des. 3, 3
(1986), 217–229.
[KWL06] KIRCHBERG K. J., WIMMER A., LORENZ C. H.: Modeling the human aorta for MR-driven real-time virtual endoscopy. In Proc. MICCAI (2006), pp. 470–477.
[LCDN06] LENOIR J., COTIN S., DURIEZA C., NEUMANN P.:
Interactive physically-based simulation of catheter and
guidewire. Computers & Graphics 30, 3 (2006), 416–422.
[LCW04] LIU D., CAO D. Q., WANG C. H.-T.: Computational Cosserat dynamics in MEMS component modelling. In Proc. World Congress on Computational Mechanics (2004).
[LLHH09] LI H., LEOW W. K., HUANG C.-H., HOWE T. S.:
Modeling and measurement of 3D deformation of scoliotic
spine using 2D x-ray images. In Proc. Computer Analysis
of Images and Patterns (2009).

[CDL∗ 05] COTIN S., DURIEZ C., LENOIR J., NEUMANN P.,
DAWSON S.: New approaches to catheter navigation for
interventional radiology simulation. In Proc. MICCAI’05
(2005).

[LLQC09] LI H., LEOW W. K., QI Y., CHIU I.-S.: Predictive surgical simulation of aorta reconstruction in cardiac
surgery. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics 142
(2009), 159–161.

[CW96] CHUNG K., WANG W.: Discrete moving frames for
sweep surface modeling. In Proc. Pacific Graphics (1996),
pp. 159–173.

[Lov27] LOVE A.: A Treatise on the Mathematical Theory of
Elasticity, 4th ed. Cambridge University Press, 1927.

[GB06] GOULD T., BURTON D. A.: A Cosserat rod model with
microstructure. New Journal of Physics 8 (2006).
[GPL05] GOYAL S., PERKINS N. C., LEE C. L.: Nonlinear dynamics and loop formation in kirchhoff rods with implications to the mechanics of DNA and cables. J. Comput.
Phys. 209, 1 (2005), 371–389.
[Gri06] GRINSPUN E.: A discrete model of thin shells. In
SIGGRAPH Courses (2006), pp. 14–19.
[GS07] GRE´ GOIRE M., SCHO¨ MER E.: Interactive simulation of
one-dimensional flexible parts. Computer-Aided Design
39, 8 (2007), 694–707.

[LPY04] LACARBONARA W., PAOLONE A., YABUNO H.: Modeling of planar nonshallow prestressed beams towards
asymptotic solutions. Mechanics Research Communications 31, 3 (2004), 301–310.
[MDSB02] MEYER M., DESBRUN M., SCHRO¨ DER P., BARR A.
H.: Discrete differential-geometry operators for triangulated 2-manifolds. In Visualization and Mathematics III,
HEGE H.-C., POLTHIER K. (Eds.), Springer-Verlag (2002),
pp. 35–57.
[MYF06] MASUDA H., YOSHIOKA Y., FURUKAWA Y.: Interactive mesh deformation using equality-constrained least
squares. Computers & Graphics 30, 6 (2006), 936–
946.

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1782

H. Li et al. / Elastic Tubes: Modeling Elastic Deformation of Hollow Tubes
∗

[NMK 05] NEALEN A., M¨ULLER M., KEISER R., BOXERMAN E.,
CARLSON M.: Physically based deformable models in computer graphics. Computer Graphics Forum 25, 4 (2005),
809–836.
[Pai02] PAI D. K.: Strands: interactive simulation of thin
solids using Cosserat models. In Proc. Eurographics
(2002).
[PTVF02] PRESS W. H., TEUKOLSKY S. A., VETTERLING W. T.,
FLANNERY B. P.: Numerical Recipes in C++: The Art of
Scientific Computing. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
[Rub00] RUBIN M. B.: Cosserat Theories: Shells, Rods and
Points. Kluwer Academic Publisher, 2000.
[SLCO∗ 04] SORKINE O., LIPMAN Y., COHEN-OR D., ALEXA M.,
R¨OSSL C., SEIDEL H.-P.: Laplacian surface editing. In Proc.
Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Geometry
Processing (2004), pp. 175–184.
[Sor05] SORKINE O.: Laplacian mesh processing. In Proc.
Eurographics (2005), pp. 53–70.
[ST07] SPILLMANN J., TESCHNER M.: CORDE: Cosserat rod
elements for the dynamic simulation of one-dimensional
elastic objects. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics
Symposium on Computer Animation (2007), pp. 1–10.
[ST08] SPILLMANN J., TESCHNER M.: An adaptive contact
model for the robust simulation of knots. In Proc. Eurographics (2008), pp. 497–506.
[TGAB08] THEETTEN A., GRISONI L., ANDRIOT C., BARSKY
B.: Geometrically exact dynamic splines. Computer-Aided
Design 40, 1 (2008), 35–48.
[TGDM07] THEETTEN A., GRISONI L., DURIEZ C., MERLHIOT
X.: Quasi-dynamic splines. In Proc. ACM Symposium on
Solid and Physical Modeling (2007), pp. 409–414.
[TKZ∗ 05] TESCHNER M., KIMMERLE S., ZACHMANN G.,
HEIDELBERGER B., RAGHUPATHI L., FUHRMANN A., CANI M.P., FAURE F., MAGNETAT-THALMANN N., STRASSER W.: Collision detection for deformable objects. Computer Graphics
Forum 24, 1 (2005), 61–81.
[TPBF87] TERZOPOULOS D., PLATT J., BARR A., FLEISCHER. K.:
Elastically deformable models. In Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH
(1987), pp. 205–214.

[Vil98] VILLAGGIO P.: Mathematical Models for Elastic
Structures. Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[WJZL08] WANG W., J¨UTTLER B., ZHENG D., LIU Y.: Computation of rotation minimizing frames. ACM Trans. Graph.
27, 1 (2008), 1–18.
[WXW∗ 06] WENG Y., XU W., WU Y., ZHOU K., GUO B.:
2D shape deformation using nonlinear least squares optimization. The Visual Computer 22, 9 (2006), 653–
660.

Appendix A: Derivation of strain variables u k in terms
of rotation vector q
From (3) and (4), we have
∂s dk = (u1 d1 + u2 d2 + u3 d3 ) × dk
= u 1 d1 × d k + u 2 d2 × d k + u 3 d3 × d k .

(39)

For k = 1, 2, 3, multiplying (39) by d3 , d1 and d2 respectively gives:
u2 = −d3 · ∂s d1 ,

u3 = −d1 · ∂s d2 ,

u1 = −d2 · ∂s d3 .
(40)

Note that dk is a function of q. So,
∂s dk =

∂dk
· ∂s q .
∂q

By substituting (14) and (41) into (40), we derive:
⎤
⎡ 2
q1 + aq22 + aq32
⎥ ∂s q
⎢
u1 = ⎣ cq1 q2 + dq3 ⎦ ·
,
q 2
cq1 q3 − dq2
⎤
⎡
cq1 q2 − dq3
⎥ ∂s q
⎢
,
u2 = ⎣ aq12 + q22 + aq32 ⎦ ·
q 2
cq2 q3 + dq1
⎡
⎤
cq1 q3 + dq2
⎢
⎥ ∂s q
.
u3 = ⎣ cq2 q3 − dq1 ⎦ ·
q 2
2
2
2
aq1 + aq2 + q3

(41)

(42)

where a and b are as in (14), c = 1 − a and d = 1 − cos q .
Substituting (14), (15) and (42) into (10) gives the energy
term expressed by the variables {r(s), q(s)}.

c 2010 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2010 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

