Interactive Poster: Interactive Multiobjective Optimization A New Application Area for Visual Analytics
Suvi Tarkkanen*

Kaisa Miettinen†

Jussi Hakanen‡

Department of Mathematical Information Technology
University of Jyväskylä, Finland

ABSTRACT
The poster introduces interactive multiobjective optimization
(IMO) as a field offering new application possibilities and
challenges for visual analytics (VA), and aims at inspiring
collaboration between the two fields. Our aim is to collect new
ideas in order to be able to utilize VA techniques more effectively
in our user interface development. Simulation-based IMO
methods are developed for complex problem solving, where the
expert decision maker (analyst) should be supported during the
iterative process of eliciting preference information and
examining the resulting output data. IMO is a subfield of multiple
criteria decision making (MCDM). In simulation-based IMO, the
optimization task is formulated in a mathematical model
containing several conflicting objectives and constraints
depending on decision variables. While using IMO methods the
analyst progressively provides preference information in order to
find the most satisfactory compromise between the conflicting
objectives. In the poster, the implementations of two new IMO
methods are used as examples to demonstrate concrete challenges
of interaction design. One of them is described in this summary.
KEYWORDS: Interactive multiobjective optimization, visual
analytics, information visualization, interaction design.
INDEX TERMS: G.1.6. [Numerical Analysis]: Optimization—
Nonlinear Programming; H.1.2 [Models and Principles]:
User/Machine Systems—Human Factors; H.5.2 [Information
Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces—Interaction Styles
1

PROBLEM CHARACTERISTICS

In our poster, we consider complex decision making problems
with multiple objectives in the form of continuous, numerical
data. These problems involve multiple conflicting criteria or
objectives that should be optimized simultaneously. The field of
MCDM is devoted to such problems [1]. Here we concentrate on
so-called nonlinear multiobjective optimization problems [2],
being a subfield of MCDM. The objectives (to be minimized or
maximized) depend on continuous variables and the variable
values may be bounded by constraint functions. An example of
continuous multiobjective optimization problem is simultaneous
consideration of investment costs, product quality, operational
costs, and environmental aspects related to some industrial
process. Both objective and constraint functions are based on
mathematical models, and their values may be obtained from the
output of a simulator. For this reason, the problems considered
can also be called simulation-based optimization problems.
*e-mail: suvi.p.tarkkanen@jyu.fi
†
e-mail: kaisa.miettinen@jyu.fi
‡
e-mail: jussi.hakanen@jyu.fi
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

Because of the conflicting nature of the objectives, there does
not exist a single solution that could be optimal for all the
objectives. Instead, we can identify compromise solutions where
none of the objectives can be improved without impairing any of
the others. These compromise solutions are often called Pareto
optimal solutions in the MCDM field. In continuous problems, we
typically have an infinite number of such Pareto optimal solutions
and we need some preference information given by a human
domain expert (sometimes called an analyst or a decision maker)
to direct the search for the most preferred compromise solution.
As the amount of alternative solutions is infinite, and as the
problems are open-ended and cognitively burdensome to solve,
we need efficient and user-friendly decision support tools.
2

IMO APPROACH AND CHALLENGES FOR DEVELOPERS

In IMO, the solution process is iterative and highly interactive,
and the analyst progressively provides preference information and
analyzes information gained until a preferred compromise
solution is found. The idea is also to enable the analyst to gain
understanding and insight about the trade-offs available and the
interdependencies between the objectives. In simulation-based
IMO, we are dealing with such problems where the solutions are
computationally generated (by means of combined simulation and
optimization) during the iterative analytical reasoning process
performed by a domain expert. It should be emphasized that at
first, the data is not readily available in any form, but by means of
the inputs given by the analyst, combined simulation and
optimization process iteratively provides new solutions (solution
vectors including a numerical value for each objective) trying to
obey the user preferences as well as possible. Thus, the amount of
data to be examined increases as the analytic reasoning process
continues.
Here, a clear connection between IMO and VA can be seen. As
stated in [3], an analysis session is more of a dialogue between the
analyst and the data: “The analyst observes the current data
representation, interprets and makes sense of what he or she sees,
and then thinks of the next question to ask, essentially formulating
a strategy for how to proceed. Undoubtedly, new questions occur
to the analyst and new factors must be considered”. At each
iteration, IMO methods generate new compromise solutions based
on the user preferences, thus enabling the expert to concentrate
only on the most desirable solutions with minimal cognitive load.
The analyst needs support in directing the solution process
towards more preferred solutions by specifying new preference
information after having analyzed the strengths and weaknesses of
the current compromise solutions already generated. Similarly, the
analyst should be supported in examining and analyzing the
resulting solutions provided by the combined simulator and
optimizer. Therefore, the challenge for the developers is, what
kind of interaction techniques could be the most intuitive, and
what kind of representation and visualization techniques could be
the most efficient for insight gaining and decision making. In our
poster, we present two examples of new IMO methods and their
tentative user interface sketches. One of the methods, called
Pareto Navigato, is described next.

237

3

AN EXAMPLE OF IMO METHOD: PARETO NAVIGATOR

Pareto Navigator [4] is an IMO method developed for nonlinear
problems where simulations typically take lots of time. The idea
of Pareto Navigator is to enable convenient examination of
tradeoffs between the objectives using an approximation of the set
of Pareto optimal solutions without continual delays due to time
taking simulation processes. An approximation allows real-time
generation and consideration of desirable compromise solutions.
An overview of the Pareto Navigator algorithm is given in
Figure 1. At the first iteration, the analyst must select the starting
point for the consideration (in step 1 of the flowchart). This can be
for example one of the Pareto optimal solutions used to generate
the approximation. The next important phase is specifying
preference information for directing the navigation phase (steps 3
and 4 in the flowchart). Finally, one must show the approximated
solutions generated to the analyst (step 5 in the flowchart). The
analyst must also be able to conveniently select any point found
so far as a point where the search direction is changed, that is,
new preference information is specified (step 4 in the flowchart).
The analyst must be able to indicate when to stop or to see the real
compromise solution closest to the approximated solution
selected. The solution process continues until the analyst has
found a solution (s)he is satisfied with (stopping criterion in step 2
of the flowchart).
1
Initialization (generation of the
starting points)
2

An example user interface sketch for this method is represented
in Figure 2. According to [3], combining controls with visual
representations can speed access, and improve productivity for the
combined human, analytical, and data system. Mirel [5] suggests
single, compressed, multipurpose visualizations. The analyst
should not have to divide her/his attention between multiple
targets, e.g. graphical entities, screens or windows.
First, before navigation begins, the analyst selects one of the
starting points among Pareto data (by dragging the bold, vertical
selection tool), and specifies preferences by setting goals (by
dragging the horizontal dash lines). The values can be fine-tuned
with the numeric up-down controls on the right. Navigation starts
when the analyst clicks a start button (not visible in the sketch),
and stops when the analyst wants to elicit new preference
information (or change the direction). With the help of the
selection tool (bold vertical line) the analyst can examine the
values of each point (the changes in values are shown
synchronously in the Value column) and select any approximated
solution of interest to be converted into “a real one”. In addition to
the Pareto data column, the real Pareto optimal solution appears
in the Approx. data column for comparison purposes. The overall
approximation can then be updated.
In our poster, we also present a user interface sketch of another
method (called Nautilus [6]). In the conference, our goal is to
bring the IMO into consciousness of VA researchers as well as
collect new ideas for further development. In addition to the
poster, we show some demos with a laptop.
REFERENCES

Has the most preferred solution
been found?
No

Yes
6

3
Would you like to proceed to some
new direction?

[1]
[2]
[3]

Stop, the corresponding
actual compromise solution
is shown

[4]

5

4

[5]

Proceed to the direction specified until
the analyst stops the navigation

Specify preferences about
desired changes

No

Yes

[6]
Figure 1. Flowchart of Pareto Navigator from the analyst’s
perspective.

V. Belton, and T.J. Stewart, Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: An
Integrated Approach, Kluwer, 2002.
K. Miettinen, Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Boston, 1999.
J.J. Thomas and K.A. Cook, Illuminating the Path: the Research and
Development Agenda for Visual Analytics, IEEE Press, 2005.
P. Eskelinen, K. Miettinen, K. Klamroth, and J. Hakanen, “Pareto
Navigator for Interactive Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization”,
OR Spectrum, To appear, DOI: 10.1007/s00291-008-0151-6
B. Mirel, Interaction Design for Complex Problem Solving –
Developing Useful and Usable Software, San Francisco, Morgan
Kaufman, 2004.
K. Miettinen, F. Ruiz, M. Luque, and P. Eskelinen, NAUTILUS
Method: an Interactive Technique in Multiobjective Optimization
Based on the Nadir Point, (manuscript).

Figure 2. Pareto Navigator’s user interface sketch.

238

