Reordered TileBars for Visual Text Exploration
VinhTuan Thai∗

Siegfried Handschuh†

Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway

A BSTRACT
The classic TileBars paradigm has been used to show distribution
information of query terms in full-text documents. However, when
the number of query terms becomes large, it is not an easy task for
users to comprehend their distribution within certain parts of a document. In this paper, we present a novel approach to improve the
visual presentation of TileBars, in which barycenter heuristic for bigraph crossing minimization is used to reorder TileBars’ elements.
The reordered TileBars can be demonstrated to provide users with
better focus and navigation while exploring text documents.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]:
User Interfaces—Graphical user interfaces
1

BACKGROUND

algorithmatically” [4]. In addition, most visual text analytic approaches consider different features of a text document as a whole,
which leads to “a smoothing of passages with an unusual trend,
camouflaging interesting patterns across the text” [4]. Therefore, in
IVEA once users have focused on a particular document, the Entities Distribution View, as shown in Fig.2 for a sample document,
provides users with details about the distribution of entities of interest across a document, and a quick way to navigate to the relevant
parts. Its design is inspired by the classic TileBars paradigm [3].
This paper contributes a novel approach to improve the visual
presentation of TileBars, in which barycenter heuristic for bigraph
crossing minimization is used to reorder its elements to provide
users with better focus and navigation while exploring documents.
2

Visual analytics is an essential mechanism to support scientists and
analysts alike in gaining needed insights quickly from text documents. In this context, we proposed an approach to enable users
to explore a text collection in a personalized manner, by using the
formal representation of entities of interest to users to drive the exploration process. This approach has been initially realized in a
prototype, called IVEA [8, 9], which is designed based on Shneiderman’s visual information-seeking mantra “Overview first, zoom
and filter, then details-on-demand” [5]. It employs multiple coordinated views, as shown in Fig.1, to guide users through this workflow. The core element in IVEA is a simple user-defined ontology
encapsulating their sphere of interest. Various statistics about the
correspondence between documents in a collection and entities in
the ontology are visually presented to facilitate the analytic process.

T ILE BARS - BASED E NTITIES D ISTRIBUTION V IEW

The TileBars paradigm shows distribution information of query
terms in full-text documents. Each document has an associated iconic representation which is a large rectangle consisting of
smaller squares. Rows are used for query terms and columns indicate positions in the text. Squares represent TextTiles and show frequencies of query terms via various shadings of grey. This compact
representation allows users to swiftly interpret the relative length of
a document, the frequency and distribution of each term in it.

Figure 2: TileBars-based Entities Distribution View in IVEA

The Entities Distribution View in IVEA (Fig.2) differs from the
original TileBars paradigm in its visual codings:

Figure 1: IVEA

To gain a deep understanding from a document, “not only the
words that are used are important but also the context they are used
in, and understanding them in the context is difficult to achieve
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

vinhtuan.thai@deri.org
siegfried.handschuh@deri.org

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

• Each document is divided evenly into fragments, since the
TextTiling approach may not work well for very long documents as the large number of fragments can be countereffective in producing a useful level of visual abstraction.
• Each entity is assigned a different color from a pallete and its
associated row is color coded accordingly. Not only does this
help in improving visual perception, it also helps in highlighting appearances of entities in text with their corresponding
color in a consistent way.
• Frequency is indicated by the height of a bar in each square.
This height is determined by thresholding based on three
equally divided intervals from 0 to the highest frequency
value. In effect, each row resembles a histogram of an entity’s frequencies in different fragments of a document. Given

225

that the sequential order of fragments is important, histograms
could deliver better visual effect than varying degrees of grey.
Users can also click on a square to directly jump to the corresponding text fragment. This click-to-navigate capability helps
users to gain quick access to the text portions surrounding entities
of interest without having to traverse through long documents.
3

R E - ORDERING T ILE BARS

BY

BARYCENTER H EURISTIC

While Fig.2 is effective in indicating distribution information of entities across a document as well as in facilitating quick navigation
based on its horizontal dimension, it also shows a shortcoming of
the original TileBars paradigm when the overlap between a document and users’ sphere of interest is large, i.e. a document contains
many entities. This happens when users need to use information on
the vertical dimension of the TileBars, i.e. to get an idea of which
entities are mentioned relatively in the beginning, middle, end or
some specific portions of a document. Since there is a diversity in
terms of distribution of entities in the text, it is not an easy task to
aggregate this information in a quick glance at Fig.2. This poses a
difficulty to analysts who need to make sense of distribution information presented in a more coherent manner.
Therefore we propose that TileBars elements be reordered so
that distribution information can be presented in a more meaningful
fashion. If we treat the TileBars layout as a connection matrix of
a bigraph which consists of (1) a set of entity vertices, (2) a disjoint set of fragments and (3) edges connecting fragments containing entities, the task of reordering a TileBars resembles bigraph coclustering. In bigraph co-clustering, partitioning one set of vertices
will induce a specific clustering of the other set of vertices, which
then itself induces a new clustering in the first set [2]. This task is
combinatorial in nature and hence there are a number of heuristics
to partition a bigraph to identify co-clusters, most notably spectral
graph partitioning [2] and barycenter heuristic for graph crossing
minimization [7]. The latter has been shown to be more efficient
than other methods given its complexity [1]. This approach repeatedly permutes rows and columns of a bigraph’s connection matrix
such that their barycenters are in an increasing order. As a result of
this process, non-zero elements of the connection matrix tend to be
placed at the top-left and bottom-right corners [6]. As such, it has
also been considered as a fast and simple way for interactive cluster
analysis of reorderable matrix [6]. As the TileBars has a matrix layout in which orders of certain elements can be changed, barycenter
heuristic is suitable for reordering its elements. In TileBars, while
rows (set of entities) can be freely reordered, columns (fragments)
have to appear in a fixed sequence. Therefore we propose to use a
simplified version of the barycenter heuristic, or one-sided reordering, whereby only the set of entities are reordered. Based on [7],
the barycenter of a vector v = (v1 , .., vn ) is defined as:
n

Bv =

n

∑ ivi / ∑ vi

i=1

i=1

Let M0 be a matrix correspond to a TileBars with an initial random order of entities (rows), K(M) be the number of crossings in a
matrix M, and βR (M) be a row reordering operation such that their
barycenters are ordered from the smallest to the largest. Algorithm
1 shows the modified version for one-sided matrix reordering.
The reordered TileBars is shown in Fig.3. In comparison with the
Entities Distribution View of the same document in Fig.2, permuting TileBars’ rows based on the barycenter heuristic has resulted in
a substantial improvement in its visual presentation, whereby filled
cells are distributed along the diagonal. Users can clearly see which
entities are concentrated in either the begining (top-left) or the end
(bottom-right) and which entities are distributed across a document
(middle part).

226

Algorithm 1 Barycenter heuristic-based one-sided reordering
1: M ∗ = M0 , K ∗ = K(M0 )
2: M1 = βR (M0 )
3: if K ∗ < K(M1 ) then
4:
M ∗ = M1 , K ∗ = K(M1 )
5: end if
6: Reverse orders of each set of rows in M ∗ with equal barycenters
7: return M ∗

Figure 3: TileBars as reordered by barycenter heuristic

4 S UMMARY
We proposed a novel approach to improve the TileBars paradigm
by using the barycenter heuristic for bigraph crossing minimization
to reorder their elements, resulting in a more coherent presentation
of distribution information. This subtle yet powerful operation can
provide better support for users in identifying patterns of occurrences of certain entities over the course of a document’s text flow.
This support benefits users who have the need to visually analyze
and navigate a large amount of documents in a timely manner.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is funded in part by Science Foundation Ireland under
Grant No. SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion-2) and the European Union under Grant No. FP7-ICT-2007-1-216048 (FAST project).
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Ahmad and A. Khokhar. cHawk: An Efficient Biclustering Algorithm based on Bipartite Graph Crossing Minimization. In Proc VDMB,
2007.
[2] I. S. Dhillon. Co-clustering documents and words using bipartite
spectral graph partitioning. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
(3):269–274, 2001.
[3] M. A. Hearst. TileBars: visualization of term distribution information
in full text information access. In Proc CHI’95, pages 59–66, 1995.
[4] D. A. Keim and D. Oelke. Literature Fingerprinting: A New Method
for Visual Literary Analysis. In Proc VAST 2007, pages 115–122, 2007.
[5] B. Shneiderman. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for
Information Visualizations. In IEEE Visual Languages, pages 336–343,
1996.
[6] H. Siirtola and E. M¨akinen. Constructing and reconstructing the reorderable matrix. Information Visualization, 4(1):32–48, 2005.
[7] K. Sugiyama, S. Tagawa, and M. Toda. Methods for Visual Understanding of Hierarchical System Structures. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, 11(2):109–125, 1981.
[8] V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker. IVEA: An Information Visualization Tool for Personalized Exploratory Document Collection Analysis. In Proc ESWC 2008, pages 139–153, 2008.
[9] V. Thai, S. Handschuh, and S. Decker. Tight coupling of personal interests with multi-dimensional visualization for exploration and analysis
of text collections. In Proc IV08, pages 221–226, 2008.

