Visualization of Uncertainty and Analysis of Geographical Data
VAST 2009 Flitter Mini Challenge Award

Jo Wood∗

Aidan Slingsby†

Naz Khalili-Shavarini‡

Jason Dykes§

David Mountain¶

the giCentre (http://gicentre.org), School of Informatics
City University London

1

I NTRODUCTION

A team of five worked on this challenge to identify a possible criminal strucutre within the Flitter social network. Initially we worked
on the problem individually, deliberately not sharing any data, results or conclusions. This maximised the chances of spotting any
blunders, unjustified assumptions or inferences and allowed us to
triangulate any common conclusions. After an agreed period we
shared our results demonstrating the visualization applications we
had built and the reasoning behind our conclusions. This sharing
of assumptions encouraged us to incorporate uncertainty in our visualization approaches as it became clear that there was a number
of possible interpretations of the rules and assumptions governing
the challenge. This summary of the work emphasises one of those
applications detailing the geographic analysis and uncertainty handling of the network data.
2

G EOGRAPHICAL M APPING

City locations were digitized and base mapping redrafted using
LandSerf (www.landserf.org) to make geographic interpretation easier (see Figure 1). Coordinates of city locations were added
to a normalised MySQL database holding tables People, Cities
and Links. This allowed a range of geographic analysis tasks to
be performed on the data.
To assess the general geographic patterns of Flitter members and
their contacts, a flow map [1] of all Flitter contacts was produced
(Figure 1) where the thickness of lines between any two cities is
proportional to the numbers of Flitter users in contact with each
other in those cities. This showed that the majority of contacts were
within Flovania and concentrated between the three cities of Koul,
Prounov and Kouvnic. It also revealed there were at least some
contacts between every pair of cities in the study region.
To explore the inter-city connections in greater depth, we constructed an Origin-Destination (OD) map [2] showing the numbers
of Flitter connections between every pair of cities arranged in approximate geographic position (see Figure 2). Each large square
of the OD map contains all the Flitter connections from the city at
that location (e.g. top-left square represents Otello). Each of the
smaller colored squares represents a connection with each of the
cities in the study region. This provided us with a base distribution
with which to compare the geography of the criminal network.
Filtering out Flitter members that did not conform to the known
characteristics of the criminal network allowed us to establish a
relatively small number of candidate networks. The geography of
these candidates helped us to establish the most likely core criminal
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:
‡ e-mail:
§ e-mail:
¶ e-mail:

jwo@soi.city.ac.uk
a.slingsby@soi.city.ac.uk
nazanin.khalili-shavarini.1@city.ac.uk
jad7@soi.city.ac.uk
dmm@soi.city.ac.uk

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

Figure 1: Flitter city connections produced using FlowMappa

network (see Figure 3). The target (Schaffter) and handlers (Reitenspies, Pettersson, Kuishnir) were based in the same large city
(Prounov). This confirmed that “target may be in a large city” and
assists face-to-face interaction between target and handlers. It supported the rejection of the Lafouge-(Lonning, Formenti, Krinz) and
Supornpaibul-(Gusat, Letelier, Bailey) networks, having protagonists in multiple cities including a smaller one (Sresk). The central
location of middleman (Good) in Kanvic is consistent with “middleman might be in nearby smaller location”. Kannvic is a small
city and close to Prounov and its central location assists the middleman’s role of intermediary between protagonists. It supported
the rejection of potential middlemen (Cuatto and Rosch) who are
located in a larger city (Koul). The leader (Szemeredi) is less vulnerable to discovery in a smaller city (Kouvnic), but “require[s]
a presence in a larger city” via Kroon, Krupp and Quisquater in
Koul, fulfilling international contact middlemen roles as part of
a fledgling ‘Scenario A’ network. The entire criminal network
formed a ‘northwestern-axis’ comprising Kouvnic, Otello, Kannvic, Prounov and Koul.
3

I NCORPORATING U NCERTAINTY

Although the suspected criminal network was characterised by a
number of rules (e.g. “Each of the handlers probably has between
30 to 40 Flitter contacts and share a common middle man in the
organization”), the use of words such as “may”, “probably” and
indeed uncertainty as to whether the actual network confirmed to
these suspected rules meant that rules could not be relied upon to
identify the network. We therefore incorporated classification uncertainty into our visualisation allowing for fuzzy role classifica-

261

Figure 2: Left: Flow map of inter-city Flitter contacts. Number indicates number of Flitter members in each city. Right: Origin-Destination map
showing numbers of contacts between all combinations of cities.

spaced from handlers by a unit distance and from middlemen by
two unit distances etc. This allowed graph location to be used to
assess network uncertainty (e.g. potential middlemen who were not
connected to likely handlers were separated from those who were).
The layout allowed manual repositioning and querying of ellipses
in order to support hypothesis generation.

Figure 3: Geographic distribution of the criminal network

tion. Each Flitter user was given a fuzzy membership value for each
role depending on their number of contacts. Users were represented
using colored ellipses according to their role, using transparency to
allow multiple roles and sized according to membership value (see
Figure 4).

Figure 5: Classification uncertainty represented by node size. Note
that some Flitter users can have multiple classes such as Employee(E) and Handler(H).

By incorporating geographic position and uncertainty into our
visualization process we were able both to reject a number of possible candidate networks as well as assess the likelihood that our
proposed network did indeed match the probable characteristics of
a criminal network. Research group members working independently with different graphical applications and techniques before
combining results and conclusions allowed us to triangulate results
and assess our assumptions about the criminal network.
R EFERENCES
Figure 4: Node size rules for categorized Flitter users

Ellipses were positioned using a spring embedded layout where
attraction was determined by the connections between nodes of different roles (see Figure 5). Similar roles were clustered, employees

262

[1] W. Tobler. Experiments in migration mapping by computer. The American Cartographer, 14(2):155–163, 1987.
[2] J. Wood, J. Dykes, A. Slingsby, and R. Radburn. Flow trees for exploring spatial trajectories. In D. Fairbairn, editor, Proceedings of the GIS
Research UK 17th Annual Conference, pages 229–234. University of
Durham, Durham, 2009.

