Geovisual Analytics for Self-Organizing Network Data
Ho Van Quan, Tobias Åström, Mikael Jern
National Center for Visual Analytics, Dept. of Science and Technology, Linköping University, Sweden

ABSTRACT
Cellular radio networks are continually growing in both node
count and complexity. It therefore becomes more difficult to
manage the networks and necessary to use time and cost effective
automatic algorithms to organize the network’s neighbor cell
relations. There have been a number of attempts to develop such
automatic algorithms. Network operators, however, may not trust
them because they need to have an understanding of their
behavior and of their reliability and performance, which is not
easily perceived. This paper presents a novel web-enabled
geovisual analytics approach to exploration and understanding of
self-organizing network data related to cells and neighbor cell
relations. A demonstrator and case study are presented in this
paper, developed in close collaboration with the Swedish telecom
company Ericsson and based on large multivariate, time-varying
and geospatial data provided by the company. It allows the
operators to follow, interact with and analyze the evolution of a
self-organizing network and enhance their understanding of how
an automatic algorithm configures locally-unique physical cell
identities and organizes neighbor cell relations of the network.
The geovisual analytics tool is tested with a self-organizing
network that is operated by the Automatic Neighbor Relations
(ANR) algorithm. The demonstrator has been tested with positive
results by a group of domain experts from Ericsson and will be
tested in production.
KEYWORDS: Geovisual analytics, visualization, self-organizing
network, multi-layer, multi-dimensional, time-varying, geospatial
data sets.
INDEX TERMS: H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human
Information Processing – GeoVisual Analytics; I.6.9
[Visualization]: Information Visualization
1

INTRODUCTION

In parallel with the 3G Long Term Evolution (LTE) specification
and development [1, 2], the Next Generation Mobile Network
(NGMN) association of operators brings forward requirements on
management simplicity and cost efficiency [3]. The vision is that
algorithms automate tasks that currently require significant
manual effort. One part of LTE that benefits from selforganization is automatic neighbor relation support. There are
some attempts to develop such automatic algorithms. For instance
Ericsson has developed an algorithm, called Automatic Neighbor
Relations (ANR) [4], which automatically creates and updates
neighbor cell relation (NCR) lists based on measured network
data. Furthermore, each cell is also assigned a physical cell
identity (PCI), which is intended to be locally unique. The goal is
1

{ho.van.quan, tobias.astrom, mikael.jern}@itn.liu.se

to automatically reassign PCIs to avoid local conflicts.
Network operators, however, may not trust automatic
algorithms because they need to have an understanding of their
behavior, reliability and efficiency, which is not easily perceived.
To enhance confidence and understanding of automatic
algorithms such as ANR, we propose that an automatic algorithm
should come with observation possibilities. For example, it must
be possible to observe the outcome; what cell relations are added
or removed, when in time this is happening etc. It must also be
possible to understand the algorithm behind; why a cell changes
its PCI, how a PCI conflict is detected etc. For these purposes, a
geovisual analytics approach should be useful to show how such
an algorithm works and to support examining various aspects of
the network.
Visual presentation and exploration of geospatial network data
can provide analysts and operators with strategic and sometimes
competitive
advantage.
Integrated
information
and
geovisualization methods, here referred to as geovisual analytics,
focus on finding location-related patterns and relationships.
Geovisual analytics (GVA) tools are designed to support highlyinteractive explorative spatial data analysis [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] of large
temporal geospatial data. In this paper we introduce a
demonstrator and case study for Adobe Flash called VoSON
(Visualization of Self-Organizing Network) allowing the
operators to follow, interact with and analyze the evolution of a
self-organizing network under the operation of an automatic
algorithm such as ANR.
VoSON increases comprehension of the behavior of a selforganizing network and supports network examination by
visualizing counts and attribute values of cells and cell relations
over time. It further gives possibilities for filtering and highlighting extreme values. With this demonstrator, it is possible to
examine and gain insight into the problem that may have caused a
situation. The following GVA methods were regarded by the
domain experts as most important tasks in VoSON:
 Interactive dialogue between the operator and cell data and
cell relation data – PCI conflicts can be analyzed and
managed;
 Large-scale cell data and cell relation data are simultaneously
analyzed through the use of dynamic linked views by the
operator to efficiently comprehend complex situations;
 Spatial and multivariate cell data and cell relation data are
analyzed and animated in a temporal context;
 Key information for the operator e.g. visual representations
are combined with textual labels and symbols placed in
separate map layers to avoid overwhelming the display.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
gives an overview of related work. Section 3 presents the data
description. Section 4 presents our GAV Flash framework. Then
the approach is presented in section 5. Self-organizing network in
geovisual analytics is presented in section 6. Finally the user
feedback is presented in section 7 and the conclusion in section 8.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

43

2

RELATED WORK

2.1
Visual exploration of spatial-temporal data
Visual exploration of spatial-temporal data has been the subject of
many research papers, see [10] for an overview. Andrienko and
Andrienko have illustrated several motivating approaches in
earlier papers [6, 7]. Many papers [5, 11, 12], emphasize the
advantages of and need for multiple linked views (MLVs) for
dynamically exploring time-varying, geographically referenced
and multivariate attribute data. As a response a generic
“GeoAnalytics” visualization (GAV) tool [13] was introduced and
similar methods are employed in this case study. The extended
parallel coordinates plot (PCP) with embedded statistical filtering
methods serves as a visual control panel linked to the choropleth
maps [14], and is a central component in this project. GeoVista
[15] and VIS-STAMP [16] are other examples of a general system
with functionalities that support exploration tools that leverage
visual and computational methods to search for space-time and
multivariate patterns.
2.2
Communication network visualization
Communication network visualization is not new. There have
been a number of attempts to visualize networks for various
purposes as summarized in [17]. Most previous work on
visualizing communication network data has been based on
measuring performance or bandwidth characteristics. Some work
is applied to network traffic monitoring, some is applied to
intrusion detection and some is applied to network behavior
monitoring.
Becker et al. [18, 19] presented the SeeNet environment that
uses three graphical tools, ‘Link map’, ‘Node map’ and ‘Matrix
display’ to visualize network data, analyze network traffic, and
study overloads. Koutsofios et al. [20, 21] also introduced
SWIFT-3D that incorporates interactive 3D maps, statistical
displays, network topology diagrams, and pixel-oriented displays
for interactive exploration of large-scale network data.
Nevertheless, in their work the network is not a self-organizing
network and their goals are also different from our goal therefore
we are not sure their visualization techniques can well suit our
needs. In our work we develop and use different visualization
techniques such as cell maps, cell relation maps, PCPs, time
sliders, time-graphs and various types of glyphs to serve our
needs.
To our best knowledge, there has been no work published in
literature that visualizes a self-organizing network to illustrate
how an algorithm such as ANR configures a radio network.
3

DATA DESCRIPTION

We start by introducing a number of basic concepts in a radio
network. In this context, a radio network includes three major
objects: base station, its cells and cell relations. A base station is
the physical entity with radio transmitters and receivers and
constitutes one or more cells covering a geographical area. A cell
supports mobility by knowing its close neighbors to which it can
handover calls; i.e. cell relations (or shortly relations in the
context of this paper). To help mobile terminals identify a cell, all
cells broadcast two identifiers: a globally unique cell identifier
(CGI) and a physical cell identity (PCI). CGIs are unique and
constant over time but are more difficult and time consuming to
detect for the mobile terminals. In contrast, PCIs are easier to
detect but they are not unique since there are only 504 different
PCIs in LTE. The PCI of a cell can vary over time since it needs
to be unique in a region and may need to change.

44

3.1
Data generation
ANR is chosen as a case study for this paper. A simulator has
been built by Ericsson and a number of simulation cases are
selected to reflect the behavior of the algorithm. In each
simulation case, a number of cells are prepared. In each interval of
15 minutes, the data generation script generates a number of
mobiles in handover locations between cells where the serving
cell and target cell are determined from the radio conditions at the
mobiles’ locations. Then events are recorded together with their
time-stamp. The basic events include

calls dropped

handover successes or handover failures

relations added or removed

PCI conflicts detected, and

cells changing PCIs
The events are divided into two groups. The first group includes
the events that reflect how the algorithm works and how the
network is configured such as PCI conflicts detected, cells
changing PCIs and relations added or removed. The second group
includes the events that reflect the network performance such as
handover successes, handover failures, and calls dropped. The
events in the first group are then stored, and the events in the
second group are counted over each time interval and are stored
by counts to save storage space. From these counts, a number of
other counts are computed to support data analysis.
The counts mainly belong to one of two types: cell counts and
relation counts. The number of call drops, and the number of
outgoing handover failures are examples of cell counts; and the
number of handover successes and the number of handover
failures are relation counts. The counts and events are then used to
visualize for each time interval to reflect the way the algorithm
configures the network.
3.2
Simulation cases
There are three cases that are selected to simulate the behavior of
the algorithm, each includes 225 cells prepared.

In case 1, cells are sequentially assigned to CGIs from 1
to 225. Then each cell is initially assigned to a nonconflict PCI except two cells, 210 and 225, which have
the same PCI, 210. Each cell is also initiated with a wellplanned neighbor cell list. Furthermore, all cells that
ideally would have both cells 210 and 225 in their
neighbor cell list only have cell 225.

In case 2, cells are sequentially assigned to CGIs from
226 to 450. There is no PCI conflict, but there are only
the most important neighbors in the neighbor cell lists.

In case 3, cells are sequentially assigned to CGIs from
451 to 675 but there are only 15 PCIs initially assigned
to cells by the following formula
PCI = ((Cell CGI - 1) mod 15) + 1
Furthermore, all cells are initiated with empty neighbor
cell lists.
The simulation is done for one day, including 96 intervals of 15
minutes.
4

GAV FLASH FRAMEWORK

The VoSON demonstrator was developed and customized using
our new GAV Flash framework. A previous version for
Microsoft’s .Net and DirectX is described in [8]. Our geovisual
analytics methods have now been adapted for the Web 2.0 using
Adobe’s Flash basic graphics and Flex for user interfaces.
Programmed in Adobe’s object-oriented (OO) language
ActionScript, the GAV Flash (figure 1) and VoSON facilitate

100% deployment to the Internet - a requirement from our partner
and network domain expert Ericsson.

4.1
GAV Map Layers
The choropleth map component facilitates a layered
architecture. It means that each class of spatial information is
represented by its own layer, e.g. shaded map, glyph, Google map.
These layers then can be combined and controlled to be displayed,
hidden or transparent depending on the needs of the user.

Figure 1. VoSON is developed with the web-compliant GAV Flash
framework and its class libraries

The GAV Flash includes a collection of common
geovisualization and information visualization components, data
analysis algorithms, tools that connect the components to each
other and data providers that can load data from various sources.
Interactive features that are needed to support a spatial and
temporal [7] analytical reasoning process are available, such as
tooltips, brushing, highlight, visual inquiry, conditioned filter
mechanisms that can discover outliers and methods supporting
time-linked multiple views. The GAV architecture allows new or
existing components/classes to be incorporated with the already
existing components, e.g. special GVA methods used in VoSON
such as the glyph layer.
In figure 3, spatial-temporal and multivariate self-organized
network data are simultaneously explored through the use of
dynamic linked views to detect complex patterns and problems in
cellular radio networks as described in more detail in sections 5
and 6. The views are coordinated using the GAV data linking
method based on the same data cube model and colouring scheme.
Any filtering or highlighting made in one of the linked functional
components propagates to all the others.

Figure 2. GAV layered map technique with Google, shaded,
symbol and glyph maps with user opacity controls.

5

APPROACH

To develop VoSON, we follow a human-centered approach
enabling deployment of a demonstrator that puts the emphasis on
tasks defined by the Ericsson domain expertise and needs of the
target-groups. Each GAV Flash component performs a specific
task in the overall GVA process. Customizing the VoSON
application we have, for example, the GAV Flash implementation
of a Parallel Coordinates Plot (PCP) and the layered map
component. Other new domain-related components are the
relation map, extended 2D-graph and extended time slider.

Figure 3. Seven main views of VoSON: two maps are used to visualize, interact with and analyze cells and relations; two PCPs are used to
explore and examine cell and relation attributes/counts in each time interval; two graphs are used to explore and examine cell and
relation attributes/counts over time; a time slider is used to move back and forth and highlight “intervals of change” of selected cells.

45

5.1 Selection of visual representations
Network data in the context of this paper mainly belongs to one of
two types: cell data and relation data. The data include
geographical data, attribute data, events and counts that are timevarying. In order to enable efficient interaction with and analysis
of the data we need to select different visual representations so
that each best suits a certain type of data. Furthermore, they
should also be arranged in a well-designed layout. To meet these
requirements, we suggest the following layout that includes seven
dynamic linked visual representations (see figure 3):

a cell map, a cell-based PCP and a cell graph for
visualization and analysis of cell data,

a relation map, a relation-based PCP and a relation graph
for visualization and analysis of cell relation data, and

a time slider for time control and analysis.
The following parts will describe these in more detail.
5.2 Cell map
The cell map is one of our central views. It is used to:

Visualize, interact with (e.g. multi-selection, zoom, pan,
highlight), and analyze cells and events relating to cells,

display cell data such as CGI, PCI, and

highlight notable cells such as ones having an extreme
value or having the same PCI.
5.2.1
Cell visualization
To be able to achieve the goals above, we first need to have a
good visual representation of cells. Cells have their geographical
positions (the position of antennas) and their own best-served
areas, called “coverage areas” that normally do not have a clear
shape as shown in figure 4(a). Nevertheless, an accurate
representation of them is not necessary for the purpose of this
project. Therefore we have represented cell coverage areas as
polygons to simplify the visualization of and interaction with
cells. Figure 4(b) shows an example of these approximations
achieved by applying a number of morphological operations such
as removing isolated parts, dilation and erosion to cell coverage
areas.

represents a cell adding or removing relations. The red flag
represents an extreme cell (i.e. a cell having an extreme value).
The green flag represents a serving-cell of an extreme relation (i.e.
a relation having an extreme value). The yellow flag represents a
target-cell of an extreme relation. The texts present CGI and
current PCI (and last PCI if the cell changes its PCI from previous
interval).

Figure 5. (a) an illustration of a multi-border and multi-sub-area
polygon; (b) a multi-border and multi-sub-area polygon is used
to display various types of cell information and data.

In addition, a color map is used to color cell coverage areas
according to the attribute or count being selected in the cell-based
PCP. A tooltip displays information about cell data (see figure 3).
5.2.3
Cell event visualization
The network events (e.g. cell events and relation events) reflect
how the algorithm works. Visualizing them can help the operators
to observe how the network evolves, interpret and get answers to
various questions such as

What relations are added or removed? When? Why?

Which cells change their PCIs? When? Why?

How are PCI conflicts detected?
and therefore facilitate analysis and understanding of how the
algorithm works.

Figure 4. (a) cell coverage areas; (b) cell coverage areas simplified
into polygons that allow easier interaction with cells

5.2.2
Visually exploring cell information and data
In order to enable the exploration of various types of cell
information and data we extend the simplified polygons to
polygons having multiple borders and divided into several subareas as shown in figure 5(a). By combining these multi-border
and multi-sub-area polygons with glyphs, texts and colors we can
display fifteen different pieces of cell information and data at the
same time. Figure 5(b) shows an example where the red border
represents a cell being selected as a serving-cell. The green border
represents a target-cell of a serving-cell being selected. The red
circle represents a cell changing PCI. The orange flower

46

Figure 6. An illustration of cell events occuring in interval 8

The cell map allows the visual analysis of various types of cell
events such as cells changing PCI, PCI conflicts detected, cells
changing relations. For each type of events there is a layer which
can be controlled to be displayed, hidden or transparent depending

on the task to be focused upon. Figure 6 illustrates the
visualization of several cell events occurring in interval 8.
5.3 Relation map
The relation map is used to

visualize, interact with and analyze cell relations and
events relating to cell relations such as relations added,
relations removed,

display cell relation data, and

allow the operator to highlight notable cell relations such
as relations in black lists or white lists.
To visualize a relation that is a directed connection from a cell
to another cell, a simple and straightforward solution is to use an
arrow. Nevertheless, there are several different types of relations
that should be distinguished such as relations being selected,
relations added, relations removed, or relations in black lists. To
be able to visualize, interpret and make sense of them, we use
arrows with glyphs and colors as illustrated in figure 7. Figure 8
shows an example where various types of relations of cell 605 in
the interval 6 are analyzed.
The relation map also uses a color map to color relations
according to the selected attribute/count in the relation-based PCP
and a tooltip to show relation data.

Figure 7. Arrows (with border), glyphs and colors are combined to
represent various types of relations

Figure 8. An illustration of using arrows with borders together
glyphs and colors to represent various types of relations

We use two PCPs: 1) a cell-based PCP that explores cell
attributes and counts in each time interval and 2) a relation-based
PCP that explores relation attributes and counts in each time
interval (see figure 3). Furthermore, to avoid analysing a large
number of variables and counts of cells and relations that would
result in very high data density we use the filter mechanism to
help the operator to select variables and counts to focus upon.
5.5 Cell graph and relation graph
Cell counts and relation counts are time-varying. To see how they
change over time, time-graphs should be useful. Therefore, we use
two time graphs: one, called cell graph, to visualize and explore
an attribute or count of cells over time and a second, called
relation graph, to visualize and explore an attribute or count of
relations over time (see figure 3). These graphs, when combined
with the maps and the PCPs above, can provide a better view of
the network data and at the same time support better analysis of
the data.
5.6 Time slider
The time slider is a key component used to control selection of
time, animation and especially to highlight intervals of change
(i.e. intervals in which cells change their PCIs or relations) of
cells or the whole network. This can help the operators to follow
the changes in the network more easily and support them in
analysis of changes in the network as presented in section 6.
5.7 Dynamic linked views and zoom in on focus
Spatial-temporal and multivariate data are effectively analyzed
through the use of dynamic linked views [11]. VoSON supports
this by inheriting from the GAV Flash framework the ability to
dynamically link views to each other through selection, color
mapping and filtering. When one or more cells are selected
(through the cell combo-boxes on the menu bar or the cell map or
the cell-based PCP etc.), the cell map will highlight them and their
neighbors with different colors and levels of transparency; then
the cell-based PCP will highlight these cells (but not their
neighbors), and the cell graph will visualize cell values of a
selected variable or count over time. The relation map then
highlights and zooms in on these selected cells and their
neighbors. Then only relations relating to the selected cells in the
cell map can be selected and interacted with in the relation map.
Similarly, when one or more relations are selected (through the
relation map or the relation-based PCP), the relation map will
visualize them, the relation-based PCP will highlight them and the
relation graph will visualize relation values of a selected variable
or count over time. If relations are selected by the cell-based PCP,
then their source-cells (or target-cells) will be selected and
visualized in the cell map and so on. In linking by filtering, when
cells are filtered in the cell-based PCP they will also be
immediately filtered in the cell map. In linking by color mapping,
one color map is shared by all three views: the cell map, cellbased PCP and cell graph and another color map is shared by the
relation map, relation-based PCP and relation graph.

5.4 Cell-based PCP and relation-based PCP

6

SELF-ORGANIZING NETWORK IN GEOVISUAL ANALYTICS

Cells and relations have many variables and counts. To explore
them and understand correlations between them, PCPs are good
choices due to their ability to explore multiple variables using
interactive features such as highlighting and filtering.
Furthermore, when linked with the cell and relation maps the
PCPs facilitate important analytics reasoning of network data as
described in section 6.

The goal of this paper is to use a geovisual analytics approach to
self-organizing network data related to cells and neighbor cell
relations to show how an automatic algorithm such as ANR
works. To achieve this goal, VoSON provides abilities to follow
and analyze the changes in the network, examine cell and relation
data, find extreme cells and relations, and determine cells having
potential problems such as PCI conflict.

47

6.1 Supervision and analysis of changes in the network
Changes in the network include two types: (1) changes of cells in
a time interval that can help to answer questions such as where
PCI conflicts are, which cells change their PCIs, and which cells
add new relations or remove relations; and (2) changes of cells
over time that can allow answering questions such as when PCI
conflicts relating to the cells are detected, when cells change their
PCIs, and when they add new relations or remove relations.
Therefore, supervision and analysis of both types of changes can
help the operators to better understand how the algorithm works
and, if needed, intervene in the system.

Figure 9. An overview of changes occurring in time interval 1

VoSON provides several abilities to supervise and analyze both
types of changes. To supervise changes in each time interval, the
cell map shows all cell events occurring in that time, highlight
cells changing PCIs and changing relations; the relation map
shows relations added and removed in that time; the cell basedPCP displays attribute values and counts of all cells, and the
relation based-PCP displays attribute values and counts of all
relations. Then when the user selects a number of cells or
relations, changes related to those cells and relations will be
shown. Figure 9 shows an overview of changes occurring in the
network in time interval 1. In case 1 there are no PCI conflicts and
only two new relations added. In case 2 there are no PCI conflicts,
but many new relations added. In case 3, there are many handover
failures, PCI conflicts and new relations added.
To supervise changes of concerned cells over time, the time
slider plays an important role. It marks time intervals in which
cells change PCIs and time intervals in which they add or remove
relations. The time graphs show their values of a concerned
attribute or count over time.

By examining events occurring in a time interval and exploring
related data such as the number of calls dropped and the number
of handover failures of cells and cell relations in several previous
time intervals, the operators can understand why a cell changes its
PCI in that time interval, why a PCI conflict happens, and how a
PCI conflict is detected etc.
Figure 10 shows changes of cell 210 over time. Cell 210
changes its relations in intervals 1, 2, 8 and 12 and changes PCI
from 210 to 64 in interval 8 after a PCI conflict between itself and
cell 225 is detected. The PCI conflict is detected by cell 224 by
the method of CGI report [4] (CGIR) after 3 handover failures in
interval 5 from it (cell 224) to cell 225.

Figure 10. (a) Intervals of change of cell 210; (b) after 3 handover
failures in interval 5 from cell 224 to cell 225, a PCI conflict
between cells 210 and 225 detected in interval 8 by cell 224

Figure 11. Changes occurring in time interval 20 for cases 2 and 3

Figure 12. (a, b, c) Intervals of change of the case 1, 2, 3 respectively;

48

Figure 12(a, b, c) shows intervals of change of all cells for cases
1, 2, and 3 respectively. Figure 11 shows an overview of changes
occurring in interval 20 in cases 2 and 3 respectively. From
VoSON, as illustrated in the above figures, we found that in case
1 there are few intervals of change at the beginning, and from
interval 12 there is no change. In cases 2 and 3, adding new
relations happens continuously in the first intervals and less often
in the later intervals. This is also true for cells changing PCI in
case 3. All these facts make sense and agree with the initial
configurations of the network in each case.
6.2 Finding notable cells and relations
There are a number of cells and relations that have an abnormal
attribute value or count or have a potential problem of PCI
conflict. Finding these cells and relations is important since it can
help the operators focus on them and follow and analyze them.
VoSON provides several ways to accomplish this. The first way is
to use the ability of PCPs to filter and find cells and/or relations
having extreme values for example a large number of calls
dropped or large number of handover failures in a certain time
interval. Then the time graphs and the time slider can be used to
see how they change over time. Figure 13 shows an example of
finding a notable cell. In this figure, the cell-based PCP is used to
find out that cell 659 has 7 call drops in interval 1. The time slider
shows that this cell changes PCI in interval 2. It changes PCI from
14 to 485 after a PCI conflict between itself and another cell in its
vicinity detected by itself by the method of transmission gap [4].
The cell graph shows that after changing PCI, it has no call drop.

the vicinity of each other and use the same PCI would have a high
potential of PCI conflict. Figure 15 shows cells having the same
PCI (3) in interval 5. Then a PCI conflict between cells 453 and
468 is detected in interval 6 and cell 453 changes its PCI to 471.
VoSON also provides the ability to find notable relations that
have a long distance between their source and target cells. These
relations should be supervised to answer questions such as when
they were added, why and if they work well. Figure 16 shows
several long-distance relations: (1) relation from cell 659 to cell
575 and (2) relation from cell 670 and cell 661. A further analysis
shows that both relations have a number of handover failures that
occur repeatedly. This also raises another question that might need
more information to answer.

Figure 14. An illustration of using the finding tool to find noticeable
cells and relations

Figure 15. (a) cells having the same PCI (3) in interval 5; (b) cell
453 change its PCI from 3 to 471 in interval 6
Figure 13. cell 659 has 7 call drops in interval 1 (left) and it
changes PCI after a PCI conflict between itself and another
cell in its vicinity detected in interval 2 (right)

Another alternative is to use a search tool that allows the user to
specify search conditions through a graphical user interface and
then flag the resulting cells and relations in the cell map and
relation map. Figure 14 shows an example of using the search tool
to find the top 3 cells having a large number of call drops and the
top 3 relations having a large number of handover failures in
interval 1. The search results show that cell 670 relates to both
results. A further analysis shows that there is a PCI conflict
between it and another cell in its vicinity detected in interval 2.
After the PCI conflict is resolved cell 670 has no call drops.
Nevertheless, it is discovered that there are still handover failures
from it to cell 672 that occur repeatedly. This phenomenon raises
a question that might need more information to answer.
To identify cells having a potential PCI conflict, the simple way
is to highlight cells that have the same PCI. Then cells that are in

Figure 16. Long-distance relations

7

USER FEEDBACK

Our partner, Ericsson, has been using the prototype during the
cycle of its development and has provided us with highly valuable
feedback regarding its advantages and disadvantages. Five domain
experts in radio network area participated with the objective to
assess usability issues such as advantages and disadvantages in
the prototype's visual representations, interaction mechanisms
and, its support of visual explorative data analysis. They were also
encouraged to give their opinions for further development of
VoSON.
The feedback shows that the users like the concept of the time
line and the ability to see the network changing “- I like the

49

concept and the view of changes over time, really good”. The
ability to find ‘problem’ cells and relations were also considered
as highly positive “-it looks useful and very good to me”.
On the negative side we have realized that several users start
with the flagging feature rather than using filters to find the
starting point for the search. It seems that the amount of
information in the PCPs or other complications hindered them.
But after a while, ‘playing’ with the PCPs, they learned this new
way of finding interesting patterns – which results in a greater
acceptance of the PCPs. The feedback has also included a number
of expected features to be considered for further development; for
example the ability to pick lines on time graphs and link them to
other views, and the ability to find extreme values in all time
intervals instead of only one interval.
Finally, the tool now consists of a balanced subset of possible
counts and parameters from the radio network. In many situations,
it is enough to explain how ANR works; however, there are some
situations that need more information especially to explain call
drops that are not dependent on ANR.
8

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We have developed a geovisual analytics tool that supports
analysis of the way an automatic algorithm such as ANR
configures a self-organizing network in collaboration with
Ericsson. The tool is based on the GAV Flash framework. It
combines interactive visual displays, a multi-layer approach and
the ability to work with multi-dimensional, time-varying, and
geospatial data sets. It allows the operators to follow events
happening in the network, supervise and analyze changes in the
network over time and answer various types of questions such as
why a relation is added or removed, why a cell changes its PCI, or
how a PCI conflict is detected that can help them to better
understand how the algorithm works. The tool can also support
the operators to examine and intervene in various aspects of the
network, find existing problems as well as potential problems.
The tool has been used and tested by a group of relevant domain
users and the findings from these efforts has been highly positive
and in favor of the tool.
Our next steps are to (1) find out what information should be
added and how it is used, (2) further improve the interaction and
performance of the tool, (3) apply it to massive data from a real
environment, and (4) finally perform a thorough evaluation.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This applied research study was supported, in part, by Ericsson
AB, Sweden and by funding from the Visualization Program
managed by the Swedish Knowledge Foundation (KK-Stiftelsen).
We would like to thank researchers Johan Moe, Fredrik
Gunnarsson, Harald Kallin, Thomas Rimhagen, and Kristina
Zetterberg at Ericsson for providing data for our case study and
ideas during the evaluation stage of the tool. Many thanks to our
colleagues at the National Center for Visual Analytics NCVA
(http://ncva.itn.liu.se) at ITN, Linkoping University.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

50

E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, J. Sköld, and P. Beming, 3G Evolution:
HSPA and LTE for Mobile Broadband. Academic Press, 2007.
3GPP TR 25.913, “Technical specification group radio access
network; requirements for evolved UTRA (E-UTRA) and evolved
UTRAN (E-UTRAN),” Release 7.
NGMN, “Operator use cases related to self organising networks,”
ver. 1.53, 2007-04-16.
M. Amirijoo, P. Frenger, F. Gunnarsson, H. Kallin, J. Moe, and K.
Zetterberg, “Neighbor cell relation list and physical cell identity self-

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

organization in LTE”, in Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Communications Workshops, 2008, pp. 37-41.
D. Guo, M. Gahegan, A. M. MacEachren, and B. Zhou,
“Multivariate analysis and geovisualization with an integrated
geographic knowledge discovery approach,” Cartography and
Geographic Information Science, vol. 32, no. 2, 2005, pp. 113-132,
April 2005.
N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko, “Interactive visual tools to explore
spatio-temporal variation”, in Proceedings of the Working
Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI 2004), 2004,
pp.417-420.
G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko, “Visual exploration of spatial
distribution of temporal behaviors,” in Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV05), 2005,
pp. 799-806.
M. Jern, T. Åström, and S. Johansson, “GeoAnalytics tools applied
to large geospatial datasets,” in Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference Information Visualisation (IV08), 2008,
pp. 362-372.
D. A. Keim, C. Panse, M. Sips and S. C. North, “Visual data mining
in large geospatial point sets”, in IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 36-44, September 2004.
W. Muller, and H. Schumann, “Visualization methods for timedependent data,” in Proceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation
Conference, 2003, pp. 737-745.
J. C. Roberts, “Exploratory visualization with multiple linked
views,” in Exploring Geovisualization, J. Dykes, A. M.
MacEachren, and M.-J. Kraak, Ed. Oxford: Pergamon, 2005, pp.
159-180.
M. Jern, and J. Franzén, “GeoAnalytics – Exploring spatio-temporal
and multivariate data,” in Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Information Visualisation (IV06), 2006, pp. 25-31.
M. Jern, S. Johansson, J. Johansson, and J. Franzén, “The GAV
toolkit for multiple linked views,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in
Exploratory Visualization, 2007, pp. 85-97.
S. Johansson, and M. Jern, “GeoAnalytics visual inquiry and
filtering tools in parallel coordinates plots”, in Proceedings of the
15th Annual ACM International Symposium on Advances in
Geographic Information Systems, 2007.
GeoVista
Studio.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.geovistastudio.psu.edu.
D. Guo, J. Chen, A. M. MacEachren, and K. Liao, “A visualization
system for space-time and multivariate patterns (VIS-STAMP),” in
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol.
12, no. 6, pp. 1461-1474, November 2006.
M. Withall, I. Phillips, and D. Parish, “Network visualisation: a
review,” IET Communications, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 365-372, June 2007.
R. A. Becker, S. G. Eick, and A. R. Wilks, “Visualizing network
data,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and ComputerGraphics,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 16-28, March 1995.
R. A. Becker, S. G. Eick, and A. R. Wilks, “Visualizing Network
Data,” in Readings in information visualization: Using vision to
think, S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, San
Fransisco, CA: Morgan Kaufman, 1999, pp. 215-227.
E. E. Koutsofios, S. C. North, and D. A. Keim, “Visualizing large
telecommunication data sets,” IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 16-19, May 1999.
E. E. Koutsofios, S. C. North, R. Truscott, and D. A. Keim,
“Visualizing large-scale telecommunication networks and services,”
in Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ‘99, 1999, pp. 457-461.
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, R. Fischer, V. Mues, and A. Schuck,
“Reactions to geovisualization: an experience from a European
project,” International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1149–1171, November 2006.

