Guided Analysis of Hurricane Trends Using Statistical Processes
Integrated with Interactive Parallel Coordinates
Chad A. Steed∗

J. Edward Swan II†

T.J. Jankun-Kelly‡

Patrick J. Fitzpatrick§

Naval Research Laboratory

Mississippi State University

Mississippi State University

Mississippi State University

A BSTRACT
This paper demonstrates the promise of augmenting interactive
multivariate representations with information from statistical processes in the domain of weather data analysis. Statistical regression, correlation analysis, and descriptive statistical calculations are
integrated via graphical indicators into an enhanced parallel coordinates system, called the Multidimensional Data eXplorer (MDX).
These statistical indicators, which highlight significant associations
in the data, are complemented with interactive visual analysis capabilities. The resulting system allows a smooth, interactive, and
highly visual workflow.
The system’s utility is demonstrated with an extensive hurricane
climate study that was conducted by a hurricane expert. In the
study, the expert used a new data set of environmental weather data,
composed of 28 independent variables, to predict annual hurricane
activity. MDX shows the Atlantic Meridional Mode increases the
explained variance of hurricane seasonal activity by 7-15% and removes less significant variables used in earlier studies. The findings and feedback from the expert (1) validate the utility of the data
set for hurricane prediction, and (2) indicate that the integration of
statistical processes with interactive parallel coordinates, as implemented in MDX, addresses both deficiencies in traditional weather
data analysis and exhibits some of the expected benefits of visual
data analysis.
Keywords: Climate study, multivariate data, correlation, regression, interaction, statistical analysis, visual analytics.
Index Terms:
I.3.6 [Computing Methodologies]: Computer
Graphics—Methodologies and Techniques; H.5.2 [Information
Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces; J.2 [Computer Applications]: Physical Sciences and
Engineering—Earth and Atmospheric Sciences;
1

which is directly addressed in the work reported here, is that visualizations have typically lacked a direct connection to statistical processes such as regression analysis. And yet, the authors have noted
that for the environmental scientists that they work with—weather
scientists, oceanographers, and physicists—a typical workflow involves performing statistical and graphical analysis simultaneously,
where the statistical correlations suggest causal relationships, and
the graphical analysis helps explain why the relationships exist.
These facts have motivated the work reported here. We have
developed a system, called the Multidimensional Data eXplorer
(MDX), that augments a parallel coordinates visualization with automated statistical processes. As shown in Fig. 1, MDX combines
parallel coordinates capabilities with advanced interaction techniques integrated with MATLAB-based regression analysis. While
most of the visualization and interaction techniques in MDX have
been previously reported, we do not believe that any other parallel
coordinates system has provided the range of capabilities as MDX.
In addition, this paper reports an extensive case study, in which a
hurricane expert studied the ability of a new environmental weather
data set, the 28-variable Colorado State University (CSU) and Atlantic Meridional Mode (AMM) data set, to predict annual hurricane activity. The hurricane expert is Dr. Patrick Fitzpatrick; he
has been a long-term collaborator in this work and is a co-author of
this paper. Approximately half of this paper describes the capabilities of MDX, while the other half describes the case study. Therefore, the research reported here is structured to directly address one
of the main calls of the NIH/NSF Visualization Challenges Report [13], which recommends that visualization researchers “collaborate closely with domain experts who have driving tasks in
data-rich fields to produce tools and techniques that solve clear realworld needs.” In this paper, the tool is MDX, the techniques are
parallel coordinates and interaction methods integrated with statistical regression routines, and the real-world need is the prediction
of annual hurricane activity.

I NTRODUCTION

For years, weather scientists have used statistical analysis to investigate associations between weather phenomena and environmental
observations. In particular, they have often used statistical regression, descriptive statistics, and correlation measures to estimate the
importance of a set of predictors for seasonal hurricane activity. The
motivation is to be able to predict, as far in advance as possible, the
number and intensity of hurricanes that are likely to occur during a
given hurricane season.
Weather scientists have also often used basic data graphics such
as scatterplots and histograms. However, the inability of basic
data graphics to convey complicated data associations is well understood by the visualization community [9]. Another limitation,
∗ e-mail:

csteed@acm.org
swan@acm.org
‡ e-mail: tjk@acm.org
§ e-mail: fitz@ngi.msstate.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

2

R ELATED W ORK

Using schemes similar to those described by Vitart [28], scientists
have successfully employed statistical regression techniques using
historical data to identify significant predictors for hurricane activity. Recently, Klotzbach et al. [15] used regression techniques to
identify the most important variables for predicting the frequency
of North Atlantic hurricane activity. Fitzpatrick [5] also created a
multiple regression scheme called the Typhoon Intensity Prediction
Scheme (TIPS) to understand and forecast storm intensity in the
western North Pacific Ocean. Although sometimes complicated to
establish, these and other statistical analysis methods (e.g. correlation analysis, descriptive statistics) provide valuable insight regarding key associations in the climate data.
In conjunction with statistical processes, climate researchers use
scatterplots and histograms that utilize either layered plots or multiple separate plots. However, the use of separate plots causes perceptual issues due to the limited memory for information that can be
gained from one glance to the next as discussed by Healey et al. [9].
Statisticians often use multiple adjacent scatterplots (a scatterplot
matrix, or SPLOM), as described by Wong and Bergeron [32]; but
it requires a large amount of space and forming multivariate asso-

19

Figure 1: The MDX system developed in this research is composed of a settings panel (upper left), parallel coordinates panel (upper right), and
a table view panel (lower). In this example, the mouse is used to highlight the AMM-June axis to examine its correlation with the other AMM
variables. The correlation appears to be stronger for the months that are closer in time. This pattern is observed for all the AMM variables.

ciations is still difficult. Wilkinson et al. [31] employed statistical
measures to organize the SPLOM and guide the viewer through exploratory analysis of high-dimensional data sets, but the perceptual
issues mentioned above remain to some degree. Instead of separate plots, layer plots can be used, which condense the visualization
into a single display; but there are significant issues related to layer
occlusion and interference as described by Healey et al. [9].
In the current work, the parallel coordinates visualization technique forms the canvas for an approach designed to address the
needs of climate analysis. The parallel coordinates concept,
which was first popularized by Inselberg [11] to represent hyperdimensional geometries and also used for direct analysis of multivariate relationships by Wegman [30], yields a compact, twodimensional representation of even large multidimensional data
sets. Several innovative parallel coordinates extensions have been
described in the visualization research literature. For example, Martin and Ward [18] described data driven brushing techniques for
parallel coordinates and Hauser et al. [8] described a histogram
display, dynamic axis re-ordering, axis inversion, and details-ondemand capabilities. In addition, Siirtola [21] presented a rich set
of dynamic interaction techniques (e.g., conjunctive queries) and
parallel coordinate axes enhanced with the box plots developed
by Tukey [26]. Johansson et al. [12] described new line shading
schemes for parallel coordinates and Dykes and Mountain [4] introduce a shading approach similar to the aerial perspective shading used in the current work. Furthermore, several focus+context
implementations for parallel coordinates have been introduced by
Fua et al. [7], Artero et al. [2], Johansson et al. [12], and Novot´ny
and Hauser [19]. Theus [25] introduced a system that ties parallel
coordinates to statistical processing functions and Qu et al. [20] introduced a method for integrating correlation computations into a
parallel coordinates display. MDX utilizes variants of these extensions to enhance the classical parallel coordinates plot.
Parallel coordinates displays have also been used for environmental data analysis in earlier works. MacEachren et al. [17] used
interactive parallel coordinates to investigate atmospheric data sets.
Also, Theron [24] used parallel coordinates in a visual analytics
system to analyze paleoceanographic conditions. In the current
work, a case study is described on the use of parallel coordinates
for conducting a tropical cyclone climate study.

20

3

I NFORMATION A SSISTED V ISUAL A NALYSIS

MDX offers a comprehensive environment for visual multivariate
data analysis by fusing automated statistical processes with enhanced parallel coordinates. The information derived from these
statistical processes is used to augment the parallel coordinates axes
in the form of graphical indicators that guide the user to important relationships, thereby reducing knowledge discovery timelines.
The resulting visualization provides a rich blend of multivariate visualization and statistical information assistance that moves beyond
conventional environmental data analysis. In the remainder of this
section, we will describe the key information assistance features
and the interactive visual analysis capabilities.
3.1 Statistical Information Assistance
The statistical processes in MDX yield information that guides the
scientist via graphical indicators. In real-time, the descriptive statistics and correlation measures are computed to provide key characterizations of the variables. Furthermore, regression analyses are
executed on demand to quickly indicate associative connections between multiple independent and dependent variables, thus amplifying cognition and reducing analysis time frames.
3.1.1 Regression Processes
Regression analysis techniques are effective for screening data and
providing quantitative associations. In addition to simple linear
regression (SLR), MDX offers stepwise multiple linear regression
(MLR) with a backwards glance, which selects the optimum number of most important variables using a predefined significance
level [29]. The stepwise MLR helps find a model that does a good
job of predicting the dependent variable with as few independent
variables as possible, which simplifies interpretation and usually
means cheaper data collection and analysis. In general, the idea
of stepwise regression is to start with an initial model and add or
delete variables step by step, one at a time, to make the model
better. The procedure stops when no appreciable improvement is
gained by making another step. Although the resulting model may
not be the best of all possible models, it is generally one of the best.
In MDX, we use the MATLAB “regress” and “stepwisefit” utilities
to perform simple and stepwise regression, respectfully. The information from these processes is parsed and graphically represented
in the parallel coordinates panel.

The variability information is encoded in the boxes that are
drawn on each axis interior. The wide boxes (Fig. 2, h) represent the
descriptive statistics for all the axis samples, while the more narrow
boxes (Fig. 2, e), which are drawn over the wide boxes, capture the
descriptive statistics for the samples that are currently selected with
the axis query sliders (Fig. 2, f). The thick horizontal lines that divide the variability boxes vertically (Fig. 2, g) represent either the
median or mean value.
The frequency information can also be displayed on each axis bar
as vertical histogram bins (Fig. 2, i) with widths that are indicative
of the number of lines that pass through the bin’s region. That is,
the widest bins have the most lines passing through, while the more
narrow bins have less lines. The user can also enable or disable the
histogram display and fine tune the bin size parameter via the MDX
settings.

Figure 2: The parallel coordinates axes in MDX have been augmented with key statistical indicators. The call-outs in this annotated
figure highlight the regression (see a, b, c, and d), descriptive statistics (e, g, h, and i), and correlation (j, k, m, and n) indicators. Query
sliders (f) are also indicated, which facilitate dynamic visual queries.

3.1.3 Correlation Indicators
MDX also facilitates correlation analysis whereby the strength of
relationships between pairs of variables are measured. The correlation coefficient, r, is used to quantify the relationship between
two variables. Specifically, the system uses the Pearson productmoment correlation coefficient to measure the correlation for a series of n measurements of X and Y written as xi and yi where
i = 1, 2, . . . , n [29]. The value of r is given by:
r=

In our regression analysis, a normalization procedure is executed
so that the y-intercept becomes zero and the importance of a predictor may be assessed by comparing regression coefficients, bi ,
between different predictors. Denoting σ as the standard deviation
of a variable, y as the dependent variable, x as the predictor mean,
and y as the dependent variable mean, a number k of statistically
significant predictors are normalized by the following equation:
k

(y − y)/σy =

∑ bi (xi − xi )/σi .

(1)

i=1

The bi values are graphically encoded in the parallel coordinates
plot using the box below the axis label and to the left of the arrow
(Fig. 2, a). Like a thermometer, the box is filled from the bottom
to the top based on the magnitude of b. The box is colored red if
the coefficient is positive and blue if it is negative. The box to the
right of the arrow (Fig. 2, b) encodes the r2 output from the SLR
process. In addition to the coefficients, the MLR analysis returns
an overall R2 value which provides an indication of how well the
model captures the variance between the predictors and the dependent variable. The box beneath the dependent variable axis name
(Fig. 2, c) encodes the overall R2 value from the MLR analyses. It
is important to note that the axis corresponding to the current dependent variable is indicated by light gray text on a dark gray box
for its title (Fig. 2, d), the reverse shading of the other axes.
3.1.2 Descriptive Statistical Indicators
The axis display also provides visual representations of key descriptive statistical measures that aid the user in ascertaining the characteristics of variable distributions. The median, interquartile range
(IQR), and frequency information are calculated for the data within
the focus area of each axis. Alternatively, the user can configure
MDX to display the mean and standard deviation range. These
central tendency and variability measures provide quantitative measures for the typical value and how “spread out” the samples are in
the distribution, respectively. This information can assist the user
in deriving confidence metrics (e.g. tight line clusters may indicate
better stability) as well as segmenting the data into above and below
normal ranges.

n ∑ xi yi − (∑ xi )(∑ yi )
[n ∑ xi 2 − (∑ xi )2 ][n ∑ yi 2 − (∑ yi )2 ]

(2)

As the user interacts with the system, the correlation information
is updated in real-time and used to augment the parallel coordinates
display. For each possible pairing of axes, the system automatically
calculates r, which yields a correlation matrix. The correlation matrix is a square matrix where each i, j element is equal to the r
value between the i and j variables. The rows from this matrix are
displayed graphically beneath each axis as a series of color-coded
blocks (Fig. 2, j). In each block, the color encodes r between the
axis directly above it and the axis that corresponds to its position in
the set of blocks. When the mouse hovers over an axis, the axis is
highlighted and the correlation coefficient blocks corresponding to
it below the other axes are enlarged (Fig. 2, k).
Similar to the regression indicators, the correlation indicator
blocks are shaded blue for negative correlations and red for positive. The stronger the correlation, the more saturated the color so
that the stronger correlations are more prominent. The r value of an
axis with itself is always equal to one and the corresponding indicator block is shaded white. Furthermore, when the absolute value
for r is greater than or equal to the significant correlation threshold,
the block is colored with the fully saturated color. Displayed at the
bottom of the parallel coordinates display (see Fig. 1), the significant correlation threshold is a user-defined value that controls the
correlation block shading and the multicollinearity filter.
In addition to the indicator blocks, MDX displays small scatterplots below the correlation indicators for each axis when an axis
is highlighted (Fig. 2, m). The scatterplots are created by plotting
the points with the highlighted variable as the y axis and the variable directly above the scatterplot as the x axis. Each scatterplot
also shows the numerical r value associated with the pair of axes
below the scatterplot (Fig. 2, n). The scatterplots provide a visual
means to confirm the type of correlation (positive or negative) and
the strength. The type of correlation is also visually detectable in
the line configuration of the parallel coordinates plot. Polylines
that cross in an ‘X’ pattern are characteristic of a negative correlation while lines that appear to be more parallel indicate a positive
correlation. Unlike the other correlation indicators, the scatterplot
is useful for discovering nonlinear relationships between variables.
For example, a nonlinear relationship can be observed in a scatterplot even if r is zero.

21

3.1.4 Multicollinearity Filter
Multicollinearity is a condition in which an independent variable
is highly correlated with several other independent variables. This
variable has much in common with several other variables and may
have little information unique to itself [10]. The presence of this
condition results in loss of power and makes interpretation more
difficult in the results of regression models.
MDX provides an automated multicollinearity filter to ensure the
proper selection of axes in subsequent regression analyses. The filter examines the visible axes in the parallel coordinates display for
multicollinearity; if any axes are correlated with each other by more
than the significant correlation threshold, one is removed from the
display. The filter removes the axis that has a lower r with the dependent axis and the remaining axis are truly independent of each
other. Although the user can use the correlation indicators to manually reduce the multicollinearity, the automatic filter can be used to
ensure independence among the variables by simply clicking a user
interface button.
3.1.5 Axis Ordering
MDX expedites statistical comparisons through its automatic axis
arrangement capabilities, which use one of the previously mentioned statistical measures. When the axes are arranged by the correlation coefficient, one axis is selected initially as the target axis.
The axes are then sorted according to the r value of the target axis
and the other visible axes. Axes with negative correlations are arranged to the left of the target axis in ascending order. Axes with
positive correlations are arranged to the right of the target axis in
descending order. The strongest correlations are placed nearest to
the target axis while the weakest correlations are placed farthest.
When the axes are sorted in this manner, the user can quickly identify the strongest correlations with the target axis.
The IQR / standard deviation range, MLR b, and SLR r2 options
all sort the axes in descending order based on the statistical values.
The dependent axis is placed at the leftmost position and the other
axes are arranged accordingly. The IQR / standard deviation range
arrangements are useful for examining the dispersion characteristics of each axis. The SLR r2 and MLR b arrangements are useful
for investigating individual associations of the axes with the dependent axis and identifying the most significant axes for the dependent
axis, respectively.
3.2 Visual Analysis Techniques
In addition to several fundamental parallel coordinates capabilities
such as relocatable axes, axis inversion, and details-on-demand,
MDX includes additional extensions such as rapid axis scaling,
focus+context, aerial perspective shading, and dynamic visual
queries. A detailed description of these capabilities are provided
in earlier publications of this research [22, 23]. In the remainder of
this section, we give an overview of the more significant extensions
to set the stage for the subsequent climate study.
3.2.1 Dynamic Queries
MDX enables the rapid selection of subsets of polylines in the parallel coordinates display using double-ended sliders. Each axis has
a pair of sliders (Fig. 2, f) for constraining the upper and lower limits of the highlighted lines. The user can drag these sliders using
the mouse to perform rapid Boolean AND queries. Lines within
the sliders of each axis are rendered with a darker shade of gray
while the remaining lines are rendered with a less prominent shade
of gray. An example of this capability is shown in Fig. 5 to highlight
above normal IH activity.
3.2.2 Axis Scaling (Focus+Context)
The dynamic axis scaling capabilities in MDX enable interactive
exploration of data subsets while retaining the context of the full

22

(a) Before scaling

(b) After scaling

Figure 3: Image sequence illustrating dynamic axis scaling capability
before (a) and after (b) axis scaling has been performed. In this
example, scaling is performed by an upward mouse wheel movement
in the focus area of the axis which moves the values of the upper and
lower limits closer together, zooming into the central axis region.

data set. This capability is implemented by allowing the user to
modify the upper and lower focus area values for a selected axis
using the movement of the mouse wheel.
Each axis is partitioned into three sections delineated by horizontal tick marks: the central focus area and the top and bottom context
areas. When the mouse hovers over the focus area (see Fig. 3), an
upward mouse wheel motion expands the display of the focus area
outward and pushes lines outside the new upper and lower limits
into the context areas. A downward wheel motion causes the inverse effect: focus area compression. Alternatively, the user may
use the mouse wheel over either of the two context areas to alter the
minimum or maximum limits, independently. This intuitive capability supports zooming into an area of interest for an axis to reduce
clutter and facilitate focused analysis on specific polylines.
3.2.3 Aerial Perspective Shading
MDX also provides a proximity-based line shading scheme, which
supports rapid investigation of multidimensional trends. This shading scheme simulates the human perception of aerial perspective
whereby objects in the distance appear faded while objects nearer
to the eye seem more vivid. The technique is similar to a fundamental painting technique often employed in landscapes. As the
distance between the viewer and an object is increased, the contrast
between the object and the background decreases.
The shading scheme is implemented in MDX in both a discrete
and a continuous mode. In the discrete mode, the lines are colored
according to the axis region that they intersect. As shown in Fig. 5,
lines that are within the query slider limits for each axis are shaded
with a dark gray value that draws the user’s attention. Lines that
fall within the context of any axis are shaded a light gray color
and drawn beneath the other lines. The remaining lines (non-query
and non-context) are colored a shade of gray that is darker than the
context lines but lighter than the query lines.
In the continuous mode, non-context lines go through an additional step to encode the distance of the line from the mouse cursor.
As shown in Fig. 3, query lines that are nearest to the mouse cursor
receive the darkest value while lines farthest from the mouse cursor
are shaded with a lighter gray. The other query lines are shaded
according to a non-linear fall-off function that yields a gradient of
colors between said extremes. Consequently, the lines that are nearest to the mouse cursor are more prominent to the viewer due to the
color and depth ordering treatments and the viewer can effectively
use the mouse to quickly interrogate the data set. In addition to the

Table 1: CSU+AMM Hurricane climate variables evaluated as predictors in the climate study.

CSU Variables
AMM Variables
(1) June–July Ni˜no 3
(17) AMM-January
(2) May SST
(18) AMM-February
(3) February 200-mb U
(19) AMM-March
(4) February–March 200-mb V (20) AMM-April
(5) February SLP
(21) AMM-May
(6) October–November SLP
(22) AMM-June
(7) Sept. 500-mb Geopotential Height
(8) November SLP
(23) AMM-July
(9) March–April SLP
(24) AMM-August
(10) June–July SLP
(25) AMM-September
(11) September–November SLP (26) AMM-October
(12) Nov. 500-mb Geopotential Height
(13) July 50-mb U
(27) AMM-November
(14) February SST
(28) AMM-December
(15) April–May SST
(16) June–July SST
SST – Sea Surface Temperature
SLP – Sea Level Pressure
U – zonal wind (or x-coordinate) component
V – meridional wind (or y-coordinate) component

seasonal activity. In Table 1, variables 1 through 8 are understood
to characterize ENSO events. This data set’s description is beyond
the scope of this paper, and the reader is directed to Steed et al. [23]
for those details.
In this climate study, we also include the Atlantic Meridional
Mode (AMM) data set, which has been obtained from the Earth
Systems Research Laboratory of the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Recent research by Vimont and
Kossin [16, 27] has shown strong relationships between the AMM
and North Atlantic storm activity on decadal and interannual time
series. The AMM is a dynamic mode of variability that is integral to
the tropical coupled ocean-atmosphere system. These connections
are due to the AMM’s association with several local climate conditions, which all influence storm activity collectively as described by
Vimont and Kossin [27]. AMM is highly correlated with a number
of local climatic factors such as SST, shear, low-level vorticity and
convergence, static stability, and SLP. The local factors cooperate
to increase or decrease North Atlantic hurricane activity [16].
To align with the years covered by the CSU data set, we use a
subset of the AMM data set in this study to cover the years 1950
to 2006. For each year, the AMM data set has 12 values, one for
each month of the year. The AMM spatial pattern is determined by
applying a Maximum Covariance Analysis to sea surface temperature and the zonal and meridional components of the 10-meter wind
field. The data are defined over the region (21S–32N, 74W–15E),
and smoothed spatially using 3 longitude and 2 latitude points [1].
4.2 AMM Exploratory Analyses

query lines, the shading scheme is also applied to the small scatterplots that are displayed beneath each axis to link the elements over
multiple views.
4

C ASE S TUDY: N ORTH ATLANTIC H URRICANE T REND
A NALYSIS

The objective of this research is to show the promise of an approach
to interactive visual analytics that relies on guidance from statistical information. Building on our earlier case studies [22, 23], we
have employed this approach in the current work by investigating
trends in a new environmental data set and ascertaining the significance of the data set in comparison to a related data set of hurricane
predictors. The discovery of hidden trends, confirmation of known
patterns, and feedback from the domain expert reveal the potential
for enhanced knowledge discovery in climate studies. In the remainder of this section, we provide an overview of the climate data
along with details of the analyses.
4.1 Climate Data
This climate study involves two data sets that contain environmental
predictors for hurricane seasons. The first data set contains 16 climate predictors observed annually from 1950 to 2006 (57 records)
and they are listed along with the associated geographical region
in Table 1. This data set was provided by Dr. Phil Klotzbach [14]
of the Tropical Meteorology Project at Colorado State University
(CSU), where it has been used in forecasts of the 2007 North Atlantic hurricane season activity by categories. These categories include the number of named storms (NS)1 , the number of hurricanes
(H)2 , and the number of intense hurricanes (IH)3 [6].
The CSU variables have known association with North Atlantic
hurricane activity. For example, Chu [3] describes how this basin
has less storms during the El Ni˜no Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
years, and more in La Ni˜na years. Because of this relationship,
scientists use the ENSO signals as one the primary predictors for
1A

tropical cyclone is given a name when its winds reach 17 ms−1 .
are tropical cyclones with winds that exceed 32 ms−1 .
3 Intense hurricanes are hurricanes with winds that are at least 49 ms−1 .
2 Hurricanes

We began the study by investigating the trends and associations
within the AMM data set. One of the first features we observed
is that all of the correlation indicators are red (see Fig. 1), which
indicates positive correlations. The correlation indicators also highlight that the AMM variables have strong positive correlations with
months that are near in time. For example, the AMM-June variable is highlighted in Fig. 1, which reveals exceptionally strong
correlations with the four nearest months (AMM-April, AMM-May,
AMM-July, and AMM-August) and considerably weaker correlation
with the other months. A glance at the correlation indicator patterns
shows that each AMM variable exhibits this pattern—the correlation strengths falls off as the temporal separation increases.
When we evaluate the correlations of the AMM variables with
the IH axis, we observe that the highest correlations occur in the
months that historically have the highest intense hurricane activity.
In Fig. 4, the AMM-August and AMM-September months have the
second and third strongest correlation with the IH axis. It is not
surprising that the weakest correlations with the IH activity are observed in the winter and spring months, which are outside the North
Atlantic hurricane season (Jun. 1 to Nov. 30); but it is remarkable
that the strongest correlation is with the AMM-December axis. The
red correlation indicators and scatterplots beneath each axis also
show that each AMM variable is positively correlated with the IH
activity. We observed similar correlations trends with the NS and
H categories; but the correlations with the other seasonal statistics
were slightly weaker than with the IH statistic.
Using the axis sliders, we compare the AMM variable values
for seasons with above normal and below normal IH activity. The
above normal seasons are highlighted in Fig. 5 to show that as
AMM values increase, the IH activity also increases. This observation reinforces the positive correlation between the AMM variables
and the IH variable. The AMM variables were also examined for
seasons with above and below normal NS and H activity and the
same positive correlation trends were observed.
After exploring the AMM variables in isolation, the next phase
of our analysis included the CSU data set. The 12 AMM were
plotted with the 16 CSU parameters and the IH dependent variable
for 29 total variables—the first simultaneous visualization of these

23

Figure 4: Correlation analysis of the AMM variables with the IH category shows that all correlations are positive and AMM-December
has the strongest correlation, but December is known to be a quiet
month for hurricane activity. The other strong correlations (AMMAugust and AMM-September ) are within the active portion of the
hurricane season.

Figure 5: The query sliders are used to examine the seasons with
above normal IH activity. The resulting line configuration shows that
higher activity levels coincide with higher AMM values.

particular parameters. This figure is not shown due to space limitations, but it demonstrates that the visualization technique is only restricted by the horizontal resolution of the display. In this case, the
overview of all the parameters revealed that the AMM have much
more gradually changing line configurations between axes.
We investigated the correlations between the IH axis and the 28
independent variables. We used the MDX axis arrangement capabilities to order the axes according to the correlation coefficient
with the IH axis. This analysis reveals that the 4 strongest correlations are with AMM variables (AMM-December, AMM-September,
AMM-August, and AMM-November). Similar correlation analyses
were executed for the H and NS categories. For the H statistic, the
6 strongest correlations are with AMM variables: AMM-December,
AMM-November, AMM-September, AMM-August, AMM-October,
and AMM-July. For the NS statistic, the 5 strongest correlations are
with AMM variables: AMM-November, AMM-December, AMMOctober, AMM-September, and AMM-August.
4.3 Identifying Significant Predictors
To determine the most significant predictors among the CSU and
AMM variables for predicting seasonal hurricane activity, we used
the MDX stepwise regression analysis capabilities. We generated
3 regression models for each of the seasonal categories: NS, H,
and IH. These are the same dependent variables used in our earlier regression analysis using only the CSU predictors [23]. The
significance level is 80%.
4.3.1 Multicollinearity Filter
Prior to running regression processes, the multicollinearity filter
was executed in 3 separate cases (one for each for the IH, H, and
NS dependent variables) for the full data set. In all three cases, the
filter removed 17 of the independent variables from the axis configuration, leaving 11 variables in the display. For the IH and H

24

Figure 6: Stepwise regression model using AMM+CSU variables with
the dependent variable set to IH (1950 to 2006) arranged by the b
values. This model excludes September–November SLP (11), which
was included in our prior regression that used only CSU data.

cases, only 2 AMM variables are included in the new configuration: AMM-December and AMM-May. With the IH case, the unfiltered axes were arranged according by the correlation coefficients
with the dependent axis to reveal that the AMM-December axis has
the highest correlation (r = .64). Similar visual analysis after multicollinearity filtering for the H category also reveals that AMMDecember has the strongest correlation (r = .62)—a significantly
stronger correlation than the second highest correlation (r = .47)
with November 500-mb Geopotential Height (12).
For the NS case, 3 AMM variables remain after the filter execution: AMM-November, AMM-January, and AMM-June. Analysis
of the remaining variables reveals that the highest correlation coefficient is with the AMM-November axis (r = .62), which is substantially stronger than the second strongest correlation (r = .41) with
the November 500-mb Geopotential Height (12) axis.
4.3.2 Regression Analyses
After executing the multicollinearity filter, the stepwise regression capabilities are used to identify the most significant predictors among the remaining 11 variables. With the IH variable as the
dependent variable, the regression model includes the 5 variables
shown in Fig. 6. The R2 value for this model is 65%, which is better than the 58% obtained in our prior case studies that used only the
CSU predictors [22, 23]. In this model, the AMM-December variable has the highest regression coefficient (b = 0.3421). The other
4 variables included in the model are from the CSU data set, which
were also included in the prior CSU case studies. The only variable
not selected in this model that was selected in the previous studies
is September–November SLP in the southeast Gulf of Mexico (11).
This variable is omitted because the AMM explained more variance
and variable (11) could no longer explain any new variance in this
particular model.
When the H variable is set to the dependent variable, the regression model included the 4 variables shown in Fig. 7. The R2
value for this model is 56%, which is significantly better than the
42% from the prior CSU data set analysis [23]. Similar to the IH
regression model, the AMM-December variable had the strongest
regression coefficient (b = 0.5027)—significantly higher than the
next strongest coefficient (b = −0.2404). Like the previous CSU
analyses, this model includes both the October–November SLP (6)
and November 500-mb Geopotential Height (12) variables; but, in
the current model, variable (6) has the lowest coefficient instead of
the highest. Furthermore, the AMM+CSU model drops the June–
July SLP (10) and September–November SLP (11) variables and includes the February 200-mb zonal wind in equatorial East Brazil
(3) variable. Variables (10) and (11) are dropped for the same reason that the IH model drops variable (11). However, the model
keeps variable (6), which also measures SLP. The reason variable
(6) is retained and variables (10) and (11) are dropped is possibly
due to geographic locations—variable (6) is measured in the Gulf

Figure 7: H stepwise regression model with AMM and CSU variables
(1950 to 2006) arranged by the b values. The AMM-December b
value is significantly greater than the other variables.

Figure 8: Correlation analysis between AMM-December and the 3
SLP variables shows that variable (6) has the weakest correlation.

of Alaska and variables (10) and (11) are measured in areas that
overlap the AMM variables. Since variable (6) has the weakest correlation with AMM-December of these 3 SLP variables (see Fig. 8),
it was not included in the model for the H category since there was
little new variance to explain.
The NS regression model includes only 3 variables and yields
an R2 value of 45%, which is better than the 34% from the prior
CSU analyses [23]. The only variable in the current model that was
also included in the CSU analyses is November 500-mb Geopotential Height (12). Like the H model, the AMM+CSU NS model
includes the October–November SLP (6) variable due to the weak
correlation with AMM-November since it is measured in the Gulf of
Alaska. The February SST (14) is removed by the multicollinearity filter process because it is strongly correlated with the AMMNovember variable (r = .56) and it has a weaker correlation with
the dependent variable (r = .42) than AMM-November. Similarly,
the September–November SLP (11) variable is removed by the filter because it is strongly correlated with the AMM-January variable
(r = −.58) and it has a weaker correlation with the dependent variable (r = −.32) than AMM-January (r = .33). Unlike the other
two AMM regression models, this model results in the exclusion
of the AMM-December variable, which is also removed during the
multicollinearity filter process due to strong correlation with the
AMM-November variable (r = .92).
In the H and NS models, the February 200-mb U (3) and
October–November SLP (6) variables are CSU predictors that are
not included in the prior CSU regression models [23]. These variables are correlated to El Ni˜no conditions. They are likely included
in the model because, as Vimont and Kossin [16] state, the AMM

is largely independent of ENSO. In Figure 9, the independence of
these variables can be observed in the lack of correlation between
the 12 AMM variables and the June–July Ni˜no 3 (1) variable.
It is also remarkable that the November 500-mb Geopotential
Height (12) variable was included in the 3 AMM+CSU regression models, as well as the 3 prior CSU regression models [23].
This variable measures the long-term oscillations that impact global
wind patterns. Specifically, it represents a different climate signal
from the AMM that is called the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO).
Vimont and Kossin [27] state that the AMM and the NAO are independent during the hurricane season which may explain its inclusion in all 3 AMM models. Furthermore, the fact that the geographic regions for variable (12) and the AMM do not overlap contributes to the independence of the variables. Since variable (12)
is chosen in all regression case studies, it should be regarded as a
significant signal for forecasting and studying hurricane seasons.
4.4 Discussion
As mentioned earlier, conventional visual analytics tools used in climate studies are usually restricted to static plots that lack linkages
to statistical processes and are not well-suited to today’s complex
data sets. MDX overcomes these deficiencies by integrating the
statistical and visualization processes for more rapid and creative
knowledge discovery. This integration significantly reduced timelines for collaborative analyses with our domain expert, Dr. Fitzpatrick, from days to hours. In addition, the ability to directly interact with the data behind the visualization via dynamic visual queries
is a vast improvement over conventional static plots. Dr. Fitzpatrick
indicated that MDX made it possible to explore the associations in
the climate data sets quicker and more comprehensively than traditional approaches. He also noted that MDX automated and streamlined the main statistical processes that are typically employed in
his studies, such as manual multicollinearity analysis.
In addition to spotlighting significant associations in the data set,
the graphical statistical indicators provide a visual uncertainty metric, which informs the user. For example, a tight clustering of lines
in parallel coordinates might indicate a relatively stable predictor
that may yield better results than another predictor with more dispersed lines. These statistical indicators can also directly guide the
user, as illustrated in our use of the central tendency and variability measures to partition the distributions into active, normal, and
inactive seasons.
5

C ONCLUSION

This research has shown, via a practical climate study, the promise
of an enhanced parallel coordinates visual analytics approach with
statistical information assistance. The new approach overcomes
several limitations of traditional climate analysis techniques and
enhances knowledge discovery. In our climate study of hurricane
trends, we demonstrated several remarkable associations in the
analysis of the AMM and CSU data sets regarding seasonal measures of activity. In the future, we will explore additional statistical
processes as well as new techniques to encode the resulting information. These enhanced analysis capabilities demonstrate tremendous potential to improve our understanding of complex environmental phenomenon.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is sponsored by the Naval Research Laboratory’s
Select Graduate Training Program, by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) with grants
NA060AR4600181 and NA050AR4601145, and through the
Northern Gulf Institute funded by grant NA06OAR4320264. The
authors wish to thank the VAST reviewers of this paper for their
constructive feedback.

25

˜ 3 (1) reveals weak correlations—very lightly saturated correlation
Figure 9: Correlation analysis between the AMM variables and June–July Nino
blocks, dispersed scatterplots, and low r values—that reinforces that theory that AMM is largely independent of the ENSO.

R EFERENCES
[1] Monthly climate timeseries: Atlantic Meridional Mode SST Index.
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, 2009.
http://www.cdc.noaa.gov/data/timeseries/monthly/AMM/ (current 1
Jul. 2009).
[2] A. O. Artero, M. C. F. de Oliveira, and H. Levkowitz. Uncovering
clusters in crowded parallel coordinates visualization. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 81–88, Oct. 2004.
[3] P.-S. Chu. ENSO and tropical cyclone activity. In R. J. Murnane
and K.-B. Liu, editors, Hurricanes and Typhoons: Past, Present, and
Future, pages 297–332. Columbia University Press, 2004.
[4] J. A. Dykes and D. M. Mountain. Seeking structure in records of
spatio-temporal behavior: Visualization issues, efforts and applications. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 43(4):581–603,
Aug. 2003.
[5] P. J. Fitzpatrick. Understanding and forecasting tropical cyclone intensity change with the Typhoon Intensity Prediction Scheme (TIPS).
Weather and Forecasting, 12(4):826–846, 1997.
[6] P. J. Fitzpatrick. Natural Disasters, Hurricanes: A Reference Handbook. ABC–CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA, 1999.
[7] Y.-H. Fua, M. O. Ward, and E. A. Rundensteiner. Hierarchical parallel
coordinates for exploration of large datasets. In Proceedings of IEEE
Visualization, pages 43–50, Oct. 1999.
[8] H. Hauser, F. Ledermann, and H. Doleisch. Angular brushing of extended parallel coordinates. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 127–130, Oct. 2002.
[9] C. G. Healey, L. Tateosian, J. T. Enns, and M. Remple. Perceptuallybased brush strokes for nonphotorealistic visualization. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 23(1):64–96, 2004.
[10] D. C. Howell. Statistical Methods for Psychology. Duxbury Press,
Boston, MA, 2nd edition, 1987.
[11] A. Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates. The Visual Computer, 1(4):69–91, 1985.
[12] J. Johansson, P. Ljung, M. Jern, and M. Cooper. Revealing structure
within clustered parallel coordinates displays. In IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 125–132, Oct. 2005.
[13] C. Johnson, R. Moorhead, T. Munzner, H. Pfister, P. Rheingans, and
T. S. Yoo, editors. NIH/NSF Visualization Reserach Challenges. IEEE
Press, 2006. http://tab.computer.org/vgtc/vrc/index.html (current 1
Jul. 2009).
[14] P. J. Klotzbach. Personal communication, Jan. 2007.
[15] P. J. Klotzbach, W. M. Gray, and W. Thorson.
Extended
range forecast of Atlantic seasonal hurricane activity and U.S.
landfall strike probability for 2007.
Technical report, 2006.
http://tropical.atmos.colostate.edu/Forecasts/2006/dec2006/ (current
1 Jul. 2009).
[16] J. P. Kossin and D. J. Vimont. A more general framework for understanding Atlantic hurricane variability and trends. Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society, 88(11):1767–1781, Nov. 2007.
[17] A. M. MacEachren, M. Wachowicz, R. Edsall, D. Haug, and R. Masters. Constructing knowledge from multivariate spatiotemporal data:

26

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

Integrating geographic visualization (GVis) with knowledge discovery
in database (KDD) methods. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, 13(4):311–334, 1999.
A. R. Martin and M. O. Ward. High dimensional brushing for interactive exploration of multivariate data. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Visualization Conference, pages 271–278, Oct. 1995.
M. Novot´ny and H. Hauser. Outlier-preserving focus+context visualization in parallel coordinates. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 12(5):893–900, 2006.
H. Qu, W. Chan, A. Xu, K. Chung, K. Lau, and P. Guo. Visual analysis
of the air pollution problem in Hong Kong. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1408–1415, 2007.
H. Siirtola. Direct manipulation of parallel coordinates. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Visualisation,
pages 373–378, London, England, 2000. IEEE Computer Society.
C. A. Steed, P. J. Fitzpatrick, J. Edward Swan II, and T.J. JankunKelly. Tropical cyclone trend analysis using parallel coordinates geovisual analytics. Cartography and Geographic Information Science,
36(3), Jul. 2009. (In Press).
C. A. Steed, P. J. Fitzpatrick, T.J. Jankun-Kelly, A. N. Yancey, and J.
Edward Swan II. An interactive parallel coordinates technique applied
to a tropical cyclone climate analysis. Computers & Geosciences,
35(7):1529–1539, Jul. 2009.
R. Theron. Visual analytics of paleoceanographic conditions. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 19–26, 2006.
M. Theus. Interative data visualization using mondrian. Journal of
Statistical Software, 7(11):1–9, Nov. 2002.
J. W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley, 1977.
D. J. Vimont and J. P. Kossin. The Atlantic Meridional Mode and
hurricane activity. Geophysical Research Letters, 34:1–5, 2007.
F. Vitart. Dynamical seasonal forecasts of tropical storm statistics. In
R. J. Murnane and K.-B. Liu, editors, Hurricanes and Typhoons: Past,
Present, and Future, pages 354–392. Columbia University Press, Dec.
2004.
R. E. Walpole and R. H. Myers. Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 5th
edition, 1993.
E. J. Wegman. Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel coordinates. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 85(411):664–
675, 1990.
L. Wilkinson, A. Anand, and R. Grossman. High-dimensional visual analytics: Interactive exploration guided by pairwise views of
point distributions. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 12(6):1366–1372, Nov. 2006.
P. C. Wong and R. D. Bergeron. 30 years of multidimensional multivariate visualization. In G. M. Nielson, H. Hagan, and H. Muller, editors, Scientific Visualization - Overviews, Methodologies, and Techniques, pages 3–33. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1997.

