Multiple Step Social Structure Analysis with Cytoscape
VAST 2009 Flitter Mini Challenge Award: Good Tool Adaption
Hao Zhou∗

Anna A. Shaverdian†

H.V. Jagadish‡

George Michailidis§

Dept. of Statistics

Dept. of EECS

Dept. of EECS

Dept. of Statistics

University of Michigan

A BSTRACT
Cytoscape is a popular open source tool for biologists to visualize interaction networks. We find that it offers most of the desired
functionality for visual analytics on graph data to guide us in the
identification of the underlying social structure. We demonstrate its
utility in the identification of the social structure in the VAST 2009
Flitter Mini Challenge.
Index Terms: Social Networks, Cytoscape
1

I NTRODUCTION

Cytoscape [1] is a widely used interaction network analysis tool
used by Biologist. Many of the features are specifically designed
for biological analysis. For example there exist functionality for integrating other forms of biological data, such as micro array data,
into a graph. Outside of the biology community Cytoscape is virtually unused. We have found that Cytoscape can be used for other
graph applications. Cytoscape is an adaptable tool for a variety of
graphs because it allows users to analyze universal graph properties such as node degree and neighborhoods. We use Cytoscape to
study a social network in several steps to identify the underlying
social structure.
2

OVERVIEW

OF

TOOLS

Cytoscape is an open source visual analysis tool for biological interaction networks. One of its advantages is the large user base who
also contribute to increasing the tool’s functionality. Cytoscape
supports the implementation of these contributions and deploys
them as plugins to the tool. Figure 1 shows a sample screen. Various plugins were installed and created for the purpose of this challenge. Figure 1.A shows the NetworkAnalyzer plugin. This plugin
calculates basic statistics about the network and saves them in their
appropriate nodes or edges. We also used the Enhanced Search plugin which allows simple queries on node predicates in the graph.
There are many ways to display a network in the window. Figure
1.B displays the data set from VAST 09 Flitter Challenge in a ForceDirected method. Cytoscape can also display the nodes and edges
in different colors, shapes, and sizes according to selected attribute
distributions. Figure 1.C shows a gradient to change the node color
based on degree progression. Other useful features of Cytoscape
include the history panel which displays all the graphs during the
current session.
We also created a plugin for the purposes of this challenge. In our
plugin we highlight the neighbors of the selected nodes excluding
∗ e-mail:

zhouhao@umich.edu

† e-mail:annaas@umich.edu
‡ e-mail:jag@umich.edu
§ e-mail:gmichail@umich.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

Figure 1: Overview of the Cytoscape interface.

the current selected nodes which are not neighbors. The combination of these plugins and Cytoscape’s basic functionality offers an
adaptable tool for this challenge.
Although Cytoscape constitutes the main tool, a number of additional tools and methods, such as Java, R, and Microsoft Office,
were also employed for validation purposes and further analysis of
the data set.
3

P ROBLEM A NALYSIS

In the VAST 09 Flitter Mini Challenge we identified the possible
criminal structure within a social network based on two possible
hypotheses. The social network consists of people represented as
nodes and interactions represented as edges. The two hypotheses
reveal possible connectivity and attribute values of the criminal subgraphs. The hypothesis most closely matched in the network represents the criminal social structure.
4
4.1

P ERFORMING A NALYSIS
Identify Possible Criminal Networks

We begin our analysis by exploring which hypothesis is more likely.
There exist cytoscape plugins to identify subgraphs, but there are
several uncertainties existing in each hypothesis. These uncertainties require a more investigative series of eliminations to identify
the criminal employee and his network. We study the node degree
distribution chart to determine how to proceed in identifying the
criminal network. Based on this chart, shown in Figure 1.A, if we
start by filtering employees we might find a solution faster because
there are fewer nodes at this degree range than the middle men degree range.
We describe how to match social structure A. We select all nodes
with degree around 40 to collect our initial employee suspect list.
Using the Enhanced Search plugin, we enter in its simple query
language: Degree: 35 TO 45 to select and display these nodes in

263

264

Figure 2: Possible Subnetworks.

Figure 3: Neighbors location distribution for all criminal members.

Cytoscapes Data Panel. In the Data Panel, we specify which attributes to display and order the nodes by a selected attribute. At
this stage there are too many possible employees to visually identify the social structure. So we continue to filter this list by applying
more of social structure As information.
Next we identify the handlers: suspect employee neighbors with
degrees between 30 to 40. In Cytoscape this task requires three
operations. First we select the neighbors of the suspect employees
with a plugin we wrote, Neighbor Node Select. We save this list of
nodes into its own network view. Next, we use ESP to select nodes
which have a degree 30 to 40. We save this list of nodes as our
initial handlers.
We refine the current employee and handler lists by filtering employees with less than three handlers. To do this we create a sub
network of the current employee and handler nodes from the original graph by selecting these nodes from their saved lists. Using
this sub network, we filter employees which have less than degree
3. This operation results in a refined suspect employees and handlers list. But there are still too many nodes to visualize the crime
network. So we continue filtering.
To complete social structure A, we find the possible Boris list.
We select handler neighbors with degree 4 to 5. We see that only
degree 5 Borises exist. From the hypothesis description, we know 3
handlers have a Boris in common. We use this to refine the current
employee, handler, and Boris lists. We have reduced the number of
possible networks but we continue to apply more information from
social structure A to pick a criminal network with high confidence.
The final elimination we apply is that Boris must have a neighbor
with degree greater than 100: the fearless leader. We can eliminate
some Borises this way by ignoring the navy blue nodes, low degree
nodes, without a white node neighbor, high degree nodes. This
network represents all possible criminal employee networks with
social structure A.
At this stage we can finally observe the most likely social structure A network from the limited possibilities. For example, we
know handlers do not communicate; therefore, node 171 is unlikely
the criminal employee. This process helps us produce a solution,
centered at employee node 100, which perfectly fits social structure A. The fearless leader has a broad network of 14 international
contacts and is located in a larger city. This extra information adds
to our confidence that node 100 is the criminal employee. Figure
2 shows a few of the finals networks we analyze. The other possibilities available might be more networks that the Embassy may
wish to investigate. We discover other sub-networks similar to social structure A and B. But, we have lower confidence in these sub
networks because of their conflicts with the descriptions: incorrect
degrees or locations or handlers communications.

4.2 Geographical Distribution
Sub-network employee 100 is well supported by the suggested city
locations of Flovania. Both employee and handlers are in the large
city, Prounov. The middleman, Borises, is in the nearby middle
sized city, Kannvic. The fearless leader is in a middle sized city,
Kouvnic, with more than 200 connections. Many of the fearless
leader’s connections are international connections.
In order to identify possible surrounding countries, which have
ties to the criminal operations, we computed the over all location
distribution for all flitter members first. Only 6.6% of all flitter
members have city locations outside Flovania, 2.1% in Transpasko
city of Transak, 2.05% in Tulamuk city of Trium and 2.45% in
Otello city of Posana. Comparing the over all location distribution to the neighbor distribution for each criminal member, we cannot find one significant surrounding country which have the closest
connection to the criminal network. The fearless leader in the network has similar amount of connectivities among all three foreign
countries. Employee and two of the handlers have connections to
at least two of the foreign countries, however, the total numbers of
their foreign connections are too small to make any significant assumptions. Figure 3 shows the location distribution pie charts to
verify the neighbors geographical information.
5 C ONCLUSION
We show that Cytoscape can be adapted into a social network tool.
We use Cytoscape to determine the criminal structure in the challenge. Our analysis is based on the Visual Analytic Algebra presented in [2], [3]. This algebra provides a structured framework for
visual analytics and is based on a number of operators, including
selection and aggregation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research is supported in part by NSF grant numbers 0438909
and 0808824 and NIH 1-U54-DA021519.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. C. Collaboration. Cytoscape Users Manual. The Cytoscape Collaboration, Institute for Systems Biology and University of California San
Diego, 2006.
[2] A. Shaverdian, H. Zhou, G. Michailidis, and H. V. Jagadish. Algebraic
visual analysis: The catalano phone call data set case study. VAKD 09,
May 2007.
[3] A. Shaverdian, H. Zhou, G. Michailidis, and H. V. Jagadish. An algebra
for visual analytics. unpublished manuscript, University of Michigan
2009.

