Integrative Visual Analytics for Suspicious Behavior Detection
VAST 2009 Challenge Awards:
Traffic Mini Challenge: Excellent Analytical Technique Featuring Integration of Data Mining and Visual Analytics
Flitter Mini Challenge: Good Analytic Debrief
Grand Challenge: Outstanding Integration of Mini Challenge Results into Debrief

Peter Bak*
University of Konstanz

Christian Rohrdantz t

Svenja Leifert*

Christoph Granacher§

University of Konstanz

University of Konstanz

University of Konstanz

Simon Butscherll

Stefan Kochl
University of Konstanz

University of Konstanz

ABSTRACT

In the VAST Challenge 2009 suspicious behavior had to be detected
applying visual analytics to heterogeneous data, such as network
traffic, social network enriched with geo-spatial attributes, and finally video surveillance data. This paper describes some of the
awarded parts from our solution entry.

Patrick Jungk**
University of Konstanz

mediate results , from which useful knowledge could easily be derived . The results of the first analysis steps triggered further investigations. The interactive loop between generating new insights
and creating new sources of information was indispensable for the
success of this proces s.

Index Terms: R.5 .2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces - Graphical User Interfaces (GUI) ; 1.3.6 [Methodology and Techniques] : Interaction Techniques.

1

2

Data - Prepa ration ,
Filterin g and Selection

FEATURING INTEGRATION OF AUTOMATIC AND VISUAL
DATA ANALYSIS FOR INVESTIGATING NETWORK TRAFFIC

For the solution of the Traffic Mini Challenge an analysis pipeline
was designed that combined automatic analyses and interactive visual explorations in a process loop (see Figure I). Different approaches led to partly overlapping and partly supplementing inter"e-mail: bak@dbvis.inf.uni-konstanz.de
t e-mail : christian.rohrdantz@uni-konstanz.de

*e-mail: svenja.leifert@uni-konstanz.de
§ e-mail: christoph.granacher@uni-konstanz.de
1e-mail: stefanmoritzkoch@googlemail.com
lie-mail: simon .butscher@uni-konstanz.de
..e-mail: patrick.jungk@uni-konstanz.de
tt e-mail : keim@dbvis.inf.uni-konstanz.de

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

Interaction

Intermediate Results

Knowle dge

Destination 10
100 .59.151 .133

INTRODUCTION

For the VAST Challenge 2009 we focused on a tight integration
of automatic data analysi s steps with interactive visual analytics.
The application of visualizations was twofold: They were used to
generate new hypotheses as well as exploring and confirming the
output of automatic algorithms. In order to extract the required
information from the provided data, it was crucial to introduce visualization techniques at all stages of the knowledge discovery process, rather than to design more sophisticated and innovative ways
of visualizing the same data . In conclusion, the contribution of the
current work is in its methodology combining automatic algorithms
and visualization, rather than in its techniques. For many insights
standard visualizations were sufficient to generate new and interesting insights. For our analyses we made use of different open
source programs like the data mining tool Konstanz Information
Miner (KNIME) ([I] , [3]) and the network analysis tool Pajek [2].
Nevertheless, the development of innovative techniques to analyze
heterogeneous data sources should be encouraged by our work, in
order to make it more efficient and applicable to larger datasets.

Daniel A. Keirn tt
University of Konstanz

t

",P'c'o",
traffic

r---, -_ _t _ _------,

__ I

New Info rma tion Sources
•
•
•

Destination IPs
Suspicious IDs
PC Abus e

SUSpiCiOUS 10
(30 )

Figure 1: Pipeline used to extract information in the traffic Mini Challenge. Automatic analytic tools and visualization techniques are
tightly coupled and introduced at all stages of the knowledge discovery process. The feedback loop - from generating new insights
to creating new sources of information through user interaction - led
finally to the desired results.

At the end any suspicious peculiarity had been checked and verified by multiple different approaches. We attained different independent evidences for the guilt of one specific person, so that we
could identify the culprit free of doubt. Analysts were supported
by automatic algorithms, so that their attention could be focused on
what is considered the strength of humans: reasoning about visible
patterns and relations, as well as deriving conclusions and planning
further analyses.
The results of our analysis first led to the discovery of the IP address, to which classified information was sent. This was achieved
through visual investigation of anomalies and outliers of Internet
traffic. Consecutively, we extracted all the traffic to this IP address
from all internal sources, which was done automatically. The automatic analysis was carried out using KNIME [I], an information
mining application. Knowing these facts, our analysis further focused on the analysis of workers' behavior and alibi for the times
suspicious traffic occurred. Finally, the worker that undoubtedly

253

sent classified information to a criminal organization could be identified.
3

ANALYTIC PROCESS FOR ANALYZING
WORKS

SOCIAL NET-

In order to identify and extract the sub-network showing the interrelation between the suspicious employee and the criminal organization, we conducted and iterative approach as shown in Figure 2.
For this purpose, first a program was written that automatically extracted interesting sub-networks. The set of possible candidate networks was then iteratively narrowed. Every extracted sub-network
was visually explored and evaluated with Pajek [2]. Finally, a self
implemented visualization tool was used to display its geographic
implications.
Suspect in
Organization

Aggregation

______ .

589

Automatic Process
. 629

Human Guided Process
.

1450

International
Contacts
3946

3235

2103

Iterative loop of

~

Figure 3: Results of the analytic process describe the scenario given
by the challenge .

not fulfill the criteria, which were continuously narrowed, until one
solution could be found.
5

Figure 2: Analytic process of investigating social network data. The
iterative loop of information extraction enabled the user to guide the
knowledge discovery process .

The amount of sub-networks to be visually explored was fairly
small, because even with relaxed constraints, only few candidates
were returned . As a result, one sub-network was identified as an
exact match to the given scenario, which is shown in Figure 3.
4

INTEGRATING RESULTS

The major task of taking part in the grand challenge was to provide
a solution describing not only who the employee is that leaks information and how he/she could be identified, but also to characterize
his/her behavior. This task implies the combination of the findings
of the three mini challenges. The third mini challenge was also
involved in this process, assessing the suspicious events from the
surveillance video. Our great challenge, to integrate the results of
these mini challenges into a final debrief, was to grasp the behavioral profile of the suspicious employee . This required a detailed
pattern analysis of all components of network traffic, geographic
locations, social connections and working hours, which finally led
to an understanding of her/his criminal activity.
Our work was mainly based on generating and testing hypotheses. In this process visualization was indispensable, in order to gain
access to the information beneath the data. Our approach was dominated by a top-down progress. In this, we first generated a complete list of hypotheses and step-by-step disregarded those that did

254

LESSONS LEARNED

Our approach to solve the given challenge was confirmed by our results. Nevertheless, the advantages and drawbacks of our approach
should not be left undiscussed. As a guiding principle, we always
aimed at involving the human as early as possible in the analytic
process. This involvement was mostly supported by intuitive and
easy to understand visualization techniques . Also, we tried to support this process by automatic analysis techniques. Their combination is, in our opinion, the most successful approach .
However, the data, task descriptions and background information
provided by the challenge committee were very helpful and made
the results possible. The provided data was easy to clean due to its
artificialness and also easy to handle due to its limited size. Scalability and appropriateness to specific tasks and data sources still
remains a research challenge in visual analytics .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors wish to thank Hangzai Luo for his initial support .
REFERENCES
[I] Knime - konstanz information miner : www.knime.org.
[2] Pajek
network
analysis
and
visualization
tool:
http://pajek.imfm.sildoku.php.
[3] M. R. Berthold, N. Cebron, F. Dill, G. D. Fatta, T. R. Gabriel , F. Georg,
T. Meinl , P. Ohl, C. Sieb, and B. WiswedeI. Knime: the konstanz information miner. In Proceedings 4th Annual Industrial Simulation Conference, Workshop on Multi-Agent Systems and Simulation (lSC 2006),
2006 .

