Analysis of community-contributed space- and time-referenced data
(example of flickr and panoramio photos)
Gennady Andrienko1, Natalia Andrienko1, Peter Bak2, Slava Kisilevich2, Daniel Keim2
1

University of Bonn and Fraunhofer Institute IAIS, 2University of Konstanz

ABSTRACT
Space- and time-referenced data published on the Web by general
people can be viewed in a dual way: as independent spatiotemporal events and as trajectories of people in the geographical
space. These two views suppose different approaches to the
analysis, which can yield different kinds of valuable knowledge
about places and about people. We define possible types of
analysis tasks related to the two views of the data and present
several analysis methods appropriate for these tasks. The methods
are suited to large amounts of the data.
1

INTRODUCTION

In the age of Web 2.0 more and more people publish various
kinds of contents on the Web. Some kinds of contents have spatial
and temporal references, for example, the photos in flickr
(www.flickr.com) and panoramio (www.panoramio.com) linked
to the places where they were taken and supplied with the dates
and times of the shots. Such data can serve as a source of
knowledge about the places and about the interests, behaviors, and
mobility of the people. The knowledge may be valuable for local
administrations, tourist services, advertising agencies, and other
organizations. However, the data are not easy to analyze. One of
the problems is the huge number of entries, which calls for
scalable computational techniques. At the same time, the
involvement of a human analyst, who perceives spatial and
temporal patterns and gives them meaning, is essential.
The community-contributed Web entries having spatial and
temporal references can be viewed, on the one hand, as
independent spatio-temporal events. On the other hand, the entries
made by the same person can be considered as a trajectory of this
person in the geographical space, which tells something about the
movement and behavior of this person. The whole dataset can be
viewed as a set of trajectories of multiple people. These two views
suppose different approaches to the analysis, which can yield
different kinds of knowledge. Another example of data that can be
viewed in such a dual way is data about mobile phone calls. We
call this class of data event-based movement data.
Analysis of event-based movement data is a relatively new
research topic. A series of papers have been published by Girardin
and co-authors (e.g. [2] and [3]). They analyze concentrations and
movements of tourists at the scales of a city (e.g. Rome) and a
geographical region (e.g. central Italy) using Flickr photos and, in
some studies, mobile phone calls made by the tourists in the same
time periods. Concentrations are shown on heat maps produced by
dividing the area of interest by a rectangular grid and counting the
number of photos in every grid cell. Interpolation techniques are
used in order to smooth the visualization. The movements are
visualized in an aggregated form by means of flow maps, where
predefined places are connected by lines with the widths
proportional to the numbers of tourists that moved between the
places. In [1], another research team uses geo-annotated Flickr
photos to find concentrations of activity and most popular places

on Earth. For that they use a non-parametric MeanShift clustering
algorithm. The authors have also used the temporal information
available from the photos to generate a few example maps
showing the movements of photographers. The trajectories are
represented by lines drawn on the maps in a semi-transparent
mode; however, no further analysis is made.
2

OUR APPROACH AND METHODS

We take a systematic approach to the analysis of event-based
movement data. We define possible types of analysis tasks related
to the views of the data as events and as trajectories. We
distinguish space-centered tasks, where the data are used to study
the properties of the space and places, from agent-centered tasks
targeting at the properties and behaviors of the people (in general,
moving agents). For the tasks defined, we try to find or develop
appropriate methods. The tasks and methods are summarized in
Table 1. The methods do not take into account the contents of the
photos but only their spatial and temporal references.
Table1. Tasks and methods in analysis of the photo dataset
Focus
Object
Events

Trajectories

Space and places
Tasks: find places of
interest, explore
temporal patterns of
visits to these places
Methods: spatial
clustering of events +
grows ring maps,
spatio-temporal
aggregation of events
Tasks: investigate flows
between places
Methods: aggregation
of moves + flow maps

Agents
Tasks: discover
meetings of people,
concentrations of
people in same place
and time
Methods: interaction
analysis, spatiotemporal clustering of
events
Tasks: discover joint
travels, frequently
taken routes
Methods: interaction
analysis, clustering of
trajectories

For space reasons, only two methods are briefly introduced here.
The example data subset consists of photos made in the area of
Atlantic City. In the poster, we shall also present the other
methods and use a bigger example dataset with about 590 000
photos made on the territory of Germany during the period from
January 1, 2005 till March 30, 2009
2.1
Spatio-temporal analysis of clusters of events
The Growth Ring Maps technique supports the exploration of the
frequencies and temporal patterns of events occurring in the same
places. For the flickr dataset, we defined the significant places on
the basis of the density-based spatial clustering of the events. For
each place, we represent the photos made in it by pixels placed
around the central point in an orbital layout according to the times

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 12 - 13, Atlantic City, New Jersey, USA
978-1-4244-5283-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

213

of taking the photos: the earlier the photo was made, the closer the
pixel is to the central point. Color-hue is used to map semantic
properties of the events or places. Thus, seasonal differences in
visiting the places may be investigated by mapping the seasons to
four distinct colors (winter-white, spring-green, summer-red, and
autumn-blue). The resulting map shows simultaneously the
intensity of taking photos at different locations and the seasonal
differences. Figure 1 exposes salient distinctions among the
seasonal patterns of taking photos in different places of Atlantic
City. In the most popular places, the photos were taken all the
year around but more photos were made in summer and autumn.
In the other places, we see a clear prevalence of a single season.

Figure 1. Growth Ring Maps showing the seasonal differences of
taking photos for Atlantic City.

2.2
Analysis of flows
For this analysis, we build flow maps showing aggregated moves
between places, i.e. how many people have moved from one place
to another. There are two major differences from what is
described in [2] and [3]. First, our flow maps show not only the
amounts but also the directions of the movement by special halfarrow symbols. It is easy to see whether the movements between
two locations are one- or two-directional and, in the latter case,
whether one of the directions prevails over the other. Second, we
do not use any predefined places but divide the territory into
appropriate compartments on the basis of clustering of the
positions from the trajectories. By varying the clustering
parameter (specifically, the desired cluster radius), we can do the
analysis at different spatial scales.
An example is presented in Figure 2. We have divided the
sequence of photos made by each person into subsequences, or
sessions, assuming that a time interval of 8 hours or more between
two photos means the beginning of a new session. The sessions
have been treated as trajectories. First, we tessellated the territory
into bigger areas using clustering with the desired radius 2.5km.
The upper map fragment shows the flows between the areas. By
means of interactive filtering, we have hidden minor flows. We
can see that people typically do not make long walks during one
photo session. Almost all movements occur in a limited area on
the northeast of the shown territory. The lower map fragment
represents the movements in the central part of the city aggregated
at a smaller spatial scale (the cluster radius was 200m). By
filtering, we have removed the minor flows. We can see
movements along the seafront and movements from the street to
two piers and back.

214

Figure 2. The flows of the photographers in Atlantic City at two
different spatial scales.

3

DISCUSSION

In most of the existing approaches to analysis of movement data it
is assumed (in most cases implicitly) that the available position
records represent continuous trajectories and, hence, intermediate
positions can be obtained by means of interpolation between
known positions. However, there are many cases when the
position records are temporally sparse and irregular, which means
that the data cannot be handled in this way. This kind of data can
be called event-based movement data. We suggest a set of visual
analytics methods combining computational techniques with
interactive visual displays to support the analysis of such data.
The methods are oriented to different classes of analysis tasks and
enable the analyst to discover different kinds of patterns in the
data, as is demonstrated by example of flickr and panoramio
photos.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

Crandall, D., Backstrom, L., Huttenlocher, D., and Kleinberg, J.
2009 Mapping the World’s Photos. International World Wide Web
Conference.
Girardin, F., Calabrese, F., Dal Fioro, F., Ratti, C., Blat, J. 2008.
Digital Footprinting: Uncovering Tourists with User-Generated
Content. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 7, 36-43
Girardin, F., Dal Fioro, F., Ratti, C., Blat, J. 2007 Understanding of
Tourist Dynamics from Explicitly Disclosed Location Information.
In 4th International Symposium on LBS and Telecartography, HongKong, China.

