Research Report
Adaptive Information Visualization Based on the User's Multiple
Viewpoints - Interactive 3D Visualization of the WWW Teruhiko Teraoka
Advanced Technology R&D Center, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation
Tsukaguchi-Honmachi 8-1-1, Amagasaki 661, Japan
teraoka@sys.crl.melco.co.jp

Abstract
This paper introduces the adaptive information visualization method for the hypermedia and the WWW based on the
user's multiple viewpoints. We propose two graphical interfaces, the CVI and the RF-Cone. The CVI is the interface
for interactive viewpoint selection. We can select viewpoint
reflecting our interests by using the CVI. According to the
given viewpoint, the RF- Cone adaptively organizes the 3D
representation of the hypermedia so that we can understand
the semantic and structural relationship among the hypermedia and easily retrieve the information. Combining these
methods, we have developed the WWW visualization system
which can provide the highly efficient navigation.

1. Introduction
Due to the remarkable advances in the hardware and
software technologies, we can use 3D computer graphics
(CG) not only on the very expensive graphics workstations
but also on the low-cost PCs. Accordingly, 3D CG has been
creating new possibilities for dealing with a large amount of
data on the information retrieval/navigation systems such
as the Hypermedia and the WWW (World Wide Web). The
techniques to handle information as visual representations
using CG have come to be known as Information Visualization [1]. With the techniques, a user can easily understand the relationship among pieces of information such as
closeness, hierarchy and importance through the visual representations. The effective information retrieval/navigation
significantly depends on the adequacy of the representation.
Moreover, it is very likely that an adequate representation
for a user is not always appropriate for another user because
of the diversity of the users' interests and purposes. However, most of the information visualization systems give the
fixed geometric representation and no changes of the structure is allowed. They lack the flexibility to provide the
visualization depending on the individual's interests and
purposes. One solution to cope with this problem is the
adaptive information visualization which interactively modifies the representation and the structure according to the
user's interests and requests.

Minoru Maruyama
Faculty of Engineering, Shinshu University
Wakasato 500, Nagano 380, Japan
maruyama@cs.shinshu-u.ac.jp

This paper presents the adaptive information visualization for the hypermedia based on the user's viewpoint which
represents the user's interest and purpose. We propose the
3D graphical interface named CVI for the viewpoint selection. We also propose the visualization technique, named
RF-Cone, of the hypermedia guided by the viewpoint selection. Every time when the viewpoint is updated, the shape
of the RF-Cone is reconstructed. The visualization of the
WWW based on the above methods are also presented.

2. Related work
The cone trees [9] have been developed to visualize the
hierarchies such as the UNIX file system by a 3D representation. Although the cone trees display the large hierarchy
on a small screen, the cone trees have the rigid structure
and can represent only hierarchical information. Navigational View Builder [7] is a system for forming overview
diagrams of hypermedia. The key feature is forming hierarchies from a complex hypermedia network based on contents and structure of the network. The Galaxy of News
system [8] has realized the visualization of the news stories.
Each piece of information is located spatially, and by zooming into a cluster of information, headlines, article bodies
and full presentation of the article appear in order. Hyperspace View [2] is enhancement of NCSA Mosaic that allows
the user to view the hyperspace displayed as a 2D tree and
to modify visually and interactively the links among the
documents and images using a point-click-and-drag operation. LyberWorld [3] gives two information visualizations,
the NavigationCone and the RelevanceSphere. The NavigationCone provides a visualization of the retrieval history.
The RelevanceSphere provides a display of the retrieved
documents and their relevance to the search keywords. In
addition, Apple's HotSauce [4] is a 3D information navigation system, in which the 3D space has rigid structure.
WebBook and Web Forager [1] are the 3D visualization of
the WWW using the 'book' metaphor.
These systems provide the visualization depending on
mainly the structure and/or the relationship among the information. Therefore there is still room for improvement to
reflect the user's viewpoint much more.

3. Adaptive information visualization
Conventional hypermedia visualization/retrieval systems give representation which has rigid structure and
shape. Every user must usually interact with the fixed representation. We propose the adaptive information visualization methods. In the methods, the information filtering is carried out and the visual representation is updated
adaptively according to the user's requests.

(1)

Nc

Figure 1. (I)The CVI, (2)A layer of a RF-Cone

3.1. Definition and visualization strategy
We have treated the hypermedia such as the WWW,
which is modeled as the graph whose nodes and edges represent the document pages and links respectively.
We define the semantic feature of a page as a vector
W in which each element is the weight for a keyword that
represents the contents of the document. The weights are
determined using a TFIDF scheme [10]. It is given by:
Wi =
{ Wik =

(Wi!, Wi2,"', WiL)

(tfik . log

:k) / -JL~=l(tfij)2. (log :)2

3.2. CVI(Crystal View Interface)

(1)
where, Wik shows the weight of a keyword k in node i. tfik
shows the number of times keyword k appears in node i.
N shows the total number of nodes in the collection. mk
shows the number of nodes which contain keyword k, and
L shows the total number of the keywords.
We characterize a viewpoint, which represents the user's
point of view (interests, purposes, etc), by a multidimensional feature vector. Each of the elements is a weight
for a keyword. The set of keywords is the same as the one
in the semantic feature. The viewpoint Vi is defined as:
Vi = (Vil,Vi2,"', ViL), (0

:s; Vij :s; 1, flvill = 1)

(2)

We also define the semantic similarity D N (ni' nj) between the node ni and the node nj, and DV(Vi, nj) between
the viewpoint Vi and the node nj as follows:
L

L

DN(ni,nj) = LWikWjk, Dv(vi,nj) = LVikWjk
k=l
k=l

breadth-first search (BFS) method. We show these descendant nodes as the set So. Fifthly, from S, choose nodes
which are unreachable from nco The depth of these nodes
is set to zero, and these nodes are treated as the root nodes
of the other trees. And calculate the depth of the descendant nodes of these root nodes except the nodes in So by
BFS. Finally, visualize these nodes as 3D objects by using
the technique, RF-Cones, described below.
With this procedure, irrelevant pages are filtered out.

(3)

Usually the graph structure induced by the hypermedia
is too much complicated. Our visualization strategy is that
the hypermedia graph is transformed into the 3D rooted
trees according to the change of the viewpoint defined in
Eq.(2). Given the viewpoint v, the root n c of the tree is
obtained such that: Dv(v, n c ) = maXk Dv(v, nk)' The
structural feature of each node is defined by the length of
the shortest path from nco
The visualization process is performed as the following.
Firstly, a viewpoint vector V is given by moving a cursor on
the CVI described below or by selecting the keywords and
giving the corresponding weights manually. Secondly, The
set of nodes, S = {ni I Dv(v,ni) > c:}, (c: is a threshold),
is collected. Thirdly, the most similar node n c in S which
satisfies Dv(v,n c ) = maxjDv(v,nj), j E S is searched.
We treat n c as the central root node. Fourthly, calculate
the structural feature of the descendant nodes of n c by

Usually, the dimensionality of the feature space, which
contains semantic vectors and the viewpoint vectors, is
high. It is almost impossible for users to understand the
high dimensional space. We consider to choose a viewpoint
through rotation in the 3D space by mapping the feature
space onto the spherical surface. If such a mapping can
preserve the structure of the feature space well enough, we
can treat the 3D space as the miniature space.
We propose the 3D interface named Crystal View Interface(CVI) for viewpoint selection using the miniature space.
To construct the CVI, we try to map the feature space
onto a unit sphere preserving the metric structure by using
SOM(Self Organizing Map) method [5]. The algorithm is
as follows:
(1) Suppose that the feature space F contains Ldimensional unit vectors {ti (11{t;il = 1, i = 1, ... ,T) and
that the spherical surface is divided into p small regions
(T« pl. (See Fig.I(I»
(2) L-dimensional weight vector, Ak (11Akll = 1, k =
1, ... , p), is assigned to each region. The elements of Ak
are given by random number.
(3) Select one vector {tj from F. And, find the region c
whose weight vector Ac is the most similar to the vector
{tj: ({tj' A c ) = maxi({tj' Ai)
(4) The weight vectors of the region c and its neighbor
regions belonging to N c (Fig.I(I» are updated by:
Adt + 1) = (Ak(t)

+ a(t){tj) /IIAk(t) + a(t){tjll

, k E Nc

(4)
where aCt) is a monotonically decreasing function with time

t.
(5) t

<- t + 1. Iterate the above procedure from step 3 until
Lk IIAk(t + 1) - Ak(t)11 < E, (E is a threshold).
(6) Place each keyword at the location on the sphere where
its corresponding weight vector is the most similar to the
keyword vector. The resultant scatter plot of the keywords
gives the landmark on the CVI.

When the 'viewpoint cursor' moves on the CVI, the viewpoint v is set to the weight vector A of the nearest region.
3.3. RF(Relationship Focllsed)-Cone

We propose the RF(Relationship Focused)-Cone by extending the cone tree to visualize the hypermedia. In the
RF-Cone, one node is located on the apex of the cone, and
its children are arranged around the base of the cone in
order of 'relevance' given by the semantic similarity defined in Eq.(3). The 'relevant' node is represented as a big
sphere and occupies the wide area. When visualizing the
RF-Cones, only links between the node and its children are
displayed to avoid the clutter of the representation. Here,
we show a basic distance between a layer and the next layer
as eo, a basic radius of the circular base of i-th layer as Ti,
a parent node as n p, and its children as no, n1, ... , nM-1.
When a node n p and its children are given, firstly we
calculate the angles to place the children along the circular base of a cone. Let n~, n~, ... , n~ -1 be the sequence given by sorting the M children in descending order with respect to DN(np,nj). Every node is represented
as a sphere. If DN(np,nj) is zero, DN(np,nj) is set to
f3 x miniDN(np,ni), (0 < f3 < 1) and the node is represented as a box. If every DN is zero, every angle is set to
the same. Otherwise, we define the ratio of the angle along
the circular base as

A(n;) = DN(np, n;)

/~1 DN(np, nj)

(5)

This measure becomes large if the child has the strong "semantic similarity" to its parent. Using this measure, the
angle B(n~) is given by:

,(k = 0)
,(k : odd)
, (k : even)

(6)
The node ni at the depth di is placed at Xi = (Xi, Yi, Zi):
(X np + Tdi cos B(ni), Yn p + Tdi sin B(ni), zn p + eo)
To/(1 + di)
(7)
Where, the location of central root node is set to X =
Xi =
{ Tdi =

°

(0,0,0).

The each location of the other root nodes,
Xl, ... , X"" is set to:

Xj

=

(Xj, yj, 0),

IIXi-Xjll > 2To, (i i= j),

(i,j

=

0,"', K)
(8)

The radius of the node ni is calculated by:

(9)
Where, Ro represents the fixed basic radius of the node,
and g(-) represents the monotonically increasing function
such as " exp(DN(n p, nil), b is a constant).
The shade of the color of the node ni is set by:

(10)

Where, <1>(-) is a increasing function of Dv(vc,ni), and Vc
represents the current viewpoint.
Fig.l(2) shows an example of a placement at a layer.

4. Example: WWW visualization
We have applied our methods to visualize the WWW
site. Our prototype system has been implemented using Internet Explorer TM, JavaT M, and Liquid RealityT M, which
is a set of Java classes for building VRML scene, under the
Windows95 TM. Fig.2 shows a screen image of our system.
The functions of our system are as follows:
1. Interactive/Adaptive 3D WWW visualization: Making

3D VRML objects, RF-Cones, guided by the user's
viewpoint selection. User can zoom in/out and rotate
the scene interactively. The system can also show locally focused view, local view, which interactively gives
detailed information such as omitted titles and links
associated with the focused nodes.
2. Interactive information filtering and retrieval: WWW
pages are interactively filtered based on the viewpoint.
User can retrieve the page by picking the node in the
RF-Cones. User can also assign the attributes such as
importance to node by picking the node.
3. Adaptive (VI: The CVI is constructed based on a userspecified set of keywords. The system prepares the
'default' keywords. The user can add/delete appropriate/unnecessary keywords.
4. User's browsing history: The user's browsing history is
stored in various types of form such as a list of titles,
the RF-Cones, visual marks on the CVI, the viewpoint
vectors and the pages of interests('local bookmark'). A
user can visually grasp his/her browsing history.
To visualize the WWW.firstlysystempresentsthe·default' keywords on the pop-up window (Fig.2). In the following examples, 52 'default' keywords were selected manually. A user can delete unnecessary keywords by pushing
buttons on the pop-up window, and also add interesting
keywords on the main frame. The updated set of keywords
is used to characterize every WWW page and viewpoint
vectors and to construct the CVI. Next, the URL of the
start page is given, and the maximum distance of the pages
to explore from the start page is also specified. After that,
the weight w of every page defined by Eq.(I) is calculated
and the structure of the WWW network is stored as a
graph. Next, the CVI is constructed. For SOM algorithm,
the semantic feature vectors of all WWW pages were used
as the unit vectors in the feature space for simplicity. The
RF-Cones are built and displayed after the user gives the
viewpoint by the CVI or directly specifying on the pop-up
window. The viewpoint vector given by the CVI can be observed on the pop-up window. The document page is also
displayed on the right frame of the Explorer.
In Fig.3, viewpoint is located around the words, 'graphics' and 'interaction'. Selected top page has the title that is
'Computer Graphics'. Fig.4 shows another view, local view,
of the same RF-Cones and focused one of the dark red nodes

· · -- ---.'.
iiT

Figure 4. An example of the local view.

~

•

'.

~

Figure 2. A screen image of our system

-~

-

I

r\ '..

I\'~

"~,l" I,;~,I " ...
t·ii!rh~·

_

-=--

.'

I

Figure 5. The different views from other viewpoints

Figure 3. An example of the RF-Cone and the CVI

which are strongly relevant to the viewpoint. Hidden links
and titles on the local view are displayed by interactively
picking the specific nodes. These red nodes have the titles,
'Human-Computer Interaction Research', 'Multimedia Research,', and 'Design Galleries' respectively. In Fig.3, we
can also get the knowledge that the pages, which are entitled 'People' and 'Search MERL web site' respectively, are
neither semantically related to the root node nor related to
the current viewpoint. Fig.5 shows other views, RF-Cones,
of the same site from the different viewpoints. As shown
in these examples, we can get the useful suggestion for the
navigation through the various views of the RF-Cones.
Letizia system [6] uses a similar semantic metric to look
ahead from the current page to find semantically similar
pages and presents them as the original textual form of the
pages. On the other hand, our method enhances the user's
intuitive understanding of the relationship among the pages
through the visual representations.

5. Conclusion and future work
We have proposed the adaptive information visualization method and the 3D interfaces for navigating the hypermedia. The CVI provides the method to easily give the
multi-dimensional query parameters (i.e. viewpoint). The
RF-Cones can represent the 3D hierarchies reflecting the
user's viewpoint. We can also understand the relationship
among the hypermedia through the visualization.
One of the important future work is to study how to
get initial unit vectors for SOM and appropriate keywords
to construct the CVI. The keyword map on the CVI is
changed whenever the navigational session starts. It sometimes leads to user's cognitive confusion. It is very important to customize and update the user interfaces depending
on the changes in the user's interests and/or old opera-

tional histories. The CVI's flexibility is the potential advantage to build the customized user interfaces. Several
other important research directions to improve the current
system include: improvement of our methods to handle the
pages with few words (e.g. pages with mostly images), extension of our current similarity measure to be able to reflect the topological connectedness (currently it is implicitly
reflected through RF-Cone generation), application of our
techniques to information organization (e.g. automatic link
generation), and development of the method to deal with
huge amount of data (e.g. more effective visualization, fast
computation, information classification). Needless to say,
more serious usability study is also very important. We
will improve our methods after doing such careful study.

References
[1] Card, S. K., Visualizing Retrieved Information: A Survey, IEEE Comput. Gr. Appl., 16(3):63-67, 1996.
[2] Gershon, N., et al., Visualizing Internet Resources,
Proc. IEEE Info Vis '95, 122-128, 1995.
[3] Hemmje, M., et al., LyberWorld - A Visualization
User Interface Supporting Fulltext Retrieval, Proc.
ACM SIGIR'94, 249-259, 1994
[4] HotSauce. http://hotsauce.apple.comj.
[5] Kohonen, T., The Self-Organizing Map, Proc. IEEE,
78(9):1464-1480, 1990.
[6] Lieberman, H., Autonomous Interface Agents, Proc.
ACM CHI'97, 67-73, 1997.
[7] Mukherjea, S., et al., Visualizing Complex Hypermedia Networks through Multiple Hierarchical Views,
Proc. ACM CHI'95, 331-337, 1995.
[8] Rennison, E., Galaxy of News: An Approach to Visualizing and Understanding Expansive News, Proc.
ACM UIST'94, 3-12, 1994.
[9] Robertson, G. G., et al., Cone Tress: Animated 3D
Visualization of Hierarchical Information, Proc. ACM
CHI'91, 189-194, 1991.
[10] Salton, G., et al., Automatic Structuring and Retrieval
of Large Text Files, Comm. ACM, 37(2):97-108, 1994.

