Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

A Usability Study on the Use of Multi-Context Visualization
Mao Lin Huang, Jie Liang, Quang Vinh Nguyen
Faculty of Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney
{maolin@it.uts.edu.au, jiliang@it.uts.edu.au, quvnguye@it.uts.edu.au}
interface or view into data. Interaction is mainly about
how the analyst requests new visual representations of
data. It allows users consider different perspectives on
the same information and provides the channels for users
to interact with the different outputs.
Without interaction mechanisms that let users
explore data, visualization tools can not maximize
human capabilities to perceive and understand complex
and dynamic data. However, interaction theory is much
less mature than visual design theory, as from literatures
we can see interaction techniques have not gain equal
attention as visualization as most researchers tend to
focus on visual representation in past decade [6]. The
datasets presented in visualization in real-world
applications are often very large with thousands or even
millions of items, such as research citation and
collaboration networks. Space-filling visualization is
considered to be a good approach for visualizing large
hierarchical datasets with better presentation of global
patterns of the overall data structure. It has a high
capacity for the visual representation of very large
hierarchical data with excellent space efficiency.
However, there are still many navigation problems
existing in large scale datasets. This paper is an attempt
to further explore the interaction theory based on
navigation methods in space-filling and a usability study.

Abstract
Graph visualization has been widely used in realworld applications, as it provides better presentation of
overall data structure. However, there are navigation
problems existing in deep and large relational datasets.
To address these challenges, a new technique called
multi-context visualization, which provides users with
rich contextual information, has been proposed as the
solution to the navigation in large scale datasets. This
paper evaluates the multi-context visualization by
conducting an experiment-based user study. To answer
whether the more contextual information positively assist
in making more accurate and easier decisions, it aims to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the multicontext visualization, by measuring the user
performance. Specifically, this usability test was
designed to test if the use of multiple context views can
improve navigation problems for deep and large
relational data sets.
Keywords--- Usability Study, Evaluation, MultiContext, Information Visualization, Navigation.

1. Introduction

2. Related Work and Motivation

In almost every field, making precise decision
becomes crucial. However, it is getting more difficult for
people to analyse and make decision with large
information, because more complex situations, dynamic
data, and complicated tasks exceed human capacity to
perceive, understand and reason. To make a profound
difference, successful visual analytics tools enable to
synthesize and simplify information and derive insights
from massive data and provide timely assessments.
Visual analytics is defined as the science of analytical
reasoning facilitated by interactive visual interfaces [1].
It is a new interdisciplinary field of information
visualization and data mining and data management that
builds a bridge between the advantages of both human
and computer to provide solutions for information
overload. Visual analytics has two important focuses,
visualization presentation and interactive techniques.
Visual Representation is traditionally understood as an

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.33

Space-filling visualization technique ensures space
efficiency by dividing the display area into nested
rectangles [3, 6, 16], polygons [4], ovals [5] or other
shapes [11] and assigning them as geometrical regions to
subsets of the entire dataset for displaying. Space-filling
techniques, especially Treemaps and variations [3, 6, 16],
have also shown high applicability and commercial value
in many areas such as finance analysis [7], sport
reporting [8], image browsing and software and file
system analysis [9, 10].
Although the layouts generated in space-filling
visualization are very efficient in terms of space
utilization, the issues of “view-ability” to produce userfriendly interactive interfaces and the ability to explore
data accurately are critical, especially for visualizing
large and deep relational datasets. This is because in

311

traditional approaches, we provide users with the display
of a progressive sequence of context views attempting to
maintain the full contextual information. Comparing
current mechanisms, full-Context view can enable users
to interactively adjust views to reach the final view of a
sub-graph, allowing them to obtain an optimal
understanding of the data items and surrounding
relational structure. This also allows users to trace each
step of their interaction and makes it easy for them to
jump or return to any level of the hierarchy they have
already visited. Wong et al. [15] found that analysts will
often look over the full structure of a semantic graph and
mentally partition the graph into natural clusters of high
activity or dense Sub-graphs. For example, after one
target dataset has been characterized, the analyst may
have to return back to larger view of picture to examine
the relationship between the target and whole
organization. The science of human concept and research
implies that the display of rich context information
produced in the exploration path could greatly increase
the accuracy of user decisions and reduce the
unsuccessful trips and unnecessary views during visual
exploration of large hierarchies.
To subjectively prove the usefulness of context
information of interactive visualization, this paper is to
evaluate the full-context view visualization by
conducting an experiment-based user study. The
motivation of this usability study is to assess the
effectiveness and efficiency of the chain-context view,
by measuring the user performance, and to answer the
question. Specifically, to answer whether more
contextual information assists in making more accurate
and easier decision, this usability test was designed to
test if context-chain view has solved the most navigation
problems in deep and large relational datasets. The
evaluation of this usability study will provide further
insight on possible improvements for existing interactive
techniques to bridge the gap between interactive
techniques and human analytical reasoning in applying
visual analytics.
In following sections, a usability study will be
conducted by comparing user performance with multicontexts, one context, and no context. Section 4
interprets and evaluates the results and discusses the
further improvements. Finally, the conclusions will be
drawn in Section 5.

space-filling visualizations as well as other visualization
techniques, it is hard to discern between nodes and
edges, hierarchical levels, labels and other properties
when thousands of items in datasets are displayed
concurrently. Therefore, an efficient and effective
navigation scheme, combined with a visualization which
provides users with necessary knowledge where to go is
essential when navigating large data structures. The
navigation scheme should enable users to interactively
adjust views to reach the final view of a sub-graph,
allowing them to obtain an optimal understanding of the
data items and surrounding relational structure they are
currently interested in, with minimal navigation steps.
The most commonly used interactive navigation
technique in space-filling visualization is drilling-down +
semantic-zooming [17], a quick and simple navigation
scheme that enlarges the display of a specific portion of
the graph allowing users to view the detail of this
substructure of the graph. The typical user interaction for
locating a node is clicking on a selected node and
moving to the sub-structure rooted and its sub-structure
and users can recursively select another sub-graph or tree
until reaching the final substructure that contains the
target node. This form of interaction is analogous to
zooming into a region of interest with each step of the
zoom operation being a sub-structure in the hierarchy.
However, under this navigation scheme, users are
usually provided with very limited knowledge about
where to go and where they have been by extracting
contextual information from only one view. Users could
spend a significant amount of time browsing for specific
items in hierarchies because user has to frequently
reform or re-establish their mental map of the relational
structure to determine where they have been and where
they should to go to find specific it. With the drill-down
approach the number of wasted actions, a user may take
to reach the specific item could be significantly increased
because in this approach, traversing each successive
layer requires abandoning the previous views. This can
lead to disorientation during navigation and reduce the
amount of contextual information available for the
decision making.
Alternative space-filling techniques focus+context
viewing (Single-Context View) provides users with a
detail view of a focused sub-graph as well as a global
view of the overall graph to maintain user orientation.
Typical techniques include Sunburst [5], Information
Slices [11], Fisheye + Zooming [12], Layering +
Transparency [13] and Multiple Views [14].
However, in real-world, especially for financial data,
interactive exploration could more than 10 hierarchal
levels or exploration. The display of one current view
and one or two context views [18] could still be
insufficient for users to gain enough contextual
information to make their further decisions on where
they should go next.
To solve this problem, a new interaction method
called multi-context visualization has been proposed for
the navigation of large information. Instead of displaying
a single or small number of context views as in

3. Usability Study
In this section, it will first describe three compared
interactive visualization techniques with multi-contexts,
single context and no context, and then review the
usability study including its user groups, and user tasks.

3.1 Description of compared interactive
navigation techniques
There are two common interactive navigation
techniques: Drilling-down + Semantic Zooming and
Focus and Context Viewing.

312

3.1.1 Drilling-down + semantic zooming This is the
most commonly used interactive navigation technique.
This quick and simple navigation scheme is widely
established in current operation systems. Three steps in
location or searching an object are:
1) Perceive relational structure from the view
2) Make decision about where to go
3) Click on a selected objective and move to the substructure until locate the target.

standard file management routines. None had any
previous experience using the navigation methods and
were not familiar with space-filling concepts.

3.3 User Tasks
The user tasks involve minimum training and
structured questionnaires with control experiments and a
post-interview. In control experiments, there are
questions with time limits and an open question in the
end. There would be no demographic questions except
Education background, in the structured interview.

3.1.2. Focus and context viewing This is an alternative
technique, provides users with a detail view of a focused
sub-graph and overall graph to maintain user orientation.
Focus and context viewing has already well developed
into many applications in medical, engineering and
financial area. Three steps in location or searching an
objective are:
1) Perceive relational structure from the both views
or a blended view
2) Make decision about where to go based on the
knowledge gained from views
3) Click on a selected objective and move to next
view until locate the target.

3.3. 1 Procedures The introduction first was given by
trainer to briefly describe the research and its reason, but
in order not to influence their preference, the details of
research were not to be informed. The training also
included the introductions of system’s features, interface
and the structure of questionnaires and time for
completing this survey. The candidates were informed to
have about 10 minutes of training how to use the
navigation systems prior to the experiment, and 5
minutes to read the tasks and notes in the questionnaires.
Before starting the questionnaires, each subject was
familiarized with both browsing tasks and navigation
methods. During the questionnaires, they were allowed
to give up or stop the trial, if the time exceeded 5
minutes in certain question. In the end, they were
interviewed by the trainer about their preferences and
suggestions.

3.1.3 Multi-context Visualization This is the new
method initially proposed by Huang and Nguyen for
visual analytics in data mining [18]. Instead of displaying
a single or two context views as in traditional
approaches, it provides users with the display of a
progressive sequence of context views, which only
occupied a small portion of the display area. The
animation techniques are applied to each interaction in
order to maintain the user’s mental orientation of views.
Three steps in location or searching an objective are:
1) Perceive relational structure from the multicontents
2) Make decision about where to go based on the
knowledge gained from whole context views and current
view.
3) Click on a selected objective and move to any
view from context views until locate the target.

3.3.2 Questionnaires The survey consists of 3
questionnaires separately for three methods a) Nocontext view, b) Single-context view and c) Multicontext views. Each questionnaire contains similar tasks.
The difficulty of the tasks and hierarchy levels of the
object increases along the way of answering the
questions. Three types of tasks were designed to test the
ability of the viewers to navigate through hierarchies,
and they are finding nodes, returning to previously
visited nodes, and listing all the ancestors of a node.
We designed 4 specific tasks to test an particular
viewer’s ability of navigating through a hierarchy; these
include 1) with no specific-path pre-defined: this task
requires the finding of a node at a specific level of the
structure in which its path was unknown, 2) with specific
path pre-defined: this task requires the finding of a node
from a given path, 3) returning back to a visited node:
this task requires the returning back to a previously
visited context in which the node that has been visited in
task 1 is found, and 4) listing all the ancestors of a node
in the file hierarchy or indicating the correct path.
There were 7 questions in each experiment.
Questions 1 and 4 required browsing with no specific
path indicated (task 1), questions 2 and 3 required the
finding of a target with a pre-defined path (task 2),
question 6 required the returning back to a previously
visited node (task 3), and question 5 required the listing

The key question for this usability test is to find out
whether the use of multiple contexts can provide
efficient and effective visualizations? The usability study
evaluates all three techniques using the same spacefilling layout algorithm and a drilling-down + semantic
zooming navigation. There techniques are a) No-context
view, b) Single-context view and c) Multi-context views
or full-context views.

3.2 User Group
In this usability test, twelve subjects participated. They
were undergraduates, postgraduates, and PhD students,
and workers who use computers or deal with data
analysis everyday. Their background varies vary from IT
and mathematics and engineering and accounting. All
were familiar with the concept of file and directory
structures and had reasonable experience in performing

313

beginning. Therefore, with little training and experience,
less complexity in the visualization and simple
navigation scheme seemed to be a better choice for the
browsing and navigation of large structure.
However, user performance improved much faster in
multi-context visualization than other two techniques at
the following experiments. Below is a summary of
statistic results. From the table, we can see that full
context navigation has comparable lower mean than
other two navigation methods. It means full context
navigation method is most efficient overall, especially
when the participants are already familiar with the
visualization.

of all the ancestors of a node (task 4). In the end, all
participants were interviewed by the trainer about their
preferences for each interactive visualization methods,
i.e. question 7.
3.3.3 Control experiments To reduce learning effects,
we used the three sets of hierarchies which were created
with the same hierarchical structures but entirely
different files. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of three navigation methods first and continued
experiments in one of three datasets in random order.
Subjects performed the experiments on a 24 inches
monitor with experimental window size of 1024x768
pixels and ran the prototype over windows XP. The tasks
were explained to them before they began the trials.
These results were obtained from these control
experiments. In control experiments, we recorded
whether the participant located the correct target,
whether the participants withdrew from the
questionnaires, whether the participants exceeded the
time limit. The time was recorded for every question at
all cases. In all, the whole control experiments involved:
12 participants x 3 navigation methods (in 3 data sets) x
7 questions = 252 trials and 12 participants x3 navigation
methods = 36 interviews.

4.1.2 Effectiveness of navigation Effectiveness is
measured by evaluating if context information has
enhanced the accuracy of users’ decisions and
confidence of making decisions. Accuracy can be
measured by correctness rate of answers to
questionnaires. From observation and interviews, we
could see that most subjects expressed the frustration
about finding a target in No-context and Single-context
visualizations and more subjects found easily to give up
the questionnaires in No–context and Single-context
visualizations than Multi-context visualization. Most
subjects gave the correct answers for the last three parent
directories in the question 6. The results prove that Nocontext view is the most ineffective navigation method.
Conversely, it suggests that Multi-context visualization
method can effectively support interactive visualization
and reveal the data structure efficiently, as the
experiments results showed that subjects completed
several tasks faster and with fewer errors with full
context. As we used small size dataset in experiments, it
implied that the benefit of full context navigation will be
amplified along with increasing density and complex of
dataset.

4. Evaluation
In this section, it will evaluate the advantages of
navigation methods, by performance measurement
including efficiency and effectiveness and the
assessment of confidence and preference, and finally it
will discuss the lessons learned from this usability study
and further improvements.

4.1

Performance measurement description

To measure the results, the research question
contains two terms that need expanding.
4.1.1 Efficiency of visualization Efficiency of
visual interactions can be measured by the numbers of
unnecessary views in unsuccessful trips. During the
navigation, an “unsuccessful trip” occurs when a user
reaches the final view and still has not located the target.
All the views including the final view during the
browsing can be called as “unnecessary views”.
However, it would be unrealistic to measure the number
of unnecessary trips during the interviews. In this
usability study, the browsing time were measured for the
candidates to locate the object.
Surprisingly, the outcomes of those first experiments
showed that the performance in No-context and Singlecontext for task 1 to task 3 was overall better than and
Multi-Context. This could be explained by the
unfamiliarity of participants with the visualization at the
first 15 to 20 minutes. Too much information and new
interactive graphics might confuse users in the

Figure1. Statistic Summary of All Questions

314

4.2 Confidence and preference
Questionnaire 7 Result

We used preference section to reflect user’s
confidence for making better decision. In order to not
influence user’s preference, we asked half of candidates
to start from No-context view and the other half start
from Full-Context view method. In interviews, 10 out of
12 subjects chose full-context navigation as the
preference over other two methods. Full context
navigation method received the highest ratings for
overall use. The overall pie graph showed the liker rating
for full-context navigation design. About 42% subjects
rated Multi-context visualization good barely, 8.3%
subjects rated it very good. In summary, 75 % subjects
rated the design and usability for Multi-context
navigation more than acceptable. (See Figure 2)

Poor

Acceptable
Good Barely
Very Good
Pies show counts

5

4. 3 Lessons learned from usability Study
4

Since the usability Study started, there were a few
improvements in datasets design and interface and
features of navigation. For example, we increased the
front and relocated the root from middle of screen to the
left up corner to reduce the data cluster and confusion,
and we also coloured the target to increase the visual
interests for experiments. To remove the luck chance for
finding a target, the new rules were gradually added into
the experiments, for example, the subjects were not
allowed to jump between questions, and had to answer
the question in order. The browsing had to be conducted
in right-clock wise.
However, to reduce the learning effect in three
control experiments, we should increase the time for
subject’s familiarity and motivation to finish the
questions. To increases the subjects’ confidence about
using interface, we should increase the training time at
the same time.

Count

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

Questionnaire 7 Result

5. Conclusion
To summarize, this usability study and evaluation
proves that the use of more context information
positively assists in making more accurate and easier
decision. First, interaction mechanism with no context
information negatively impacts user’s performance to reestablish one’s mental map to find the target. Second, the
single context viewing interaction mechanism displays
both focus and context simultaneously, which provides
more accurate decisions on where they should go next.
However, it is still insufficient for users in larger data
sets. In contrast with the other two methods, full-context
visualization effectively support interactive visualization
and reveal the data structure efficiently and addressed the
need of users to explore and browsing in details in large
scale dataset. To conclude, multi-context visualization is
a more efficient and effective navigation scheme to
bridge gap between representation of focus and
contextual data.

Figure2. Results of Question 7

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

315

Thomas, J.J., Cook, K. A Visual Analytics Agenda.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 26(5), pp.
10-13, 2006.
Thomas, J.J., Cook, K. Illuminating the Path: Research
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE
Computer Society, 2006.
Bederson, B.B., Shneiderman, B. and Wattenberg, M.
Ordered and Quantum Treemaps: Making Effective Use
of 2D Space to Display Hierarchies. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 21(4), pp. 833-854, 2002.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

Balzer, M., Deussen, O. Voronoi Treemaps. In
Proceeding IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization. IEEE, pp. 49-56, 2005.
Stasko, J., Zhang, E. Focus+Context Display and
Navigation Techniques for Enhancing Radial, SpaceFilling Hierarchy Visualizations. In Proceeding IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization. IEEE, pp. 5760, 2000.
Bruls, M., Huizing, K., van Wijk, J.J. Squarified
Treemaps. In Proceeding Joint Euro graphics and IEEE
TCVG Symposium on Visualization, Springer, pp. 33-42,
2000.
Jungmeister G.A., Turo, D. Adapting Treemaps to Stock
Portfolio Visualization. Technical Report UMCPCSD
CS-TR-2996, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland 20742, USA, 1992.
Jin,L., Banks, D.C. Hierarchical Visualization with
Treemaps: Making Sense of Pro Basketball Data. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 17(4), pp. 63–65,
1997.
Balzer, M., Deussen, O., Lewerentz, C. Voronoi
Treemaps for the Visualization of Software Metrics. In
Proceeding ACM Symposium on Software Visualization,
pp. 165–172, 2005.
Baker, M.J., Erick, S.G. Space-filling Software
Visualization. Journal of Visual Languages and
Computing, 6(1), pp. 119-33, 1995.
Andrew, K., Heidegger, H. Information Slices:
Visualizing and Exploring Large hierarchies using
Cascading, Semi-Circular Discs. In Proceeding LateBreaking Hot Topics-IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, IEEE, pp. 9-12, 1998.
Shi, K., Irani, P., Li, B. An Evaluation of Content
Browsing Techniques for Hierarchical Space-Filling
Visualization. In Proceeding IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, IEEE, pp. 81-88, 2005.
Nguyen, Q.V., Huang, M.L. A Focus+Context
Visualization Techniques Using Semi-Transparency. In
Proceeding 4th International Conference on Computer
and Information Technology, IEEE Computer Society,
pp. 101-108, 2004.
Baldonado, M.Q.W., Woodruff, A., Kuchinsky, A.
Guidelines for Using Multiple Views in Information
Visualization. In Proceeding Advanced Visual Interfaces
(AVI'2000), ACM Press, pp. 110-119, 2000.
Wong, P.C., Chin, G., Foote, H., Mackey, P., Thomas, J.
Have Green: A Visual Analytics Framework for Large
Semantic Graphs. In Proceeding IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pp. 67-74,
2006.
Johnson, B., and Shneiderman, B. Tree-Maps: A SpaceFilling Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical
Information Structures. In Proceeding 1991 IEEE
Visualization, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 284-291,
1991.
Baker, M.J. Eick, S.G. Space-filling Software
Visualization. Journal Visual Languages and
Computing, 6(1), pp. 119 – 133, 1995.
Huang, M.L., Nguyen, Q.V. Context Visualization for
Visual Data Mining. Visual Data Mining: Theory,
Techniques and Tools for Visual Analytics, book chapter,
to appear.

316

