Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Specification and implementation of a folding parametric operator to Assist
Architectural Conception at the Drafting Stage
Jean-Paul Wetzel
CRAI (Centre de Recherche en Architecture et Ingénierie) UMR M.A.P. CNRS, N°694
Architecture School of Strasbourg, 8 Boulevard du président Wilson, 67000 Strasbourg, France,
Phone : +33.3.88.32.25.35 ; fax : +33.3.88.32.82.41
Salim Belblidia, Jean-Claude Bignon
CRAI (Centre de Recherche en Architecture et Ingénierie) UMR M.A.P. CNRS, N°694
Architecture School of Nancy, 2 rue Bastien Lepage, 54000 Nancy, France,
Phone : +33.3.83.40.81.34 ; fax : +33.3.83.40.81.30
{wetzel@crai.archi.fr, belblidia@crai.archi.fr, bignon@crai.archi.fr}

In this article, we propose a specification for one of
these morphological operators: the operator "folding".

Abstract
In the early stage of creation, the architect tests his
work hypotheses by making many adjustments while
designing. During the sketching phase, the existing
modeling tools are not compatible with the iterative
nature of this process. So the challenge lies in the
definition of a model which will allow the whole creative
process with its various trying and going back during the
phase of conception. We will illustrate this model by
implementing a parametric operator allowing the action
of folding. Its parametric specificity will enable the
architect, in the design phase, to make the numerous
moves and returns required to obtain an optimal shape.

2. « Folding » operator in architecture and
design
« The role of the fold is variable: it plays either as a
chain result, one inducing an other, either by mutual
interaction or quasi-independence. » [6] The fold has
several functions, it can be a space or only a structural
device. Depending on the scale and the material used, the
fold will have a very different characteristic and
function.
Folds introduce motion in a form. Its repeated use
paves the way for a complex form which is part of the
current production. The architect or designer introduces
this notion to formalize and materialize an idea. The
metaphor of the enlightens used by Daniel Liebeskind
for the realization of the Jewish Museum in Berlin is the
most charismatic example.
Through the buildings1 that we have previously
studied [7], we found that parametric operators, and in
particular the operator "Folding", can be applied at
different scales of the project. They can govern, in a
comprehensive manner, the whole volume of a project,
or they can be used to shape an element of the project in
particular: the roof, walls, etc.
Two recent examples are: the tower in Jeddah Hilal
(Hraztan Zeitlian) and an example of chai Spain (RCR
Architects).
The Hilal tower, submitted for the contest for the
new headquarters in Jeddah of the Islamic Conference
Organization, is a crescent moon formed by several
folds. The architect used several times the operator Bend
applied in a comprehensive manner on the whole
building.

Keywords--- fold operator, design aid, modifier,
modelisation/modelling.

1. Introduction
More and more architects exploit the possibilities of
three-dimensional modellers to create new forms. The
strategy of this approach is clearly to formalise an idea.
In earlier work [1], we have assumed that the
genesis of these forms results from successive operations
of processing forms. These operations have semantic
targets and are guided by one or more mental image(s)
[2, 3, 4].
But work on these forms, in particular in view of
achieving them, often requires many adjustments, which
are not compatible with a linear approach of geometric
modeling.
This journey consists in many trips back and forth
[5] and significant variations between different stages of
the form. These characteristics make it an iterative and
parametric process.

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.51

1

The Berlin Jewish Museum by Daniel Libeskind and
the Strasbourg Car Park and Terminus by Zaha Hadid.

138

Figure 4 Providing the "folding" operator on the
continuity of a mesh
We have chosen to define a new operator “Folding”
to overcome these two defects.

Figure 1 Hilal Project of Hraztan Zeitlian
In the draft for a wine and spirits store in Spain,
RCR Architects use the kink primarily on the steel roof,
as an attempt to reinterpret the traditional roofs Corten
steel.

3.1. General principle
To define the parameters of this operator, we are
guided by the process of folding operated by a sheet
metal press (figure 5). The object to be bent is placed in a
press containing a "Vé" and a "Counter-Vé", the latter
turned to bend the metal sheet. We can identify at this
stage a bending axis located outside the side of the plate
where the angle obtained after bending is inferior to
180°. On the opposite face we see an elongation of the
material.

Figure 2 RCR, Example of a winery built in
Spain, using on several occasions the operator
"folding" for the design of the roof
“Folding” operators are also present in design. We
can cite the example of Gerrit Rietveld who in 1932
designed the Zig-Zag Chair from a representation of 3
folds. The representation of the kink is thus in conflict
with the wood material that, in essence, is not pliable.

Figure 5 Example of a metal sheet bending
machine
On the basis of this system of folding a sheet in the
industry, we generalize the process of folding a
volumetric 3D, from two parameters: a “folding” axis
and a “folding” angle.
It must be specified here that a metal sheet, taking
account of its proportions, amounts to a plan and that the
folding axis is in the plan. How to generalize this process
to a volume and thus how to treat surfaces not containing
the bending axis.

Figure 3 G. Rietveld, Zig-Zag chair

3. Specification of « folding » operator

3.2. “Fold” a three-dimensional mesh

We found that the three-dimensional modelers that
we used (3DS Max, Maya) do not fold the concept of a
volume. The user must therefore perform multiple
elementary operations to eventually obtain a fold, which,
moreover, is not satisfactory since it presents a distortion
of the grid on the area of folding, instead of a merger of
the two meshes. (Figure 4.)

As a first step the user defines a folding axis through
two points on the surface of the object.

139

Figure 8 Moving items on the edge of the plan
following the folding edges

Figure 6 Implementation of the plan folding
From the positioned folding axis, we get a fold axis
on the outside surface of the geometry to treat, which
allows the subdivision of the geometry into two parts.

Figure 9 Geometry obtained
The consequence of this process is an overall
elongation of the geometry, originating from the folding
axis and plan. The integrity of the geometry is globally
respected, which is important in the design phase.
We still need to define the use of this operator from
the point of view of the interface, in order to obtain a
fully functional prototype.

4. User Interface
Figure 7 Subdivision of the volume and
creating edges intersect at the fold

We consider it essential to address the aspect of the
interface between the user and the operator implemented.
We propose to place the settings directly on the geometry
[8] which is to be treated and no longer in a dialog box
set beside it.
We could improve ergonomics by using multi-touch
screens [9] which would add semantic gestures (Figure
10) to the introduction of some operators in the modeling
of a project.

The folding algorithm performs a rotation of the two
previously obtained geometries, following two values
around the bend axis. The geometry is then reconstructed
by joining the split edges.

140

Figure 10 Multi-touch screen "Surface"

Figure 13 Definition of the axis control two
points of impact

Microsoft ©
W e will develop in the rest of this article the
principles for introducing the parameters of the
“bending” operator in an environment using a tactile
interface.
To apply the operator "folding", the user must define
the geo-location of the fold on the geometry. The GSE is
determined by an initiator bending axis of the fold.
Taking origami as a basis, we deduce that there are three
principles for the definition of this axis:
A Direct definition, which is defined by the user :
following two points on a ridge outside the geometry, he
can directly define the axis of folding. (Figure 11.)

When the fold is geo-localized on the geometry, the
user will be able to vary the parameters that we have set
out above.

6. Validation of the operator “folding”
modelling of the Rietveld chair
In order to validate the specification, we implement
this operator in 3D Studio max. We test our prototype
with the modeling of Rietveld’s "Zig-Zag Chair" (Figure
3) from 3 folds located on a rectangular parallelepiped.
We chose to use this primitive original as a standard
because it allows to symbolize a wooden plaque as the
designer could have imagined it.

Figure 11 Definition of the axis of control by two
points
An Indirect definition which leads the user to deduce
the location of the fold according to the geometry of the
object being modeled. It can be implanted:
• Either through two axes defined by four points.

Figure 14 Wooden Plaque

Figure 12 Definition of the axis of control by two
•

Either through two impact points on the geometry.

Figure 15 Implantation of the first fold

141

approach, which is, in essence, iterative and must allow
setbacks and adjustments.
As such operators are easy to identify in the
modeling process, and since they are adjustable and can
thus develop varied spatial solutions, their use in the
process of morphogenesis appears more suited to the
practice of architects than the conventional polygonal
modeling. The purpose of this approach is to allow the
designer to preserve, under the form of a tree, the
different stages of morphological transformations, in
order to make him able to go back to previous stages for
a more detailed formal research.

Figure 16 Implantation of the second fold

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

Figure 17 Implantation of the third fold

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

Figure 18 Adjustment of three folds

[9]

The “Folding” operator has allowed us to model the
chair correctly. Moreover, its parametric nature allows
the designer to adjust the fold in real time and to go
backwards if necessary.

Conclusions
In this article, we have attempted to define and
validate a method of implementation and use of the
"folding" operator.
The experimental prototype that we implemented
has allowed us to test the operator “fold” on various
geometries. We have also verified that our interpretation
of the action of folding corresponds to a design

142

Jean-Paul Wetzel, Salim Belblidia, and Jean-Claude
Bignon. A proposal for morphological operators to
assist architectural design. in DDSS 2006, 8th
International Conference on Design & Decision
Support Systems in Architecture and Urban
Planning. 2006. Eindhoven: Springer.
Daniel Estevez, Dessin d'architecture et infographie.
L'évolution contemporaine des pratiques graphiques.
. 2001, Paris: CNRS Editions.
Mario Borillo and Jean-Pierre Goulette, Cognition et
création, Explorations cognitives des processus de
conception. 2002, Sprimont: Mardaga.
Peter G. Rowe, Design Thinking. 1987, Cambridge:
The MIT Press.
John Zeisel, Inquiry by Design: Tools for
Environment-Behaviour Research. 1984, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jean-Marie Delarue, Le pli, source de formes et de
sens. Les cahiers de la recherche architecturale, 1997.
40: p. 39-46.
Jean-Paul Wetzel, Salim Belblidia, and Jean-Claude
Bignon. Specification of an operator for the design of
architectural forms : "Pleating". in eCAADe. 2007.
Frankfurt.
Sviataslau Pranovich, et al., Structural Sketcher Representing and Applying Well-Structured Graphic
Representations in Early Design,. International
Journal of Architectural Computing., 2005. 3(1): p.
75-91.
Ellen Yi-Luen Do, Digital Sandbox, integrating
landform making and analysis for landscape design,
in Artificial Intelligence in Design. 2002, Kluwer
Academic: Cambridge.

