Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Remote Sensing of Aerosols over Penang Island from Satellite Measurements
C. K. Sim, H. S. Lim, C. J. Wong, M. Z. MatJafri and K. Abdullah
School of Physics,
Universiti Sains Malaysia,
11800 Penang, Malaysia.
Tel: +604-6533888, Fax: +604-6579150
E-mail: cksim_83@yahoo.com, hslim@usm.my, wongcj@usm.my, mjafri@usm.my, khirudd@usm.my
Environmental pollution is coeval with the
appearance of humans. When Homo sapiens first lighted
fire, its smoke provided the first medium of environmental
pollution. The burning of fuels for heating and cooking has
contributed to the air pollution of inner spaces [2]. Air
pollution is one of the most important environmental
problems, which concentrates mostly in cities. Generally,
human activities induce monotonous accumulation of
pollutants [3, 4]. Sources of exposure to particulate air
pollution are many, Indoor sources, including cooking,
unvented heating appliances and pets often make important
contributions to exposures. Road traffic, however, generally
provides the major source of ambient particulate pollution
[5].
The objective of this study was to test the
feasibility of the proposed developed algorithm for air
quality mapping using Landsat TM satellite image. This
proposed methodology derived from two assumptions, 1.
The pollutants should affect visible and infrared bands and
not only the thermal infrared band. 2. The strong correlation
between the measured and thermal infrared bands of
Landsat TM. Hence our study attempted to measure the
PM10 using the relation with the reflectance in the three
visible bands and DN in the thermal infrared band.

Abstract
Remotely sensed can be the only data source in
rural and remote areas where no ground-based
measurements are taken. This image is used to detect air
pollution at regional level, in coarser resolution. Remotely
sensed data can be used qualitatively to provide a regional
view of pollutants and to help assess the impact of events
such as biomass burning or dust transport from remote
sources. In this study, we explored the relationship between
particulate matters of size less than 10 micron (PM10)
derived from the Landsat TM using regression technique.
We was developed a new algorithm that can effectively
estimate the spatial distribution of atmospheric aerosols
and retrieve surface reflectance from remotely sensed
imagery. The algorithm was developed base on the aerosol
characteristics in the atmosphere and the algorithm is
modified to accommodate the visible and thermal bands of
Landsat TM5 image. We were obtained the atmospheric
reflectance values by subtracting surface reflectance from
the amount of reflectance measured from the satellite. The
satellite recorded reflectance is the sum of the surface
reflectance and atmospheric reflectance. The efficiency of
the developed algorithm, in comparison to other forms of
algorithm, will be investigated in this study. Based on the
values of the correlation coefficient and root-mean-square
deviation, the proposed algorithm is considered superior.
The calibrated algorithm will be used to generate the air
quality maps over Penang Island, Malaysia. The finding
obtained by this study indicates that the Landsat TM data
can be used to retrieved air quality information for remotely
sensed data.

2. Study Area
The study area is Penang Island, Malaysia, which
is located within latitudes 5o 12’ N to 5o 30’ N and
longitudes 100o 09’ E to 100o 26’ E. The corresponding
satellite track for the TM scenes is 128/56. The map of the
region is shown in Figure 1. The satellite image was
acquired on 17-01-2002. The corresponding PM10
measurements were collected simultaneously during the
satellite overpasses.

Keywords--- Aerosol, PM10, Landsat TM

1. Introduction
Remote sensing has been widely used for
environmental application such as for air quality and water
quality studies. But the atmosphere affects satellite images
of the Earth’s surface in the solar spectrum. So, the signal
observed by the satellite sensor is the sum of the effects
from the ground and atmosphere. Surface reflectance is a
key to the retrieval of atmospheric components from
remotely sensed data. The accuracy of aerosol remote
sensing techniques heavily depends on the information on
the ground reflectance [1].

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.41

380

relationship between both aerosol and molecule scattering
[6].

W a Pa (4)
4P s P v

Ra

(3)

where
Ĳa = Aerosol optical thickness (aerosol)
Pa( 4 ) = Aerosol scattering phase function
Atmospheric reflectance is the sum of the particle
reflectance and molecule reflectance, Ratm, [9].
Ratm=Ra+Rr

(4)

where
Ratm=atmospheric reflectance
Rp=particle reflectance
Rr=molecule reflectance

R atm

Figure 1 Study area

ªW a Pa (4) W r Pr (4) º

«
»
4P s P v ¼
¬ 4P s P v

3. Algorithm Model

P

e0  e1 Ratm1  e2 Ratm 3  e3 DN 6

(1)

>W a Pa (4)  W r Pr (4)@

(5)

W

VUs

(6)

where
Ĳ = optical depth
ı = absorption
s= finite path

W

W

a

 W

W r V r Ur s
W p V pUps

The atmospheric reflectance due to molecule, Rr, is given by
[6]

W r Pr (4)
4P s P v

4P s P v

The optical depth is given by other studied [10], as in
equation (6). From the equation, we rewrite the optical
depth for particle and molecule as equation (7)

where
P = Particle concentration (PM10)
DN6 = the digital number for thermal infrared band
Ratmi= atmopsheric reflectance, i = 1 and 3 are the band
number
ej= algorithm coefficients, j = 0, 1, 2, … are then
empirically determined.

Rr

1

R atm

An algorithm was developed for PM10
determination. The independent variables are the TM visible
wavelengths reflectance and thermal infrared band signals.
The equation is given below.

r

(7a)
(7b)

Equations (7) are substituted into equation (5). The result
was extended to a three bands algorithm as equation (8)

(2)

where
Ĳr = Aerosol optical thickness (Molecule)
Pr( 4 ) = Rayleigh scattering phase function
μv = Cosine of viewing angle
μs = Cosine of solar zenith angle

Form the equation; we found that PM10 was linearly related
to the reflectance for band 1 and band 2. This algorithm was
generated based on the linear relationship between Ĳ and
reflectance. Other studied also found that the PM10 was
linearly related to the Ĳ and the correlation coefficient for
linear was better that exponential in their study (overall)
[11]. This means that reflectance is linear with the PM10.

We assume that the atmospheric reflectance due to particle,
Ra, is also linear with the Ĳa [7, 8]. This assumption is
reasonable because other studied also found the linear

381

short wavelengths (less than 0.45 pm) or large sun and view
zenith angles [12].

1

>V a U a sPa (4)  V r U r sPr (4)@
4P s P v
s
>V a U a Pa (4)  V r U r Pr (4)@
4P s P v

R atm
R atm
R atm (O1 )

Rs – TRr = Ratm

where:
Rs
= reflectance recorded by satellite sensor
Rr
= reflectance from surface references
Ratm
=
reflectance
from
atmospheric
components (aerosols and molecules)
T
= transmittance

s
>V a (O1 ) PPa (4, O1 )  V r (O1 )GPr (4, O1 )@
4P s P v

s
>V a (O 2 ) PPa (4, O 2 )  V r (O 2 )GPr (4, O 2 )@
4P s P v
(8)
a 0 R atm ( O 1 )  a 1 R atm ( O 2 )

R atm (O 2 )

P

The surface reflectance in mid-infrared band is
related to those in the visible bands. The surface
reflectances were measured using a handheld
spectroradiometer in the wavelength range of visible
wavelengths (red and blue bands). The surface reflectances
of dark targets in the visible bands are as follows:

Where
P = particle concentration (PM10)
G = molecule concentration

U(TM1) = U(TM7)/4.26
U(TM3) = U(TM7)/2.11

We assume that the independent TM signals for visible
wavelength reflectance will be added with a function of data
for thermal infrared band. So, the equation (8) was rewrite
into equation (9) as given below

P

e0  e1 Ratm1  e2 Ratm 2  e3 Ratm 3  e4 DN 6

(10)

(11)

For each visible band, the dark target surface
reflectance was estimated from that of the mid-infrared
band. The reflectance measured from the satellite
[reflectance at the top of atmospheric, U(TOA)] was
subtracted by the amount given by the surface reflectance to
obtain the atmospheric reflectance. And then the
atmospheric reflectance was related to the PM10 using the
regression algorithm analysis.
In this study, Landsat TM signals were used as
independent variables in our calibration regression analysis.
A good result was produced by the proposed model, which
achieved the correlation coefficient of about 0.89 as shown
in Figure 2. The PM10 map was generated using the
proposed algorithm and geometrically corrected using the
cubic convolution method with first order polynomial. This
produced a smoother goecoded image. In addition, image
smoothing was then performed to the map to remove
random noise. The generated map was colour-coded for
visual interpretation (Figure 3).

(9)

where
DN6 = the digital number for thermal infrared band
Ratmi= atmopsheric reflectance, i = 1 and 3 are the band
number
ej= algorithm coefficients, j = 0, 1, 2, … are then
empirically determined.

4. Data Analysis and Results
A satellite Landsat TM which covered Penang, Malaysia
was acquired for this study on 17/01/02. Landsat TM
satellite data set was selected corresponding to the ground
truth measurements of the pollution levels. The PCI
Geomatica version 9.1 image processing software was used
in all the analyses. Digital number (DN) for each location of
PM10 measurement was determined for each three visible
bands and the thermal band. Then the DN for each three
visible bands was converted into reflectance values.
The surface reflectance can be obtained from midinfrared band because the surface reflectances at various
bands across the solar spectrum are correlated to each other
to some extend. The surface reflectances of dark targets in
the blue and red bands were estimated using the
measurements in the mid-infrared band (Quaidrari and
Vermote, 1999). Over a simple black target, the atmospheric
reflectance observed, is written here as the simple sum of
reflectance of aerosols and Rayleigh contributions
(Equation 10). This simplification, however, is not valid at

382

established correlation between the visible and mid infrared
reflectance over land in this study for retrieval the surface
reflectance can be used for air quality study. Atmospheric
reflectance can be retrieval by subtracted the measured
surface reflectance from the satellite total reflectance. The
established relationships between the visible and midinfrared have to be verified in future studies. A PM10 map
was successfully generated using the proposed developed
algorithm. The proposed algorithm produced high accuracy
with high R value of 0.89 and low RMS value of 6.3 Pg/m3.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the technical staff who
participated in this project. Special thanks are extended to
Global Land Cover Facility, Institute for Advanced
Computer Studies, University of Maryland, College Park,
USA for providing free online data of the satellite image
used in this study. Thanks are extended to USM for support
and encouragement. This project was carried out using the
USM short term grants and Science Fund.
Figure 2 Relationship between measured and
estimated PM10 (Pg/m3)

References
[1]
Kokhanovskya,b, A.A., Mayer, B. and Rozanov, V.
V., 2005, A parameterization of the diffuse
transmittance and reflectance for aerosol remote
sensing problems, Atmospheric Research 73, 37 –
43.
[2]
Makra, L. and Brimblecombe, P. 2004. Selections
from the history of environmental pollution, with
special attention to air pollution. Part 1. International
Journal of Environment and Pollution (IJEP),
22(6):641-656.
[3]
Makra, L., Horváth, Sz., Taylor, C.C., Zempléni, A.,
Motika, G. and Sümeghy, Z. 2001a. Modelling air
pollution data in countryside and urban environment,
Hungary. The 2nd International Symposium on Air
Quality Management at Urban, Regional and Global
Scales. Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul,
Turkey, 25-28 September 2001. Proceedings.189196. Eds: Topcu, S., Yardim, M.F. and Incecik, S.
[4]
Makra, L., Horvϝth, Sz., Zempléni, A., Csiszϝr, V.,
R˴zsa, K. and Motika, G. 2001b. Air quality trends in
Southern Hungary. "3rd International Conference on
Urban Air Quality and 5th Saturn Workshop.
Measurement, Modelling and Management."
Institute of Physics, Canopus Publishing Limited.
Loutraki, Greece. Extended Abstracts CD-ROM.
[2001. március 19-23.].
[5]
Gulliver, J. and Briggs, D. J. 2004. Personal
exposure to particulate air pollution in transport
microenvironments. Atmospheric Environment,
38:1-8.
[6]
Liu, C. H., Chen, A. J. and Liu, G. R., 1996, An
image-based retrieval algorithm of aerosol
characteristics and surface reflectance for satellite
images, International Journal Of Remote Sensing, 17
(17), 3477-3500.

Figure 3 Map of PM10 around Penang Island,
Malaysia (Blue < 40 Pg/m3, Green = (40-80)
Pg/m3, Yellow = (80-120) Pg/m3, Orange = (120160) Pg/m3, Red = (>160) Pg/m3 and Black =
Water and cloud area)

Conclusion
Evaluation of existing Landsat TM capabilities
indicates that air pollution can be mapped using satellite
data to provide a bigger spatial resolution of coverage. The
results produced by this study indicated that Landsat TM
imagery could provide useful remotely sensed data for air
pollutant measurements using a multiband algorithm. The

383

[7]

[8]

[9]

Fukushima, H., Toratani, M., Yamamiya, S. and
Mitomi, Y., 2000, Atmospheric correction algorithm
for ADEOS/OCTS acean color data: performance
comparison based on ship and buoy measurements.
Adv. Space Res, Vol. 25, No. 5, 1015-1024.
King, M. D., Kaufman, Y. J., Tanre, D. dan
Nakajima, T., 1999, Remote sensing of tropospheric
aerosold form space: past, present and future,
Bulletin of the American Meteorological society,
2229-2259.
Vermote, E., Tanre, D., Deuze, J. L., Herman, M.
and Morcrette, J. J., 1997, Second Simulation of the
satellite signal in the solar spectrum (6S), [Online]
available:

[10]

[11]

[12]

384

http://www.geog.tamu.edu/klein/geog661/handouts/6
s/6smanv2.0_P1.pdf.
Camagni, P. and Sandroni, S., 1983, Optical Remote
sensing of air pollution, Joint Research Centre, Ispra,
Italy, Elsevier Science Publishing Company Inc.
Retalis, A., Sifakis, N., Grosso, N., Paronis, D. and
Sarigiannis, D., 2003, Aerosol optical thickness
retrieval from AVHRR images over the Athens
urban
area,
[Online]
available:
http://sat2.space.noa.gr/rsensing/documents/IGARSS
2003_AVHRR_Retalisetal_web.pdf.
Vermote, E. and Roger, J. C., 1996, Radiative
transfer modeling for calibration and atmospheric
correction, Advances in the Use of NOAA AVHRR
Data for Land Applications, 49-72.

