Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Evolution of Computer Graphics and its Impact on
Engineering Product Development
Sathyanarayana K. and Ravi Kumar G. V. V
Product Life Cycle and Engineering Solutions,
Infosys Technologies Limited, Electronic City, Bangalore, India
{ Sathyanarayana_K@infosys.com ; ravikumar_gvv@infosys.com}
Abstract

Behind the sparkling graphics screens that we see
today, lies decades of research, innovation and
evolution in both hardware and software fronts. CG
is widely used in engineering product development,
across multiple industries like automotive,
aerospace, ship building, architectural, civil,
mechanical, heavy engineering, oil and gas. CG
helped in Visualizing large scale data in real time,
concurrently and collaboratively there by reducing
the product development cycle time drastically,
Improving the quality of the end product, and Post
deployment of the product – operations and
maintenance.
CAx applications provide rich
interactivity, ease and flexibility while designing,
which is difficult to achieve through manual
approach. The interactivity is facilitated by graphics
in the form of Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs),
2D/3D mouse, joy stick etc. GUIs with a good
backing of algorithms from geometry, mathematics
and graphics (Fig 1.), serve as powerful tools,
enabling
planners,
analysts,
designers,
manufacturers and sales people to handle problems
hitherto unsolved and unheard of[1],[2].
As
depicted in Fig.1, graphics plays a key role in most
of the CAx applications.

Computer graphics matured over many years and
played an important role in the development of
engineering products like automotive and aircraft
components. The current CAx (CAD/ CAM/ CAE)
tools use computer graphics extensively, while
helping in conceiving better designs with improved
quality.
Nowadays,
engineering
product
development is being done concurrently and
collaboratively, due to the advances in computer
graphics. This paper presents a brief overview on
evolution of computer graphics over the years. It
also attempts to present, how advances in computer
graphics, have revolutionized the current
engineering product development and what future
technologies will offer.

1.0 Introduction
In the early years of human evolution, cavemen used
pictures as a way of communicating their ideas with
one another and with other tribes. Humans have
used maps, charts and paintings for ease of
communication throughout the ages, and in all
civilizations. ‘Graphics’ are visual representation of
objects or ideas. The Computer graphics (CG) is a
domain that deals with use of graphics on computer.

Fig1. Graphics, Visualization and CAx

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.67

32

system. In 1960, William Fetters of Boeing coined
the word “Computer Graphics” [4]. In 1961, a
computer drawing program called Sketchpad was
created by Ivan Sutherland. Sketchpad allowed users
to draw simple shapes on the computer screen using
a light pen, save them and recall them later. Because
of his pioneering work in this field, Ivan Sutherland
is considered as “Father of Computer Graphics”.
Ivan Sutherland’s Sketchpad System can be
identified as the first application of computer
graphics in engineering design space. In 1963
Douglas Engelbart, developed the first computer
mouse, windows, e-mail, and the word processor.
He is widely known as “father of GUI”. The late
1960s saw an outburst of activity in Computer Aided
Design (CAD) in both hardware and software. The
first commercial solid modeler is “Syntha Vision
Solids Software” by MAGI. Steve Coons published
a surface patch called “Coons Patch” in 1967, which
is widely used in the CAD community. Pierre Bezier
while working at Renault developed Bezier
parametric curve/surface representation that has
revolutionized interactive free surface creation for
various automotive & aerospace applications.
Constructive solid geometry (CSG) and Boundary
representation (B-Rep) concepts have been
developed to model large solid and surface models.
Bruce Baumgart introduced “Winged Edge Data
Structure” for efficient representation of 3D objects
using B-Rep concepts. Brief sketches of the
developments are depicted in Fig2 (a) and (b).

Various computer graphics techniques such as bump
mapping, texturing, animation, morphing, fractals
and ray tracing help a great deal in achieving realism
in models generated. Further, rendering techniques
like point based rendering, image based rendering
and volume rendering have helped in pushing the
frontiers of applications of graphics in visualization.
Today, Computer Graphics applications form a
trillion dollar industry spread worldwide. No
wonder, bitter competition and so called ‘wars’
(kernel wars, GUI wars, browser wars etc..) engulf
the product life cycle management (PLM) market in
the past, present and perhaps in future.
The evolution and application of computer graphics,
in engineering product development space, is
presented in the following sections.

2.0 Initial application phase
Initial groundwork of graphical algorithms can be
traced back to Mathematicians and scientists like
Euclid (200-300BC), Rene Descartes (1596-1650),
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646 - 1716) and Issac
Newton (1642 - 1727) [3]. However the tremendous
scope of graphical applications got revealed only
after the computers reached common man’s desk.
Patrick J.Hanratty (known as “Father of CAD”) used
graphics extensively in his CAD systems [4]. His
first contribution began in 1957 with PRONTO, the
first commercial numerical control programming

(a) Before1970

(b) After 1970
Fig2. Initial Development and Application

33

Though ray tracing is not so popular in CAx, there
are packages like BRL-CAD solid modeling system
by Mike Muuss. There are recent publications about
application of ray tracing like visualizing large data
of Boeing 777 [9]. Another major milestone in the
1980's for computer graphics was the founding of
Silicon Graphics Inc. (SGI) by Jim Clark in 1982.
In 1982, John Walker and Dan Drake along with
eleven other programmers established Autodesk Inc.
In 1982 Tom Brigham found the “Morphing”
technique. This technique is being used many
CAD/CAM models development [10]. Autodesk
introduced AutoCAD in early 1980’s which is a
computer assisted design software package for 2D
and 3D design and drafting. Structural Dynamics
Research Corporation (SDRC) brought IDEAS CAD
tool in 1982 for mechanical computer aided
engineering. Prior to this software SDRC released
tools like Super FEA, Modal Plus and Super TAB
tool for modal testing analysis and modeling. By
1985 CATIA Version 2 contained fully integrated
drafting, solid and robotics functions making it
leader in aircraft industry. Late 1980’s saw the
development of multimedia. At the 1989
SIGGRAPH, Autodesk unveiled a new PC based
animation package called Autodesk Animator.
Animation is a great way to showcase the behavior
and workflow of the CAD models.

In early 1970’s the Hidden Surface algorithm was
invented by the team led by Evans at university of
Utah. The widely used Gouraud shading was found
in early 1970’s. Gouraud shading provides good
rendering quality compared to flat shading without
taking more computations. In the hardware front,
early 1970’s saw the introduction of microprocessor.
Color frame buffer and animation techniques for
motion pictures were used during this period. The
arrival of NURBS geometric entities in late 1970’s
revolutionized the computational geometry. Most of
the geometric entities like free form curves and
surfaces can be easily represented in generic
NURBS framework. Thus NURBS have become
industry standard representation for complex
geometries [5]. In 1974 Ed Catmull covered
Texture Mapping, Z-Buffer and rendering curved
surfaces in his Ph.D. thesis [6]. Texture mapping
provided a new level of realism in computer
graphics. Texture mapping is used in generating
models particularly in Architecture, Engineering,
Construction and entertainment industries [7]. In
1974 Phong Bui-Toung developed a new shading
method known as Phong shading, that gives accurate
shading compared to the traditional Gouraud
shading [8]. Models without shading called ‘wire
frame models’ are used mostly only for previewing
the model. In 1975 Benoit Mandelbrot found the
Fractal Geometry which can be used to create
realistic simulations of natural phenomena such as
mountains, coastlines, wood grain, etc [8]. In 1975
Avionics Marcel Dassault (AMD), now Dassault
Systemes,
purchased
CADAM
(ComputerAugmented Drafting and Manufacturing) tool from
Lockheed becoming one of its first customers. James
Blinn developed a new technique called “Bump
Mapping” and “environment mapping” in 1976.
Without these techniques, 3D objects would look
flat and un-interesting. By 1977, AMD assigned its
engineering team the goal of creating a three
dimensional interactive program CATIA (Computer
Aided Three dimensional interactive application).
Computervision introduced the first CAD terminal
using raster display technology in 1978. Its CAD
tool CADDS5 has considerable presence in aircraft
and ship building industry. In 1979 Boeing, General
Electric and NIST developed a neutral file format
called IGES (Interactive Graphics Exchange
Standard). By 1980, the entire value of all the
computer graphics systems, hardware, and services
reached about a billion dollars [8]. Turner Whitted
published a paper in 1980 introducing “Ray tracing”.

3.0 Matured application phase
During 1990’s most of the aerospace and automotive
industries embraced CAD/ CAM/ CAE tools in their
product development programs. This has lead to
concurrent product development there by improving
the productivity and quality. CATIA, CADDS5 and
Unigraphics have dominated most of the aircraft
industry. However, CATIA with its version 5
software dominated the majority of the industry.
Parametric
Technology
Corporation
(PTC)
introduced Pro-E software to cater the automotive,
equipment and heavy engineering industry brought
new concept like parametric modeling in product
development. Solidworks Corporation introduced
the first powerful 3D CAD software available on
windows platform based on Parasolid kernel. Many
finite element pre and post processors like
PATRAN, Hypermesh, LS-Post, and ABAQUS used
graphics extensively for preparation of input data for
finite element analysis and also analyzing the output.
Numerous mesh generation algorithms were
developed for both 2D and 3D models.

34

system is the ISO standard for 2D and 3D Computer
Graphics but in early 1990s’ SGI came up with
OpenGL and Open Inventor. OpenGL, with all the
basic 3D graphics libraries soon became the De
facto standard. Open Inventor provided many
advanced features like scene graph, which facilitated
fast application development and interaction with
complex 3D scenes. Many applications particularly
games started appearing in the IT market. Soon
Microsoft came up with its proprietary DirectX and
Direct3D libraries with more features like
DirectSound and DirectInput which OpenGL was
lacking. Even now most of the CAx applications and
games use either OpenGL or DirectX. Virtual reality
Modeling Language (VRML) based on Open
Inventor, enabled programming and visualization at
a high end, which was not possible earlier. The
Graphical World Wide Web (WWW) is started with
the release of NCSA Mosaic in 1993. With this
began the new ‘collaborative’ design approach in
CAD. Later on Netscape and Internet Explorer
quickly captured the browser market. Late 1990s
saw the development platform independent Java3D
API, web applications and browsers. The latest
Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) by
Microsoft supports declarative programming
through XAML. Another area of intense work and
competition is in providing hardware acceleration
for the graphical rendering pipeline. Many
Companies particularly NVIDIA and ATI are
making better and faster Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) using which many of the calculations can be
done at the hardware level. Khronos group has
come up with OpenVG and Scalable Vector
Graphics (SVG) for the vector graphics world. With
easy availability of GPUs, Vector graphics is
making fast inroads to desktop graphics. Particularly
the new Windows release (Vista) by Microsoft relies
heavily on GPUs and Vector Graphics. Rendering
based on ray tracing and vector graphics is
becoming popular in many visualization tools. Many
research papers suggest that Ray Tracing becomes
feasible when the scene has more than a million
polygons [12]. Other developments in Computer
Science like data sharing standards (for example
XML), language and platform independent
programming, parallel processing and Rich internet
Applications(RIA’s) have enabled development of
independent modules and integration at a later stage
[13]. The usage of various graphics techniques in
CAx is presented in Table2.

Advances in Computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
have also fueled the growth of computer graphics. In
this period, aerospace and automotive industries
could fully utilize computer graphics in almost all
the stages of product development cycle. The role of
computer graphics in various stages of product
development is given in Table 1. About a decade
back, product development was a laborious manual
process involving huge amount of product data and
its tracking. Any changes in specifications or design
modifications resulted in long time delays before
release of new drawings to shop floor. As the
complexity of the products increased, it became
humanly impossible to keep track of the data. People
started using computers for problem solving and
data storage. However the data at various stages of
product development was stored discretely and there
were no tools to link all the data. Introduction of
visualization based PDM and PLM tools enabled
uniform way of storing, tracking and visualization of
the data. Visualization in this domain is typically
through windows, GUIs, display of graphic models
and drawings. Links can be established between data
at various product development stages. Any changes
in data at one stage of the process can be easily
upgraded in other stages. Moreover the changes can
be tracked and reverted back if necessary. Effect of
the changes can be visualized which is easy to share
with the stakeholders. Complex problems
necessitating decades of experience to solve, can be
handled even by people of less experience. Digital
mock-ups and virtual prototyping is extensively used
by all the aircraft OEMs, which was made possible
due to advances in visualization techniques. Many
high end packages like CATIA, NX have included
knowledge based engineering and features for
integration with legacy PLM tools.

4.0 Current trends in computer graphics
application
Recent changes in CAx landscape have been more
due to developments in both Information
Technology and hardware fronts, rather than
changes in the actual core algorithms or the
techniques (Fig. 3). In May of 1990, Microsoft
shipped Windows 3.0. It followed a GUI structure
similar to the Apple Macintosh, and laid the
foundation for a future growth in multimedia [11].
In 1990, Autodesk shipped 3D Studio: their first 3D
Computer animation product. Graphical Kernel

35

Stage

Role of Graphics

Commercial Tools

Concept/Preliminary
/ Detailed Design/
Prototyping
Analysis
and
Optimization
Manufacturing
simulation & Data
generation
Testing
Maintenance

Creation of initial geometric entities, free form
curves and surfaces; Tolerance analysis, detailing
and drafting; Geometric and Solid modeling;
Pre and processing of large analysis data

CAD tools like CATIA, UG,
PRO-E, IDEAS,

Visualization of tool paths, Assembly sequence
visualization; Virtual prototyping

Hypermesh, PATRAN, LSPOST
DELMIA, NC modules of
CAD tools

1D/ 2D/ 3D visualization of physical test data
Visualization of damage and repair data

Internal and commercial tools
Internal and commercial tools

Table 1: Role of Graphics in Various Stages of Product Development

Fig3. Computer Graphics Current trends

Technique Used

Activity
Drawing generation
3D model generation
Digital mockup, Assembly,
Disassembly, Collision
Checks
Data Visualization

Large Data Modeling (LDM)
Analysis & Optimization

2D GUIs and 2D Graphics
2D/3D GUIs, 3D Graphics, texturing, bump mapping, environment mapping,
Morphing
3D Graphics, Animation, texturing, bump mapping, environment mapping,
Morphing, Virtual reality concepts, Augmented reality concepts
2D/3D GUIs, 2D/3D Graphics, Contour generation, multitexturing,
mipmapping, texture cube, special effects, stencil and depth buffering, point
based rendering, volume rendering, image based rendering
Tile based rendering, GPU based rendering
3D Graphics, Mesh generation concepts, Animation, Deformable body
physics, Contour generations
Scalar and Vector Volume Visualization
Collision detection, Path generation algorithms

CFD
Manufacturing simulation &
Data generation
Testing
2D/3D GUIs, Image processing, Volume visualization
Maintenance,
Structural Volume visualization, Image Processing, pattern recognition
health monitoring
Training
Animation, multimedia, virtual reality, augmented reality
Table 2: Usage of Computer graphics Techniques in CAD

36

5.0 Future role of computer graphics

a future technology that would be always available,
often monitoring or anticipating the user’s needs,
even when the user was not explicitly aware of the
technology [16]. The main issue for computer
graphics seems to be the potential lack of need for
sophisticated 3D graphics to accompany small
portable pieces of computers [17]. With all the
promise of exciting developments like Ubiquitous
Computing, Software as a service(SAS), 3d printing,
mobiles and cellular networks, it can be confidently
stated that ‘Imagination is the only limit for
Computer Graphics development’(Fig4).

In 2007 among CAD users, 63% are still working in
2D, and 37% work in 3D [13]. Revenues for 3D
CAD programs are higher. In all revenues for 3D
CAD accounted for 53% of the market and 2D CAD
accounted for 47% of the market. Development of
modern day cellular networks, wherein data
acquisition and data interpretation can be done using
Mobile devices, has made life easy in fields like
Geographical Information Systems (GIS), Location
based services (LBS). The virtual and augmented
reality concepts [14] are going to help engineers,
technicians and shop floor personnel in effective and
improved communication from design concept to
final finished product. Another area that holds
promise for the future is integration of Vision,
Audition, Olfactory, Vestibular and Haptics [15].
The future of product development systems will be
integrated knowledge based systems. Computer
graphics plays a major role in knowledge elicitation,
storage and dissemination. Computer graphics will
also play major role in analyzing the large volume
data in real time and help in realizing optimal
designs with improved productivity and quality.
Voxel based volume visualization concepts have lot
of potential in health monitoring and maintenance of
mechanical
systems.
Visualization
and
representation of Nano-materials at nano scale will
pose many challenges for computer graphics.
Ubiquitous Computing (or Pervasive Computing) is

6.0 Conclusions
Computer graphics played a vital role in the
engineering product development from conceptual
design to manufacturing and post production stages.
CG helped in creating improved products with
reduced cycle time. Digital prototyping and
manufacturing is being carried out on regular basis
in all the new and current product development
programs. A brief point of view on how computer
graphics have helped in engineering product
development is presented along with some thoughts
on future applications of computer graphics.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Sambasiva Rao
and Mr. Valmeekanathan for their support and
encouragement.

Fig4. Future of CAx

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Frank Nielsen,” Visual Computing: Geometry,
Graphics and Vision”,2005
Rogers, D.F., and R.A.Earnshaw: Techniques for
Computer Graphics,1987.
www.cs.fit.edu/~wds/classes/graphics/History/history
/history.html
http://accad.osu.edu/~waynec/history/timeline.html
Piegl, L. and Tiller, W., The NURBS Book, 2nd
Edition, Springer Verlag Berlin, 1997
www.cs.cmu.edu/~ph/nyit/morrison/1970s.txt
Foley,J.D., and A.Van Dam: Fundamentals of
Interactive Computer Graphics,1982
http://hem.passagen.se/des/hocg/hocg_1960.htm

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

37

”Exploring a Boeing 777: Ray Tracing Large-Scale
CAD Data”, doi.ieeecomputersociety.org /10.1109/
MCG.2007.147.www.cadanda.com/CAD_4_6__04.P
DF
www.cs.cmu.edu/~ph/nyit/morrison/1990s.txt
http://www.intel.com/technology/itj/2005/volume09i
ssue02/art01_ray_tracing/p10_authors.htm.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rich_Internetapplication
http://www.jonpeddie.com/special/CAD_report.shtml
www.avl.iu.edu/~ewernert/I590_VR/lecture3.1.pdf
http://ubiqcomputing.org/Overview.pdf
http://tangible.media.mit.edu/content/papers/pdf/pane
l_2_SG98.pdf
http://tangible.media.mit.edu/content/papers/pdf/pane
l_2_SG98.pdf

