Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Normalized Cross-correlation based Fingerprint Matching
Deepak Kumar Karna, Suneeta Agarwal, Shankar Nikam
Computer Science Department, Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology, Allahabad
karna.deepak@gmail.com , suneeta@mnnit.ac.in, nikam@mnnit.ac.in
Abstract - To perform fingerprint matching based on the number
of corresponding minutia pairings, has been in use for quite
sometime. But this technique is not very efficient for recognizing
the low quality fingerprints. To overcome this problem, some
researchers suggest the correlation technique which provides
better result. Use of correlation-based methods is increasing dayby-day in the field of biometrics as it provides better results. In
this paper, we propose normalized cross-correlation technique
for fingerprint matching to minimize error rate as well as reduce
the computational effort than the minutiae matching method.
The EER (Equal Error Rate) obtained from result till now with
minutiae matching method is 3%, while that obtained for the
method proposed in this paper is approx 2% for all types of
fingerprints in combined form.
Keywords - Correlation,
correlation, recognition.

Fingerprint,

Normalized

cross-

I. INTRODUCTION
Biometric techniques of authentication have been well known
for the personal identification and have been in the great
demand. Biometric method identifies persons by their
physiological or behavioral characteristics such as fingerprint,
face, retina, etc. Fingerprint recognition [1] is one of the most
used techniques among them.
Fingerprint matching means matching of two fingerprint
images with respect to certain features like minutiae, ridges,
etc of two images. The feature based matching is an
appropriate method of matching and provides better results for
majority of fingerprints, but there are a number of fingerprints
of low quality which could not be identified easily by these
methods [2].
Correlation is a statistical technique which can show how
strongly pairs of variables are related. Correlation coefficients
range from -1.0 to +1.0. The closer r is to +1, the more closely
one variable is related to the other [3]. The correlation
between two signals (cross-correlation) is a standard approach
to find out how the two signals are related. It can be thought of
as the function of the relative time between the signals and has
applications in pattern recognition and cryptanalysis.
Mathematically, the cross-correlation of two discrete functions
can be represented as
(

)

(1)

Where, the sum is appropriate values over j with i as delay
whose value ranges as i=0….m-1 i.e. up to the size of function
m. The images to be matched may be too bright or dark which

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.11

may affect the process of matching giving the degraded
values.
These conditions in the image may cause different values of
mean and variance (M and VAR) on the fingerprint images.
So to bring them to the desired mean and variance (M0 and
Var0), the computations given in equation (2) is done. [4]
( (, )

)

( (, )

)

,

(, )

(, )
,

(2)
Where, X(i, j) denote the gray-level value at pixel (i, j) and
Y(i, j) denote the normalized gray-level value at pixel (i, j).
Normalized cross correlation is a mathematical computation
that fulfills an essential role in image processing. Other than
template matching and image registration, normalized cross
correlation (NCC) has also been used extensively in machine
vision for industrial inspection including defect detection in
complicated images.
The normalized cross-correlation process normalizes the
image to unit length, yielding correlation coefficient
( , )
( ( , )
)
(3)
,

Where, f and g are the representations for template and testing
fingerprint images. is the mean of the f while is the mean
of the g.
is the array of normalized cross-correlation
shows the standard deviation of
calculated as above. and
fingerprints f and g respectively.
Approaches to correlation technique have already been
proposed [5], [6]. The most important aspects of these
techniques consists of selection of appropriate areas of
fingerprint image for correlation and some computational
effort required for alignments between the fingerprint images.
In order to take into account displacement and rotation,
Ouyang et al. gave the idea of a local Fourier-Mellin
Descriptor (FMD) [7]. However, since the center of relative
rotation between two fingerprints is unknown, the local FMD
has to be extracted for a large number of center locations. Our
work correlates the common region of two fingerprint images
considering the image rotation and scaling.
To solve this type of problem, this paper focuses on efficient
fingerprint recognition method based on normalized crosscorrelation. In this paper, we demonstrate that this technique is
highly effective for fingerprint matching even for low quality

229

fingerprints. The whole process goes on as shown in the figure
1.
II. PREPROCESSING
The difference between the alignments of the fingerprint
causes the degradation in the value of the correlation peak,
although both being same. So, to eliminate this type of
problem, the fingerprint images should be aligned according to
the base image or the template which is used for matching.
A. Interest Point Selection
This step consists of selection of the interest points from the
template and testing fingerprint images f and g respectively.
Points of interest are selected from both the fingerprint images
f and g with the help of matlab function cpselect (which is a
GUI that enables us to select control points from the two
related images and returns a structure containing a set of
points such as input points and base points respectively). The
important matching points of interest are core, delta, corners,
etc in the fingerprint images. The selected points of interest
decide the alignment of the testing image with respect to that
of the base image.
A. Image Transformation
The selected points of interest are taken for the registration of
testing fingerprint g with respect to the template fingerprint
image f. The registered image g’ is obtained by passing the
selected points of interest through the matlab transformation
function cp2tform (which infers the spatial transformation
from control point pairs supplied to it. It returns a structure
containing a spatial transformation. It also takes the value of
transformation type as the parameter into it which may be
linear conformal, affine, etc.), and then the resulting
components from it to imtransform (applies 2D spatial
transformation to the image. The structure for the spatial
transformation is provided from the previous function
cp2tform. It automatically shifts the origin of the output image
to mark a much of the transformed image visible as possible)
function. All the other necessary components are also passed
through the two functions as necessary. The registered image
g’ is ready to be processed further.

The normalized cross-correlation is computed in between the
two resultant common regions f” and g” from the template
fingerprint f and registered testing fingerprint g’ respectively
using the matlab function normxcorr2 to get the normalized
cross-correlation coefficients as the result. Equation (3)
represents the normxcorr2 function.

III. COMMON REGION EXTRACTION

The total process can be seen through the procedure given
below.

Figure 1. Figure showing the whole process of image matching

IV. NORMALIZED CROSS-CORRELATION

This step is related to extracting the overlapped region or the
region of intersection between the two fingerprint images
(here f and g’). The presence of non-overlapped region in the
images may act as the unwanted components during the
process of matching, so it is better to extract the overlapped
region to obtain the accuracy [2].
In order to detect the effective areas in template f and
registered fingerprint image g’, n1-axis projection and n2-axis
projection of pixel values are examined. Only the common
effective areas f” and g” of same size are extracted for the
succeeding fingerprint image matching process.

Input
Two fingerprint images
f: registered or template fingerprint
g: input unregistered fingerprint image or testing image
Output
Cross-correlation value from the correlation peak.
Matching Procedure
1. Start

230

2.

3.
4.

5.
6.

In the preprocessing stage, register the input or
testing image g so as to make it invariant from
rotation, and scale. The resultant image is g’.
Extract the common region f” and g” from both the
images f and g’.
Compute
the
normalized
cross-correlation
coefficients between the common regions extracted
from template fingerprint image f” and that of testing
fingerprint image g”.
Record the highest correlation coefficient value as the
result.
End.

V. MATCHING/UNMATCHING DECISION
From the obtained normalized cross-correlation coefficients,
the highest value obtained is the final value of the matching.
For a little degradation in the similar fingerprint, there is no
way of changing in the inner part of the fingerprint image, so
there is some degradation seen in the correlation peak.
Correlation coefficients of two different fingerprints are lower.
These can be well seen in the figures 2 and 3 below.

VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Fingerprint images were collected from 100 individuals from
the institute. The individual consisted of students, mess
workers, guards, etc. The age distributions of the individuals
were from 19 to 50. All the individuals were asked to give the
fingerprint of all their 10 fingers which were managed for left
and right hand separately. All individuals gave three different
impressions of all 10 fingers, and the database consisted of
200*10*3 fingerprints. 20 percent of the fingerprints in the
database were seen to be of poor quality as they were less
clearly visible, 20 percent as intermediate between poor and
good quality while the rest were of good quality. Out of 3
impressions of each finger of the same person, one was taken
once as a template while the rest were considered as testing
fingerprint images. Then the probability distribution of the
genuine and imposter individuals was calculated.
False Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Reject Rate (FRR)
were used to calculate the system performance. FAR is the
acceptance of impostor fingerprint image by the system, while
FRR is the rejection of genuine fingerprint image by the
system. A set of variable thresholds were calculated from the
matching result which were later used to compute an ideal
threshold for the matching purpose using the ROC (Receiver
Operating Curve). If the matching score of the fingerprints
exceeded the ideal threshold value then the prints were
considered to be of same finger, while for those having value
less than the ideal threshold value were considered to be the
prints of different fingers. It can also be well visualized from

Figure 2: Peak for same fingerprint image matching

Figure 3: Peak for different fingerprint image matching

231

Figure 5: Example of fingerprints used for testing

the reduction came to be of almost 1%
1 with our method.

TABLE I.
EER FOR BOTH PRO
OCESSES

Methods
(A) Minutiae Matching Method
(B) Normalized Cross Correlaation

EER (%)
3
2

Here, the comparison between the fingerprint
f
matching based
on minutia pairs (A) and the meth
hod proposed in this paper
(B) are shown.
VII. CONCLU
USION
A new method of fingerprint matching based on normalized
cross-correlation technique is propo
osed here. The poor quality
fingerprints are matched with a good result. Main
consideration of this method depend
ds upon the registration of
the fingerprints. Better the registraation method better is the
result of cross-correlation. Experimeental results have shown
that the proposed method can match
m
the two fingerprints
correctly considering the poor qualitty fingerprints also.
ES
REFERENCE
[1]
Figure 4: Figure showing EER of both methods (A) Minuutia Matching
Method, (B) Normalized Cross-correlation Method

[2]

the experimental results in graph (figure 4) as well as in the
table 1.

[3]

The graph in figure 4 shows the logarithmic pplot of the results
obtained from the manipulation of data oobtained through
various matching of fingerprints. A straight liine with the angle
of 450 is drawn from the origin in both the ppart of the graph.
The point, at which it cuts the plotted graph, denotes the EER
of the graph. It is done in both the part of grraph which shows
two different methods. Then, a straight line iis drawn from the
EER of the first part of the graph so as it toucches the x-axis of
second part of the graph. The point of passinng of this straight
line is clearly seen to be bit farther from the EER of the
second part of the graph and this shows thee reduction in the
EER in second method (i.e. our method) as compared to the
first one (i.e. minutiae matching method). Whhen compared,

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

232

D. Maltoni, D. Maio, A.K. Jain, S. Prab
bhakar: Handbook of Fingerprint
Recognition, SpringerVerlag, 2003
H Nakajima, K. Kobayashi: A
K. Ito, A. Morita, T. Aoki, T. Higuchi, H.
Fingerprint Recognition Algorithm Usin
ng Phase-Based Image Matching
for Low-Quality Fingerprints, IEEE Int’l Conf. on Image Processing,
vol. II, 2005
T
Survey System, Available:
(Creative Research Systems) Title. The
www.surveysystem.com/correlation.htm
m
L. Hong, Y. Wan, and A.K. Jain, Fingerrprint Image Enhancement:
Algorithms and Performance Evaluation
n. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 20, no. 8,
8 pp. 777-789, Aug. 1998
F. Zhao, Z. Huang, W. Gao: Image Mattching by Normalized CrossCorrelation, IEEE, 2006
Bazen, A. M., Verwaaijen, G. T. B., Geerez, S. H., Veelenturf, L. P. J.,
Van der Zwaang, B. J.: A Correlation-B
Based Fingerprint Verification
System, In: Proc. Workshop on Circuitss, Systems and Signal Processing
(ProRISC), pp. 205-213, 2000
Ouyang, Z., Feng, J., Su, F., Cai, A.: Fingerprint Matching with
Rotation-Descriptor Texture Features,, In: Proc. 18th Int’l Conf. on
Pattern Recognition (ICPR’06), vol. 4, pp.
p 417-420, 2006

