Towards a Multimedia Learning Environment for Undergraduate Students
,
Studying Architecture and Construction
K. J. Henderson', P. K. Oriogun2, J. Cook2, A. Bake2
'School of Construction, Faculty of Architecture and Design
UNITEC [nstitute of Technology, Private Bag 92 025 Auckland, New Zealand
Email: khenderson@unitec.ac.nz
Tel + (649) 8 15 4343
2Leaming Technology Research Institute
University of North London, 2-16 Eden Grove, London N7 8EA, UK,
Email : p.oriogun@unl.ac .uk
Tel+44(0) 207 973 4855
3Flat Earth Communications, P 0 Box 838, London

The aim of the ARTyFACTS Learning Environment
[ I ] is to begin a process where a 3D object becomes
'intelligent'
and accessible within an online
environment. Specifically, our system draws on
Constructivist [2] multimedia leaming environment
ideas that emphasise rich user-centred interaction, e.g.
active discovery, the use of authentic problem situations,
the use of multimedia, the facilitation of deep learning.
i.e. experience of, and with the knowledge of the
construction process [3], and approaches to problembased leaming [4].

Abstract
Within the contest cfselfdirected learning via
the internet, the on-gofng ARTyFACTS Learning
Environment research project currently under
development at the Learning Technology Research
Institute, University qc North London explores
dgferent ways of re-exhibiting 3 0 objects virtually.
This multimedia facility will ultimately help the
remote student in their studies, the disabled person
who cannot access the work itself; or a person who
cannot travel to see the work. In this paper we will
describe aspects of the extension of our recently
completed prototype ARTyFACTS Learning
Environment. The proiotype was evaluated by
Architectural students at UNITEC Institute of
Technology, Auckland, New Zealand, who provided
positive feedback in terms of usability and utility.

Research students from University of North
London's (UNL's) School of Informatics and
Multimedia Technology were used to work on the
interface design, and implementing the programming.
UNITEC School of Construction staff were used to
research the historical building. This project involved
close liaison between software engineers, multimedia
designers and developers, artists, and pedagogical
scientists.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, construction students' leaming
environment included a physical building
component in their qualification. A generation
later the students' practical knowledge is relegated
to observing and logging the construction process.
More recently, within a growing interest in distance
learning packages, the ability for students to link
the theory with reality provides the course designer
with a very real problem.

Although our user modelling system is still
rudimentary, we feel it contains important design
features that fit into the current trends for distance
learning systems. Furthermore, because we have taken
the time to specify the underlying design of our system
quite formally, we expect that the next steps of scaling
up the project to a full-blown system will be easily
achievable.

62 1
0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

In A.I. in education we construct syste,ms that
try to individualise learning by building up user
models that can help in making decisions about
what intervention to make for a particular leamer
[ 5 ] . With distance leaming, the viewer is becoming
more and more demanding, and come from more
varied backgrounds. User profiles are an important
part of making the system more sensitive to
different types of users. A parallel can be drawn
with a matrix. One axis lists the user profiles, such
as architecture, engineering, quantity surveying,
construction management,
and architectural
technology student. The other axis allows the user
to specify the particular area of interest. The cell at
the intersection of the specified row and column
represents the core knowledge at the base of the
spiral (Figure I).

The Spiral holds information relevant to the user
group selected and is also the method used to retrieve
this information. A spiral was used because it offered a
simplistic visual representation of data available. The
core of the spiral depicts the object being queried. The
icons shown in Figure 1 moving out from the core
signify objects that we classified as being less and less
relevant to the user group. The icons are used to depict
text, movie, sound and pictures tiles available on the
database.

4. Evaluation of ARTyFACTS by UNITEC
Students
The ARryFACTS prototype, with little modification,
was presented to Architectural (Year 3) students, and
several cohorts of Architectural Technology (year 1)
students. With no instruction (other than a discussion of
the meaning of "prototype") the students were given the
Web address and asked to run the programme and
answer a simple questionnaire.

2. User Profiles
It was decided that 'User' profiles were the key
to any development. From the initial list of
possibilities, in this iteration a Diploma in
Architectural
Technology and Bachelor of
Architecture student were chosen. Broadly
speaking, the Architectural Technology student
requires more technological information, whereas
the Architecture student requires more aesthetic
considerations.

The students, especially the Architecture students,
were impressed with the layout of the spiral. A CAD
lecturer (staff) commented that although there were no
instructions, the spiral provided an intuitive feeling that
icons toward the centre of the spiral were more
important or relevant to the inquiry. Other students
found the second screen "very stimulating". At the
resolution available on the student computers the icons
on the spiral were difficult to decipher. Students
indicated that they were interested in such a tool
becoming available to facilitate course related leaming.
There were guarded comments that students would not
like to be bounded by the information contained within
ARTyFACTS, that they would use this facility in
addition to a regular web search.

3. Prototype Learning Environment

'

We researched Rachael Whiteread's "House",
courtesy of Anthony D'Offay gallery and
developed a preliminary working interface. ' The
current prototype allowed us to obtain user
feedback.

5. Conclusion and Future Research
It is evident from the comments by UNITEC Institute
of Technology students and staff that the ARTyFACTS
Learning Environment has potential in the teaching and
learning process within the architecture and construction
industry, especially in relation to distance leaming and
e-learning education.
Future research will involve
incorporating the UNITEC students' evaluations to
improve the usability of this initial prototype.

Acknowledgement
This work has been supported by a grant from the
Arts and Humanities Research Board, UK.
Figure 1: Rachael Whitread's "House"

622

References
[ I ] Cook, J,, ~
~A. and
k
~
~ p., ,K (~ooo);,
ARTyFACTS: End of project report to Arts and
Humanities Research Bl,ard,
Technology
Research Institute, University of North London,
November 2000.
,,

[2] Glasersfield, E. von. ( 1995), Constructivist Approach
to Teaching,
- In L. P. Steffe & J. Gale (Eds.),
Constructivism in Education, pp. 3-15
[3] Boyle, T. (2000). Professorial Lecture, entitled
'Learning Technology: Vi.sionand Rea@ ', University of
Nortti London, 22nd November 2000. Slides available at
the
LTRI
site:
http://www.unl.ac.ukltn/~)ubs/t-boyle/tb-pro~alk.ppt

623

[41 Grabinger, S., Dunlap, J.
awl Duffeld J. A., (199719
Rich Environment for 'Active Learning in Action: ProblemBased Learning, Association for Active Learning Joumal, Vol
5 , NO 2, pp.5-17.
C.3

[5] Self, J. (1 999), The defining characteristics of intelligent
tutoring systems research: ITSs care. precisely, lntemational
Journal of Artificial Intelligence iiEducation, IO, 350-364.

