Visualizing Chat Log Data Collected in 3-D Virtual Worlds
Katy Bomer & Yu-Chen Lin
Indiana University, SLIS
10th Street & Jordan Avenue, Main Library 019
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
E-mail: jkaty, vclin] 0 indiana.edu
This paper presents a visualization of six chat log files
that contain utterances from 32 people logged into a 3-D
virtual world. It starts with a review of literature on social
visualizations. Subsequently, we introduce the 3 D online
browser technology used to design the virtual world which
we are studying. Next, we explain and discuss different
visualizations of chat log files. The paper concludes with a
discussion and an outlook.

Abstract
The paper reports work in progress on the analysis and
visualization of chat log data collected in 3-dimensional
( 3 - 0 ) virtual worlds. In particular, it presents an analysis
and visualization of six r'og files containing chat
utterances from 32 people thiit attended a demonstration
of different learning environnrents in a 3 - 0 virtual world.
We start with an introduction and a review of research in
'social visualization '. Subsequently, we introduce the 3 -0
online browser technology u>ed and present the analysis
and discussion of chat log data. The paper concludes with
a discussion and an outlook.

2. Social visualizations
Social visualizations show data about a person, illuminate
relationships among people, or aim to visualize user group
activity. For example, lifeline visualizations are used for
revealing migrations, transitions and trajectories (Kullberg,
1995; Plaisant et al., 1996). Other research aims at the
visualization of very large-scale conversations such as those
that take place on the Usenet (Smith, 1998; Donath et al.,
1999; Paolillo, 2000; Sack, 2000) or visualize web activity or
user trails (Skog & Holmquist, 2000; Wexelblatt, 1999; Minar,
1999; Hochheiser & Shneiderman, 1999). The representation
of people in text-based or graphical VWs by avatars is yet
another topic. Avatars are varied and range from purely
Extual descriptions over -D smiley faces, cartoon
characters or photographic images, to abstract or highly
realistic 3-D models (Damer, 1997).
Further, there is interest in visualizing and supporting
social interactions in text -based or 2-D graphical systems
(Donath, 1995; Erickson et al., 1999). Chat Circles (Donath et
a., 1999) is a -D graphical interface for synchronous
conversation. It visualizes the non-textual components of
online chatting such as pauses and turn-taking behavior,
that can be key to fully understanding the nature of
discussion (Saville-Troike, 1982) and that are lost in regular
chat log files. The conversational archive of Chat Circles
Pan be visualized as a -D, interactive conversational
landscape in which each vertical line shows the activity of
one participant and the horizontal lines are postings.
Peoplecarden (Xiong & Donath, 1999) uses a particularly
apt flower metaphor to create individual data portraits of
chat participants and a garden metaphor for combining these
portraits to present the conversation activity of a group of
participants.

1. Introduction
Shared 3 D virtual worlds (VWs) differ from single user
systems in that they equip their users with sophisticated
self-representations called avatars (acting as placeholders
for human users) that wave, dance, and share space. In
addition, they facilitate natural, multi-perceptual interaction
using spatial sound, animation, and video. The shared
awareness of the environment provides users with a feeling
of presence (Lombard & Ditton, 1997) and an authentic
context for interaction. It promotes informal communication
- brief, unplanned, and frequcnt (Kraut et al., 1988) and
makes users perceive VWs not as a system but as a place
(Croon Ers & Jakobsson, 2000) that frames interactive
behavior (Ham'son & Dourish, 1996), and offers users the
chance to interact with other people and engage in
activities that have real consc:quences (Jakobsson, 1999;
Qibbell, 1998). Accordingly, the research
uestions
aonnected with the design and evaluation of -D
collaborative VWs are manifold.
We believe that data mining and information
visualization techniques (Card et al., 1999; Chen, 1999;
Ware, 1999; Spence, 2000; Dodge & Kitchin, 2000) can be
advantageously applied to monitor, evaluate, and optimize
&llaborative -D VWs and to study their evolving
communities. For example, they can be exploited to visualize
general login data concerning the kind and length of the
connection, navigation patterns, manipulation patterns,
conversation patterns, or web iiccess patterns.

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

141

three main windows: a 3 D graphics window populated by
avatars, a web browser window, and a chat window. At the
top are a menu bar and a toolbar for avatar actions.

Another line of research aims at the visualization of
MUDs or 3-D virtual worlds themselves in the form of 2-D
or 3-D spatial maps. Martin Dodge's Atlas of Cyberspuces
section on MUDs & Virtual Worlds (Dodge, 2000) gives a
good overview. Maps by Andrew Smith (2000) even show
the urban density and the teleport systems of his 3 D
world.
The existing systems teach many valuable lessons about
how to visualize online spaces, their users, navigation and
conversation activity, as well as (social) relationships.
However,
the
analysis
of
computer-mediated
communication is dominated by textual analysis without
spatial reference, using linguistic discourse analysis and
ethnographic methods (Hemng, 1996). To our knowledge,
there exists no analysis of simultaneously generated chat
log files recorded in a 3-D world.
This paper reports first results of such an analysis and
its visualization. In addition, it points out productive
directions for the application of information visualizations
that would benefit the design, evaluation, and optimization
of 3-D VWS.

Figure 1. The 3-D AW interface
Users can collaboratively navigate in 3D, move their
mouse pointer over an object to bring up its description,
click on 3-D objects to display the corresponding web page
in the right web frame of the AW browser, or teleport to
other places. The web browser maintains a history of visited
places and web pages so that the user can return to previous
locations.
Currently, AW hosts over six hundred different worlds in
the main, entertainment oriented universe, and more than
one hundred worlds in EduVerse, a special universe with an
educational focus.

3. Designing 3-D collaborative virtual worlds
Different commercial 3 D Online Browser Systems are
available to design collaborative virtual worlds (VWs) that
are accessible from standard computer platforms via the
Internet, 24/7. Frequently used systems are Blaxxun's online
community
client-server
architecture
(httD://www.blaxxun.com/communitv),
Microsoft's Virtual
Worlds Platform (httD://www.vworlcls.oro/), Active Worlds
technology
by
Activeworlds.com,
Inc.
(httD://www.activeworltls.com/), or the new Atmosphere
by
browser (httD://www.adobe.com/Droducts/atmosDhere/)
Adobe. Damer (1 997) provides a review of different systems
and existing virtual communities. To appreciate the
potential of 3 D browser systems one has to try them out
for oneself.
Each of the above listed 3-D browser systems facilitates
the creation of multi-modal, multi-user, navigable, and
aollaborative VWs in -D that are interconnected with
standard web pages. AI1 represent users by avatars,
providing an authentic means of interacting with objects in
&e -D VW, with embedded information sources and
services, or with other users. In all these systems, users
can communicate synchronously via a chat facility or a realvoice audio connection.
Ehe selection of the appropriate rowser system is
critical since the' technology that mediates user interaction
has a great impact on the forms that interaction will take
(Jakobsson, 1999; Preece, 2000).
Active Worlds (AW) is one of the most popular VW
systems. Figure 1 shows the AW interface. In contains

Figure 2. A 2-D overview map of iUni

142

Katy: Hi everybody!
meow: hi, katy.
mite2a: Hi, everybody
Brian: Good morning!
Katy: Hi Mite!
Kent: Morning
Katv: Where are vour from
Mite?
Hello: hello
mite2a: Hone Kong.
Wired: ok
Katv: Hi Niki!
Wired: I've been here beofre
Hello: a lot of stuff to loWillo: lets PO on the t o u a
Katv: Hello hello!
Niki: hi
Katv: Where is hello froid
Cloud: ok
Willo: come n
Willo: on
Willo: that is
Hello: I came to tour her':
Katv: WE WILL START
THE DEMO IN 10 MINA

Brian: Good morning!
Katy: Hi Mite!
mite2a: Hong Kong time is 1 I
p.m.Brian: (to mite2a) Good
evening
mite2a: Good evening to you.
Do you have to get prepared for
the presentation. I hope I have
not been causing you any
problem.
Kent: Morning
Brian: (to mite2a) not at all
Katv: Where are vour from
Mite?
Hello: hello
mite2a: Hone Kone.
Wired: ok
Katv: Hi Niki!
Wired: I've been here beofre
Hello: a lot of stuff to load UD
Willo: let's EO on the tour first
Katv: Hello hello!
Niki: hi
Katv: Where is hello from?
Cloud: ok

Kent: Morning

Katv: Where are vour from

Mite?

Hello: hello
mite2a: Hone Konp.
Wired: ok
Katv: Hi Niki!
Wired: I've been here beofre
Hello: a lot of stuff to load UD
Willo: let's go on the tour first
Katv: Hello hello!
Niki: hi
Katv: Where is hello from?
Cloud: ok
Willo: come n
Willo: on
Willo: that is
Katv: WE WILL START THE
DEMO IN I O MINs
Cloud: I"m waiting
Bernie: hello cloud
Cloud: hey
Willo: I'm trying to figure that
out

Figure 3. Top most utterances in three chat log files
demonstration, chat logs were collected from six users.
The logs report the chat utterances of the user plus the
avatars that are in closest proximity - maximally at a 120m
distance. Figure 3 shows the top lines of three chat log
files collected by users 'Katy', 'Brian', and 'Kent'.
Utterances that show up in more than one log file are
underlined. Utterances which have been whispered to
another user such as 'Brian: (to mite2a) Good evening' are
logged in the whisperer's chat file and contain the
recipient of the chat message in parenthesis.

The iUni - Information Universe (Bomer, 2001) - is a
world in EduVerse. Figure 2 shows an overview map of
the 400m by 400m area of the iUni world rendered in 2-D
based on the list of objects th,at made up the world on
Dec dh,2000. Objects are rendered in white. Black labels
are used to identify community spaces. The learning
environments are labeled in blue.
On Dec. 7,2000, IOamnoon, iUni was demonstrated to
32 users logged in from all over the world, including sites
in the US, Liverpool, and Hong Kong. The demo started
with a short introduction of the world followed by a sightseeing tour (denoted in red in Fig. 2) of student
residences and community places. Subsequently,
students showed and explained five different learning
environments - a Natural Disaster Area, a Science House,
a Quest Atlantis portal to different theme parks for kids,
an Art Cafe, and a Virtual Collalioration area that they had
created in collaboration with facidty at Indiana University.
The 3-D VW graphics window iii Fig. 1 shows the Natural
Disaster area in the iUni world, which teaches about the
formation
and
effects
of
tornadoes.
See
httn://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-kat~/~for details.
During the demo, the AW chat window wits used to
guide participants and to answer questions. After the

4. Chat log file analysis
The chat log files have been analyzed to answer
questions such as: How many users participated in the
discussion surrounding the demo as logged in the chat
files? How much overlap exists among the log files? How
much do users chat and who chatted the most? How
many utterances are devoted to greeting, explanation,
commands, questions, or other topics? How long is the
average utterance length (number of words in a utterance)
for different users? How often do users whisper? The
results are presented subsequently.

143

Figure 5 shows the number, lengths, and type of
unique chat utterances resembling the (darkhed) bars in
Fig. 4 Each utterance is represented by a rectangle of
uniform height. The width of the rectangle corresponds to
the number of more or less meaningful ‘words’ in the
utterance. The color of the rectangle reflects its type
according to the five categories. Ovals denote that the
utterance was whispered.
The visualization reveals that some people such as
‘yukay’ posed questions exclusively. Others, such as
‘Randy’ specialized in long explanations. ‘Willo’ very
actively participated in the chat discussion. However,
most of the utterances get classified under ‘Other’. The
‘Brian’, ‘Katy’, and “sneakpeak” accounts were used to
give the demo while specific learning environments were
presented by ‘000 Tim 000’, ‘Randy’, ‘hakan’, and
‘magster’. This is correctly reflected in Fig. 5.
Colored, full-size versions of Figures 2, 4, and 5 are
accessible at htt~://eIla.slis.indiana.edu/-katv/Iv200 I a.

Altogether, the 6 chat log files contain utterances of 32
users (7 visitors and 25 EduVerse citizens). Figure 4 plots
the virtual names of all users on the x-axis (see Fig. 5 for a
close-up). Names in quotes such as “Diane” indicate
users with visitor status. All other users are ‘citizens’ of
the EduVerse. The y-axis indicates the number of unique
(darkhed) and duplicate (gray) utterances as they appear
in the different chat log files. Blue dots on top of bars
indicate the users that provided the chat log files and
thus users for which we have a complete record of chat
activity.

5. Discussion & outlook
The presented analysis shows that chat log files
concurrently recorded in a 3 D V W can be analyzed to
answer questions concerning number, length, and topic
of recorded utterances. However, the chat log data gives
very limited insight into the 3D interaction that took
place between the different users. A major problem is the
restricted range of chat logging in the AW browser. If
people from which chat log files are taken are close in
space, then the union of their chat ranges does not cover
the entire virtual world and the log file misses chat that
takes place at remote locations.
Given that participants move around in a 3 D space,
the set of users i n chat range is constantly changing too.
Assuming that users try to stay close to one another and
visit different places together, chances are high that most
of the chat was captured during the demonstration of
iUni. However, in general, and especially for less
organized events, i t would be desirable to record all chat
utterances by utilizing bots (software programs)
positioned in a grid like fashion throughout the 3D
space.
Furthermore, the chat log files contain no information
on the %D position of the users’ avatar nor any kind of
time stamp that would allow one to plot and relate
utterances of different users in 3-D space and time. This
information seems to be important in analyzing humanhuman and human-computer interaction and needs to be
recorded in order to analytically examine and evaluate
virtual worlds and their communities.
Besides having a chat log file in which each utterance
is saved w i t h a 3-D position, and a time stamp, i t would be

Figure 4. Unique and duplicate chat utterances
According to Fig. 4 there are seven users who actively
participated in the discussion with more than 25
utterances. Two of them - “sneakpeak” and ‘Willo’ have
a large number of duplicated utterances, indicating that
they stayed in close range to the users from which the
chat log files were collected.
Subsequently, each unique chat utterance has been
semi-automatically classified into one of five categories.
These categories together with the number of utterances
in each category as well as sample utterances are as
follows:

No

Category

49
214
21

Greeting
hello I Hi I Bye
Explanation North I teachers here at IU
Command Go to sign I See web Page right I

Sample Utterances

59
159

Question
Other

Can you access the WebCast?
101 I ok I cool

Note that ‘Commands’ start with a verb and advise
certain actions. Utterances classified as ‘Other’ are
typically short.

144

P

r

1
v

Name

Figure 5. Number, lengths and type of unique chat utterances
desirable to log the 3 D position of each user in the 3-D
VW continuously. This would help to reveal ‘lurkers’ users that may have followed the demo but did mt
contribute to the conversation at all. While their avatars
may have been visible to other users during the demo, the
information captured in the log file does not reveal them.
Last but not least, user interaction in VWs comprises
not only chat but also navigation (e.g., teleport usage) and
manipulation (e.g. web access) activity. These activities
need to be recorded as well if they are to be visualized and
evaluated. Our future research will aim to develop tools
that permit one to record, analyze, and interactively
axplore user behavior in -D VWs. The resulting
visualizations are intended to aid designers with the
organization and layout of world content and the selection
of interaction possibilities, to assist users in making sense
of the world, its information resources, and collaboration
possibilities, and to enable researchers to study the
communities evolving in 3-D VWs.

6. Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Activeworld’s generous support in
Broviding free hosting of -D VWs for educational
purposes as well as an active research environment in
EduVerse. Several students are involved in this research
including Sy-Miaw Lin, Maggie Swan, and Min Xiao. The
research is supported by a High Performance Network
Applicafion grant from Indiana University 2000/2001.

7.References
Bomer, K. (2001) Using Active Worlds Technology to build an
iUniverse of 3D collaborative leaming environments. IEEE
Learning Technology newsletter. January.
Card, S . K., MacKinlay, J. D., Shneiderman B. (Editors) (1999)
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think,
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Chen, C. (1 999) Information Visualisation and Virtual
Environments. Springer Verlag.

145

Kullberg, R. L. ( I 995) Dvnamic Timelines: Visualizine Historical
Information in Three Dimensions. M.S. Thesis at the MIT
Media Laboratory (Boston, MA, September 1995).
Minar, N. ( I 999) Visualizing the crowds at a web site. Extended
abstracts of the CHI 99 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
Paolillo, J. C. (2000) Visualizing Usenet: A Factor-Analytic
Approach. Proceedings of the 34* Annual Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Sciences, Los Alamitos,
CA: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Computer Society .
Plaisant, C., Milash, B., Rose, A., Widoff, S. & Shneiderman, B.
(1 996) Life Lines: Visualizing personal histories. ACM CHI
'96 Conference Proceedings, 22 1-227.
Preece, J. (2000) Online Communities: Designing Usabilitv and
Sumorting Sociability. John Wiley & Sons.
Sack, W. (2000) Discourse Diagrams: Interface Design for Very
Large Scale Conversations. Proceedings of the 34* Annual
Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences,
Persistent Conversations Track, Los Alamitos, CA: Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Computer
Society.
Saville-Troike, M. ( 1 982) The Ethnograohv of Communication.
2nd Edition. New York, NY:Basil Blackwell.
Schvaneveldt, R. (Editor) (1 990) Pathfinder Associative
Networks: Studies in Knowledge Oreanization. Norwood,
NJ: Ablex.
Shneiderman, B. (2000) Creating creativity: User interfaces for
supporting innovation. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction Vol 7, Issue 1, pp. 1 14-1 38.
Skog, T. & Holmquist, L.E. (2000) WebAware: Continuous
visualization of Web site activity in a public space.
Proceeding of the CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 35 1-352.
Smith,
A.
(2000)
Mapping
30 days,
CASA,
htt~://www.casa.ucI.a~.~~~~Oda~s/ma~~ing.ht~n
Smith, M. (1998) Invisible Crowds in Cyberspace: Measuring
and Mapping the Social Structure of USENET in
Communities in CvbersDace: PersDectives on New Forms of
Social Organization by Smith, M. and Kollock, P., Routledge
Press.
Spence, R. (2000) Information Visualization. Addison-Wesley.
Ware, C. (1 999) Information Visualization: PerceDtion for
Design, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Wexelblat, A. (1999) History-Based Tools for Navigation
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii International
Conference on Systems Sciences, Los Alamitos, CA: Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Computer
Society.
Xiong, R. & Donath, J. (1999) PeopleGarden: Creating data
portraits for users. Proceedings of the 12th annual ACM
Symposium 01 User Interface Software and Technology,
pages 37 - 44.

Croon Fors, A. & Jakobsson, M. (2000) Beyond use and design
- The dialectics of being in virtual worlds. Internet Research
1 .O: The state of the interdisci~line.Lawrence, KS, USA.
Damer, B. (1997) Avatars!: Ex~loringand Building Virmal
Worlds on the Internet. Peachpit Press.
Dibbell, J. (1998) My tiny life. Crime and passion in a virtual
world, Henry Holt & CO,New York.
Dodge, M. & Kitchin, R. (2000) MaDDing CvbersDace.
Routledge.Damer, B. (1 997) Avatars!: Exploring and Building
Virtual Worlds on the Internet. Peachpit Press.
Dodge, M. (2000) An Atlas of Cyberspaces. Multi-User
Dimensions
(MUDS)
&
Virtual
Worlds
httn://w~~.geog.ucl.ac.uk/casa/martin/atlss/inuds
vw.htnil
Donath, J. (1995) Visual Who: Animating the affinities and
activities of an electronic community. ACM Multimedia 95 Electronic Proceedings. San Francisco, California
Donath, J., Karahalios, K. & Viegas, F. (1999) Visualizing
conversation.
Journal
of
ComDuter
Mediated
Communication,4(4).
htt~://www.ascucs.or~/icmc/volWissue4/donath.html
Erickson, Th., Smith, D. N., Kellogg, W. A., Laff, M., Richards,
J. T. & Bradner, E. (1999) Socially Translucent Systems:
Social Proxies, Persistent Conversation, and the Design of
"Babble", Proceeding of the CHI 99, pages 72 - 79.
Harrison, S. & Dourish, P. ( 1 996) Re-place-ing space: the roles
of place and space in collaborative systems. Proceedings of
the ACM 1996 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, pages 67 - 76.
Hemng, S. C. (ed) (1996) ComDuter mediated communication.
Linguistic. social and cross-cultural Dersoectives. John
Benjamins Pub Co., AmsterdamPhiladelphia.
Hochheiser, H. & Shneiderman, B. (1999) Using interactive
visualizations of www log data to characterize access
patterns
and
inform
site
design.
ftv:l/ftp.ss.uind.ed~pub/hcil/Rzuorts-.4
bs tract?.Ribliogranhv/~df/c)~~-~~,pdf.

Holmstrom, H. & Jakobsson, M. (2001). Using models in virtual
worlds design. Proceedings of the 34th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Sciences, Los Alamitos,
CA: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Computer Society.
Jakobsson, M. (1999). Why Bill was killed - understanding
social interaction in virtual worlds. In Nijholt, A. et al. (eds.).
Interactions in virtual worlds. Proceedings of the fifteenth
Twente workshop on language technology. Enschede, The
Netherlands: Twente University.
Kim, A. J. (2000) Communitv Building on the Web: Secret
Strategies for Successful Online Communities, Peachpit
Press.
Kraut, R., Galegher, J . & Egido, C. (1988) Tasks and
relationships in scientific research collaborations. HumanComputer Interaction, 3,31-58.

146

