Soil Mechanics “Virtual” Laboratory - A Multimedia Development
Robert C Barnes
The Open University, Centrefor Interactive
Media, UK
R. C.Barnes @open.ac.uk

Amir M Alani
University of Portsmouth, Department of Civil
Engineering, UK
Morteza.alani @port.ac.uk

the laboratory and refresh their memory so that they are
more capable of relating their results to expected
outcomes. Very often students struggle through
experiments with very little insight and procedural
guidance - a direct consequence of not having essential
prior knowledge of the laboratory, its equipment, and
function.
The main objective of this investigatioddevelopment
is to address the above problems by providing students of
relevant disciplines with a computer aided virtual (realtime) Soil Mechanics Laboratory which enables them to
view the laboratory facilities at their own leisure and pace.
The resulting software, which is in the form of a CDROM, provide students with unrestricted access to the
facilities, the principal advantage of which is that they
may ‘visit’the laboratory electronically in a highly
interactive and information-rich environment - before,
during and after the experimentation period. This package
consists of three distinct key elements:

Abstract
This paper discusses development of a highly interactive
multimedia package which includes series of standard
soil mechanics laboratory experiments for teaching and
learning purposes at undergraduate level of a typical
Civil Engineering or Earth Science course. The developed
software is in the form of a CD-ROM and consists of
three distinct key elements including, a ) photo-panoramic
guided tour of a typical soil mechanics laboratory
(navigable movies), b ) technical information, which
includes a procedural statement for each experiment, a
description of the equipment and apparatus, an example,
typical results, references to other literature and
additional information to underpin lecture notes, c )
questions and log file of results and navigation.
The paper also provides an example test (Shear Box Test)
explaining step by step procedure of using the package.
Finally detailed technical and programming information
about how this package was designed and developed have
been provided in this paper.

Photo-panoramic guided tour of a typical Soil
Mechanics Laboratory (navigable movie), providing
students with navigational access to the laboratory
facilities. This incorporates a high degree of
interactivity, direction, level and pace.
Technical information, which includes a procedural
statement for each experiment, a description of the
equipment and apparatus, an example, typical results,
references to other literature and additional
information to underpin lecture notes. This element
also includes a video clip of each individual
experiment demonstrating preparation of the
sample/s, assemblage and mode of operation of each
experiment (animated), standard procedure,
equipment details and good practice.
Questions and log file of results and navigation. Users
can examine their level of understanding from each
experiment by answering questions provided under
the heading of “what can you remember” at the end
of each session. Also properties that can be set are a
password log-in utility, a question score method,

Keywords: Multimedia, Soil Mechanics, Teaching Le
Learning, Sofhyare, ToolBook.

1.0 Introduction
The procedures adopted for students to undertake
laboratory experiments have remained virtually
unchanged for many years. Students are expected to
undertake experiments using a “recipe“ sheet, which
provides them with a step-by-step procedure. This work
sheet is often only provided on the day that the experiment
is to be carried out, and consequently student’s procedural
progress is severely hampered by a general lack of
confidence.
If experiments are to be valid and worthwhile,
students must be provided with a sense of ownership, both
before and after experiments have been conducted. In the
process of undertaking an experiment, and in the
subsequent writing up, students need to be able to revisit

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

500

score results encryption (tamper proof scoring) and
feedback to the tutor (email facility).

ForeHelp V 2.96
Adobe Acrobat V3.01

2. Application Requirements

3. Application Design

Factors influencing the choice of software, hardware and
application design is a limited time schedule, very tight
budget and remote working practices between the project
leader and software designer. The application also
required a large amount of media to be produced in the
form of video clips, 3D animation, digital still images of
laboratory equipment and narration. The whole package
has to be published on a single CD-ROM. Based on the
above criteria, it was evident that the latest multimedia
authoring and animating software would be required.

3.1. Introduction
The design of the application has been kept simple.
Navigation is kept very open utilizing traditional
forward/back buttons and via the two panoramic views of
the soil laboratory. An open navigation allows full access
to all parts of the application. This allows past and future
topics to be explored at will. A simple visually pleasing
background image and layout provides initial visual
impact but does not dominate the overall look and feel.
Each page has an identical look and feel, keeping topic
lists and button groups in identical locations. This is
important to achieve user familiarity.

2.1. Hardware
The computer and peripherals used to develop MSL are a
400MHz Pentium 11, 192MB of RAM, 9GB hard drive,
17 inch monitor, 32Mb AGP card with video capture
capability, CD read/writer, scanner, printer and zip drive.

3.2. Pages
Pages contain the background image, a topic list with
buttons (Figure 1) , all other navigation buttons and
buttons to open the laboratory viewers.
A single page is used for each test. All information,
equipment, video clips, references and questions are
available by selecting items from the topic list on the
page. To aid in the navigation shortcut keystrokes and
button tabbing order is available. Users can use familiar
keystrokes to launch items on the screen without using a
mouse.

2.2. Media Equipment
Recent advances in the home media market have allowed
us to produce digital formats in an affordable way. Much
of the video footage has been captured in a digital format
on Hi 8 videotape. Digital formats have a quality far
higher than required by the application at present but it is
useful to archive the footage for later advances in
technology. The equipment used in MSL is a video
camera (digital recorded on Hi 13 tapes), digital camera,
camera, video capture/editing equipment (University of
Portsmouth Media Centre), video capture/editing software
(PC based) and a sturdy tripod.

2.3. End User Requirements
The application has been designed to run on Windows
9Y98mT4.0 using a 200MHz Fentium, 32MB of RAM,
1 GB hard drive, 14 inch monitor, 12 X CD

2.4. Software
The following software has been used to develop MSL:

Figure 1, Title of the tests included in the
package

ToolBook I1 instructor Version 6.la by Asymetrix,
3D Studio MAX R3.1
Core1 Draw 7
Digital Video Producer (DVP V4) by Asymetrix.

501

3.4.2. Equipment. A digital still image of the apparatus is
presented in a window (Figure 3). As the user moves the
mouse over a zone an explanation of that component is
displayed in a text field located below the image. Some
zones when entered display a zoom cursor indicating that
a larger more detailed image is available for viewing.
Components in the image are zoned using invisible
polygons. ToolBook provides a polygon tool that allows
components to be zoned with precision by dragging
around the outline. The polygon is then assigned a name
and a script is written using a “mouse over” event. The
polygon is made transparent and then grouped together
with the image (pictureobject). This ensures that all the
polygons keep their positions in relation to the image.

3.3 ToolBook Viewers (Windows)
ToolBook viewers are used extensively throughout the
application. Viewers are windows, which overlay the
page. The advantage of this is that the user is able to open
many viewers at once and manage these on the desktop
using functions to close, minimize, maximize and window
dragging. Viewers are used to display a field of scrollable
text, graphics to display items or parts of equipment and a
selection of questions.

3.4. An Example Test
On entering a laboratory test page, the user is able to
select topic items that provide descriptive information
(Figure 2), perform tasks, and display audio-visual
material or answer questions. Although the list of topics is
set out in a liner fashion, it is possible to access any
component on the page at any time. The topic titles below
represent the Shear Box Test topic list and describe what
is launched when a button in the list is clicked.

Figure 3, Shear Box Apparatus (zoned images)
3.4.3. Assemble the Shear Box. The traditional method
of demonstrating the shear box sample holder assembly is
during a soil mechanics practical lesson. However, it
would be useful to demonstrate this before the student
enters the laboratory to have some familiarity with the
components and how they fit together. We have achieved
this by using a narrated animation (Figure 4). On entering
the exercise page, the student is presented with a list of
components to assemble, a numbered image indicating the
assembly sequence and the first frame of the animation.
The student clicks an item in the list, which starts an audio
narration describing the procedure. Following the audio,
an animated sequence is displayed. The words of the
narration are also presented in a text field. The
combination of reading from the screen and listening to a
narration helps the student retain the information. It also
caters for hearing disabilities or machines which do not
have audio enabled. The student can assemble the
apparatus by activating each component in succession or
randomly.

test

3.4.1. About the Shear Box Test. On clicking the button,
a window displays a description of the test with images of
apparatus, formulae to calculate test results and example
graphs (stress strain curve and shear stresskompressive
stress).
A content list at the top of the page is provided
which links to the corresponding location within the body
of the text. To navigate easily back to the content list (top
of the page), links are placed intermittently throughout the
text. Images and graphs are displayed as “popup”
windows by clicking links within the text.

502

Watcb the Shear Plane Develop

Figure 4, Shear Box assemibly (animation)
3.4.4. Set-up the Shear Box apparatus. During a soil
practical lesson the student will normally watch a skilled
technician perform the test and then is expect to perform a
similar task under supervision. 'To provide a similar
demonstration, a narrated video clip is used. The student
is able to play, rewind, forward wind and stop the clip
using the video player provided in the viewer.

Figure 5, Shear Plane Developing and Stress
Strain Relationship (animation)

3.4.5. Watch the Shear Develop. This topic
demonstrates the processes within the shear box as the
normal load and shear forces arl: applied. During the
laboratory practical lesson these processes are not clear as
the box is enclosed. Animation is the best method to
demonstrate this (Figure 5). Objects making up the box
are rendered with varying degrees of transparency so that
components are visible through one another. Objects are
annotated to make identity even clearer. As the clip
progresses, one half of the box is moved over the other
and a shear plane develops. At the same time a graph of
shear stress against stain is drawn.

C-W"-hS-J.4Xdl

Figure 6, A typical Test Results

3.4.6. Test Results. Example test sheet(s) and test results
are provided here. In the shear box test, graphs of stress
strain curve and shear stress/compressive stress are
displayed. During the practical demonstration, the student
is given a laboratory test sheet to fill in which adds more
confusion to an already hectic environment. To alleviate
this, the student can see how the laboratory test sheet is
completed and see a set of calculated test results before
entering the practical lesson (Figure 6).

3.4.8. What Can You Remember. In this section the
student is questioned about test procedures and test
results. No score from these questions is generated but the
answers are logged. The question styles used are multiple
choice, true or false and "fill in the gap".
When the application is started, the student must
define a path to the log file and enters hisher name, which
identifies the student to the tutor. The log file records the
answers to questions. Analysis of the log file by the tutor
will demonstrate a student's understanding of the topic.

3.4.7. References. A carefully selected list of references
is displayed in a scrollable window, which refers to the
texts used to produce the test example and references
suitable for further reading. Reference will aid in the
preparation of the practical laboiratory report or for
revision purposes.

503

name. An uncompressed version is also kept for archive
purposes. Initially, the first video clips produced for MSL
used the Cinipak codec. It was originally chosen because
it is installed as part of the multimedia components within
Windows 95,98 and NT. This allows clips to be played
using the players installed on these operating systems.
However, Cinipak looses a significant amount of picture
quality, creates artifacts within the video clip and the files
are slightly larger than more recent codecs. Later clips use
the Indeo 5.1 1 codec [http://www.ligos.com]. Indeo 5
produces significantly better picture quality, fewer
artifacts and smaller file sizes. This codes is not shipped
with Windows 95 and needs to be installed. To solve this
problem, the Indeo 5 setup is provided on the MSL CDROM.
The specification for video is a clip length of 2 to 5
minutes long; compressed using Cinipak or Indeo 5. I 1
codecs and displayed at 320(w) x 240(h) pixels size in 24
bit color at 15 frames per second.

4. Where Hollywood and Soil Mechanics
Meet
4.1.360' Panoramic Views of the Laboratory
Producing the laboratory panoramic views has been
problematic technically and photographically. The views
are used as an integral part of the navigation to laboratory
items in MSL and presented in a ToolBook viewer. The
lens of the camera tended to distort the image.
The following method has been used to create the
panoramic. The footage is taken with a digital video
camera which is fixed to a leveled tripod and rotated 360'
in a constant manor while the camera is recording. The
resulting clip is then captured as individual frames with
sufficient overlap. Each image is enlarged and then
stitched together to produce a single 360' panoramic
image. ToolBook is only able to support images up to
2000 pixels wide. This then restricted the final panoramic
to 200 pixels high. A ToolBook viewer is then used to
display a portion of the panoramic. A scroll bar in the
viewer (window) allows the full width of the panoramic to
be viewed. Laboratory items are defined by invisible
polygons on the panoramic image. These are "hot" and
display a line of text describing the laboratory apparatus,
which may also be used to navigate to pages in MSL.

4.3. Creating the Animation
The animation is created in 3D Studio Max R3.0
(AutoDesk Inc.). In the Shear box example, components
of the sample holder are created using standard primitives
(cube, sphere, cone etc.) or Splines (line, rectangle, circle
etc) which then have modi tiers applied to them such as
lathe, extrude or mesh edit. Realism is achieved by
applying a texture to the surface of the object such as the
"scinted-bronze'' effect used for the porous plate. This
texture is created using digital photographs of sandpaper
(bump map) and copper metal mixed with ambient and
diffuse color (diffuse map). To set the scene, a target
spotlight and several omni lights are added to illuminate
ob-jects and apply shadows.
Objects are animated in the track view where time
lines and positions in space are displayed (function curve).
Fine control of each object in space is performed by
changing the shape of the function curves. The function
curves display an objects height, left and right movement
and back and forth movement. Keys are moved, added or
deleted to modify the curve.
Finally, the animation is rendered and
compressed to an audiovisual file ( m i ) . In the render
properties window the file location, frame sequences,
compression codec (Indeo 5) and image size are set.
The specification for animation is a clip length of
0.S to 2 minutes long, compressed using Cinipak or Indeo
5. I 1 codec in an .avi format, displayed in a range of sizes
up to 640(w) x 480(h) pixels in 24 bit color at 12 frames
per second.

4.2. Creating the video
Developing video clips for the Soil Laboratory has
proved problematic in that vast amounts of video footage
was generated, bad lighting conditions in the laboratory
and final clip file sizes were very large (85Mb for 5.5
minute clip). These have been solved by modern video
equipment, good video production and editing techniques
as well as the use of current compression software
(codecs). Soil testing can be a long process involving
detailed and complicated applications of equipment. This
can generate up to 4 0 minutes of video footage per a test.
This footage is then edited to a clip of around 2 to 5
minutes! A method devised to achieve this is to film the
complete test precisely and very quickly (main shot).
Important parts of the test are then filmed again in closeup. In the first edit, the close-up portions are then inserted
at the appropriate places within the main shot and the bulk
of the unwanted footage is removed. The first edit is saved
uncompressed. The second edit (final approved edit)
removes further unwanted footage. It is at this point where
the effects or accompanying animation are added. Fade
transition effects are used to break up a lengthy parts of
repetitive content. The second edit is compressed at this
point using a codec (compression software) and a new file

504

4.4. Narration for Video and Animation

to handle buttonclick
local STRING pdfFilePath
IinkDLL shell
WORD ShellExecute( WORD, STRING,
STRING,STRING, STRING, INT )
end linkDLL
pdfFilePath = “al-pi.pdf’
get ShellExecute( sysWindowHandle, “print”,
pdfFilePath, NULL, NULL, 5 )
end

Once the video and animations are finished (final edit) the
narration script is then written. The narration is limited to
the length of the clip. Some forethought is required while
editing the clip to keep enough footage to contain the
narration. As very little time is available, the narration
script needs to be precise. Audio is recorded using the
sound recorder available in Windows 98 and a standard
head mounted microphone. The audio file is saved in 16
bit mono at 22KHz as a .wav file. The clip is
synchronized with the narration by recording the audio
while watching the clip. The nan-ation is then added to the
clip using the video editing sofi.wa-e. 8 bit recording is too
low a quality and is not recommended unless file size is an
important consideration.

5.3. Shared Scripts
To reduce the amount of repetitive scripting (same script
occurring on each page), the control of keyboard short
cuts, cursor changes, exit sequence and button events have
been converted to shared scripts. This optimizes the
scripts reuse and editing. Editing the script is done in one
location but affects all objects using the script throughout
the application.

5. Making the Application Work Programming in ToolBook

5.4. Managing and Controlling Clips

5.1. ToolBook Command ELased Language
(Openscript)

Another innovative use of ToolBook is to add all media
(video, animation, images and narration) to the clip
manager. This facility manages large media files which
reside outside of the multimedia application. These media
files are then loaded as required from the hard drive or
CD-ROM (when installed). Scripts are used to control the
loading of media files. To develop the equipment
assembly sequence, a script is used to start and stop the
media file at particular frame sequence and at the same
time a narration is played. To control the clip in this way,
the clip must be told to hold and/or wait until certain
events have finished.

ToolBook has a command bawd scripting language called
Openscript. This enables lower-end development to
produce more specialized and slophisticated applications.
Openscript can be learnt quickly without the need of
specialized programming ability. A script can be written
to control events or actions of objects or to control the
presentation of an application.
An object hierarchy exists in ToolBook. Scripts
can be placed at object level or higher up at page level
and so on. Most events in this application are controlled
from the page level or book level. The scripts at page
level control nearly all the functions on the page. As every
page is virtually the same, a copy of the page copies all
objects, scripts and background image. Reproducing
pages in this way allows for quick application
development and reuse of common scripts. Minor
modifications of the script are easy when using a naming
convention for objects and variables.

6. Questions and Logging
Every test example has a series of questions. No score
from the questions is generated but the answers are
logged. To enable a better picture of the student
perceptions of the application, a set of optional questions
are provided on exit. The properties of these have been set
to provide a rating based on the answer response and then
recorded in the log file. The log file location is specified
when the application is run by the student. The student
then provides hisher name, which is recorded in the log.
The question types are multiple choice, true or false and
“fill in the gap”. Question widgets (utilities built into
ToolBook) are available from a widget catalogue. These
are selected and dragged onto the page. Score and
response properties for the question widgets can be set.
The log file procedures are set within the lesson

5.2. An open script example
Printing screens from within ToolBook is troublesome
and does not maintain the document formatting. A
solution to the problem is to convert the original
document into a .pdf file using Adobe Acrobat. The
example script below links a dynamic linked library (.dll)
and uses a Windows Advanced Programming Interface
(API) function.

505

Portsmouth, during the 2ndsemester of the academic year
2000/01.
It was also recognized that this experience could
expand easily to other practical *andexperimental based
engineering and science courses.

properties. The lesson properties are set to record the
navigation route (provides a page name), the time taken to
navigate through the application and record responses to
questions. The logs from each student are appended to the
log file as a tab separated text file. Analysis of the log file
by the tutor will identify problems with the application,
give an indication of a preferred method of navigation,
demonstrate a student’s understanding of the topic and
show that a student made full access to each topic.

9. References
[ I ] ALAN1 M., BARNES R.C. A multimedia soil mechanics
laboratory sofhvare developed f o r teaching and learning
purposes. Conference Proceedings, International Conference on

7. Creating the Installation CD and
Application Test

Engineering Education, Ostrava - Prague, Czech Republic,
1999.
[2] FINCH E. Creating Navigable Movies a s a Teaching Aid.
Department of Construction Management, University of
Reading, UK. Available from www:
<URL:htt~://ctiweb.cf.ac.uWHABITAT/HABITAT3/fhab.
htmm
131 ISSA R. R. A., COX R. F. and KILLINGSWORTH C. F.

For easy and convenient publication, ToolBook I1
Instructor V6 is shipped with InstallShield. Installations
can be created using the Auto Packaging Wizard (written
to publish ToolBook applications using InstallShield) or
by the more advanced feature contained within the
InstallShield application. Additional installers for the
Indeo 5.1 1 codec and Adobe Acrobat Reader are also on
the CD-ROM.
A number of tests using the pilot version of MSL were
conducted on computers running Windows 95 and 98
using 6 and 24 speed C D drives. The tests showed that on
the lowest spec. Pentium 100 MHz, 16Mb of RAM with a
6 speed CD drive efficiently displayed the application.
Very little delay was experienced when navigating
between pages and very few frames were skipped when
playing the video. The audio was of satisfactory quality.

Measuring the Effect of Multimedia-Based Training on Student
Learning and Retention. pp. 276-287 Computing in Civil

Engineering, 1998.
[4] NZEWI E. Using Readily Available Technologies and
Laboratory Experiences to Enhance Course Content. pp. 380385 Water Resources and the’Urban Environment, 1998.
[5] RILEY D. and PACE C. Improving Teaching Efficiency with
Multimedia Teaching Aids. pp. 129-135 Computing in Civil
Engineering, 1997.
[6] SUNIL S. and HARDCASTLE J H. A Multimedia Approach
for Teaching Geotechnical Laboratory Testing. University of
Idaho, Department of Civil Engineering, Moscow, ID, USA.
[ 7 ]WIEZEL A. The Real Value of a Multimedia Education
Environment. pp. 288-296 Computing in Civil Engineering,
1998.

8. Conclusions
Studentdstaff responses and comments [ I], demonstrated
that this project is certainly a step in the right direction by
providing complementary material to support and improve
students’ learning experience in the field of Soil
Mechanics/Geotechnics. It has also been demonstrated
that Multimedia is a viable option to be considered for
such purposes.
It was noted that wide availability of software of
this nature might influence students’ participation in the
laboratory sessions with serious consequences. However,
it must be stressed that the above situation will depend, to
great extent, on how the software is introduced to students
and how it is incorporated within the teaching program.
From the reactions received to this software, we are
encouraged to believe that positive steps have been taken
towards the enhancement of students’ learning experience
in this particular branch of a typical civil engineering
course. Utilization of this package, in a formal manner,
has already started as it was introduced to a combination
of first year BEng Civil Engineering and HND students in
the Department of Civil Engineering at the University of

506

