Visualisiing Document Content with Metadata to
Facilitate Goal-directed Search
Mischa Weiss-Lijn, Janet T. McDonnell
Department of Computer Science
University of College London, London
WClE 6BT, UK
Email - {m.weiss-lijn,
j . mcdonnell)@cs. ucl.ac.uk

Leslie James
Strategy Research Team,
J Sainsbury plc, London

Much corporate knowledge is captured in documents.
This paper will describe the d(?sign and evaluation of an
application, named Gridvis, which uses metadata to
enable rapid goal-directed searches within corporate
documents. Gridvis visualises metadata that describes
and dlfferentiates the contents of individual paragraphs.
This visualisation is used as the basis for rapid querying
and navigation. An experimental evaluation of Gridvis
performance on representativt: work rusks is described.
Qualitative analysis of the dtyta suggests that there is
substantial room for performance improvements, and has
inspired design changes to realise this potential.
Quantitative analysis proved inadequate to detect a
numerical advantage due to the sample size restrictions
inherent when doing academi,: research in a corporate
setting. The problems of empirical evaluation in a
corporate setting are discusseci! An alternative approach
to reliable evaluation is propos,?d.

store in corporate documents. There is much work
currently looking at how to locate and automatically
distribute relevant documents to employees. This research
is therefore exploring a technology for improving the
effectiveness of using documents once they have already
been located.
Gridvis is intended to support an important class of
document use where information needs are realised at the
paragraph level. Adler et a1 [ I ] identify this prevalent class
of reading in a study of work related document use in a
range of work settings. They characterise it as ‘goaldirected reading’, which they described as “sampling
information in the text which satisfies the goal of the
search” [I]. Van House [8] concludes that “Workplace
users [...I want to retrieve information rather than
documents per se.”. It is therefore likely that search goals
in digital library use are most commonly satisfied at the
paragraph or section level. Gridvis has therefore been
conceived to facilitate goal-directed search by helping the
user home in on paragraphs relevant to their goal.

1

2

Introduction

Gridvis was envisaged for use with a small but
important portion of a diverse corporate document
landscape, which can be characterised as being
information rich and having a relatively long life. A set of
documents with these characteristics was selected (as
described in the evaluation section) to serve as a basis for
developing metadata taxonomy, and conducting
evaluation.
Gridvis parses a document marked up with metadata
and one containing a metadata taxonomy. It uses the
result to produce a visualisation and customised HTML
views of the document text.
The metadata taxonomy is necessary for several
reasons, only some of which can be fully described here.
For the users of Gridvis undertaking a goal-directed

Part of the semantic web’s mission is to provide access
to the nuggets of relevant information within online
documents. It therefore addresses the need to make better
use of knowledge in stored corporate documentation.
This paper is a part of ongoing research looking at
whether goal-directed search of a document could be
facilitated using an interactive visualisation of metadata
that describes the content of paragraphs within corporate
documents. Gridvis, the system built to test out this idea,
is first described, then the results of an empirical
evaluation are discussed, and finally suggestions are made
for further evaluation.
The work was motivate’d by the need within
Sainsbury’s, a large UK retail organisation which sponsors
this research, to make better use of the knowledge they

71
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 1E:EE

System Description

in principle be able to use metadata produced within these
sophisticated ontologies, Gridvis only requires a simple
taxonomy.
The metadata and the metadata taxonomy were
constructed by adapting informal ontology construction
methodologies [6]. The metadata was manually produced
for each paragraph of the documents prepared for Gridvis,
using the taxonomy as a guide, to encourage complete and
consistent tagging. Each instance of metadata was given
an 'applicability' attribute which recorded the degree to
which the metadata tag applied to a paragraph (1 - 'is
principally about', 2 'partly about' or, 3 'mentions in
passing').
Since Gridvis is designed for use on a corporate
intranet in a corporation where software installation for
low

search, it is essential that the metadata has some
meaningful organisation. With a good taxonomy the user
can rapidly locate a small subset of the metadata relevant
to their information need, rather then undertaking an
exhaustive linear search through all the metadata tags
describing the documents contents. Other benefits of the
metadata taxonomy are the advantages it has for metadata
authoring (discussed below), and the extra power it allows
automatic searches.
The metadata taxonomy developed for Gridvis, is
essentially a simplified form of the ontologies use in the
Enterprise [7] and (U)*
projects [2]. These ontologies
were engineered specifically to take advantage of
advanced automated searching techniques for large
document collections. Gridvis on the other hand is for the
manual search of single documents. So, although it would

I

U

" J

#

=

1

Figure 1 A screenshot of Gridvis. By placing their mouse over a cell in
the grid the user has highlighted a paragraph in the iconic document
overview and all the metadata terms in the metadata tree relevant to this
paragraph.

72

The servlet will produce an HTML version of the
document in which every paragraph tagged with the
selected metadata is highlighted using a bold font. The
browser will display paragraph selected; thereby offering
details on demand [3].

priority applications is probleniatic it was given a clientserver architecture: The visualisation is a client-side Java
applet, the queries are answered by a Java servlet using
XLS-T to produce customised HTML documents. The
documents and taxonomy are encoded as XML. The
document structure is described with a standard
hierarchical XML structure, the metadata is embedded
within this alongside the text it describes using RDF.

3 Evaluation
An experiment was undertaken to see whether Gridvis
offered a performance advantage for goal-directed search
tasks.

2.1 The visualization
The Gridvis client-side application contains a
visualisation of a document’s nietadata (see fig 1). This
visualisation can be considered as 3 interlinked sections;
the metadata tree on the lefi-hand side, the iconic
document overview running along the top, and the grid
sitting at the centre. The metadata tree consists of the
document’s metadata tags ancl the metadata taxonomy.
The taxonomy is used to creale a tree structure and the
metadata tags are added to this, as leaf nodes. Each tag
corresponds to one row in the central grid. The iconic
document overview is a miniature image of the document
laid out horizontally along the top of the visualisation.
Each paragraph in this overview lines up with one of the
columns in the grid below. The central grid shows which
metadata tags have been applied to which paragraphs in
the document; each column represents a paragraph and
each row represents a tag. Hence, to show that a tag has
been applied to a particular paragraph the cell where the
appropriate column and row meet is shaded. The colour of
the cell is determined by the value of the applicability
attribute given to the tag when it was applied to this
paragraph; the higher the applicability the darker the
colour (a legend for this scale is always visible in the top
left hand comer). The metadata tags and taxonomy, iconic
document overview and grid, are thus brought together to
produce a visual overview of the document.
The user can query the visualisation with their mouse
through a combination of dynamic querying and brushing
[3]. When the mouse is placed over a cell in the grid, all
the tags in the column are highlighted; hence the
paragraph’s content is described. By looking along the
row of an interesting tag, the mer can see where and to
what extent that topic comes up in the document. So by
moving the mouse in the central grid the user can explore
what different parts of the document are about, and where
in the document particular topics are covered.
The user can also query the document by clicking on
the any cell in the grid. Clicking on the grid will produce a
query that is sent to the servlet formulated with the
metadata and paragraph corresponding to the selected cell.

3.1 Method
The documents selected were a set of five reports
written by an analytical research team within Sainsbury’s.
These are substantial papers, which may inform business
choices on specific supply chain issues for the foreseeable
future.
Five of these documents were used in this
experiment; these were tagged with metadata, and
paragraph numbers.
Three information needs for each document were
elicited from the original audience of the documents. One
to two people were interviewed for each document
(corporate restructuring meant this was the best that could
be done), and were asked to say what they had been
looking for, or would look for now, when they read the
document. This process was undertaken to ensure the
information needs used would be as representative as
possible of what Gridvis would be used for in a real work
situation.
The relevance of paragraphs in the document to each
information need was established using three judges and
an adjudicator. In each case one of the judges was the
documents author, and the other two had been subjects in
the experiment described below. They were asked to read
through the document caretidly to locate every relevant
paragraph. They were asked to classify the relevance of
each paragraph as one of ‘contains key information’,
‘contains relevant information’, and ’contains related
information’. An adjudication session, including three of
the judges and the researcher as an adjudicator, was used
to decide the relevance of paragraphs where the original
judgements showed large disagreements. Where the
differences were small, a mean score was calculated. This
process resulted in a single set of relevance judgments
with which the retrieval performance could be measured.
Twelve participants were found who were employees of
Sainsbury’s and had not read the documents, yet claimed
to be familiar with the concepts in them. Each had the
visualisation explained to them and were asked to

73

classification was made on the basis of inspecting video
and text log files of the session. During analysis of the first
few subjects the classification selection was refined until
they could account for 95% of tag selections and 88% of
paragraph selections.
The strategies used in this
classification will only be listed briefly, with some being
explained as they are raised later discussion. The tag
selection strategies were: keyword mapping, synonym
keyword mapping, related concept keyword mapping, and
narrative keyword mapping. The paragraph selection
strategies were: ‘left-to-right’, ‘applicability’ only, ‘cooccurrence’ only and finally ‘applicability and cooccurrence’.
The frequency of usage of different tag selection
strategies was examined first. Subjects were found to use
a range of strategies, with no one strategy being unduly
neglected. The only problem observed here was a
tendency for subjects to overlook some relevant tags as
evidenced by the of use a mean of 3 out of the mean 6 tags
relevant to each information need.
However, behaviour seemed more problematic in the
use of paragraph selection strategies to pick paragraphs
related to a tag of interest. Here the users were found to
seldom use strategies that capitalise on information given
by the visualisation. Only a third of tags were queried
using the ‘applicability only’ strategy.
This strategy
involves inspecting paragraphs in an order based on
applicability information (i.e. cell shading colour), which
indicates how relevant a tag is to a paragraph.
Additionally, users seemed to make little use of the ‘cooccurrence only’ strategy. CO-occurrence is essentially
information about what other tags have been applied to a
paragraph of interest. This information is important since
it can serve to more fully describe a paragraph’s content
and disambiguate metadata tags. The analysis revealed
that co-occurrence seemed to be used to select paragraphs
only for a fifth of the tags inspected. Hence, in the case of
paragraph selection, the information offered by the
visualisation was little used.
This apparent under-utilisation of the information
provided by Gridvis suggests performance improvements
would be realised if the information were used. The
validity of this suggestion depends on the assumption that
making full use of information about applicability and cooccurrence will lead to better performance. An initial test
of this assumption was undertaken by exhaustively
applying the tag and selection strategies listed above.
Recall (proportion of total relevant paragraphs located)
was increased to threefold of that achieved by subjects in
across conditions by exhaustive application of tag
selection strategies. It was also found that the resulting

familiarise themselves with it by attempting to satisfy
three information needs as quickly as possible with the
first document. The subjects were then asked to repeat
this task with four other documents.
Two of the
documents were presented with Gridvis; the other two
were displayed alone in a browser window. When using
Gridvis, the subjects were asked to only make minimal use
of the document window’s scroll bar and thus rely on
Gridvis for navigation and search.
The detail of users’ interactions were preserved through
a continuous screen recording of the entire experimental
session. Every document query action (i.e. when the
participants clicked on a cell in the grid) was automatically
recorded in a text file and the relevance of paragraphs
found were noted by the subjects. They were asked to
record the paragraph numbers of germane paragraphs and
to classify the paragraph’s relevance. A paragraph could
be given three levels of relevance, as described above.

3.2 Results and discussion
A quantitative analysis of anything but large
performance differences is not a realistic part of academic
research in a corporate environment. For the effect size
observed (d=0.55, a medium effect size) we would require
a sample size of 126 to perform a sufficiently powerful
two sample t-test [4]. Nevertheless in the hope of large
performance differences, data from this experiment was
used to calculate average search times, as well as scores
for precision (the proportion of answers that were correct)
and recall (the proportion of all the possible correct
answers obtained).
The medium effect size and large
variance observed precluded their being any significant
difference between performance with and without Gridvis
using only 12 subjects.
A qualitative analysis of the data was therefore
undertaken to determine why Gridvis did not produce a
large performance improvement and what improvements
might be possible. This analysis started by looking at
what strategies the subjects might be using to make
queries with Gridvis.
The results of an earlier task analysis of Gridvis use
were used to focus the analysis of strategy usage. The task
analysis divided document query production into two
components. Firstly, the user has to find a relevant
metadata tag, then they must to select from amongst the
paragraphs relevant to this tag. The task analysis also
suggested a number of strategies that might be used to
make these selections.
This initial set of strategies was used to classify each
tag and paragraph selection action of the 12 subjects. The

74

decrease in precision (the proportion of located paragraphs
that were relevant) could be offset using the paragraph
selection strategies. These stra1.egies were used to rank the
set of paragraphs related to the tags identified with the tag
selection strategies. The topranked half of this set of
paragraphs had a recall and precision about 60% higher
then the bottom-ranked half. Hence, using the tag and
paragraph selection strategies can be used to increase
precision and recall.
If making more use of the information given by the
visualisation would have improved performance, why did
users not do so? Lack of familiarly and expertise might
be one reason. A more important problem is that the cost
of using this information might be too high. This seems
particularly true for co-occurrence information. To use
this, the user must read the metadata tags applied to each
paragraph. The tags for each paragraph must then be held
in memory while their relative relevance is assessed.
Moreover, the application design makes using COoccurrence information particularly difficult and time
consuming in some circumstances. For example, if there
is more then one interesting tag, the user might want to
find paragraphs relevant to thern all. This requires the user
to scan along the row of each interesting tag to find
coloured cells. Upon arriving at each of these, the user
must then scan vertically to the check if the cells relating
to the other tags of interest are coloured in.
New functionality is being added to Gridvis, to address
these problems. The co-occurrence strategy can be
partially automated if the user selects tags of interest and
Gridvis indicates the number O F tags that co-occur on each
paragraph. This will also allow users to find paragraphs
tagged with all the metadata of interest.
Another possible factor inhibiting the use of
applicability and co-occurrence information is Gridvis’
voracious appetite for screen real estate. With longer
documents the users have to scroll horizontally to see the
whole grid. This makes it impossible to see every
paragraph relevant to a tag and therefore confounds
attempts to select the most appropriate paragraph. This
problem is being addressed by a new implementation that
dynamically redraws the grid at varying levels of detail to
only show in full the parts of the document relevant to the
currently selected tag(s).

presents an insurmountable problem to the academic
researcher working in a corporate environment.
Gridvis was created for use in a corporate environment.
Its design has therefore evolved around the corporate
material (documents, metadata etc) it uses.
These
materials, however, mean little to the uninitiated. Also,
for the evaluation to meaningfully relate to use in the work
situation, representative information needs were elicited
from Sainsbury’s staff. Only people with the appropriate
background knowledge will fully understand these
information needs.
Therefore for Gridvis to be evaluated, subjects must be
found who understand the documents, metadata taxonomy,
metadata and information needs used. The implication is
that participants must be Sainsbury’s employees from the
parts of the business close to the documents used. This
means that obtaining more then the twelve willing subjects
found for this experiment would be extremely challenging.
Obtaining the 126 required for a sufficiently powerful
statistical test is virtually impossible. Another problem is
that one can only ask these subjects to devote a small
portion of their time to an evaluation; an hour at most.
This did not seem to be enough time for users to become
truly confident with the application before doing the
experiment.
Consequently, this kind of empirical
evaluation can only test the performance of novice users.
An additional limitation of this approach is that the
already prohibitive size and cost of experiments
dramatically increases with the number of questions
examined. It is therefore unsuitable for answering the
many detailed question needed to inform application
design and improvement.
An alternative approach, perhaps more suited to
evaluation in a corporate setting is performance modelling.
We are currently using quantitative optimisation models of
information seeking developed at Xerox PARC [5] to
predict the best performance achievable with the interface
given a set of well-defined strategies.
This ‘best
performance’ can then be compared to a control condition
i.e. performance for the same task with paper documents
where people are already expert performers.
Such
comparisons needs much smaller sample sizes of around
25 subjects [4]. Another advantage is that many different
task parameters (e.g. document length, query difficulty)
and design possibilities (e.g. improving the speed of
certain operations) can be examined more cheaply and
more powerfully.

3.3 The problems of empirical evaluation in a
corporate environment
Robust quantitative empirical evaluation using
controlled experimentation often depends, as it has with
Gridvis, on having a reasonably large sample size. This

4

Conclusion
This paper has described Gridvis, a tool for rapid goal-

75

[3] S. K.Card, J. D. Mackinlay, & B. Shneiderman (Eds) (1999)
Information visualisation: Using vision to think, Morgan
Kaufmann, p 223
[4] D. C. Howell, Statistical Methods for Psychology (4'h
edition) Duxbuy 1997
[ 5 ] P. Pirolli and S. K. Card (1999). Information Foraging.
Psychological Review 106(4): 643-675.
[6] M. Uschold (1996) Building Ontologies: Towards a Unified
Methodology,
http://www.aiai.ed.ac.uk/-entprise/enterprise/ontology.
html#pape
rs - abridged version appears in Proceedings of the Workshop on
Ontological Engineering in conjunction with ECAl 96
[7] M.Uschold, M.King. S.Moralee and Y.Zorgios (1998) The
Enterprise Ontology The Knowledge Engineering Review , Vol.
13. Special Issue on Putting Ontologies to Use (eds. M. Uschold
and A. Tate).
[8] N.A. Van House. User Needs Assessment and Evaluation
for the UC Berkeley Electronic Environmental Library Prqject.
Digital Libraries '95: The 2"d Conf. on the Theory and Practice of
Dig. Lib., June '95. Austin. US

directed retrieval of information within a document. It
uses visualisation to enable humans to make direct use of
metadata that describes content at a paragraph level. The
visualisation is an overview of document content which
allows the production of simple dynamic queries.
Empirical evaluation was used to examine whether
Gridvis increases the efficiency of information location.
Subjects were asked to satisfy a set of information needs
using online documents with, and without, the aid of
Gridvis. Quantitative analysis did not reveal a significant
numerical improvement in performance when using
Gridvis. However, qualitative analysis suggested that
subjects were not making full use of the metadata. This
result helped to identify several problems with the Gridvis
interface, which are currently being tackled through a set
of improvements.
We have encountered important constraints on what
methodology is used for reliable evaluation of
visualization performance in a corporate context. The
research must be sensitive to limits in the amount of
business resources it can expect. It will rarely be tractable
to obtain the large sample sizes of staff often needed for
controlled experiments. For this reason it is suggested that
a model-based approach provides an evaluation
methodology better suited to such industry based academic
work.

5

Acknowledgments

This research was sponsored by J Sainsbury plc and
undertaken within the Postgraduate Training Partnership
established between Sira Ltd and University College
London. Postgraduate training partnerships are a joint
initiative of the DTI and the EPSRC.

6 References
[l] A. Adler, A. Gujar, B. L. Harrison, K. O'Hara and A. Sellen.
A diary study of work-related reading: design implications for
digital reading devices; Conference proceedings on Human
factors in computing systems, 1998, Pages 241 - 248
[2] V. R, Benjamins, D. Fensel and S. Decker, (KA)': building
ontologies for the internet: a mid-term report, International journal
of Human-Computer Studies (1999) 51, 687-712

76

