Visualisation of Long Distance Grammatical Collocation Patterns in Language
Contact author: John Elliott, jre @comp.leeds.ac.uk
Co-authors: Eric Atwell, eric @comp.leeds.ac.uk
Bill Whyte, billw@comp.leeds.ac.uk
Organisation: Centre for Computer Analysis of Language and Speech,
School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, Yorkshire, LS2 9JT England

sources, such as music, images, and white noise. It is
assumed
that
generic
species-independent
communication can be detected by concentrating on
localised patterns and rhythms, identifying segments at
the level of characters, words and phrases, without
necessarily having to "understand" the content.
Furthermore, the simplifying assumption is made that a
language-like signal will be encoded symbolically, i.e.
some kind of character-stream. A language-detection
algorithm for symbolic input can use a number of
statistical clues: data compression ratio, "chunking" to
find character bit-length and boundaries, and matching
against a Zipfian type-token distribution for "letters" and
"words". SETI researchers do not claim extensive (let
alone exhaustive) empirical evidence that such
language-detection clues are "correct"; the only real test
will come when the Search for Extra-Terrestrial
Intelligence finds true alien signals. If and when true
SETI signals are found, the first step to interpretation is
to identify the language-like features, using techniques
like the above.

Abstract
Research in generic unsupervised learning of
language structure applied to the Search f o r ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence (SETI) and decipherment of
unknown languages has sought to build up a generic
picture of lexical and structural patterns characteristic
of natural language. As parr of this toolkit a generic
system is required to facilitate the analysis of
behavioural trends amongst selected pairs of terminals
and non-terminals alike, regardless of which target
natural language was selected. Such a tool may be
useful in other areas, such a lexico-grammatical
analysis or tagging of corpora.
Data-oriented
approaches to corpus annotation use statistical n-grams
and/or constraint-based models; n-grams or constraints
with wider windows can improve error-rates, by
examining the topology of the annotation-combination
space. We present a visualisation tool to help linguists
find "useful" PoS-tag combinations, and cohesion
between linguistic annotations at other levels; and
suggest some possible applications.

2. Correlation profiles

1. Introduction: language identification in
unknown signals

An intermediate research goal is to apply Natural
Language Learning techniques to the identification of
"higher-level" lexical and grammatical patterns and
structure in a linguistic signal. We have begun the
development of tools that measures the correlation
profile between pairs of words, parts of speech, and
potentially other linguistic labels in a tagged corpus, as a
precursor to deducing general principles for 'typing' and
clustering into syntactico-semantic lexical classes.
Linguists have long known that collocation and
combinational patterns are characteristic features of
natural languages, which set them apart [ 131. Speech
and language technology researchers have used wordbigram and n-gram models in speech recognition, and
variants of PoS-bigram models for Part-of-Speech
tagging. In general, these models focus on immediate
neighbouring words, but pairs of words may have bonds

Research on NLP applied to the Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence (SETI) has sought to build up a
generic picture of lexical and structural patterns
characteristic of natural language. (Elliott et al [5,6,7])
describe algorithms and software developed to
characterise and detect generic: intelligent language-like
features in an input signal, using Natural Language
Learning techniques: looking for characteristic statistical
"language-signatures" in test corpora. As a first step
towards such species-independent language-detection, a
suite of programs has been developed to analyse digital
representations of a range of data, and use the results to
extrapolate whether or not there are language-like
structures, which distinguish this data from other

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

297

content terms is more complex, we believe the
fundamental results should be consistent.

despite separation by intervening words; this is more
relevant in semantic analysis, eg [14, 41. We sought to
investigate possible bonding between type tokens (i.e.,
pairs of words or between parts of speech tags) at a
range of separations, by mapping the correlation profile
between a pair of words or tags. This can be computed
for given word-pair fype (wl,w2) by recording each
word-pair roken (wl,w2,d) in a corpus, where d is the
The
distance or number of intervening words.
distribution of these word-pair tokens can be visualized
by plotting d (distance between w l and w2) against
frequency (how many (w 1 ,w2,d) tokens found at this
distance). Distance can be negative, meaning w2
occurred before w I .

om

3. Applications in Part-of-Speech Tagging
Part-of-Speech tagging programs have tried to
combine statistical n-gram-based models with local
combinational constraint rules in various ways. The
first large-scale PoS-tagging system TAGGIT [8], used
to PoS-tag the: Brown Corpus, used a set of tagcombinational constraints “hand-crafted” by linguists,
where tag combination preferences were specified
within a window or local context of 5 words. In practice,
researchers found most of the constraints, which fired,
relied on only the immediately preceding or following
word. So, the successor PoS-tagger built for tagging the
follow-on LOB Corpus, CLAWS [ 1 I ] instead used a Is‘order Markov or bigram model of tag-coocurrence,
learnable from a pre-tagged training corpus (sampled
from Brown), augmented with some hand-picked
longer-context constraints when post editors thought
these could improve accuracy [ 1,2]. The widely-used
Brill tagger [3] uses constraint rules rather than a
statistical bigram model, but these constraints are
machine-learnt from, a pre-tagged training corpus, so the
sy,stem can learn different tagging schemes from
different tagged training corpora [ 151. The ENGCG
approach [IO] requires an expert linguist to devise a
Constraint Grammar rule-set using linguistic knowledge
and corpus evidence. Others have extended the
statistical bigram approach to more sophisticated
statistical models (eg Manning and Schutze [12]);
however these may require larger training sets, and
furthermore the increase in sophistication, eg from
bigrams to trigrams, does not yield corresponding
increase in accuracy: error rates have not improved
dramatically.
It appears that many trigrams are “redundant” in
that they would not alter the tagging decision from that
made by the simpler bigram model. A general
observation is that a model based on bigrams or
or
immediate neighbours, whether Markovian
constraint-based, can go a long way, but lower errorrates can be achieved most efficiently by selective use of
longer-context patterns or constraints only when
necessary. A tool to visualize the topology o f . the
combinational-space for Part-of-Speech tags may help
linguists in their search for useful or significant
combinations: the mapping may show up peaks and
troughs, which
correspond
to
longer-distance
combinatiqnal constraints.

-1 - -. - . - - - - - - - . - ..-- .>
I

P(wl,w2)

I

P(w2,wl)

I O............. 1 1 .............10
Offsets

Figure 1. Visualisation of a correlation profile
for a word pair (wl =the,w2=king)
Figure 1 shows the results for the relationship
between a content and function word, so identified by
looking at their cross-corpus statistics. More detailed
examples and explanation are below. It can be seen that
the function word has a high probability of preceding
the content word but has no instance of directly
following it. At least metaphorically, the graph can be
considered to show the ‘binding force’ between the two
words varying with their separation. We are looking at
how this metaphor might be used,in order to describe
language as a molecular structure, whose ‘intermolecular ,forces’ can be related to part-of-speech
interaction ‘and the development of potential semantic
categories for the unknown language.
. , So far we have mainly been working with English,
but we have begun to look at languages which represent
their functional relationships by internal changes to
words or, by the addition of prefixes or suffixes.
Although the process for separating into functional and

,

298

4. The Toolkit
The process by which samples are analysed is subdivided into a number of separate processes, each within
a separate program, which are “piped” at the command
line. This method is used to enable command line
arguments and facilitate choice of output formats.
At the command line two main sets of arguments
can be supplied to constrain the analysis. The first of
these is simply which pair of tokens are required for
analysis. The other constrains the range [window size]
for analysis and later display. Potentially, the system
can depict the behaviour of selected units over the entire
sample in a single snapshot. However, for our purposes
and usually most practical applications, analysis needs
to be restricted to a closer neighbourhood, where
language is most likely 10 possess conditional
grammatical relationships.
Once the data has been ‘cleaned’ it is passed onto
programs, which ‘flag’ and record the positional
information of selected command-line arguments within
the input data for subsequent behavioural analysis. This
positional information is segmented according to the
selected window size.
Using this constraint, it scans for the first
argument; once found it then looks for an instance of the
second argument and records the distance [offset] it was
located at. If no instance is found of the second
argument within the range selected, a value of zero is
recorded and the next instance of the first argument is
sought.

The constrained accumulative behaviour for the
cohesive bonding of the chosen linguistic objects are
then collated and formatted for visualisation.

5. The output.
Finally, the data extracted is passed to the last link
in the chain, which prepares the information for display.
Here, two options are available. One is in the form of a
graph, which shows the two sets of information argI..arg2 and arg2..argI - either side of a centre line .
This style of representation is perhaps preferable when
first searching for ‘trends’ prior to any precise analysis
supplied numerically.
The alternative display is numeric, where the
individual frequencies, independent and conditional
probabilities are displayed for interpretation.
Here
again, both sets of ordered argument pairs are displayed,
with the additional indicator to whether the frequency of
the pairs’ occurrence at that particular word separation is
greater or less than that of the combined independent
probabilities.

35
30

25
20

1snr.y
15

io
5
0
1

=noun

Figure 2. Bilateral co-occurrence detection
distance

As the reverse behaviour of the selected arguments
has the potential to be useful in developing a complete
picture, the program also records the behaviour where
argument one follows argument two. This analysis of
‘mirrored pairs is performed coricurrently providing time
efficiency at run-time.

.

c

9

10

Figure 3: VB-tag profile
In addition to measuring the frequency of exclusive
collocations within a given window size, the system also
measures and includes the frequencies of all second
arguments for each offset within range. These are made
distinguishable by representing each combination using
different colours and texture (for black and white
displays). Therefore, for this measurement, the system
does not cease to look for subsequent occurrences of
argument 2 once the first is found, moving on then to
the next occurrence of argument1 but continues to
record all second argument occurrences up until the

c

f(W1) f(w2) = x>o f(W1, x, w2) + x<o f(w2,
x, w l )
and the probability w l precedes w2 at offset is:
f(W1)
f(w1, x, w2)
fWW)
f(w1, n, w2)
Left hand side probability = f(x) /
Left hand side probability = f(x) /

f(x)
f(x)

x < ~

x,~

299

in a Markov model. However, some longer-distance
cohesive trends were found, indicated by h, in the above
table, where n is the offset distance. For example, in our
sample, adverbs (Rb) were never immediately followed
by a common noun (Cnoun), but there was a peak at a
separation of 5.
Such information could be used to guide
development of Constraint Grammars. The English
Constraint Grammar described in [IO] includes
constraint rules up to 4 words either side of the current
word (see Table 16, p352); the peaks and troughs in the
visualisation tool might be used to find candidate
patterns for such long-distance constraints.

given limit. This particular measure has proved useful
in observing grouping of parts-of-speech.
To enable analysis of multiple selections and how
they compare with each other, the information
extrapolated is then ported for 3D graphical
representation [see fig 31. This particular stage will
eventually be integrated for purposes of efficiency but is
not essential.
Examining language in such a manner also lends
itself to summarising the behaviour to its more notable
features when forming profiles. Therefore conducting
information compression akin to Principal Component
Analysis.
A technique more usually found in
applications conducting analysis of images and found to
be extremely effective.

7. Assessing syntactic separation of related
word-classes

6. Finding long-distance combinational
constraints

In addition to the above general overview of word-tag
combinational topology, the visualisation tool can focus
on specific subsets, of thc grammar. WH-words are
given a detailed sub-classification in the LOB tag-set,
with five different W-tags (tags for WH-words, starting
W...). The W-tag set from the LOB corpus was
analysed to ascertain whether such fine-grained lexical
sub-categories are justifiable. In the table below [figure
51, principle behavioural elements of the syntactic
topography show results for each major W-tag followed
by one of a number of selected major PoS-tags (the
reverse being also automatically calculated) using a
larger sample set of over eighty five thousand words.

Using a five thousand-word extract from the LOB
corpus [9]; a number of parts-of-speech pairings were
analysed for their cohesive profiles. The arbitrary figure
of five thousand was chosen, as it both represents a
sample large enough to reflect trends seen in samples
much larger (without losing any valuable data) and a
sample size, which we see as at least plausible when
analysing ancient or extra-terrestrial languages where
data is at a premium. Figure 4 shows a sample of the
main syntactic behavioural features for their cooccurrence ranging over the chosen windo,w of ten
words.

Fig 5
WDr

Fig4
noun

coni

verb

article

P*,hh

6,b

a-, h2

I
I

Idem

I

noun

Z

I

6. h,,

I
I

xij
6. h,

I

adverh
h,

Figure 5. Analysis of grammatical collocation
patterns of LOB WH-tags illustrated in fig 6.
Key:

Figure
4.
Analysis
of
distinguishing
grammatical collocations of main Parts of

Z = Zero bigram - or at offset specified - occurrences.
6 = Very weak bonding - near zero - at bigram occurrences.

p = Strong bonding at bigram co-occurrences.

Speech.

" = Indicates opposing cohesive trend when P.O.S. reversed.
l,,= High peak beyond bigram at offset distance of 'n'
I$= Flat distribution across offsets - bigram bonding evident.

Most of the combination patterns found correspond
to tag-bigrams, which could be extracted automatically

300

Figure 6 shows the topography of one example Wtag set obtained from corpora analysis. The tables
indicate broadly similar combinational behaviour, with
very little distinctive behaviour to justify such subcategorisation. There may well be a case for combining
most, if not all of these tags into one grammatical
category; the sub‘classes are lexical classes rather than
syntactic classes.

The rationale here being: given no prior ,knowledge
except those gleaned from previous stages of
unsupervised analysis, can statistically based features of
the annotation-combination space topology contribute
towards clustering the functional words into parts of
speech.
To ascertain the feasibility of such a hypothesis,
English functional words, which are discovered >during
previous unsupervised analysis, were analysed. It was
found, using such distant behaviour, that frequent almost bound - word combinations such as in figure 7
below, display a marked ‘tailing off‘ in the direction
where bonding is evident, in contrast to the opposing
direction where repulsion occurs at the immediate zero
offset bigram occurrence.
The red area depicts behaviour for the bigram idthe,
whilst the blue depicts its opposite. This profile can be
compared with the non-bound word pair topology of
‘inlof‘, seen in figure 8.

Figure 6: WRB-tag profile
To investigate whether particular combinations
display distinguishable traits at more distant separations,
which may further aid unsupervised language learning, a
one hundred wordlparts-of-speech tag window was
employed.

Figure 8: idof profile
The white areas, which contribute towards the overall
topology, are where the exclusivity of selected pair
combinations are not enforced and intervening
secondary occurrences of a selected word are ignored.

8. Devising constraint grammars at other
linguistic levels
Corpus linguists are developing corpora annotated at
higher linguistic levels, for example discourse speechact labeling. A “grammar” of speech acts could be
developed in the style of the Helsinki Constraint
Grammars, by building up a rule-set of combinational
constraints. The visualisation tool could be applied to
any level of corpus annotation, in building a constraintbased description of tag-combination at that level.

Figure 7: inithe profile

30 1

9. Conclusion

Semantics, Tiltburg, Netherlands.
[5] Elliott, John, and Eric Atwell. 2000. Is there anybody out
there? :The detection of intelligent and generic language-like
features. In Joumal of the British Interplanetary Society,
53:1/2, 13-22.

In general, we realise that testing our language detection
algorithms will be a significant issue. We do not have
examples that we know to be definitely from nonhuman, but intelligent origins, and we need to look
extensively at signals of non-intelligent origin which
may mimic some of the language characteristics
described above. This will form a significant part of our
future work and we welcome discussion and
suggestions.
This is not to claim that the system described is
revolutionary or indeed unique. However, we are not
aware of any system that tackles the problem of terminal
and non-terminal behaviour in such a visual and flexible
way. Manning and Schiitze state [12], Any technique
that lets one visualise the data better is likely to bring to
the fore new generalisations and to stop one from
making wrong assumptioris about the data". We
therefore submit that the ability to visualise interactive
behaviour over more distant offsets in a single snapshot
has the potential to identify often overlooked but
nonetheless important behaviour.
Potential implications for tagging and probability
assignments underlying Hidden Markov Models are the
trends observed at offsets, which exceed often more
commonly used conditional information such as
trigrams.
Using this long-distance view, which is
enhanced with visual representation, we believe a more
intuitive and immediate feel for conditional behaviour
can be gleaned and a more complete and reliable model

[6] Elliott, John, Eric Atwell and Bill Whyte. 2000. Language
identification in unknown signals. In Proceeding of
COLING'2000,
18th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 1021-1026, Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL) and Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, San Francisco.
[7] Elliott, John, and Eric Atwell 1999. Language in signals:
the detection of generic species-independent intelligent
language features in symbolic and oral communications in
Proceedings of the 50th lntemational Astronautical Congress,
paper IAA-99-IAA.9.1.08, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

'I

[8] Greene, Barbara and Gerald Rubin. 1981. Automatic
grammatical tagging of English. Providence, R.I.: Department
of Linguistics, Brown University.

[9] Johansson, Stig, Eric Atwell, Roger Garside and Geoffrey
Leech. 1986. The Tagged LOB corpus: users' manual. Bergen
University, Norway: ICAME, The Norwegian Computing
Centre for the Humanities.
[IO] Karlsson, Fred, Atro Voutilainen, Juha Heikkila, and Arto
Anttila. 1995. Constraint Grammar: a language-independent
system for parsing unrestricted text. Berlin: Mouton de
Gru yter.
[ 1 I ] Leech, Geoffrey, Roger Garside and Eric Atwell. 1983.

The automatic grammatical tagging of the LOB corpus.
ICAME Journal 7:13-33.

developed.

[ 121 Manning, Christopher and Hinrich Schutze. 1999.

Once we have a clearer picture of how visualisation
peaks and troughs correspond to constraint rules, it
should also be possible to semi-automate the process of
extracting constraint grammars from (tagged) corpora.
Plans are in place to completely automate this system
for public domain o n the Internet.

Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
[ 131 Sinclair, John. 1991. Corpus, concordance, collocation,
describing English language. Oxford University Press.

[I41 Wilson, Andrew and Paul Rayson. 1993. The automatic
content analysis of spoken discourse. In C Souter and E Atwell
(eds), Corpus based computational linguistics. Rodopi,
Amsterdam.

10. References
[ l ] Atwell, Eric. 1982. LOB Corpus tagging project: post-edit
handbook. Department of Linguistics and Modern English
Language. University of Lancaster.

[ 151 Atwell, Eric, George Demetriou, John Hughes, Amanda
Schiffrin, Clive Souter, and Sean Wilcock. 2000. A
comparative evaluation of modern English corpus
grammatical annotation schemes. CAME Joumal, 24: 7-23.
Bergen: International Computer Archive of Modem and
medieval English.

[2] Atwell, Eric. 1983. Constituent Likelihood grammar.
KAME Joumal 7:34-66.

[3] Brill, Eric. 1993. A Corpus-based approach to language
learning. PhD thesis, Department of Computer and
Information Science, University of Pennsylvania.
[4] Demetriou, George, and Atwell, Eric. 2001. A domain
independent semantic tagger for the study of meaning
associations in English text. To appear in proceedings of
IWCS4: Fourth International Workshop on Computational

302

