Visualizing Capacity and Load in Production Planning
Peter Y.F. Wu
Department of Information Science and Telecommunications
~ c h oIoof ~nformationSciences, University of Pittsburgh
E-mail: P W u @ s is . p i t t . edu
in-time, make-to-order, supply chain optimisation,
etc. and a variety o f constraints: raw materials
availability, fluctuating market demands, human
resources regulations. All may aim at gaining a
competitive advantage, but the different objectives
and constraints may be quite incongruent in practice.
The problem is not only a difficult optimisation
problem because of the large number of parameters
one needs to deal with, but it is also a complex
management problem because of the changing nature
o f the constraints.
Advanced Planning and
Scheduling systems have come a long way to begin
establishing a market only about five or six years ago.
However, most of these systems work in a closed
manner. They offer no tools to visualize how their
optimised, or more often sub-optimised, solutions are
reached, and they do not facilitate for manual changes
to the production plans they put together [ 1,2,3].
Good visualization tools for production
planning data are simply rare. Our objective is to use
visualization to support making incremental manual
changes to a production plan. We believe this
approach will allow businesses to better cope with the
dynamic changes of constraints in production
planning [4], and will augment current Advanced
Planning and Scheduling systems to improve
versatility and enhance usability [5,6,7].
Our study is prompted by the production
planning problem of metal ingot casting. We identify
the potential bottle-neck machines of the production
process, namely the melting furnace and the pre-heat
oven. Our approach is based on visual models of the
production capacity of these machines. These models
allow us to visualizing the production capacity in the
load graph of the bottle-neck machines. Using the
load graphs, the planner can interact with the
production plan and make changes manually, while
relevant information about the impact of the changes
may be shown immediately through visual feedback.
Our basic premise is derived from Goldratt’s theory
o f constraints [SI. We focused our attention on

Abs,tract
Production planning is difficult not just because
of the intricate relationships between the myriads of
parameters, but also the dynamic nature of changes
in the decision making environment.
Good
visualization tools for production planning are rare.
A good visualization tool can augment an advanced
planning system to make it more usable: it would
provide a better undersllanding of the production
plan, as well as a medium for the human planner to
make manual changes by direct manipulation, while
having the ramijications ofthe changes in immediate
visual feedback. Production planning is not merely
an optimization problem. The possibility of making
incremental manual charges will allow the planner
to be more responsive to the dynamic changes in
businesses today.
This paper reports our study prompted by the
production planning of metal ingot casting. To
visualize the production capacity and the current
load in production planning, we put our focus on the
potential bottle-neck machines, nameb, the melting
furnace and the pre-heat oven. We developed models
of these machines which capture their special
characteristics relevant to planning. Using our
models in the loadgraphs of these machines, we were
able to visualize the loading situation and the
available production capmi@. The visual models
facilitate direct manipulation by a human planner to
interact with a production plan to make incremental
changes, with the impact of the change verijied
automatically. Visualization with our interactive
techniques will augment advanced planning systems
to provide better versatility and enhance usability.

1. Introduction
Modem production is facing the tremendous
challenge of global competition today. Apart from the
fast pace of order fulfilment requirements, production
planning must also deal with multiple objectives: just-

357
0-7695-1195-3\01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

observe that planners will still need to make
incremental manual changes every now and then.
The need to visualize the available capacity in the
production plan becomes critical.
We apply Goldratt’s theory of constraints [8]
and focus our attention on the potential bottle-necks.
The loading situation at the bottle-neck would give us
a better measure of the available production capacity.
With respect to each machine, a production therefore
loads the plan in two key dimensions: the time
(duration) and the timing (slot). We partition the time
domain into contiguous and disjoint buckets to
visualize these two dimensions: an order which needs
this machine is represented as a block in the time
bucket, occupying a time duration in its timing slot.
The maximum capacity of the machine is then simply
the total available time. Figure 2 illustrates such a
load graph, with the time bucket size of one week.
The maximum feasible load may then be 168 hours,
assuming availability of 24 hours and 7 days a week.
Each block represents a job assigned for production
within that week. The height of the block represents
the load on production capacity, that is, the time
duration it will have to occupy the machine. We can
easily see any case of overloading, as well as the
availability of capacity for production. Furthermore,
each job assigned to any particular week may be late
for delivery, too early for production, or optimal. We
color coded the blocks, so that late jobs are red, early
jobs are blue, and the ones done just in time are
green. Interesting interaction occurs on the load
graph when the planner can drag and drop each block,
moving it from one week to another, re-arrange their
order within each week, or split up a block and move
one part away. When the ramifications of these
changes are computed automatically with visual
feedback, the planner can then decide whether or not
the change is feasible, or desirable.

planning with finite capacity, and more specifically,
on planning for the constraint machine.
This paper will first briefly describe the metal
ingot casting problem. The main point however is
not to address the issues of arriving at an optimised
plan, but rather the visualization of the production
capacity in the loading of the production plan to
facilitate for incremental manual changes. We focus
our attention on the potential bottle-neck machines
and the building of accurate visual models to support
direct manipulation in interaction. In the case of
metal ingot casting, we identify two categories of
machines in the potential bottle-necks, namely, the
set-up sensitive machines and the batch operation
machines. For each of these categories, we also
extend the model to capture more detailed
characteristics relevant to planning, and we describe
how these features support planner interaction to
make incremental changes in the production plan.
Each of the two categories shows its own uniqueness
in the design.

2. Metal ingot casting
In metal ingot casting, each alloy consists of the
proportion of different ingredients to be mixed with
the metal ore. The mixture is poured into the melting
furnace. The molten mixture is then released into the
dropping tool to cast into ingots. The ingots then
need to go through the pre-heat oven for heat
treatment. Each type of ingot product has its recipe
detailing the temperature profile for heat treatment.
Figure 1 below illustrates the process.
. Metalore
Pre-heat Oven

II

Melting
Fumace

Dropping
Tool

Figure 1. The metal ingot casting process
Traditional planning approach lays out the tasks
of each work centre (machine) in a Gantt Chart. To
satisfy an order for production, we load the machines
needed, each at the appropriate time slot needed for
the production process. However, the Gantt Chart
does not make it easy to assess the production
capacity still available. This becomes evident when
the load is close to the total available capacity. While
the overall plan is a global optimisation problem, we

Week 1

Week 2

Week 3

Week4

-

Figure 2. Loading a production plan
Each block may also serve as a window (screen
real estate) to facilitate interaction with the planner to
drill down and find more detailed order information
such as product code, customer order number,

358

customer name and select to display any, of the
information as label on the block.

3. Two categories of machines
When a production plan is near full capacity, we
should pay attention to the loading o f the potential
bottle-neck machines.
Overloading may occur at
these machines before others. Hence the planner
should only make manual incremental changes to the
loading of the bottle-neck machines, with possible
overloading on other machines due to the change
checked automatically, along with other requirements
(such as availability of raw materials and human
resources). However, since the bottle-neck machines
are the ones that dictate cwerall throughput, we extend
our model to accurate capture the special
characteristics of these machines which are relevant
to planning.
In metal ingot casting, the two
predominant bottle-necks are the melting furnace and
the pre-heat oven. Taking the abstraction of their
respective characteristics, we classify them into two
categories. The following will describe our model of
the two categories of machines, respectively.

Figure 3. Loading a set-up sensitive machine

3.2. The Batch Operation Machine
By batch operation machine, we refer to
machines that handle multiple jobs in one single
operation, taking a fixed duration of time for the
operation. The pre-heat oven in metal ingot casting is
an example. Metal ingots need to go through heat
treatment, specified by a temperature profile over
time called the recipe. While a recipe may take a
substantially long time, the pre-heat oven can apply
the same recipe to different jobs at the same time if
there is sufficient space in the oven. Hence, the preheat oven can take multiple jobs in one batch. The
operation takes a fixed duration dependent only on
the recipe, whether or not the batch is filled. In
planning for batch operation machines, it would be
desirable to fill up each batch as much as possible.
Visually presented on the load graph, each
batch operation is represented as a frame instead of a
solid block, so that we may also show the jobs
assigned to that batch inside the frame. Each frame is
a batch, it may or may not be filled. The height of
each frame is a measure for the time duration of the
batch operation. Each frame also supports direct
manipulation with drag-and-drop, so that the planner
can interactively move them around. The frame itself
is not associated with a customer order, and has no
status for late, early, or on-time delivery. We show
the jobs assigned to the batch as blocks within the
frame, visually presenting the filled/empty status of
the batch. Each block within the frame is a j o b
associated with a customer order, and is color coded
for the status of late, early, or just-in-time delivery.
They also support direct manipulation with drag-anddrop: the planner can move the job to another batch
by moving the block from one frame to another. The
planner may also move the whole frame. Then all the
blocks within the frame will move along together. In

3.1. Set-up Sensitive Machine
By set-up sensitive machine, we refer to
machines that may require substantial time for
preparation when switching from one job to another.
The melting furnace in metal ingot casting is a set-up
sensitive machine. Changing from one alloy to
another can be very costly because of the need to
wash and flush the whole furnace with expensive
molten metal, and precious machine time to melt the
metal. In planning for set-up sensitive machines, we
need to minimize the set-up cost. Visually presented
on the load graph, the yellow blocks (or strips.
because they are usually thin) represent the set-up
jobs necessary to change from one job to the next.
The set-up jobs are not associated with any customer
order and have no promised delivery dates. When the
planner moves the blocks around to adjust the
production plan, the yellow block may appear of
disappear as required by the j o b sequence. They give
the planner an easy ,visual perception of the
performance of the production plan in saving set-up
time. Figure 3 is an actual screen capture of the load
graph of a set-up sensitive machine, to support direct
manipulation through visualization.

359

each case, the ramifications of the change must be
computed with immediate visual feedback. Figure 4
illustrates the load graph with the frames and blocks
for the batch operation machine.
-

....!!!??I?!!

m.:..?! .... . . ...........

5. References
[I]

....

[2]
[3]

[4]

Figure 4. Loading a batch operation machine
[5]

4. Further work
The work reported here is on-going. Our design
is to present the visual model together into a load
planning board, to support manual interaction by
direct manipulation. To visualize whether or not the
change is feasible or desirable, the planner will also
need to synchronize the planning with availability of
raw materials, human resources, and the strategy for
projected inventory level. The load planning board
should then incorporate these information and have
them updated automatically along with manual
changes to the production plan. The design and
development work of the visual load planning board
in on-going. In ‘our effort, we have identified two
categories of potential bottle-neck machines which
apply to metal ingot casting. To work with other
production industries, we may very well need to
extend our visual models to capture the specific
characteristics of possibly other machine categories.

[6]

[7]

[SI

360

The Aberdeen Group, ”Advanced Planning Engine
Technology: can capital generating technology change
the face of manufacturing?’ Aberdeen Group Report,
February 1996.
Alice Greene, “Decision-Support Tools Provide
Competitive Edge”, Managing Automation,
March 1996, p.8.
Bill Mcilvaine, “Planning and Scheduling gets
the job done”, Managing Automation, August
1996, pp.24-26.
Octavio Juarez, “Evaluating Visualization Based
on the Performed Task”, Proceedings of the
Information
Visualization
International
Conference, London, July 2000, pp. 135-142.
Peter Y.F. Wu, “Visual Capacity Modeling for
Interactive Production Planning”, Proceedings of
Computer Technology Solutions‘99 Conference,
Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Detroit,
Michigan, September 1999.
Ping Zhang, “Visualizing Production Planning
Data, Visualization Blackboard”,lEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications, Vol. 16, No.5, 1996,
pp.7-IO.
Ed H. Chi, “A Taxonomy of Visualization
Techniques using the Data State Reference
Model”, Proceedings of the Information
Visualization International Conference IV 2000,
London, United Kingdoms, July 2000. pp.69-75.
Eliyahu Goldratt and Jeff Cox,.”The Goal: A
Process of On-Going Improvement”, North River
Press, Inc. 1984.

