2009 International Conference on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation

Research on 3D Interactive Simulation System for Li/MnO2 Coin Cell Production Line
Based on Virtual Reality

Chen Xiaoming

Lin Shuzhong

School of Machinery and Electronics
Tianjin Polytechnic University
Tianjin, China
cxm19840126@163.com

School of Machinery and Electronics
Tianjin Polytechnic University
Tianjin, China
linshuzhong@gmail.com
realize the function What You See Is What I See
˄WYSIWIS˅, which not only has characteristics of low
cost, resource sharing, but also can transcendence limit of
time and regional to improve efficiency for design products
[2].
This paper focuses on the development of a novel 3D
interactive simulation system for supporting Li/MnO2 coin
cell production line design based on virtual reality.

Abstract—A novel 3D interactive simulation system for
Li/MnO2 coin cell production line was presented in this paper.
In order to solve the shortcomings of using traditional solid
model for static simulation, the 3D visualization of the model
and interactive motion simulation for Li/MnO2 coin cell
production line was realized by AutoCAD/3dsmax/VRPlatform interaction through the external software interface.
The 3D assembling model was built by AutoCAD software and
exported into the 3ds max environment by DWG format for
rendering, and then channeled into VR-Platform software for
creating virtual environment, human-computer interface and
database connection inquiry for interactive simulation. Based
on these techniques, the simulation system is achieved and
provides an adequate interactive simulation interface for
Li/MnO2 coin cell production line manufacturing process
simulation, perfect information inquiries for designer and
manager. Therefore the research of 3D interactive simulation
system for Li/MnO2 coin cell production line has important
research value and application prospect.

II.

The combination of AutoCAD/3dsmax/VR-Platform
composes of the system whose framework is organized by 3
key steps: first, production line model is created by
AutoCAD, and several critical steps are proposed. Second,
rendering production line model in 3ds max environment.
Then, creating virtual environment and human-computer
interactive interface and database connection inquiry by use
of a famous domestic VR software called VR-Platform. The
system structure is presented in Fig. 1.
Each module of a machine design should be rapidly
verified with errors and misconceptions identified as early as
possible and a whole product as an assembly of various
modules should then be analyzed and tested virtually before
being physically implemented. The simulation system
provides an adequate interactive simulation interface for
Li/MnO2 coin cell production line manufacturing process
simulation, perfect information inquiries, and will make
products design re-configurable and flexible in final.

Keywords-VR; modeling; simulation; VR-Platform; Li/MnO2
coin cell

I.

INSTRUCTION

In present China, most of the Li/MnO2 coin cell
manufacturing equipments also remain in the manual or
semi-mechanization level and the productivity is very low
[1], so to develop a Li/MnO2 coin cell auto assembly line
which has independent intellectual property rights is
essential. As its high automation, it can greatly reduce labor
intensity and improve the efficiency of the coin cell
production, so the coin cell production line can be widely
used in the domestic coin cell manufacturing enterprises. In
order to adapt to market demand, production line requires the
continuous improvement of the structure and the
performance, at the same time, the R & D cycle needs to be
shortened. Therefore, using advanced technological methods
and means to develop production line is to be an inevitable
choice.
Virtual reality becomes an emerging technology, which
summarizes the computerized manufacturing activities with
models, simulations and artificial intelligence instead of
objects and their operations in the real world, and
transmission of network to realize resource-sharing. It can

978-0-7695-3583-8/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICMTMA.2009.124

THE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF
SIMULATION SYSTEM

III.

PRODUCTION LINE 3D MODELING

A. The Composition of the Production Line and Process
Analysis
The Li/MnO2 coin cell auto assembly line is electrical
and mechanical equipment. According to production
technology of Li/MnO2 coin cell, the production line is
composed of 6 critical processes, including the cutting and
pressing Lithium-chip process, etc [1]. These components
and their relationships are illustrated in Fig. 2.

510

Process1
Process5

Process2, 3
Process6

Process4

Figure 3. The 3D assembling model of Li/MnO2 coin cell production line.
Figure 1. The framework of VR-based simulation system.

B. ModelingǃInterference Check and Optimization for
Production Line
The 3D assembling model for Li/MnO2 coin cell
production line is built by AutoCAD software. By use of the
existing AutoCAD two-dimensional drawings of parts,
through stretching, rotating and Boolean operations to create
three-dimensional model of parts and assemble them in
accordance with the relationship of the location between
parts. The Fig. 3 shows the assembling model of the
production line. After assembly, we should do interference
check to check the reasonableness of the design. If
interference occurs, it will prompt the interference parts and
the sites, and then following the prompts to adjust them to
the correct design, reasonable assembly [3]. The Fig. 4
presents the interference check of process 2ǃ3. In this way,
we may check and modify other processes and create models
accurately.

Figure 4. Interference check of process 2ǃ3.

IV.

RENDERING FOR PRODUCTION LINE IN 3DS
MAX

Rendering in 3ds max is the preparation for VR-Platform.
In order to realize the perfect interactive simulation effect, it
is necessary to render and optimize the production line. First,
we need to import the model into 3ds max by DWG format.
After matching materials to production line and setting key
parameters, rendering the model and the Fig. 5 shows the
result. Then baking the rendered model and exporting it to
VRP editor.

Figure 5. Rendering for production line in 3ds max.
Figure 2. Flowing chart of the production line.

511

V.

INTERACTIVE SIMULATION IN VRPLATFORM

B. Database Connection Inquiry
In order to realize interactive information inquiry of
production line to assist designer and managers, we may
construct a database (Fig. 9) which contains of related datum
of production line, and make use of the ADO database
interface to link the database. Through script edition and
setting mouse event in VR-Platform environment, when
mouse is close to a part, the information call-board will
display related datum of this part and it will be useful for
design and production. For example, the NO.2 hopper
information is shown in Fig. 10.

VR-Platform is an excellent domestic 3d interactive
simulation platform. The application of the software is
simple and highly visual. As its powerful functions, it will
inject new vitality into the development of VR industry.
Now the VR-P software has been widely used in visual
simulation, urban planning, interior design, industrial
simulation, the rehabilitation of monuments, bridges and
roads design, military simulation and other fields.
A. Creating Virtual EnvironmentǃHuman-computer
Interactive Interface
In this research, we use the convenient data interface
between VR-P and 3ds max, by clicking the “[*VRPlatform*] | Export | all objects” button to export the
rendered model to VRP editor to build the virtual
environment. First of all, by use of the VRP-SDK module to
organize the mechanical movement of production line and
realize 3D motion simulation. Second, on the “creating
object” panel of VRP editor, we can create “camera” to roam
in the virtual environment. Third, on the “create a new
surface board” panel , we edit two-dimensional interface for
human-computer interaction by creating “buttons”. When
editing work is complete, we compile it and generate a *. exe
compiler file which will be played by VRP browser. The
compiling process is shown in Fig. 6. Running the compiler
file, the demonstration of virtual environment of production
line can be observed by VRP browser in Fig. 7, and VRP
browser interface includes control buttons. Press the “start”
and “pause” buttons to control product line motion
simulation, and “camera” button to roam in the virtual
environment to observe production line clearly.

Figure 8. Database connection inquiry design

Figure 9. Access database information of production line

Figure 6. Compiling process in VRP editor

Figure 10. Information inquiry of NO.2 hopper

Figure 7. Virtual environment and human-computer interface

512

VI.

SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

A. Summaries
• The 3D interactive simulation system for Li/MnO2
coin cell production line is realized by
AutoCAD/3dsmax/VR-Platform interaction through
the external software interface based on virtual
reality. The motion simulation is feasible and highefficient on VRP browser.
• The advantages between AutoCAD, 3ds max and
VR-Platform are effective combined. The modeling
is convenient and swift and file can effectively
transmit on network.
• User can observe Li/MnO2 coin cell production line
motion status in any views, and the database
connection inquiry technology is verified by the VRPlatform.
• Because of its good utility and versatility, the system
can be applied to other related industry fields as well.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

B. Future Work
With the development of simulation technology of
computer, the online simulation of production line is
becoming a hot topic. So in the future work, we will use
networks and database technology to realize the real-time
information flowing between the simulation system and the
physical scene and to achieve remote controlling and online
real-time simulation.

[9]

[10]

[11]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[12]

This work reported in this article was supported by the
Foundation of Key Subjects Construction of Tianjin City in
the 11th Five-Year-Plan, grant No. 029459.
The authors also acknowledge the contributions of Sun
Huilai, Zhang Lijuan, and Liu Binying to the system
infrastructure which made this work possible.

[13]

REFERENCES

[15]

[1]

[2]

[14]

L.X. Sun and S.Z. Lin, “The design of the control System of
assembly Line for Li/MnO2 button batteries,” Battery Bimonthly, vol.
34, Apr. 2004, pp. 102-103.
L.D. Zhu, C. Su, J.M. Hou, Y.Y. Su, W.S. Wang, “Study on
simulation system for turn-milling centre based on VR technology,”

513

Proc. 2008 ISECS International Colloquium on Computing,
Communication, Control, and Management (CCCM), IEEE Press,
Aug. 2008, pp. 400-404, doi: 10.1109/CCCM.2008.381.
J.G. Zhao, Q.M. Wang, and X.G. Xiao, “Based on AutoCAD and 3ds
Max software realized the working devices’ 3d emulation,” Modern
Manufacturing Engineering, 2006, pp. 123-126.
M. Onishi, T. Odashima, “An immersion-type 3D dynamic simulation
environment for developing human interactive robot systems,”
Systems and Computers, Sep. 2006, pp. 47-57.
L.D. Zhu, C.X. Zhu, J.Y. Yang, T.B. Yu, J.S. Shi, and W.S. Wang,
“Research on motion simulation for robot based on virtual reality,”
Proc. 2007 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics, ROBIO, Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Computer Society Press, 2008, pp. 1296-1300.
G. Bian, Y.D. Liu, “Simulation of 3D motion of vessel based on 3ds
Max,” Computer Simulation, April 2004, pp. 216-270.
G.f. Ding; J. Zhang; Y. He; Y.S. Zou; B.X. Liu, “VR-based
simulation on material handling remote operation for engineering
machine,” Proc. 2007 4th International Conference on Image and
Graphics, IEEE Press, Auguest, 2007, pp. 984-9.
M.N. Yuniarto, A.W. Labib, “Designing an online and real time
simulation, control and monitoring of disturbances in an intelligent
manufacturing system,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Industrial Informatics, IEEE Press, 2003, pp. 273-278..
H.J. Li, L.Y. Tong, and X.R. Xie, “A method of fast stability
simulation for online transient pre-decision,” Proc. 2005 IEEE/PES
Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exhibition, IEEE
Press, 2005, pp. 10-13.
L.Y. Albertwen, and T.L. Hsin, “A Petri Net based offline simulation
and online diagnostic platform for manufacturing systems,” Chinese
Institute of Industrial Engineers, January 2005, pp. 64-75.
H.M. Liu, “An overview of online simulation techniques,” Computer
Knowledge and Technology, May 2005, pp. 61-63.
M.L. Wang, J. Xee, Y. Yang, “Dynamics model simulation on VR
platform,”. Proc. 2nd International Workshop on Digital Media and
its Application in Museum and Heritage, IEEE COMPUTER SOC.,
2007, pp. 268-271.
B. Ferry, L. Kervin, K. Rudd, “Use of rich internet applications to
develop an online classroom-based simulation,” Inderscience
Enterprises, 2006, pp. 200-14.
R. Zheng, G.F. Zhang, S.L. Dai, “Development of scene simulation
platform with online edit ability,” System Simulation, vol. 20,Mar.5,
2008, pp. 1229-1233.
P.V. Saturley, A.D. Spence, “Integration of milling process
simulation with on-line monitoring and control,” INTERNATIONAL
JOURNAL
OF
ADVANCED
MANUFACTURING
TECHNOLOGY, vol. 16, 2000, pp. 92-99.

