Learning and the Importance of Interactivity
Information Design becomes Interaction Design
R. Brian Stone, Assistant Professor
Department of Industrial, Interior, and Visual Communication Design
The Ohio State University
stone. 158@osu.edu
Because multimedia requires the interaction of a user,
casual decisions cannot be made. Therefore, the
engagement of multimedia cannot be treated as a passive
activity. The user must take on an equal amount of
responsibility if the program is to be successful.
As educators, we are now faced with a more
heterogeneous group of learners. Learning styles,
multiculturalism, and age demographics are just some of
the factors that contribute to this diversity. We must begin
to look at new ways to deliver educational content in an
effort to effectively educate this changing group of
students (and users). Interactive media may be just one of
the answers to this issue. It has the ability to empower
students to not only work at their own pace, but to become
an active participant in the experience of synthesizing
information. This paradigm places learning with the
learner.
While it may be argued that all media are interactive to
a certain degree, interactive multimedia, and in this case,
CD-ROM applications, enjoy the potential of an unusually
high level of interactivity (cognitive, physical, audible,
and visual). In examining interactivity as a salient feature
of this media, we propose to think beyond the notion of
interactivity as two-way communication between people
and devices, but stimulus-response psychology [2]. This
model is useful in pointing toward two-way
communication versus one-way; it does require that the
user and the computer both send messages and respond to
what is sent.

Abstract
As designers, we are faced with a more heterogeneous
group of customers, product users and learners. Learning
styles, multiculturalism, arid age demographics are just
some of the factors that contribute to this diversiy. As
designers and design educators, it is our mission to look
at new ways to deliver instructional material and
information in an effort to propose a new paradigm it1 the
delivery of this content.
Our results of teaching at The Ohio State Universip
will be demonstrated through a variey of interactive
niultiniedia programs focused on the objective of teaching
and learning. Each student project in some way
challenges current cotiventiotis iri linear, static
educational> arid information processes. These dynamic
programs, incorporuting senrantic tl)’pography, sound,
video, and animation offer multiple but logical paths of
navigation. Student designers explore how infornratioti
design (complex itforniation or systems) can be niade
more accessible by engaging the user through
interactiviy. Additional project criteria rnclurle the
application of an appropriate arid effective architectural
structure, effective interface design, and strong
typographic principles.

Tell nie, I forget.
Show me, I remember,
Involve nie, I understand,
-Benjaniin Franklin

Teaching Interactive Multimedia
Introduction
Interactivity is the fundamental principle underlying the
growth of communication between users and responsive
systems delivered via the Internet, CD-ROM and other
digital media. Given the constraints of structured
curriculum. how then do we appropriately integrate this
rapidly emerging field into design education’! Because
interactive multimedia is primarily a visual medium, its
incorporation into visual communication design
curriculum is a logical one. In order to make optimum use

Interaction is one of the higher order levels of
feedback that behaviorists and cognitivists agree are
important in the educational process. Those who see
education as a construct would also include feedback and
more importantly interaction as a needed feature in
education [ I ] . Allowing customers, product users, and
learners to be actively involved and engaged with
educational and information content can indeed heighten
the transference of this information.

624
0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

'

design of appropriate user interfaces. Interface design is
the fundamental principle underlying the connection of
communication between users and information systems. It
is the interface that allows the user to experience a fairly
individualized, input-dependent interaction. It provides
two-way communication (in the way of feedback), and
actively engages the user / learner (both physically and
cognitively).
If the content of these programs lends itself
appropriately to interactions, and if learning is a major
goal for the users, then designing a program with a high
level of interaction, via clear, engaging interfaces, is likely
to be the most conducive to transference of content.

of this medium; one must be grounded in the issues
relevant to those concepts thal. distinguish the medium.
Interactive multimedia in many cases is instructed under
the umbrella of graphic design, visual communication, or
art and technology curricula. However, effective
multimedia mtist extract appropriate ideology from its
companion disciplines of industrial design, interior space
design, and cognitive science engineering. Visual
communication students must look to semantic issues to
_. facilitate 'the design
of multimedia functionality.
Furthermore, the idea of designing with time, kinetics,
animation, sound, music, and multidirectional paths of
navigation must clearly be defined.
The design department at The Ohio State University is
unique in that industriad, interior, and visual
communication design are structured under one
department. It offers opportunities for collaborative
learning and research. Many of our students supplement
their design education thrclugh course work in the
cognitive sciences. In teaching interactive multimedia, our
theoretical approached is bawd upon an exploration of the
relationships between these interdisciplinary design
curricula, and how it can be appropriately integrated into
interactive multimedia and visual interface design.
Interactive multimedia is an application in design
practice that crosses several curriculum boundaries. The
similarities in design process and activity between
industrial, interior, and visual communication design
models have provided a structured process for
understanding and teaching interactive multimedia. We
embrace the syntactical ideas of product interface and
tactile feedback and translate these concepts into a screenbased medium, as well as the pragmatic aspects explored
by interior space designers, (i.e. space planning,
architecture, access, and egress) to develop clear, intuitive
paths of navigation. Furthermore, our design process
adopts a user centric approach, allowing content to
enhance functionality and reflect the maturity of the
product's audience.
Our theoretical approach is balanced by the application
of student projects using princ.iples of information design,
in an effort to develop a meaningful learning experience
for product users. We define information design as the
selection, organization and presentation of information to
a given audience. It should communicate efficiently,
clearly and allow users to make relevant comparisons of
data and/or statistics. We mansform information by
revealing a conceptual model that a particular audience
can easily grasp.
Information design can take on a variety of contexts. It
can involve presenting information as an organizational
arrangement (facts or data). It can involve presenting
information to facilitate the Understanding of a situation or
process. It can also involve the design of control systems,
such as that of the input and feedback controls of a
product or vehicle [3].
A key component to th'z development of these
programs is the relationship of information design to the

Demonstration
Our results of teaching at The Ohio State University
will be demonstrated at the Multimedia Showcase through
a variety of interactive multimedia programs focused on
the objective of teaching and learning information. Each
student project in some way challenges current
conventions in linear, static educational processes. These
dynamic programs, incorporating semantic typography,
sound, video, and animation, offer multiple but logical
paths of navigation. Student designers explore how
information design (complex information or systems) can
be made more accessible by engaging the user through
interactivity.
Each student project regarding information design
incorporates a different context. In some cases, users
extract only what is needed for a particular purpose. In
other cases, the content may lie not so much in the
information itself as in the movement in a given direction
by the user and associative references discovered. Each
project, in different ways, accomplishes the following
objectives:
1. provides a stimulating and comprehensible context for
engagement with the material

2. provides tasks that foster correct representations and
understanding of the information
3. provides tools and conceptual models that the user /
learner already understands

4. provides goals that when reached are rewarded

5. provides feedback from interfaces to acknowledge user
input
Additional project criteria include the application of an
appropriate and effective architectural structure, effective
interface design, and strong typographic principles.
The following pages include screens shots from
selected interactive programs accompanied by conceptual
descriptions.

625

Project 1: The Pyramids, Jens Hartmann
This interactive program is intended to provide the user
with a background in the history and development of the
Egyptian Pyramids. It uses interactivity and interface
design to allow users to make relevant comparisons
regarding scale, height, and mass.

l a . Visual communication evokes
mystery and intrigue. Users are
immediately introduced to interface.

1b. A familiar visual reference point
for OSU community members
(football stadium) is provided to
facilitate understanding.

1c. Users are able to drag a plan view
of the university campus under the
footprint of the Cheops Pyramid in
order to understand mass.

1d. Comparisons to historical
architecture, relative to height and
scale, can be achieved by the use of
an interactivetimeline (left).

1e. Comparison can be additionally
be made from a geographical
standpoint.

I f . As technology and materials
develop, it is demonstratively
revealed that this pyramid was
eventually dwarfed.

1g. Responsive interfaces allow users
to explore pyramid details.

626

Project 2: Learning Si:gnLanguage,

Alex Chon
This interactive program was designed to fulfill a
personal need of the student. He had been unable to find a
resource that would effectively teach sign language by
demonstrating concepts in tlheir actual context. The user,
through this program, is given the opportunity to make

2a. A kinetic typographic opening,
accompanied by music, sets context
and user expectations.

decisions based on need and interest. Multiple access
points to the content are provided through this program, is
given the opportunity to make decisions based on need and
interest. Multiple access points to the content
are provided.

2b. Users are able.to scan across the
alphabet in a linear or non-linear
fashion. Visual “sign” references (top)
are clearly associated with text.

2c. Upon mouse click, users can
study in detail and depth. An
interactive QuickTime VR allows
users to see the “sign” in context
(right).

Project 3: Scuba Diving, A Tutorial,
Corey Allenbauch

3a. Interaction and feedback allow
users to make connections froin a
textual or visual reference point.

3b. Global references (text and
image) are given to show ideal
geographical locations for diving.
Global navigation allows universal
content access.

627

3c. Upon a selection, users are
presented with video, audio, and
manageable amounts of text
description.

Project 4: Explore Inniswood Metro
Gardens, Bok Young Kim
This program allows users to experience the dynamics
of a public park through a series of seasonal portals. It
visually expresses the characteristics of a changing
landscape through time and space. 2d and 3d views of
trails and environments enhance user experiences.

4a. Opening module uses kinetic
typography and sound to set context
unattainable by static media.

I

I

4b. Each seasonal portal uses a
different musical score.

.-*

4c. Interaction and feedback allow
users to make connections from a
textual or visual reference point.

4d. User is presented with animated
mapping options according to
direction and geographic location.

4e. Map is transformed from a 2dplan view (abstract) to 3d virtual
reality view (literal).

4f. Users learn about herbs by the
use of "gaming" activities. Hints are
provided according to level.

4g. Clear feedback is giving when
attaining a correct answer.

4h. A puzzle is revealed (lower left)
as a reward, intended to keep users
further engaged.

628

References
[ I ] Forsyth, Ian,Teaching and Leaming Materials and the
Internet. London: Kogan Page Limited, 1996.

,

.

[2] Ely, D.P.Protocols and Processes for Promoting
Interactive Cross-cultural Media Transfer. Tucker, 26-34.
Tucker, Richard N. Interactive Media: The Human
1ssues.Worcester: Billings & Sons, Ltd., 1989.

[ 3 ] Wildbur, Peter and Michael Burke, Information Graphics.
New York, Thames and Hudson Limited, 1998.

629

,

.

'

