Cognitive Effects of Animated Visualization in Exploratory Visual Data Analysis
Kumiyo N a k a k ~ j i ” ~&io
. ~ , Taka~hima*.~,
Yasuhiro Yamamoto3
‘SRA Key Technology Laboratory, Inc.
2TOREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation
3
Graduate Schooc‘of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0101, Japan
+81-743-72-5381
kumiyo @is.aiist-nara.ac .jp, akio-t a @is.aist -nara. ac .jp, yxy @is.aist-nara. ac.jp
\

Our research has focused on animated information
visualization. Animated visualization means a type of
information visualization technique that produces
autonomous motions of representations along the time
dimension. Existing research on information animation
has regarded animation as providing one more dimension;
enabling 4D graphs by adding motions to 3D graphs [ 151.
We argue that the effect of animation is more than the
fourth dimension. Motions produce certain cognitive
effects and appropriate use of motions empowers users in
exploratory data analysis.
Despite the existence of a large body of research on
information visualization, however, there has been little
known what cognitive effects animated representations
have, and how and when we should use animation
especially in the domain of visualizing abstract data [6].
Moreover, we have very little understanding about how to
apply the notions developed in the spatial visualization to
the temporal visualization. To take the notion of
Focus+Context for instance, how can we support a user to
focus on a particular time in playing an animation; should
we play it slower, faster, or pause the play; and how can
we provide the context of the whole animation while
playing an animation?
As a first step to address these issues, we have
conducted two user studies. First, we have conducted a
user study comparing effects of representations among
tables, graphs and animations (animated graphs). Through
the study, we have found that animations work effectively
when one needs:
(1) to focus on transitions of values of the time-based
data, and
(2) to view the data from a particular viewpoint.
In the second study, we have developed an interactive
animated visualization environment that visualizes the
evolution of a large object-oriented programming library,
and observed how a programming expert examines the
data interacting with the environment. As a result, we have
found that a user interacts with animated information
visualization:

Abstract

The goal of this research is to study the role and
effects of the use of animated irlformation visualization in
early stages of exploratory data analysis tasks. Despite the
existence of a large body of research on information
visualization, there has been little known regarding how
and when one should use and how to interact with
animated visualization to help exploring data. By
animated visualization, we mean a type of information
visualization technique that produces autonomous motions
of representations. This reseanrh has explored the issue
from two aspects: what cognitive effects animated
information visualization has, and what interactions
people would have with animated visualization when
exploring data. We have conducted two user studies to
investigate each aspect, and identified research challenges
for designing an interactive animated information
visualization environment that supports early stages of
exploratory data analysis. These findings help us further
study how to extend the notions developed in the spatial
visualization to the temporal visualization; for instance,
what Focus+Context means when applied to the time
dimension in animated visualization.

1. Introduction
Graphic representations, such as charts or diagrams,
help people grasp the meaning of information more easily
and quickly [ 131. Computers have been used to visualize
information, and a number of graphical representation
methods have been explored, including 3D and animations
[41.
The problem, however, is that abuse of such powerful
visual representations may make people misinterpret the
information or obscure the focus of the information. It is
important to understand when, and how we should use
complex visualization to help people understand and
explore the information space more easily, and more
accurately.

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

77

visualization offers help users perform such exploratory
data analysis.
The field called visual data mining has emerged to
specifically support exploratory data analysis [ 161. The
visual data mining approach integrates information
visualization with autonomous analytical data mining
techniques.
We focus on the use of visualizations in supporting
the exploration and understanding of the data. In this
approach, users try to find verbalizable relationships
among aspects of data and make hypothesis on causeeffect relationships. Although we do not support any
analytical data mining techniques, our approach in
visualization can be used as a visualization support for
visual data mining systems.

(1) to identify data points where the values change
prominently,
(2) to find a snapshot of a particular point of time, and
(3) to acquire feeling of immersion to more intuitively
understand data.
Through these studies, we have identified
requirements for interactive animated information
visualization systems:
they need to help users understand the context of
changing data, for instance, whether the value is
increasing or decreasing;
they need to help users understand the context of
changing time as the animation is played, for
instance, in what point of time (e.g., in an early
phase or in a late phase) the current snapshot
represents; and
0
they need to allow users to have hands-on control
over both time and space.
In what follows, we first discuss the use of animated
visualization. Then we present two user studies followed
by discussions on findings. We then discuss research
challenges for designing interactive animated information
visualization environments and present ongoing
prototyping efforts addressing the challenges.

2.2 Animation: Autonomous Motions in
Visualization
In this paper, by animated information visualization,
or animation for short, we mean autonomous motions of
representations. Many information visualization systems
dynamically change representations while interacting with
users. Animation, in contrast, by definition, produces
changing representations along the time dimension by
representing one aspect of data (see Figures 1(b) and 2(b)).
Some systems actually use animation to simulate
changing phenomena over time on computer displays. The
use of animation on computer systems can be categorized
along the spectrum that has the following two ends:
(1) systems that represent the motions of existing objects,

2. Animated Information Visualization
Our approach is to use animated information
visualization to support exploratory data analysis tasks.
This section first describes characteristics of such tasks,
and discusses related work in animation and in interactive

and

vi sua1i zati on.

( 2 ) systems that represent the changes of abstract data.
A type of animations which are close to the first end
is represented by animated movies. Animated movies, for
instance, Disney animation, represents motions of realworld objects, such as humans, mice, or balls, using CG
technology. This type of animations does not necessarily
have to truthfully reflect the reality. They sometimes
exaggerate a certain aspects of motions. A body of
knowledge has been developed and shared among the
community how to effectively represent motions in
producing this class of animation, for instance, one can
exaggerate the movement with a take, sneak, or stagger

2.1 Exploratory Data Analysis Tasks
Information visualization has long been studied to
use
computer-supported,
interactive,
visual
representations of abstract data to amplifi. cognition [4;
p.71. Information visualization amplifies human cognition
in increased resources, reduced search, enhanced
recognition of patterns, perceptual itference, perceptual
nionitoring, and nianipiilable nzedium [ibid; p. 161.
We have been using animated visualizations to
support early stages of exploratory data analysis. An early
stage of data analysis is better supported by viewing it as
an exploratory task rather than by applying standard
statistical analysis techniques [8]. In exploratory data
analysis, a user plays many what-if games to discover
interesting aspects of the data, gradually understands what
phenomena were taking place [SI[ 171. Enhanced
recognition of patterns, perceptual inference, perceptual
monitoring, and manipulable medium that information

~41.
Another type of systems that fall into the same
category is scientific visualization. Their goal is to
simulate the reality based on models developed after the
reality. The approach represents otherwise impossible
phenomena on a computer so that users can have a better
understanding of what will be or has been happening in
the real world. While some of simulation systems produce

78

motions over time, adds one more dimension to what is
represented in a lD, 2D or 3D space. We could argue that
the 2nd dimension (the horizontal axis) of Figure l(a) is
replaced with the time dimension in Figure l(b) and the
3rd dimension (the depth axis) in Figure 2(a) is replaced
with the time dimension in Figure 2(b). In this sense, Figure
1(a) and 1(b)are semantically equivalent, and so are Figure
2(a) and 2(b).
However, as one can easily imagine, these two
representations, a static graph and an animated graph,
have very different cognitive effects. As we will describe
below, our study has demonstrated that people get very
different impressions from a static graph and an animated
graph, and have certain preferences on one over the other.
One aspect of our research goal is to identify what
cognitive effects animated information visualizations have.
Once we have a better understanding of effects of
animated graphs, we can provide more effective
visualizations to support exploratory data analysis.

(above) Figure 1.2D graph (a) versus
animated I D lgraph (b)
(below) Figure 2.3D graph (a) versus
animated 2D graph (b)
static information as a result of simulation, many of
simulation systems simulate changes by dynamically
changing representations on a computer display over time
based on the underlying model. For instance, they are used
to predict courses of typhocin or flows of molecules.
Virtual reality also uses animal ion to represent movements
of virtually represented objects.
The type of animation systems that are close to the
second end is what we call animated information
visualization. Such systems visualize abstract data and
represent changes of the value!; of the data over time using
motions. The goal of these systems is not to model the
reality, but to help users in analyzing data and making
decisions by uncovering meanings hidden in the data.
Breathing Earth [ 3 ] ,for instance, visualizes magnitudes of
earthquakes that happened during a three-month period by
putting bubble shaped obje4:ts on the corresponding
surface points of the earth along the much-shortened time
scale, making the earth look like breathing. Wright uses
the term irlforniutiori uniniation to describe 3D graphics
with motions [15]. In presenting complex data in the
domain of capital markets, he uses the time dimension of
animation as the fourth axis to 3D graphs. The system uses
motions and interactions as a means to increase reliability,
accuracy, and preciseness of 311 graphs.
We argue that the effect of animation is more than the
fourth dimension. Motions produce certain cognitive
effects and appropriate use of motions empowers users in
exploratory data analysis. And surprisingly little is known
about such cognitive effects.
To illustrate our argument, let us take a simple
example.
Figure 1 represents (a) a bar chart represented in 2D
and (b) an animated single bar. and Figure 2 represents (a)
a 3D graph and (b) an animated 2D graph. Animation, or

2.3 Interactive Visualizations
Information visualization systems, by definition, do
not only present visualized information, but also allow
users to interact with the visualized information [4]. Some
systems actually use animation to help users maintain the
context while the users interact with the representation and
move the focus within the representation [51[7].
Dynamic query systems [ I ] [IO] are interactive
systems for searching for information Erom databases. A
Typical dynamic query system consists of an interface that
allows a user to specify a query for data retrieval, and a
visual representation that displays a result of the query.
Query specification is typically done by moving slider
bars or clicking on toggle buttons. The result of the data
retrieval based on the query is almost simultaneously done,
which gives users a feeling of “direct manipulation;” a fast
feedback reflecting changes in a user’s query makes users
feel as if the user manipulates data directly by changing
the query specification [ l 11.
Because moving a slider bar in such a dynamic query
system changes the visual display on time, this gives users
a feeling that the user is producing animation for data
display. However, the goal of dynamic query systems is
different from that of animated information visualization
in two ways. First, the goal of dynamic query systems is to
filtering information; the user’s task is to find what he/she
is looking for. In contrast, information animation is for
users to understand the whole data by finding meaningful
aspects within the data, not necessarily locating particular
data points. Second, animation, by definition, produces
autonomous motions. Dynamic query systems, on the

79

other hand, produce changes in their visualizations in
response to a user’s interaction, Although we also stress
the importance of interaction with users for animated
information visualization systems (as described in Section
4), the emphasis is put differently.
In the next section, we present our first user study on
cognitive effects of animated graphs. The following
section then describes our second user study on how a user
interacts with animated visualizations.

(a) used for 1D-DataGroup

IO0
75
0

25

IO

(2)

(1)

(b) used for 2D-DataGroup

3. Cognitive Effects of Animated
Visualization
This section describes our preliminary user study,
which compares cognitive effects of information
animation with those of static tables and graphs.
In this study, a list of numbers is represented in a
table, in a bar chart, and in an animated bar chart (Figure
3). We observed how users get different impressions from
the three types of representations, and how they differently
interpret the data in the three types of representations.

(2)

(1)

(3)

Figure 3. Three representations used in the
user study
While detailed results are given in [12], this
subsection briefly summarizes what we have identified.

3.1 Method
Table 1. Codina Scheme for the User Studv
We have used two types of data sets, each of which
was represent in the three different representations: (1)
table, (2) graph, and ( 3 ) animated graph.
1D-DataGroup: Each list has ten numbers.

Exemplary protocol
CD

2D-DataGroup: Each list consists of three lists each of
which has ten numbers.

ID

Each number is between 0 and 100 and put in a
random order. Figure 3(a) represents an example
representation of a data from the ID-DataGroup, and
Figure 3(b) represents one from the 2D-DataGroup. In
preparation for the experiment, we used a regular
Microsoft Excel to produce 2D and 3D graphs, and
Macromedia Director 8 to produce animated graphs.
In order to avoid any learning effects, we prepared
seven different data sets for each of DataGroup. Six of the
seven were used for each of all the possible orders of the
three types of representations (e.g., graph -> animation ->
table) and the seventh data is used to show three
representations at once.
Three subjects were asked to view seven patterns for
each of 1 D-DataGroup and 2D-DataGroup and instructed
to do think-aloud reporting which aspect of the
representations they pay attention to. The sessions were
video-taped and protocols were scribed.

I

tation

chunking
data

I tend to count the number of graph,
“peaks” and “waves” in thest animation
representations

interpreting

I know

data

related to each other bict still, animation
I tend to see them as a flow.

that these )nay not De

I

11
Represen

graph,

GW grasping the I t is really hard lo icndersricnd animation
whole
what happened in the end

EX

expecting

next

Up ancl down and i i p and
down, so the next shoukl be
Ul’

CP

comparing

Wow, theese three vcilites get
I O 0 simrrltaneoiisl~!

animation

table,

animation

graph

ST

statistically I can easily tell wliat the
analyzing
average is in approximation

FO

focusing/filt It is good that this one forces animation
ering
me to stay with one viewpoint

By analyzing protocols collected from the user
observations, we have developed a coding schema
consisting of seven codes (Table 1). We encoded
transcripts, and categorized which aspects were more
frequently emphasized in which representations.

3.2 Results

80

During our pretest sessions, we have found that users
often request for a means to allow them to compare the
currently displayed value with the previous value or the
following value. So we have added blue and red value
indicators (see Figure 4) that represent a value in the
previous frame in blue and a value in the next frame in red
embedded in the display of the current value.

From the result, our finding is summarized as
follows:
Animation gets positive reactions for data viewing
cognitive aspects including CD, ID, EX, CP, FO, but
not favored in aspects including GW and ST; tables
and graphs were preferred ia these two.
All of the three subjects liked graph representations
for 1D-DataGroup. In contrast, one subject explicitly
favored animation for 2D-DataGroup, and the other
two subjects also expressed positive reactions to the
use of animation for 2D-DataGroup.

F i l e Edit

View

Light

Uisc

From post-experimental interviews, all the subjects
mentioned that animation was helpful in focusing on
the changes of data, and in limiting a point of view in
a single aspect.
In viewing animation, all thle subjects frequently used
a control bar (the bar beneath the animation window)
to change the speed of animation and to repeatedly
view a certain segment of the animation.
This result has indicated that adding motion to graph
representation is effective even if the graph is not 3D. And
while animation means autonomous motions, users need
to interact with them by having control over how to play
animation. The next study fccused on the aspect of
interaction with animated visualization.

Figure 4. The animated visualization used in
the second user study
We asked an expert programmer to be a subject, who
is familiar with the Jun library. The subject was engaged
in interacting with the animated visualization for about 90
minutes. The session was video-taped and the protocol
was transcribed.

4. Interacting with Animated Visualization
In order to observe how users interact with animated
graphs, we have first constructed an interactive
environment that produces animated graphs. We used a
data on Smalltalk class library as a case example and
asked an expert programmer to view the animated
visualization.

4.2 Results
In the experiment, the subject first scanned the whole
animation a couple of times. Then, the subject started
using the play controller (located at the bottom of the
window) to have a control over the play speed and
position of the animation. After that, the subjects started
expressing interesting comments interacting with the
animation.
The result of this case study can be summarized from
the following five aspects. Detailed results are described
in [12].
(1) Control over time. The subject very frequently
held the play controller to fine-tuning the playing time and
displaying certain frames of the animation. When the
subject found seemingly interesting snapshots (kames),
the subject went back and forth between a certain timespan playing forward and backward. Often the subject
played a particular part of the animation extremely slowly

4.1 An Experimental Setting
Figure 4 represents an animation system that we have
developed. We used data consisting of the number of
classes, that of class methods, and that of instance
methods of each of 360 versions of an open-source
Smalltalk class library, called, Jun, that has evolved over
five years [2]. We have developed an animation so that
each frame represents a single version. Three 3D bars
represent the numbers of classes, class methods and
instance methods of a version. Users can control the
viewpoint for the 3D graph as in a regular 3D viewer, and
control the playing speed and position of animation using
the bar underneath the window as in a regular movie
viewer.

81

by gradually moving a play-controller examining changes
of data.
(2) Differential representations. The subject
depended on the presentations of the previous and next
values (blue and red value indicators; Figure 4). From the
protocol, the subject often tried to find where a drastic
value change takes place in the data using the red and blue
value indicators.
( 3 ) Feeling of immersion. The subject sometimes
changed the viewpoint in the 3D representation so that the
representation is extreme in its projection (Figure 5). This
helped the subject to also identify where a drastic value
change happens. The subject liked that the system allowed
him to use this view because it helped him “feel dynamism
of the data.”

In summary, the subject found that the animated
visualization was useful understanding the data. By
interacting with the animation of data, the subject has
found interesting aspects regarding object-oriented
programming. One example is when comparing how the
number of classes and how that of instance methods grow
over time, the subject mentioned that:
“the number of classes grows first and then the
number of classes grows like this following the class
increase. This is a good way of programming (an
object-oriented program) indicating a good design. ”
While saying this, the subject keeps holding the play
controller, and repeatedly plays among several shots very
slowly confirming what he has just found.

5. Toward An Interactive Animated
Information Visualization Environment
Through the two studies, we have found that
animated visualization is effective for exploratory analysis
of certain types of data. We have also confirmed that
interaction with animated information is an essential
element. Based on the findings, we have identified
research challenges in the design of system that uses
animated visualizations to help users perform exploratory
data analysis. We also have started constructing prototype
tools that address the challenges using ARTWare, a 3D,
multimedia application construction kit [9 1.
How to effectively visualize changes of data. Users
need to understand the context of changing data,
for instance, whether the value is increasing or
decreasing. Our blue and red value indicators
(Figure 4) were found helpful but too simple. We
have started using the depth as representing
“afterimage” and “forefeel” (Figure 6). We need
further study and prototyping to confirm the effects
and produce alternative visualizations.

I

Figure 5. A view that emphasizes feeling of
immersion
(4) Focusing on information. After the experiment,
we showed a 3D graph of the same data that had been

produced using Microsoft Excel program. The subject
preferred animation because “this is too much. The
animation was good that it forced me to scan through the
versions one by one.” The animation made the subject
focus on a limited aspect of the data at a time, helping him
better understand what was happening in the data.
( 5 ) Context in time. For a couple of times, the subject
got lost in terms of the time dimension by saying ‘‘when
was this?’ That is, the subject had to interpret the data in
terms of the whole data. He needed to know which version
the values in a particular snapshot represent. The subject
used the location of the play-controller handle in terms of
the length of the whole bar to understand whether the
snapshot is in an early, middle, or late stage of the project
lifecycle. In addition, the subject sometimes wanted to
annotate the time. He wished he had mechanisms to
“bookmark” snapshots so that he could remember where
he looked at and which time-span interested him.

How to effectively visualize context of time. If we

watch a movie, we tend to have a pretty good
remembrance on whether a certain frame was at the
beginning, middle, or end of the movie because the
frame is often associated with a story. In contrast,
with animating graphs, it is hard to remember each
snapshot. Currently our play-controller helps users
understand the context of time, but we need better
mechanisms for this purpose. One approach that we
have started looking was to use more elaborated
movie controller, consisting of a series of snapshots
from the animation (Figure 7).

82

How to provide more easily accessible hands-on
control over both time and space. The subject
appreciated that he could change viewpoints to the
animated graph. It provides a simple 3D viewer,
but also has a mechanism to help the user
understand where the viiewpoint is; what we call a
metaview (Figure 8). In general, navigating in 3D is
hard because users often get lost where the
viewpoint is located in terms of the whole space.
The metaview allows the user to look at where the
user’s viewpoint is located. We need a similar
mechanism for time, which helps users understand
in which point in time the user is currently situated.
How to support the enifireprocess of exploratory
data analysis. By interacting with animated
visualization, users not only view it but also
identify interesting aspects in a trial-and-error
manner gradually externalizing findings. We have
been prototyping a system that allows users to ( 1 )
segmenting a part of the animation, (2) to put the
segmented in a 2D space, (3) to textually annotate
each segment, and (4) tci compile a summary report
in a html format (Figure 9) [9].

-I-

h

1

Figure 7. Elaborated play controllers

6. Discussion
This paper presents our approach to support
exploratory data analysis with interactive, animated
information visualization. We argue that animation has
more power than just yet another dimension to 3D
representations. We have conducted user studies to
identify research issues in designing system that uses
animated visualizations to help users perform exploratory
data analysis. The goal of such an environment is to use
animated information visualization to complement what is
otherwise excluded from regular graph representations.

Figure 8. a metaview for the space
Based on these findings, we will further study how to
extend the notions developed in spatial visualizations to
the temporal visualization. Our next step is to find ways to
provide Focus+Context for animation. In regular “spatial”
visualization, afocus on a particular point in a space and
its condext is achieved by enlarging an adjacent region of
the point, while distorting the remaining surrounding area.
In temporal visualization, however, focus on a particular
point of time does not necessarily mean to play animation
frames around the point of time slower. It may be
necessary to play them faster, or to repeat playing them.
Figures 6, 7 and 8 presented in the previous section are
some of our initial efforts to represent context over
multiple frames, i.e., time. We are currently designing
more representations for temporal Focus+Contexf and

Figure 6. Representing “afterimage” and
“forefeel”

a3

[6] I. Herman, G. Melancon, M.S. Marshall, Graph
Visualisation and Navigation in Information Visualisation: a
Survey, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, VoI.6, No.1, pp.24-43, 2000.
[7] J. Lamping, R. Rao, The Hyperbolic Browser: A Forcus +
Context Technique for Visualizing Large Hierarchies, Journal of
Visual Langueges and Computing, Vol. 7, No.1, pp.33-55, 1996.
[8] W.E. Mackay, M. Beaudouin-Lafon, DIVA: Exploratory
Data Analysis with Multimedia Streams, Proc. of CH1'98, ACM
Press, pp.416-423, 1998.
[9] K. Nakakoji, Y. Yamamoto, A. Aoki, ARTWare: A
Component Library for Building Domain-Oriented Authoring
Environments, ACM Multimedia'Ol, July, 2001 (submitted).

[IO] C. Plaisant, B. Milash, A.Rose, S. Widoff, B. Shneiderman,
LifeLines: Visualizing Personal Histories Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI96), pp. 221-227, April, 1996.

Figure 9. An integrated animated visual
information environment for exploratory data
analysis
conducting empirical
challenges.

studies t o further s t u d y these

[ I I] B. Shneiderman, Direct Manipulation: a Step Beyond
Programming Languages, IEEE Computer, Vol. 16 No.8, pp.5769. 1983.

7. Acknowledgements
[ 121 A. Takashima, Information Animation for Understanding
Data, Master's Thesis, Graduate School of Information Science,
NAIST, Nara, Japan, March, 01.

We t h a n k Atsushi Aoki for h i s valuable discussions
and h e l p for this research. T h i s study was supported by t h e
Proposal-based N e w Industry Creative Type Technology
R&D Promotion P r o g r a m from t h e N e w E n e r g y a n d
Industrial
Technology
( N E D O ) of J a p a n .

Development

[ I 31 E.R. Tufte, Visual Explanations, Graphics Press. Cheshire,
CT. 1997.

Organization
[I41 T. White, The Animator's Workbook, Watson-Guptill
Publishing, Toronto, Canada, 1988.

8. References

[I51 W. Wright, Information Animation Applications in the
Capital Markets, Proceedings of InfoVis '95, IEEE symposium
on Information Visualization, pp. 19-25, color plates 136-137.

[ I ] C. Ahlberg, B. Shneiderman, Visual Information Seeking:
Tight coupling of dynamic query filters with starfield displays,
Proc. of ACM CHI '94 Conference, Boston, April, pp. 313-317.
1994.

[I61 P.C. Wong, Visual Data Miing, IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, Vol. 19, No.4, pp.22-3 I , 1999.

[2] A. Aoki, K. Hayashi, K. Kishida, K. Nakakoji, Y. Nisinaka,
B. Reeves, A. Takashima, Y. Yamamoto, A Case Study of the
Evolution of Jun: an Object-Oriented Open-Source 3 D
Multimedia Library, Proc. of International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE'2001), Toronto, CA., 2001 (to
appear).

[I71 Y. Yamamoto, A. Aoki, K. Nakakoji, Time-ART: A Tool
for Segmenting and Annotating Multimedia Data i n Early Stages
of Exploratory Analysis, CHI'OI, Extended Abstract, pp. 113-1 14,
April 2001.

[3] BreathingEarth, http://www.sensorium.org/breathingearth/

[4] S.K. Card, J.D. Mackinlay, B. Shneiderman, Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, MorganKaufmann Publishers, San Meteo, CA, 1999.

[5] G.W. Furnas, The FISHEYE View: A New Look at
Structured Files, Murray Hill, NJ: AT&T Bell Laboratories,
1981.

84

