Information Visualisation for the Architectural Practice
Sameh Shaaban, Stephen Lockley, and Hisham Elkadi
Construction Informatics Research Centre, School of Architecture, Planning, and Landscape
University of Newcastle upon Tyne
s.shaaban@ncl. ac. uk
Abstract

information acquisition and use, have clearly appeared.
Whereas information use is a large area of study, this
paper focuses on identifying the problems concerning
information acquisition in terms of accessibility and
assimilation.
Recently researches emphasized the crucial role of
information acquisition in the building industry, as well as
the lack of interest among practitioners in using
information resources. Several surveys on IT usage in the
building industry [6,9] show the reluctance in adapting
advanced IT systems for both information acquisition and
management, while interest and investment is still
directed towards CAD solutions. Vries [ l ] and Love [4]
emphasized that both exploration and finding information
are as important sub-processes as the architectural design
process itself. On the other hand, Davidson [6] advocated
that practitioners still do not see searching information as
a productive activity. He identifies this phenomenon by
the lack of the ‘acquiring information skills’ training in
the current educational programs. The implications of
lack of information accessibility were addressed by many
other studies. For example: An earlier study by Lockley
et, al, [7] identifies high levels of rework in the design
and design-development phases and argues that
insufficient information leads to faulty decisions that have
to be revisited. Abdel Meguids’ [IO] study of delayrelated claims reveals that in nearly 60% of the cases
judged in court the ‘availability and access to
information’ block was mentioned as a “claims’ causation
factor”.
It still may be argued that there are also technical
problems in the current information resources, which
would lead to this extensive need for improving skills.
Work so far explored information resources including
Internet search engines, online product selectors [ 1 I], and
online document libraries (e.g. the Construction
Information Service [ 12]), and has identified two classes
of technical problems:
1) Information accessibility problems - this relates to:
(a) the lack of information filtering of the search
results. (b) Information overload, where the user needs

Information is a critical element for architects to
accomplish their tasks. The overwhelming increase and
complexiv of digital informaiion has revealed problems
concerning information acquisition. New techniques of
handling information are needed to improve the
transformation of data into information, and then into
knowledge. Applying inforwtation visualisation (Iv)
techniques is seen as one of these techniques. This paper
discusses the importance of irrformation in architectural
practice and the potentials ojr utilizing IV techniques to
improve the information acquisition process. The paper
attempts to draw an application model for developing IV
tools. It explores in detail four main factors that influence
their successful application, which are: ( I ) underlying
data structure, (2) information seeking strategies. (3)
identification of IV techniques, and (4) analysing the user
profile. Based on these factors, the paper critically
examines different possible /.V development approaches
f o r the architectural practice, these include: technology
push, data structure based, and task driven approaches.

1: Introduction to the role of Information in
the Architectural Practice
Information processing is the most common
theoretical perspective on the architectural processes
found in the contemporary literature of design research,
[1,2,3,4]. The ontology of the design process, as
information processing, assunies that information has a
neutral value and different interpretations are transferred
according to its codification (designed) [4]. Information
in the architectural practice falls into two categories: (a)
project related information, and (b) general information
[5,6]. The architects’ role is to manipulate this
information to reproduce it in a meaningful form, which
are often described as designs.
With the overwhelming increase and complexity of
‘digital’ information, problems, particularly regarding

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 IEEE

43

to overcome the problems of information overload
and lack of filtering within architectural practice.
2. To enhance the understanding of the relationships
and dependences between items of information,
allowing the identification of trends and the
comparison of alternatives. For example, this could
be useful for improving online building product
selectors or online digital libraries.
3. To help in avoiding misconceptions due to
inadequacies in data sets. This for example could
solve the problem of bias result lists.
4. To offer a visual manipulative user-driven
environment that increases the level of interaction
between the user and the system. Developing an IV
system that incorporate the user information needs is
a value added feature to the overall performance.
Within our area of concern, two focuses of IV
application levels are apparent, data set, and document
levels. While the former level represents a wide and
shallow set of data, the later represents narrower and
deeper information about a document.
On the data set level, the IV task is to provide an
overview of a large collection of data, in terms of
relevancies, indexes, trends, clusters, and hot spots [ 151.
IV methods on this level could be applied as generic and
explicit visualisation tools, which could serve different
user disciplines, due to the use of highly abstracted
graphics or ‘symbols’ [2 1,22,231.
On the document level, the IV task is to provide more
focused and detailed information about the document
under consideration [ 15,241. On this level, the type of the
knowledge domain influences the selection of IV
techniques and methods. IV tools that serve a specific
knowledge domain have a greater potential for success
due to the availability of using less abstract visualisations
and domain-related visual vocabulary [25].
Both IV levels of application have relevance to the
architectural domain. However, in order to determine the
appropriate application level of IV tools, it is necessary to
understand the factors that influence the successful design
of the systems. In addition, it is necessary to identify the
reference model that describes the basic components of
IV systems.

reading through all results to find the relevant ones.
(c) Excessively time consuming processes. (d) Lack of
appropriate interaction with the user information
needs, i.e., the user could not define search queries
that fulfil specific criteria such as location boundaries
or cost implications.
2) Information assimilation problems - These are
related to the output quality of the final search results.
These problems include: (a) Bias result lists of
manufacturers,
consultants,
or
construction
companies, with inadequate supporting information to
allow decisions to be made. (b) Electronic copies of
paper-based catalogues or documents, with limited
reuse levels. (c) Inadequate tools to facilitate
comparison between results. Consequently, users tend
to use help from external resources. Hence, more time
is consumed and more skills are needed.
It becomes clear that it is necessary to adapt new
technologies to improve information accessibility and to
enhance information presentation. Though different
technologies are being researched, e.g. intelligent agents
and user adaptive interfaces, this study investigates the
efficiency of adapting information visualisation (IV)
technology for that purpose.

2: Application of information visualisation
systems
In our research, the problem area of specific interest
has been identified as the retrieval of relevant documents
from a large collection of building industry specific
documents and the rapid assimilation of information
contained in these documents. The application of IV
techniques has been examined from this perspective.
The application of visualisation to improve
assimilation is not a new theory of practice. Studies of
visualisation methods pre-date the evolution of the
computer and the information age [13]. With the rapid
development of information systems and their associated
computer technologies, there has been considerable reinvigoration of interest in the information centric aspects
of visualisation [14]. This new area has attracted research
bodies from human-computer interaction [ 14,15,16],
through graph visualisation and algorithm [ 17,181, to
perception and cognitive process [19,20]. The focus of IV
is the use of interactive computer based visual
representations of non-physically based data, i.e.
attributes or relationships between entities. Incentives for
applying such IV tools to the acquisition and assimilation
processes are seen as:
1. To reduce the required time for information
assimilation by providing visual aids to interpret the
intended knowledge. These techniques can be used

3: Reference models for information
visualisation
Several attempts have been made to outline IV
reference models [14,20]. These attempts identified IV as
the adjustable mapping from raw data to visual forms.
Figure ( I ) shows such a typical IV reference model
consisting of four main development stages: (1) the
collection and storage of the raw data it self, (2) the pre-

44

processing to transfer data into understandable form such
as tables, (3) the selection of graphic algorithms to
accomplish this visual presentation, and (4) the
understanding of the user’s perceptual and cognitive
system.

system.
Each of these influencing factors is now discussed in
detail with relevant to the architectural domain.

3.1:

Factor 1: Underlying data structures

A key determinant in the design of IV tools is the
underlying data structures (figure 2), often referred to as
data models. These data structures range from
semantically rich representation formats, e.g. XML or
vector objects to presentation formats with poor semantic
contents, e.g. flat text, paper-based, or images [26]. The
quality of data structures has a significant impact on the
quality of the resulting IV system.
In the building industry, data modelling has been
regarded as the enabling technology for computerintegrated construction (CIC) [27,28]. According to
Froese [29], existing working models are being classified
into two main types. Core models, which contain wellstructured data, could be used as the underlying structure
for document level type of IV applications. Cfussrficution
models that contain less structured contents are more
appropriate for the development of IV tools at the data set
level of application.
Core models: are mostly conceptual models. They were
constructed to provide formal definitions of the basic
entities and relationships required to represent
information about the AEC domain. They are intended to
be high-level models that provide a unifying reference for
more detailed application models to be constructed below
them. The most frequently used application models are
process models [29,30] and object (product) models
[3 1,261. Currently, the two main standardisation efforts
are the continuing development of STEP (IS0 10303) and
the industry foundation classes (IFC) [32]. They model
deep knowledge areas but are applied to narrow data sets.
Classification models: adopt some simple conceptual
models for representing entities to develop extensive

cognitive

Figure 1: IV reference model and its influencing
factors
Development of an IV system for a specific domain,
e.g. architectural practice, requires analysing each of the
four components of the reference model together with the
influencing factors and their related parameters. Figure
(2) illustrates the relationships between these factors and
their parameters. The four IV c’omponentsare influenced
by the factors as follows:
1. The raw data development stage is influenced by the
underlying data structures in the targeted domain. In
the building industry, data sbructures are classified into
core and classification mode Is.
2. The pre-processing and transformation stage is
affected by the users’ information seeking strategies.
In the Architectural domain, these strategies are either
project-related or general infiormation strategies.
*
3 . The selection of graphic algorithms, i.e. designing the
visual interface, is bounded, with identifying the IV
techniques to be implemented. This design decision
includes the selection of visualisation methods, level
of abstraction, and visual properties to be used.
4. Finally, building a user profile that includes the users’
knowledge base, their backgrounds, their visual
abilities, and their hyperspace experience influences
the understanding of the user perceptual and cognitive

Related

parameters

_-

Figure 2: IV influencing factors and their related parameters

45

includes setting three main related parameters: (a) the
selection of proper IV methods, (b) the identification of
efficient levels of abstraction, and (c) the selection of the
visual properties to apply (figure 2).
(a) IV methods have been heavily researched and
classified based on data types and tasks [16,14,38]. They
include several techniques to be used for IV, e.g. 1-D
linear, 2D map, 3-D world. Determining the visualisation
methods to be implemented is bound with defining both
the required IV application levels and users’ searching
strategies. The multi-disciplinary nature of the building
industry and the variety in information types and needs
provide a rich environment for adapting several or
combined IV methods. Such IV methods should provide
answers to the related design and construction inquiries.
Table (1) shows an example of possible implementation
of IV method(s) to various information inquiries for
building products data, as well as the corresponding
application level of the IV systems.
(b) Identification of information abstraction level is
a crucial factor to the design of an IV tool. In fact the
overview, zoom, filter, and details-on-demand tasks
where introduced by Shneidennan [16] as a taxonomy of
IV tasks. Each representation of a IV application level,
either data set or document level, requires different
abstraction levels, whereas the coordination of all levels
offers the required flexibility and comprehensiveness for
tackling complex and extensive problems [39].
Architects heavily use information abstraction in the
their design practice. They use graphical-oriented forms,
which shows a large potential in using IV approaches.
Two examples of common forms of abstraction, which
are used in architectural practice, are bubble diagrams,
which could be identified as a data set application, and
drawings, which represent document level application.
These forms of abstraction allow architects to concentrate
on certain elements of design by reducing the complexity
level of the design problem to its essential elements [40].
(c) The visual properties, e.g. size, distance, colour,

categorization or classification breakdowns for the
purpose of providing classification systems or
enumerating all of the specific elements of the AEC. The
diversity of building standards and regulations as well as
the variety of international environmental constraints has
diverted the aim of developing a unified classification
model to more national based models. Examples are: the
UNICLASS in UK [33], the MASTERFORMAT in USA
and Canada [34], and the BSAB in Sweden [35]. The
main drawback of these systems is that they are designed
for shelving and filing systems of paper-based documents,
with minor emphasis on the document contents itself.
They model shallow knowledge areas and are applied to
wide data sets.

3.2:

Factor 2: Information seeking strategies

A person engaged in an information acquisition
process has one or more goals in mind and uses a search
system as a tool to help achieve those goals [ 151. The
main objective of information access tasks and related
visualisation tools is to achieve those goals. Recent
studies in information retrieval systems emphasize the
importance of identifying the user goals by analysing
hidher information needs and seeking strategies [ 15,361.
These analyses enable the system developers to configure
proper pre-processed formats of the raw data. They can
then be used to develop the required IV systems by
mapping visualisation requirements for each seeking
strategy. These mappings are typically the level of
abstraction [30], correlation with images, filtering
requirements, and navigation needs.
Architects’ information seeking strategies can be
classified into two main areas based on type of
information under examination (figure 2). These
strategies are either project related information seeking or
general information seeking. The former is particular to
an individual project and is accumulated during the
project related process of design, manufacture, and
construction. On the other hand, general information is
accumulated constantly as more is leamt about building
related technology, and about the application of the
human and natural sciences to building (61. The role of
the general information is to nourish the design process. It
is to provide quick and sufficient information to architects
when confronted with a decision-making situation, in a
suitable form [5].

Inquiries
Appearance.
Mechanism
Performance
Cost analysis

3.3: Factor 3: Information Visualisation
techniques

Regulations.
Standards

The methodology of selecting a certain visualisation
technique affects the resulting IV tool interface. It

Sourcing

46

IV method@)
2D. 3-D

Application level
Document level

Temporal, 2D. 3-D,
Multi-dimensional
2D. 3-D, Multidimensions
2D, Temporal.
Tree. Network
2D. Tree. Network

Document level

Data Set level
Data Set level
Data Set level

[45]survey on users’ use of IV tools shows that their
reluctance to adapt new-look interfaces is one of the
major reasons for their less use of such tools. Yet, it could
be argued that hyperspace experience soon will be a
standard required skill, especially with the fast developing
electronic communications and Internet-based services.

motion, and orientation, are seen as the language
vocabulary of the IV interface. Their role is to
communicate intended concepts to the users. Applying
different visual properties affects the users’ perception,
and the resulting semantics 01‘ their internal knowledge
cognition [20]. Determining which visual properties to
implement depends on the concepts that the IV tool is
designed to communicate. However, architects are
familiar with most of these visual properties and their
effects. They are used to adapt them to their designs
sharing the same objective of communicating their
intended concepts to the users of the building [ 191.

3.4:

4: Approaching IV for the architectural
domain
One of the ongoing concems of IV systems designers
has been to create systems with increasingly complex
functions that are still user-friendly and easily accessible
to users, whether those users are experts or novices in
information seeking. As this subject area has matured,
studies emphasize the importance of adopting a usercentric approach by incorporating the two equally
important factors of the information seeking strategy and
the user profile. In this section, we evaluate three
proposed approaches to the research and development of
IV tools for the architectural practice, namely: technology
push approach, data structure based approach, and task
driven approach.

Factor 4: T h e u s e r profile

From an information proce:js view of the IV systems,
the user’s role is simply to inteiract with the system and to
interpret the visual information, which is presented on the
screen, into the intended knowledge. This user’s
perceptual process depends highly on the user’s
interpretation ability to visual information (or visual
ability). The goal of analysing the user profile is to take
advantage of the user’s strong interpretation abilities and
to avoid visualisation techniques that require a user’s
weak interpretation abilities [41,42]. Based on Gutkauf
[42] and Hook [43], user-profile parameters for visually
oriented systems are users’ knowledge base, background,
visual abilities, and hyperspace experience (figure 2).
Knowledge: The variety of information seeking
strategies and data types between each team player in the
building industry, i.e. architects,, contractors, or engineers,
increases the significant role of the users’ knowledge base
about the subject searched. These users want to learn
about relevant issues in small information chunks right at
the time when they need them, i.e. learning on demand
knowledge acquisition.
Background: The temporary nature of the building
team, on project basis, emphasises the importance of
including the users’ background analysis. Individual team
players, from different work cultures, normally use
different norms, symbols and representations.
Visual abilities: As discussed earlier, the goal of
analysing the user model is to take advantage of the user’s
strong visual abilities in order i:o reduce misinterpretation
of the presented information [44]. However, studying the
architects’ learning traditions and their heavy usage of
visual vocabulary in the architectural practice world
shows the large potential for visual approaches success in
enhancing their information cognition.
Hyperspace experience: Collecting information
about the users’ experience in dealing with complex IT
systems as well as lntemet resources is seen as a step to
the decision making of how to design an IV tool. Card’s

4.1:

Technology push approach

In this approach (Figure 3), the IV development
process starts with identifying the IV technique(s) that
will be implemented. Second, a data model is to be
compiled to enable this technology to perform. Following
these two stages, system developers propose potential use
for the developed systems, i.e., to find a purpose for
applying such solutions [41]. In fact, this technology push
approach was the main deriving force for the evolution of
the state of the art 1V technology. The several attempts,
which have been made to post-rationalize the IV formal
theory base, were mainly derived from these explorations
[23,25,16].
This approach is seen to be effective when exploring
new technologies as well as producing generic IV tools
for commercial purposes. However, it has several
drawbacks that could be summarized as the following:
I ) Lack of integration with user’s information needs and
seeking strategies.
2) Hard to be customized for a specific domain.
Therefore, it often requires the users to re-engineer
their working behaviours, which makes the users
reluctant to start using it, especially within complex
processes such as in the Architectural domain.

Figure 3: Technology push IV

47

Spotfire [46] is a successful example of task driven
approach in developing IV systems for a specific domain,
Chemical engineering.
A data model is to be compiled incorporating a
semantic structure that enables achieving this required
functionality, together with the selection of appropriate
IV techniques. IV tools in this case are derived from
identifying real users’ information acquisition problems
and aim at providing relevant solutions. Adapting a task
driven approach provides:
1) Coherent IV functionality with users’ needs for
specific tasks, e.g. the architect could select one of
pre-defined stages of the project development and the
system responds with the required type and amount of
information.
2) Conformity with users’ expectations, as the interface
design is configured to serve a specific user-group.
3) System transparency by using domain specific forms
of abstraction, e.g. drawing symbols in the
architectural domain.
4) Effective visualisation techniques that correspond to

3) Users are expected to have an adequate level of IT
skills, which add to their lack of enthusiasm for
adapting such techniques, (See section I).
However, this large number of efforts in developing
IV tools throughout the last decade [38] provides
evidence that the concurrent technologies are capable of
producing efficient IV software tools. It also emphasises
the need for assessing information access problems in
conjunction with the user needs and profiles in order to
provide effectual solutions.

4.2:

Data structure based approach

Another approach to develop IV tools based on
existing data models of a specific domain (Figure 4),
where users’ analysis are only to enhance the IV tool end
product. This approach is bounded with the quality of the
applied data structure. Therefore, successful IV tools
reflect the richness and consistency of these models, e.g.
the Visible Human Explorer [ 2 5 ] as it is based on a rich
semantic data structure of the human body.

Req. Task

Figure 4: Data structure based IV

Figure 5: Task driven IV

Applying this approach in the building industry
implies adapting existing working data models, which are
either core models or classification models. Due to the
semantic differences between these models, as discussed
earlier, different meanings could be communicated when
using 1V techniques. Visualisations based on ‘core
models’ could be used to represent deep and detailed
information about documents, or to clarify relationships
between other sub-models, i.e. on the document level. On
the other hand, visualizations based on ‘classification
models’ could be used to expose trends and relationships
within large collections of documents, i.e. on the data set
level. In this case, prior users’ knowledge of such
classification structures is required otherwise; users will
spend more time trying to locate the categories that
include the required documents.
Due to the inconsistency of data models in the
building industry, IV tools that are based solely on this
approach offer fewer facilities and less effective
information exploration opportunities to the domain users.

the user’s strong interpretation and visual abilities.
A drawback in task driven approaches is that the
methods of analysing users’ tasks are frequently tied to
the existing technology employed in the task and it is
therefore difficult to produce a creative, novel solution to
system design based on such methods. This problem often
called “paradox of change” [ 3 7 ] , where solutions might
be too influenced by the existing organisation of work,
tools used, and practitioners’ level of participation.

5: Conclusions
With the overwhelming increase of digital information
in the building industry, several problems, particularly
regarding information acquisition and use, have clearly
appeared. Though previous research justified this
phenomenon to the lack of skills and motives among
practitioners, this paper argues that current information
resources could be technically enhanced to reduce these
problems. The paper has investigated the effectiveness of
implementing infomation visualization techniques for
that purpose, as well as the factors that influence its
success for a specific domain, namely: underlying data
structures, information seeking strategies, information
visualization techniques, and the user profile.
Three proposed IV development approaches, for the
architectural practice, has been critically discussed:

4.3: Task driven approach
This user-centric task driven approach [47,43] focuses
on identifying the required IV task and application level
by analysing the user’s information needs and seeking
strategies, as well as analysing hidher profile (Figure 5 ) .

48

7

Lockley, S. R., Wiltshire, J., and Dudek, S. (1987).
"Information Transfer and Knowledge Based Systems in
Architectural Design." Proc. of ARECDAO, 1st
international symposium of computer aided design in
architecture and civil engineering, Barcelona.
8
Doherty, J. M. ( I 997). "A Survey of Computer Use in the
New Zealand Building and Construction." ITcon, 2.
9 Hansen: K., Gann, D., and Groak, S. ( 1 998). "Information
technology decision support and business process change in
the USA." Engineering Construction and Architectural
Management, 5(2), 115-126.
10 Abdel Meguid, T. (1997). -'Managed Claims Procurement
Strategy (MCPS): a Comparative Study of the Performance
of Alternate Building Procurement Strategies," PhD Thesis,
University of Montreal, Montreal.
1 1 Ofluoglu, S. (1999). -'Building Product Sites Worldwide,

(1) Technology push approach is seen to be effective
for exploring new IV technologies as well as producing
generic tools for commercial purposes. However, the
study presented several drawbacks of applying such
approach in the architectural practice in terms of lack of
integration with users' information needs, its demand for
new working behaviours, and its requirements of users
with certain level of IT skills.
(2) Existing data structures in the building industry
provide a range of application levels for IV tools from the
data set level using 'classification models' to the
document level using 'core models'. Though data
structures based IV systems have been successful in other
domains, the multi-disciplinary nature of the building
industry and its inconsistent data models shows less
potentials of success.
(3) In contrast to the two previous approaches, task
driven approach is seen as most effective when applied
for specific domains. It has direct interrelationship with
the users' information needs, seeking strategies, and
visual abilities. The paper has emphasised that analysing
users behaviours, specially in such information intensive
domain, is often tied to the existing employed technology
and therefore solutions might be too influenced by the
existing organisation of work, tools used, and
practitioners' level of participation.
Future research is required to examine each of these
three approaches in order to evaluate their impacts on the
current information acquisition problems in terms of
accessibility and assimilation. as well as the users
acceptance and willingness to adapt to their practices.

littp:'iwww.caad.cd.ac.uM-salih/~rodlin~.litm'~.
12 NBS. ( 1999). "Construction Information Service (CIS),
http://www.tionestop.co.uk.", Technical Indexes.
13 Tufte, E. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, Graphics press, Connecticut.
14 Card, S., Mackinlay, J., and Shneiderman, B. (1999).
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think. Morgan Kaufmann Inc., San Francisco.
15 Hearst, M. A. (1999). -'User Interfaces and Visualization."
Modem Information Retrieval, Ricardo Baeza - Yates and
Berthier Ribeiro - Neto, eds., ACM press, New York, 257323.
16 Shneiderman: B. (1998). Designing the User Interface.
Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction.
Addison Wesley Longman, Inc.
17 Ahlberg, C., and Wistrand? E. (1995). "IVEE: An
Information Visualization & Exploration Environment."
Proceedings of Information Visualization '9566-73.
18 Herman, I.? Melancon, G., and Marshall. M. (2000).
"Graph Visualization and Navigation in Information
Visualisation: a survey.'' IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6.
19 Tufte, E. (1 990). Envisioning Information, Graphics Press,
Connecticut, USA.
20 Ware. C. (2000), Information Visualization: Perception for
design, Morgan Kaufmann
21 Olsen. K., Korfhage. R., Sochats, K., Spring, M.: and
Williams, J. (1993). "Visualisation of a Document
Collection: The VIBE System." Information Processing &
Management, 29( I ): 69-8 1.
22 Lamping, J., Rao: R.; and Pirolli, P. (1995). "A
Focus+Context Technique Based on Hyperbolic Geometry
for Visualizing Large Hierarchies." Proc. of ACM CHI'Yj
Conference: Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACW:
40 1-408.
23 Dodge, M. (2000). "An Atlas of Cyberspace.'' Centre for
Advanced Spatial Analysis, University College London.
Available: http:i/www. cvberpeopraphv.orp/atlas/.
24 Hearst, M. A. "TileBars: Visualization of Term
Distribution Information in Full Text Information Access.''
CHI '95 Proceedings, 1995, Denver.

References
Vries, E., and Jong, T. (1997). "Using information systems
while performing complex tasks: an example from
architectural design." Internotional Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 46( I), 3 1-54.
Lawson, B. (1998). "Towards a computer-aided
architectural design process: a journey of several mirages."
Computers in Indust?, 35( I).
Papamichael, K. ( 1 999). ".4pplication of information
technologies in building design decisions." Building
Research & information. the International Journal of
Research, Development, Demonstration & Innovation,
27( I ) , 20-34.
Love, T. (2000). "Philosophy of design: a meta-theoretical
structure for design theory." Design Studies, 2 1(3), 293313.
Mackinder, M., and Marvin, H. (1982). "Design decision
making in architectural practice." Institute of Advanced
Architectural Studies, University of York, Research Paper,
19.
Davidson, C. (1998). "Thc Information Problem in
Building - Causes and Effe'cts, first Edition, Montreal,
May." , http://www.cibat.qc.ca/iWva/ifpubdex.htm.

49

25 North, C., Shneiderman, B., and Plaisant, C. (1996). “User
Controlled Overviews of an Image Library: A Case Study
of the Visible Human.” The 1st ACM International
Conference on Digital Libraries, 74-82.
26 Augenbroe, G. (1 998). “Building product Information
Technology, Executive White Paper.”, Construction
Research Centre, Georgia Institute of Technology.
27 Zamanian, M., and Pittman, J. (1999). “A software industry
perspective on AEC information models for distributed
collaboration.” Automation in Construction, 8: 237-248.
28 Brandon, P., and Betts, M. (1995). Integrated Construction
Information, E & FN Spon, London.
29 Froese, T. (1996). ”Models of Construction Process
Information.” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering,
American Society of Civil Engineers, 10(3), 183-193.
30 Sanvido, V. (1992). “Linking levels of abstraction of a
building design.” Building and Environment, 27(2), 1952.8.
31 Tolman, F. (1999). “Product modelling standards for the
building and construction industry: past, present and
future.” Automation in Construction, 8, 227-235.
32 1AI. (2000). “International Alliance for Interoperability.”,
http://iaiweb.Ibl.gov/.
33 RIBA (1997). Uniclass: Uninified Classification for the
Construction Industry, Royal Institute of British Architects.
34 CSI. (1995). MasterFormat 1995 Edition, The Construction
Specifications Institute, (http://www.csinet.org).
35 Ekholm. A., Haggstrom, L., and Karlsson, H. (2000). BSAB
96, the Swedish construction industry classification system,
Swedish Building Centre.
36 Wilson: T. (2000). “Human Information Behaviour.”
Informing Science, 3(2), 45-55

37

38
39
40

41
42

43

44

45

46

47

50

Downs, E., Clare, P., and Coe, I. (1988). Structured
Systems Analysis and Design Method: Application and
Context, Prentice-Hall, London.
OLIVE, On-line library of information visualisation
environments, htt~://otal.umd.edulOlive/Franirsi
Koutamanis,
A.
(2000).
“Digital
architectural
visualization.” Automation in Construction: 9(4), 347-360.
Schmitt, G. (1987). Microcomputer-Aided Design: For
Architects and Designers., John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Veltman, K. (1 998). “Frontiers in Conceptual Navigation.”
Knowledge Organization, 24(4), 225-245.
Gutkauf, B., Thies, S., and Sasse, A. (1997). “User
Adaptive Presentation of Information.” Proc. of the
International Symposium on Global Engineering
Networking, organized by GLENnet e. V., Antwerb,
Belgium.
Hook, K. (2000). ”Steps to take Before Intelligent User
Interfaces Become Real.” Journal of Interaction with
Computers, 12(4), 409-426.
Gutkauf, B., Thies , S., and Domik G. (1999). “IDIAS An Intelligent Diagram Assistant,
http://www.unipaderbom.de/fachbereich/AG/agdomik/arbeitsschwerpunkt
e/ucmm/idias/root.html.” , C-LAB, Cooperative Computing
& Communication Laboratory, Paderbom, Germany.
Card, S. (1996). “Visualizing Retrieved Information: A
Survey.” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
16(2), 63-67.
SpotFire. (2000). 5potFire.net Decision Analytics: a
Business Level Description, (White Paper).‘‘ URL:
http..;:iz,wic;..spotli~e.corn.
last visited Feb 200 1.
Nardi, B., and O’Day, V. (1999). Information Ecologies,
Using Technolop with Heart, MIT Press.
~

