Addressing Ethical Issues in Computer Graphics Curricula
Dr. Mark W. Bannatyne
Department of Computer Graphics
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
E-mail: mwbannatyne@tech.purdue.edu
Dr. Dmity I. Troitsky
Dept. of Automated Manufacturing Systems
Tula State University, Tula, Russian Federation
E-mail: troitsky@uic.tula.ru
Professor Robert A. Hall
Dept. of Programs - Lakes Region Facility
NH Dept. of Corrections, Concord, NH, USA
E-mail: Hhallral @jjcs.com
we may say that a prime goal of our programs is to not
only teach computer graphics courses, but to provide
our charges as well rounded an education as we
believe they will need in their careers.
However, an examination of the curricula offered
in our field in institutions of higher education will
reveal that most programs have been neglectful in
teaching one important subject that is paramount to our
field. The subject is *‘Ethics.“
If we were to survey professional educators in
engineering and technology programs as to the reason
why they have ignored this subject, we would no doubt
be met with a wide variety of reasons. Some of our
colleagues contend that such a topic falls under the
venue of general education requirements, or that
departments that concentrate on philosophy are better
able to treat the subject more completely. We could
argue that a general review of ethics in either a
historical approach, or based on current issues, might
indeed be better taught in such related departments.
The problem remains however, that the topic of
ethics is rarely addressed in a manner that centres on
computer graphic applications. This means that our
students are never brought face to face with topics and
issues that concentrate on their chosen careers, or on
the evolving nature_of computer graphics.
With this being the case, we should pose the
questions: “Who then should teach this subject to our
students?” and, “Who understands the applications of
graphical information better than we do?” It would be
foolish for us to pretend that the topic of ethics doesn’t
cause most of us to draw a deep breath, or cringe a bit.

Abstract
Many professional educators who instruct
courses in computer graphics programs have been
mindful of teaching students those subjects
required to become successful graduates in their
field of study. However. many teachers and
professors believe that we have not ensured that
their students have always been properly prepared
to deal with ethical issues associated with the work
they will do in industry and business once they
enter the world of work. We have not given
adequate attention to the moral preparation that
must also attend academic endeavors. Serious
attention must be given 1.0 including courses in
ethics that concentrate on the impact that computer
graphics is having on a global scale.

Introduction
As professional computer graphics educators
demand that we concentrate considerable amounts of
time during each school year on updating curricula to
reflect new ideas and applications in our field. Periodic
reviews of our curricula ensure that our students are
participating in a wide breadth of science, math, and
general education. Indeed, we would be accused of
being derelict in our responsibilities as educators if we
did not ensure that our students participated in diverse
subjects outside of our area of specialization. In brief,

263
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

and group beliefs. Indeed, each category is influenced
by the other as well as by external concerns such as the
opinions of our family, friends, and the daily
experiences that cause our ethical foundation, that is,
our belief of good and evil, or right and wrong, to
change over time.
Our responsibility as educators therefore involves
ensuring that we impart to our students the knowledge
that these changes are going to require them to reexamine their role in society many times throughout
the rest of their lives. As Lovejoy so correctly noted,
“The challenge of.. .education is to teach students the
skills they need today as well as the ability to
assimilate and apply ne\v information to new situations
that inevitably arise in the workplace [3].”

For many educators, in any discipline, any subject that
deals with personal standards of behaviour may seem
to be an intrusion into the private beliefs of their
students, or cause their own values to be placed under
public scrutiny. However, this is a stumbling block
that can be overcome if the subject of ethics is
approached in the correct manner.

What Do Our Students Need?
A review o f computer graphics programs in the
United States, Canada, and Russia has revealed a
common trend about the requirements made on
students. to obtain practical work experience during
their college careers. Programs in Canada and the
United States encourage students, but do not require
them. to participate in summer internships or
cooperative placements. While students in Russia are
required to complete a series of short internships,
placements are often scarce and therefore made on a
sporadic basis. Student enthusiasm is also low among
participants. As one student at a Russian university
responded, “Our school year is so full of studying all
we want to do in the summer is to relax.” As a result,
too few students graduate with any practical
experience in their chosen profession.
Further consideration also needs to be made as to
what sort of ”life experiences” most students have. A
poll conducted at Purdue University (1999) in showed
that of the 92 seniors who were scheduled to graduate
from the computer graphics program within the next 3
months:
1.

Understanding What We Do in Computer
Graphics
Before we will be able to address the issue of how
we should approach the challenge of teaching ethics in
our classrooms, we need to recommend that educators
must accept a broader view of what constitutes
computer graphics. While our field certainly includes
the solitary person who sits in front of a dedicated
workstation, computer graphics encompasses the
Internet with its commercial and privately posted
WWW sites, broadcast video, commercial animations,
and even e-mail just to mention a few of the more
obvious applications. Perhaps our first task could be to
evaluate how technology is distributed around the
globe and what effect this might have on our teaching
strategies. Few nations today have a parallel system of
technology in computer graphics with any o f its
international neighbours. Binyon‘s startling review of
facts taken from a United Nations Development
Programme report supports the technological
imbalance that currently exists in our world:

51 had never left the state in which they lived

2. Only 8 had traveled more than 250 miles
from their home
A mere 3 students had visited another country
4. Only 2 had been involved in a summer
internship during their time at university, and
5. One had participated in a Study Aboard
program in Italy
?

J.

1.

2.
Almost 4 decades ago Jerome D. Frank (1966)
reminded us that technology, “...formulates concerns
relevant to the rightness of certain actions, the
goodness of certain attitudes, or the justification of
certain policies [l].” Despite this, most students will
enter the workforce unable to deal intelligently or
morally with the decisions and challenges technology
will require them to face.
We might very well ask ourselves, ”Isn‘t ethics
something that is private and singular to each
individual?” Ethics takes many forms and plays many
roles in each activity we engage in whether at work or
in private pursuits. As Iannone noted, an individual’s
ethics are not cast into a single set of values that are
applied to every circumstance [2]. Our ethical values
fall into several categories that include both personal

3.

4.

’

Half of all the computers in the world are
housed within the United States,
In 1999, there were 36 million computers in
the world that had Internet access. In 1988,
there were only 100,000 computers with such
access,
South Asia has one-quarter of the world’s
population, yet only 1% of this population are
classified as “Internet users”,
The cost of a computer in Bangladesh is equal
to the average salary earned by one of its
citizens in 8 years.

While these findings speak to both the abundance and
lack of computer technology available throughout the
world, they also reveal a darker side of what is
happening with computer graphics globally. Speaking
directly to issues associated with the Internet, Binyon
further noted, .‘The Internet divides the educated from

264

the illiterate, men from wonien (75 per cent of all users
in Brazil are men, for example), rich from poor, young
from old (the average British user is under 30) and
urban from rural ...Bulgaria has more Internet hosts
than sub-Sahara Africa [4].”
Kufi Annan, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, has stated that, ‘....technology will rewrite
many of the globe’s oldest rules” [5]. However, in
consideration of this statement we might query, “How
and what rules will be rewritten?’ At a time when
technology companies are begging for highly skilled
workers, the number of women in the United States
receiving degrees in computer and information
sciences has fallen to less than 30% (lower than the
36.8% earned in 1985). As Haag stated, “The problem
area is they (women) are underrepresented in computer
classes, as network engineers, software developers areas that are growing [6]”.
While we cannot predict the future with any
accuracy, it may be safe to assume that rules
concerning how the computer will be applied around
the world will continue to exert an influence in our
societies. The computer has either become ingrained
into our societies, or is the goal of other. But, do we
see that every action has a consequence? A survey of
2,000 people conducted by Roper Starch Worldwide
for Hearst Magazines found that, 75% of those
surveyed believed that the computer has made life
better. However, at the same time, 67% of those who
responded said, “Technology has made life’s quick
pace even more frantic [7]”.
In addition, we will still be faced with issues
based on gender, age and social values, as well as
issues associated with social norms as to who will be
allowed access to technology such as the Internet and
who will not. Addressing how the computer has even
changed our communications styles Sklaroff wrote
that:

its resources. As Mannix reminded us, each person that
“surfs the Web” is exposed to:

...Rigged
auctions.
Viruses.
Adoption
scams.. .All illustrate the tremendous power of the
Internet in perpetuating a whole range of crimes
and misdemeanors and suggests that, for all its
marvels, the online world is a place one must
navigate with abundant caution [9].
Are individuals the only ones doing things differently
in their lives as a result of their interaction with the
computer?
Of course not!
Companies and
governments alike have reconfigured the way they
conduct business and deal with each other. As Lardner
pointed out, more than 7,000 employees at Arthur
Anderson (an international consulting firm) have been
issued Palm Pilots in order to standardize the tracking
of travel expenses and billing hours [IO].
Staying in touch and the sharing of data in a
common format has become the standard of business
and is nothing less than a solid business practice.
However, those who are without the necessary
computer literacy or digital communication skills will
discover that they will not have the ability to become a
member of such new cyber-societies. Commenting on
the approach that governments have taken to stay in
touch with one another, Webster and Smith reported
on the results of technology discussions that occurred
at the meeting of the G8:
The G8 - America, Britain, Japan, Germany,
France, Italy, Canada, and Russia - yesterday
adopted an information technology charter with
the aim of helping poorer countries to benefit from
the Internet revolution. A new ‘.digital opportunity
taskforce” is to report back to the G8 next year on
how Internet use in the developing world can be
increased. The world leaders also agreed to a
suggestion from Vladmir Putin, the Russian
president, that they e-mail one another frequently
[111.

Life is different: Where once Americans depended
on the vagaries of the post office to communicate
in personalized, written messages, now we send
2.2 billion E-mail messages a day, compared with
just 293 million pieces of first-class mail. And
while frequent communications across borders of
state and country once cost serious money (in big
phone bill payments), you can now trade digital
one-liners with pals in, say, Kuala Lumpur for the
price of a local phone call. Space and time are
collapsed in a Star Trek second [SI.

It appears then, that world leaders now have begun to
embrace technology as a means to adopt a more
“personal touch” in dealing directly with one another
and sidestepped many of the diplomatic channels
which had stood for centuries.

Developing an Appropriate and Effective
Teaching Strategy

Those who have access to e-mail are creating a world
where communications is becoming an elitist activity.
Those who are without technology will not be included
in the “new rules.” Can this. be justified or considered
ethical?
We also cannot ignore the social consequences
that we face as the plethora of available information
because ever more accessible to those who can tap into

In considering how to develop curricula to address
the topic of ethics we may take several approaches. It
is important to remember in any of these strategies that
our main concern, as in any curricular issue, must be
centred on the needs of our students. However, in
whatever course of action we decide to pursue, it is

265

within their home or community. A person’s social
view of their world concentrates more on issues of that
deal with “group ethics.”

wise to always consider the international impact that
graphics is having on our students.
As the political borders of the world yields to
faster and more efficient computer communications
our students are being exposed to e-mail missives and
WWW sites from around the globe. These contacts
will most certainly influence their opinions as to the
impact computer graphics will have in the decisions
they will make in the workforce. Indeed, many of our
students will, during their careers, work for
internationally linked corporations where they will be
dealing on a regular basis with colleagues in different
countries. With such experiences our students will
have to work with many peers whose cultural
backgrounds and experiences may be contrary to their

1.

These include issues that deal with our:

-

-

-

Interactions with governments,
Local and federal laws,
Ideas conceming our perceptions of our
national and international image,
Public and higher education,
Associations with ethnic populations
Community service, and,
What types of jobs are considered socially
acceptable, and which are normally shunned.

O W .

a. Cultural Approach

Ideas could be offered on the impact that the
computer has had in changing a particular
community’s opinions toward:

Using this approach the subject of ethics may be
addressed in a variety of ways:

-

2.

1.

2.

3.

-

Topics relative to each culture’s approach in
regards to which members of its group are entitled
to participate in technology could be explored.
Various cultures have strict rules as to which
members will be allowed to receive
public education or enter the university, how roles
in the home will be assigned based on gender, or
the liberties afforded or expected as to the
responsibilities assigned to specific age groups.
Topics could also be organized and discussions
conducted which focus on specific aspects of the

-

c.

Medical practices,
Retirement,
Economic stability,
Leisure time activities,
Mass communications,
Personal improvement,
Social stability or harassment issues, and,
Governmental influence exerted on issues
considered to be personal, or outside the
realm of the government’s responsibility.

Historical Approach

culture (e.g. traditions), or how technology may be

Of all the approaches that might be used, perhaps the

transforming the way in which members of the
group see their role changing or remaining the
same within the cultural life of their ethnic or
religious community.
Another strategy could be to invite local
community or spiritual leaders to your class to
express their views as to the advantages or risks
that they believe technology poses to the cultural
life of their community or nation. Our opinions do
not need to be the only ones heard in relation to
this subject. Students must be allowed and
encouraged to consider alternative points of view
if they are to develop a personal standard of
ethical behaviour by which they will conduct their
own lives.

strategy of discussing this topic from a historical
perspective is the one that most teachers find to be the
most comfortable. This strategy allows us to address
the topic in a more removed manner where less of a
personal aspect associated with our own culture or
society is involved. In this strategy we address issues
on a multinational scale by looking at how various
technologies throughout history have influenced
various nations, societies, and cultures.
Laying a historical foundation in this manner
allows the instructor to simply state facts and examples
that show a clear correlation between technology’s
influence or action and an associated result. By
pointing out, as the British author James Burke called
it, these “Connections,” the instructor is able to bring
the discussion forward to the present time and include
those issues related to computer graphics. Topics,
which could be included in the foundational
components of this approach, could include, but not be
limited to:

b. Social Approach
While cultural and social approaches may appear to be
a redundant strategy, they are in fact two very different
methods of presenting information on this topic. A
person’s cultural values deal primarily with influences
that effect their view of the world as a result of their
interactions with immediate or extended families

1.
2.

266

Technological innovations that caused a move
from agrarian to urban living,
Revolutions in transportation,

3.
4.
5.

not neglect to ensure that we teach to the “affective”
portion of our students and not just to the “cognitive”
component of the individual. Ethics aAer all belongs to
the affective portion of our intellect.
We cannot leave this task to others for no other
professional educators have the experience necessary
to enlighten our students as to the subtleties that are a
part of our field of expertise. In an article in USA
Today entitled, “Where the work is in computer era,”
journalist Craig Wilson listed the ten best and worst
jobs as reported in a New York-based lifestyles
magazine. Of the ten best jobs listed, Multimedia
software designer was ranked as number one. The jobs
of Internet advertising executive, Internet surfer
(supposed to be a kind of digital librarian), and
Cyberdetective, were all included in the best jobs list
with other positions related to services we would
expect to be present such as health care services and
financial resource managers. A review of the top
listing showed a need for a level of computer literacy
with a particular need to understand and utilize
graphical communications. It is particularly interesting
to note that not one of the ten worst jobs listed a
profession that had a direct link to computers or
graphics. The world we are sending our students into is
primarily visual and it is going to demand that they
stay current with technology and change with it [12].
Our responsibility is clearly laid out for US: We
must provide for our students a vehicle, either through
dedicated courses or seminars, the opportunity to gain
a better understanding of the ethical challenges that
await them. This is a topic that is as important to their
future welfare as any of the traditional academic
courses in which we expect them to excel. As an
educator. ask yourself, “Would I allow my students to
treat their studies of computer languages or systems
passively and expect them to have success in their
future occupations in business and industry?” No
doubt the answer is obvious in the negative. Then how
can we consider denying any student the opportunity
to arm themselves with a strong sense of their own
ideas and values and expect them to have success in
the workforce? The answer is, of course that cannot
be.
As your fellow colleagues, we will readily
concede that the task before us is a challenging one.
One that will not be without its trials and difficult
moments. Any attempt to establish such a course will
undoubtedly those in administrative positions to draw
a long breath, at what they perceive will be the
controversial nature of such a subject. There will also
be those that will wince at the unknown aspects of this
topic, and wonder aloud at how the community at large
may perceive the values that they will assume are
being challenged. However, in the midst of your
attempts to establish your course always remember:
This responsibility cannot be passed along to our
colleagues outside our field. We must shoulder this
duty ourselves.. .and quickly too.

Medical discoveries,
The rise of international business, or
Mass communications.

All of the suggested topics have direct links today to
the use of computer graphics and can provide a
springboard for extensive discussion and research.

d. Contemporary Issu’es
The inclusion of a dedicated course that deals
directly with technology, and specifically with
computer graphics, is a difficult course to have
approved in some universities. Due to the reasons that
we have listed previously in this paper, often a full
course on this topic is ignored or rejected as being too
controversial to risk as a permanent part of a
department’s published curriculum. In an effort to still
present our students with an opportunity to participate
in this subject the last suggested strategy is one that is
can be used as the platform to conduct seminars.
Current topics taken from professional journals,
government reports, newspaper and current affairs
magazines, dissertations, published proceedings from
conferences, presentation as regional, national, and
international meetings, and guest lectures, can all be
used as the topic of each meeting.
If we have a fault as educators it may be that we
fail to ask our students to seek out new ideas or ask
more questions about the way we do things. While we
must ensure that a rigid academic standard of
excellence is maintained in our degree programs, we
cannot forget that the acquisition of knowledge comes
from applying what we have learned and not from
simply being able to repeat facts or answers from rote
memory. Let us ask our students to come out of
themselves and to express their opinions and belief
systems in a professional and non-confrontational
standpoint.

Summary
With the beginning of each school year we face
new challenges in computer applications that we are
responsible for presenting to our students. Technology,
and particularly computer graphics, is moving at a
pace that only a decade ago we believed was still
something that only the next generation would have to
contend with.
The far-reaching effects of societies and
individuals that accept, or fail to adopt, new
technologically sophisticated ways of doing things is
changing at an exponential rate and there seems to be
no “stop sign” on the horizon. Of course we all realize
that no curriculum can remain static and still expect to
prepare students for a successful careers once they
graduate. In the midst of our anxiety to stay as current
(as is humanly possible) with these changes we must

267

References
[7] Plumb, L. (Ed.), *'What We Value: World Life
Program", Hope Health Letter,The Hope Heart Institute,
Seattle, WA., USA, July, 2000, Vol. 20, No. 7, p. 8.

[ 11 Frank, J . D., "Galloping Technology: A New Social
Disease", Contemporary Moral Controversies in
Technologv, Iannone (Ed.), Oxford University Press, USA,
1987, p. 12.

[8] Sklarofc S., "E-mail Nation", U.S. News and World
Report, USA, March 22,2000, pp. 54-55.

[2] Iannone, A. P. (Ed.), Contemporary Moral
Controversies in Technology. Iannone (Ed.), Oxford
Universiv Press, USA, 1987, pp. 3-4.

[9] Mannix, M., "The Web's Dark Side", U.S. News and
World Report, USA, August 28, 2000, pp. 36-38.

[3] Lovejoy, B., "Continuous Improvement", Vocational
Education Journal, The American Vocational Association,
USA, February, 1995, p. IO.

[IO] Lardner, J., "PC Rebels Are Gaining", U.S. News and
World Report, USA, March 22,2000, pp. 46-48.

[4] Binyon, M., "Technology Tax Suggested As Answer to
Third World Debt", 7he Times, London, England, July 14,
1999, No. 66,565, p. 1.

[ 1 I ] Webster, P., & Smith D., "Britain Leads G8 Into War
on Drug Barons" The Sunday Times, London England, July
23,2000, No. 9178, p. 2.

[5] Dowell, W., Waller, D., & Wosnitzna, R., "The Five
Virtues of Kofi Annan", Time, USA, September. 4, 2000,
pp. 34-42.

[ 121 Wilson, C., "Where the Work is in Computer
Age", USA T o d q , USA, March I , 1995, p.3.

[6] "Technology's Gender Gap Grows Despite Wealth of
Jobs", Lincoln Journal Star, Associated Press, USA, July 4.
2000, p. 2A.

268

