The Graphical I[nterfacein the Digital Millennium: The Past is Present
Dr. John Antoine Labadie
Director, Media Integration Center
Art Department
University of North Carolina-Pembroke
of radical change in such traditional practices. In fact,
over more than twenty years of teaching art I have
observed what appears to be a declining interest in
physical tools for graphical communication.
Throughout human history acts of communication
and expression through making marks have been
fundamental among human instincts. Drawing, that
most basic of graphical acts, has long provided a
direct physical means for the recording of human
intentionality. Such mark making has been
manifested across tens of thousands of years in the
forms of human art making. Since Paleolithic people
first made marks in caves and rock shelters there
have been durable forms of evidence produced which
have recorded the unique visual thinking and
sophisticated communication abilities of early
humankind. We can still view much of this work
today due to the original makers’ employment of
lithic and pigmented “graphical” interfaces. Despite
the ravages of time, even now there is a vast record
of human visual cognition available for inspection in
the rock art that is distributed, in one form or another,
throughout the known range of human habitation.
The technologies of human mark making, these
graphical artifacts of how we make two-dimensional
sense of the three-dimensional world around us, have
evolved with us to encompass a remarkable range of
working one surface against the other to allow for the
formation of intentional design(s) upon what was
once a tabla rasa. In the durable artifacts collectively
known as “rock art” we have ample evidence of the
path humans have followed through abstraction and
distillation of thinking into visual symbols. Over
many thousands of years such cognitive travels along
this graphical path have resulted in various, highly
evolved and carefully structured notational systems:
musical, mathematical, artistic, languages. As
cultural adaptation, the sciences, and new
technologies have evolved ever more advanced
means of making marks, the invention and
introduction of portable and more easily perishable
substances such as paper and other specially prepared
substrates have allowed for ever more sophisticated
and refined graphical statements. Moreover, the
continued and often parallel development of

Abstract
Communication through making marks is a
fundamental human instinct. Humans have always
used the act of drawing as c! means to express ideas,
emotions and to record actions. Currently, the
discipline of drawing is being profoundly influenced,
and perhaps forever changed, by the proliferation of
new drawing media, technologies, and diverse
approaches to making marks through digital means.
A s such, the perception and understanding of what
constitutes
drawing
is rapidly
expanding.
Simultaneously, many graphic artists are expanding
upon historical approaches to drawing. The early
twenty-first century is a time when the dialogue
between innovation and tradition has never been
stronger. This paper seeks to explore this dialogue by
embracing the breadth of what drawing is and to
conjecture on where drawing might go in the
immediate future by exploring the use of new
technologies, elaborating the impact of continuing
traditions of drawings, and to engage the expanding
range of ideas that are brought to this basic form of
human expression. As we enter into this new
millennium the immediacy of drawing offers, as it
always has, a profound mirror to the swift change
that pervades global digitul culture. The presenter
invites all those involved ,in drawing, in whatever
form, to be a part of this dialogue.

I teach drawing as visuall thinking in traditional
media design classes and also digital imaging in fully
realized computer graphics studios. Although these
university level studios are mere steps from each
other down the same hallway, it appears to many of
my colleagues that the nature, as well as the practice,
of graphics in these classrooms is sometimes worlds
apart. Perceptual drawing, that mark making
accomplished from observation of the physical world,
seems, to some, to be in deep conflict with the
practice and goals of technologies employed in
digital studios. Indeed, it is not arguable that many of
my students have grown up with keyboards and mice
rather than the graphite and paper of my youth and
many generations before me. But we exist in a time

245
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

reversed. Those fields which once required
perceptual drawing as a prerequisite to professional
function are now populated, or will soon be
populated, by practitioners (architects, engineers and
designers) who did not learn to (or perhaps are not
even able to physically) “draw a straight line” as
software interfaces now allow this once-difficult goal
to be quickly achieved by a very different population
than in times of the utter dominance of perceptual
drawing. Moreover, linear perspective, modeling,
various other representations of three-dimensional
constructions, works with accurately depicted
proportions, and drawings with subtly varied line
forms can now all be produced via software and input
device interfaces. The evidence of this surrounds us
and is, for example, pervasively present in the
electronic as well as print media. What can be
produced graphically and how graphical products are
created has forever been altered. Perhaps even the
concept of permanence is now arguable more with
respect to the chemistry of CD-ROM plastics than
that of paper and inks. The era of “virtual” works and
the demise of the traditional “original” has arrived.
The concepts of media and substrates for drawing
have been reconceptualized in terms of “dpi” and
“file type” as well as the considerations of pixel
versus vector applications for graphics development
and production. The concepts of immediacy in media
and fluency of graphic ability have not removed
themselves altogether but such long held ideas and
practices must be reconsidered in the bright light of
the RGB display calibrated to IS0 (International
Standards Organization) specifications. This is a vital
as well as a transitional time for the graphic artist as
well as the more pragmatic graphics user. Today
many involved in education in the visual arts are
expanding upon historical approaches to drawing as
metaphors for digital working environments. The
early twenty-first century is also a time when the
dialogue between advocates of innovation and the
keepers of the traditional in drawing and related
graphical fields has never been stronger. But in order
to effectively capitalize on this ephemeral moment
we must realize that drawing, the making of marks
regardless of the technologies used to do so, is not
simply an exercise in making aesthetic statements or
notations of some sort. Much more is involved.
Drawing in the traditional forms is a deeply
philosophical enterprise that deals with the
acquisition of empirical knowledge and the pursuit of
epistemological investigations. Through drawings we
learn heuristically and acquire experiences which are
then reproduced as graphical works. Whether on
paper with pencil and now on perhaps with a Wacom
tablet and stylus, perceptual graphics involve the
maker in distilling an inherently three-dimensional

specialized graphical tools has allowed for ever more
rarified and nuanced recordings of expressive intent
and visual thinking through the employment of a
wider range of graphical tools introduced by each
generation of scientists and artists. By the early
twentieth century, highly evolved forms of chalks,
graphite pencils, colored pencils, pastels, oil pastels,
crayons and other specialized artists’ materials have
allowed artists of succeeding generations to engage in
“never before possible” activities in the various
traditional, and also newly established, graphical arts.
As the tools for graphical expression and notation
have changed so have the possibilities, the universe
from which such choices can be made. Although the
hand, with opposed thumb, has remained the same
for our species for some time, the tools for graphical
expression have developed marvelously over the
millennia to now encompass virtual graphics through
digital interfaces. With the introduction and now
widespread adoption of digital imaging the nature of
the user appears also to have been deeply modified.
Particularly over the last two decades of the twentieth
century and into the second millennium of Western
history, those of us involved in the teaching of
traditional drawing have students come to the studio
who rarely use any part of the hand other than the
index and middle finger to make their “mark”
graphically. Simply put, the discipline of drawing,
making specialized marks through traditional
graphical tool interfaces, has been profoundly
influenced, and perhaps forever changed, not only by
the proliferation of technically new traditional
drawing media, but more powerfully through the
interface offered by newly invented technologies, and
the corollary and diverse approaches to making
marks through digital means. An altered reality now
exists wherein a “new hand” has been created
through invoking things-digital as a viable
replacement (or inheritor?) for perceptual drawing
skills. In the year 2001 the digital world has
advanced pervasively and qualitatively to, perhaps,
the point of overwhelming perception-based
graphical works altogether. To produce visualizations
in this new digital millennium those persons working
in visual fields must effectively connect with the
newest graphical technologies in order to work in
most fields. There is literally no choice in this regard.
Furthermore,
the
cultural
perception
and
understanding of what has traditionally constituted
drawing is rapidly expanding, and changing - daily.
In many, if not most, educational and professional
training environments, it is no longer is it seen as
necessary for students to deeply learn and utilize
traditional drawing skills as practical tools for
disciplines such as engineering, architecture and, in
some cases, the fine arts. Such trends will not be

246

way(s) will have to make sense of what sort of
practitioner we will be in this new age of drawing.
For example, as an expressive artist I have some very
specific questions about the merging of traditional
practice with the possibilities of my digital future.
For me all such inquiries fall into two categories. 1.
Where might a rational approach take the graphic
arts? Corollary: What are some more “reasonable”
conjectures about where graphics (drawing) may go
and what are the related sources from which we
might derive our empirical knowledge for a
scientific, developmental approach? 2. Where might
a sentient approach take the graphic arts? Corollary:
What are some more “affective” conjectures about
where graphics (drawing) may go and what are the
related sources from which we derive our aesthetic
knowledge for an artistic, intuitive approach? These
are my categorical questions; other “users” will have
theirs. But whatever our questions, reflection and
then well-informed action developed in order to
understand and guide new graphics education and the
future development of drawing is vital to human
expression and communication. In summary, I
believe our potential for actions toward guiding the
evolution of drawing in the age of the digital
interface, to the extent that this is even possible, can
be constructively assisted by introspective and
reflective activities about the nature of work and our
world. In my view, those of us in involved in
education, the pragmatic arts, the sciences, and the
expressive arts must issue a call to our colleagues to:
1. Raise the self-consciousness of professional
publics regarding the nature of the graphical
interfaces in our collective domains. The goal here is
to move beyond being a “user” toward a heightened
awareness of a merging of our possibilities for what
drawing might become based upon an understanding
of what it is, and what it does at this time. 2 . Describe
specific means or instrument(s) that might allow
concerned parties to construct an accurate and
informative
view of
the
similarities
and
dissimilarities of digital “drawing” and more
historical, traditional graphical interfaces. Here the
goal is to develop an accessible literature for the
development of pedagogy and educational practices
that do not BEGIN with the digital interface alone. 3.
Define the cultural identity of what it is we as
graphics producers, as digital visualizers, create in
terms of product impact: social, scientific, artistic. 4.
Examine our educational practices. How, and in what
ways, do we formally acculturate persons into “things
graphical”? What are the practices? How does the
practices work? How effective are such practices in
terms of building the future of drawing on the
practices of the present what most assuredly have
been founded on our rich graphical past.

world into a slim, tonal, linear, carefully shaped
depictions of one’s consciousness of the perceptual
world. As organisms we are tremendously limited in
what we can perceive, let alone understand, of that
remarkable assemblage of possibilities that constitute
the visual world. Generations of researchers have
shown that we perceive only a fraction of what is
“there” to understand. What we selectively grasp and
can, perhaps, respond to graphically is only a fraction
of the perceptible. Enhanced graphical abilities now
available through digital interfaces allow for more
careful and thoroughly acqu.isitive understandings of
our world than ever before. What can we do to move
such possibilities forward in practical ways? W e
might greatly expand our expressive and
informational horizons by learning to balance the
possibilities of digital arts with those of the robust
and empirically-rich realms of traditional graphics
studio
practices.
Thorough
and
structured
examinations of traditional graphics practices through
art historical inquiry can present informed digital
users technical and aesthetic possibilities more
thoroughly and sensitively than one often finds in
much of the contemporary literature on digital
imaging and the “new” graphic arts. Armed with a
more informed sense of the historical path, graphical
practitioners of today rnight more effectively
conjecture where drawing (in a greatly broadened
sense of the term) might go in the immediate IT
driven future. At this time of new mark making, the
immediacy of new drawing tools offers a profound
mirror to the swift change that pervades global digital
culture. In this regard, some relevant questions also
emerge. For example: What are digital users using
and how are digital works being made? What
constitutes a new graphical work of the digital
species anyway? Why have some artists chosen, or
not chosen, to “go digital” or to stay “traditional” or
experiment somewhere in between? What does an
analysis of current trends and behaviors seem to
indicate? Do we now have enough information, or the
perhaps even the tools needed to gather sufficient
information to make such judgments at all? In this
regard, there is much potential difficulty in defining a
reliable and generally acceptable means to collect
useful information on such topics as: the fracturing of
disciplinary boundaries in graphics; descriptions of
global graphical interactivity; the rate of elaborations
and inventions of graphical media; or even methods
of graphical activity - among many other potential
topics of interest. Moreover, how can useful,
structured inquiries of this unprecedented era can be
conducted and then become informative and vital
tools for positive change? We have much work ahead
along this path. Beyond the realm of wider inquiry,
each of us who utilizes digital imaging in any serious

247

