PCIS - A Visual Decision Tool for Construction and Design Management
Dennis Fu kai
College of Design, Construction, and
Planning
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida, USA
fu kai@ufl. edu

Ravi Srinivasan
College of Design, Construction, and
Planning
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida, USA
sravi@uf.edu

breakdown structure (WBS) that is tailored to the
requirements of almost any building.
The second
component of PCIS is a dataTHEATER that surrounds the
anatomical model. The theater sets up a combination of
two-dimensional data planes that can be hypergraphically
accessed to view layout dimensions, details, and
specifications. The third part of PCIS is the data WORLD
with cameras fixed to the intersections of its latitudes and
longitudes. The cameras attached to the dataTheater and
dataworld control the visual display of the pictorial
information (Figure I).
A software engine polls the cameras and publishes the
images into a set of directories as files that are accessed by
the hypergraphic interface. The information visible to these
cameras can be changed through a standard survey matrix
(SSM).

Abstract
This paper demonstrates the potential of Piece based
Construction Information System (PCIS) as a visualization
tool f o r technical cooperation, collaboration, and
communication by literally aligning the points of view of
architectural, engineering, and construction methodology.
There exists complexity during actual construction or
assembly wherein the sequence is mostly always confused
and this leads to wastage of time, material and manpower.
PUS, the pictorial database, as a decision-aid tool
provides information in a sequence that is often forgotten
or missed in construction. PCIS has three
components.

1 : PCIS: A Pictorial Construction Information

System
The concept of a dataworld that organizes construction
information through user interaction was first presented as a
visual information concept at ACADIA '96, Tuscon [l].
After more than five years of development and field tests,
the original dataworld has evolved into a multidimensional
piece-based construction information system called PCIS
(Figure 2).
PCIS is able to document and record the assembly of
complex objects in construction. It acts as a pictorial
database that guides the design, management, construction,
and maintenance of a building [2]. The networked system
is pictorial since the design and construction information
are indexed to the pieces of a three-dimensional model that
are in turn linked to values like dimensions, specifications,
procurement, engineering, assembly instructions, and
operation and maintenance procedures.

Figure 1. Cameras s e t on the dataworld

Thefirst is an anatomical model, functionally organized
according to ASTM WIFORMAT II. This programmatic
standard means the model can be sequentially constructed
and deconstructed according to a standard work

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

376

on navigation. Surveys showed that 90% of visualization
and understanding was achieved in the first few minutes of
navigation. After that point, interest shifted to a visual
search for the information necessary to actually build the
building [8].

/I

Figure 2: MultkDiniensional PCIS
The organization of data conesponds to the organization
of pieces of the model with information in a progressive
sequence. The challenge is to' control and display these
pieces in a way that retains their visual and information
relationships [ 1][3]. Any reasonably knowledgeable CAD
operator can, of course, use a model for construction
information by visually turning on or off each piece of the
virtual assembly, but the time and tedious nature of using
the model in this way would clearly not be effective on a
jobsite [4].
The challenge is to automate these actions in an
anticipatory manner in order to convey visual construction
PCIS does this by organizing a
information [5].
constellation of cameras as a three-dimensional matrix of
fixed and therefore predictable images. These images are
then posted to a pictorial display that conveys threedimensional construction infomiation in the same manner
as a set of traditional two-dimensional drawings [6]. They
can also be sequentially ''played'' to animate an assembly
from a single camera angle or viewed as a collection of key
frames to capture a series of views of a particular phase of
construction.

I

Figure 3: Trainer Model
This means, a virtual environment, like a real
environment, has infinite points of view. In real world, this
is valid since the structure exists; information acquisition is
direct and driven by a simple motivation of understanding
the actual form. However in the virtual world of a
construction information environment, the objective is to
build the modeled object not to simply understand or
visualize the resulting spaces [9].

2: Lessons Learned
PCIS was initially tested usin,g an experimental structure
called the Trainer (Figures 3). This began with field studies
of VR and VRML models, drag and drop interactive
interfaces, motion studies and animations, and fixed data
planes within a three-dimensional information environment
model.
Early research in virtual information environments was
confusing to use and navigate [;'I. Coined 'datachambers'
(Figure 4), these information environments explored two
possible configurations. The firsi. was a VRML model with
linked objects. Though the results are visually impressive, it
was understood that the result had an infinite number of
views of the model and an inordinate amount of time spent

Figure 4: Sketch of datachamber

Another lesson learned was that even the best intentions
to "illustrate" a construction image distracted the user and
slowed down information transfer.
Early information
environments like the chambers were exciting to enter and
experience, but they were of little utility in the field because
visual overload left the navigator confused and

377

3: PCIS: An anatomical model in dataTheater
surrounded by a dataworld and controlled by

overwhelmed by visual information.
In the same way, rendered details of overly textured
images were interesting and largely satisfying to the author,
but visually conhsing to the constructor in the field (Figure
5). It was clear that images had to be controlled and
processed as visual information to specifically emphasize
the information necessary for that particular task.

a Standard Survey Matrix
PCIS has three components. The first is an anatomical
model, functionally organized according to ASTM
UNIFORMAT 11. This programmatic standard means the
model can be sequentially constructed and deconstructed
according to a standard work breakdown structure (WBS)
that is tailored to the requirements of the structure that it
surrounds. An anatomical construction model differs from
an architectural or visual model because every piece of the
construction is represented as a separate object in the
informational context of the total assembly. As a visual
database, these pieces act as a visual interface to all the
forces shaping the design.
The second component of PCIS is a dataTHEATER that
surrounds the anatomical model. The theater sets up a
combination of two and three-dimensional data planes that
can be hypergraphically accessed to view layout
dimensions, details, and specifications. These planes
include elevations, plans, and sections that make it possible
to automatically define the details of the structure as a

In other words, unlike a rendering or a technical
illustration, drawings extracted from an anatomical
construction model have to be anticipatory and
documentary [lo]. This means images must explain the
construction process in a way that would convey
information quickly and efficiently according to their
associated task. For visual information theory, this means
clear images, with minimal color, annotations, and clutter to
reduce the “noise” that may confuse a particular set of
instructions [ 111 as in Figure 6.

--~

I -

t

i

Figure 7: dataWORLD

Figure 6: PCIS Image without ‘noise’
The third lesson was context. The context for the
information contained in the pictorial display contains as
much, if not more, information that the display itself [2]. If
each frame is a three-dimensional image that delivers
precise process related visual data it must be presented in
parallel to the construction activity. It has to appear to
emerge from the interactivity of that process and “be there”
just as a worker in the field needs the information [ 121. The
sequential process should contextualize this means
construction information in a way that only the computer
can support - interactivityand key frame animations [ 131.

378

facilities document because the base data is derived for
anatomical model.
The third part of PCIS is the dataworld (Figure 7). With
cameras fixed to the intersections of its latitudes and
longitudes, an array of pre-established viewpoints is
available above and below the anatomical model. The
actual number of viewpoints and the zoom resolution of
each camera are determined by the complexity and
construction requirements of the components of the subject
structure. This is similar to other imaging technologies
where visual output is more u s e l l than the base software
[ 141.
The information visible to these cameras can be changed
through a Standard Survey Matrix, SSM (Figure 8). The
SSM sets the variables associated with a particular point of

view within this threepart environment. These variables
include zoom distance, apcrture size, angle, and the
visibility of each piece or combination of pieces. The
cameras of the dataneater and dataworld therefore control
the visual display of the pictorial information.
A software engine polls the cameras and publishes the
images into a set of directories as files that are accessed by
the hypergraphic interface. The result is a working
document composed of an interactive collection of
multidimensional images that {canbe displayed or published
to a network of related team members (Figure 10). Using a
hypergraphic interface or a text based search engine, the
team will have control over the information indexed by the
three dimensional model.

corresponding contextual relationships as an array of
otherwise ambiguous and often forgotten information.
Standardization of this information from the initial stages of
design to the final facility management supports the
constructibility, assembly, inspection, maintenance and
future expansion of the building [ 151.
Anticipation as a kind of built-in intelligence has been
recognized by other researchers as "task pointers" and
"glances" for other types of information environments
[ 16][171. The general idea is to post the next probable view
or signal the next step in a process. This kind of motion
brings the information environment to life because
anticipation clarifies the process as a sequence and extracts
time from the three-dimensional model.
Working from early tests of virtual environments, it also
became clear that combining two and three-dimensional
images would become important. It was also evident that
the distinct advantage of an information environment was
that it would be able to deliver the construction sequences
missing in these otherwise static views of the construction
information. In addition, anticipating the sequence of
construction would mean that the model might enhance
efficiency by capturing the construction processes.
Visual composition of images transfemng the
construction information with standardized viewpoints were
considered as a significant factor in construction
information transfer. These diagrammatic pictorial
instruments are very similar to the standard views or sheets
of plans, elevations and specifications found in a set of
construction drawings [6]. PCIS thereby allows a wide
range of players to share information oriented along the
same visual reference with a common perception. This
provides the potential for communication, collaboration and
long-term informational relationships that are important to
the design, construction, operation and maintenance of any
building [6].

Figure 8: Standard Survey Matrix (SSM)

4: Context, Anticipation, and Sequence
The current structure of PCIS differs from virtual models
or immersive computer environments because of the details
associated with the pieces of the anatomical model. For an
anatomical model to be useful, the information it contains
has to be processed so that it is delivered according to its
most likely sequence of construction.
This means
controlled combinations of three-dimensional layers and
visual references must track the production of the actual
construction process. Design1:rs and constructors cannot
afford the luxury of searching for information in the set of
drawings or navigating around a virtual environment
looking for notes or dimensions, only to face the potential
of misinterpretation. As such, the information must follow
the sequence of the construction process and be intuitively
visible at the moment the information is required. PCIS
anticipates the informational needs of the workers and
responds to those needs as they are presented.
The result is a visual interface of the model organized
according to the context of the construction process. The
pieces are processed to display information according to an
anticipated sequence in the construction process. A
hypergraphic
interface
visually
categorizes the

5: PCIS: Current Work
PCIS has been tested in field studies on construction
projects. For example, a project for Holder Construction
(Figure lo), studied existing infrastructure under a proposed
footprint in order to coordinate the design and placement of
pier foundations for a new building footprint.
5.1 Holder Construction Project
This involved preconstruction analysis and correlation
with schedules and estimates to illustrate the impact of the
new building on various construction altematives.
Calibrating the model to the geophysical data means
aligning infrastructure, roads, staging, marshalling, and the
structure of the building across the boundaries of reality.
The correlation of geographic information in this current
implementation suggests a spatial instrument with

379

a series of threedimensional construction models and aerial
maps shot from the same camera positions. At this point,
early massing models are overlaid on topographic data
extracted from USGS data (Figure 11). This will be refined
with aerial stereographic photos to facilitate the exact
location, using GPS, of piece-based construction models.

multidimensional images of the PCIS document projected
onto an augmented display (Figure 9, 10).

5.3 International Space Station (Proposal)
In conjunction with the NASA Ames Research Center,
PCIS is also being studied as a pictorial database that can
guide orbital assembly and maintenance of the Intemational
Space Station, ISS (Figure 12).

Figure 9: Studying Existing Structure

Figure 12: International Space Station
Though the ISS is already designed and substantially
constructed, PCIS will visually organize the varying
elements of the orbital facility in ways that would support
current visual information research [ 1S][ 191.
PCIS produces a collection of three-dimensional
illustrations, integrated into a graphical database capable of
supporting the long-term operation and maintenance of the
ISS and planetary settlements. The resulting database will
illustrate the details of the ISS, cross-referenced to provide
images of various combinations of the pieces of the
anatomical model, assembly sequences, maintenance
procedures, and searchable details and specifications.

Figure I O : Camera Shot from below Ground Level

5.2 Cross Florida Greenways Project

6

Conclusion

PCIS appears to be a viable altemative to a set of twodimensional construction contract documents
in
commercial applications. Coined a Lego approach to
construction modeling (Jarko 99), PCIS is a collaborative
tool that facilitates the design, construction, and
management of buildings and other engineering structures.
It works to streamline the design process by providing early
programmatic guidelines, increase project efficiency
through preconstruction simulation and analysis, and
documents lifecycle, repair, maintenance, operation, and
management of complex facilities. PCIS is based on visual
information theory and specifically addresses ways to
transfer information quickly using pictorial representations.
As a networked pictorial interface, it coordinates the visual

Figure 11: Dataworld located on the Terrain
In another example, early work on the integration of an
augmented mapping tool for the Cross Florida Greenways
project is now under funded development.
The idea here is to correlate geographical information
and terrain models of a 100-mile trail with design and
construction guidelines as a trail management plan. The
project uses a collection of two -dimensional maps to index

380

[8] Ellis, S R, “Virtual Environments and Environmental
Instruments in Simulated and Virtual Realities”, K.Carr &
R.England, eds. Taylor & Francis, London, 1995, ppl l-51.

perceptions within a diverse design team on a set of similar
viewpoints.
PCIS captures this evolutionary process of a design’s
development and the underlying forces associated with the
design development as infonnation within the pictorial
system; the entire process is captured for future reference
and changes can be added to maintain the database for later
management, operation, and maintenance. This enables
PCIS to grow with changes to the construction information
while archiving all prior versions of the facility, the result is
a living pictorial document and a historical database.
Current research demonstrates that PCIS is, therefore, a
visual three-dimensional tool that seems to have the
potential to facilitate comrnunication and maximize
collaborative efforts over the life of the project.

[9] Ellis, S R, “Pictorial Communication: Pictures and the
Synthetic Universe. Pictorial Communication in Virtual and Real
Environments”, 2nded., Taylor & Francis, London, 1993.

[IO] Lacourse, Dan, “How Solid Modeling Previews the Future”,
Design News, V46, N 10, May 10, 1990, p90-92.
[ 1 I] Tuft, Edward R, “Envisioning Information”, Graphics Press,
1990.
[ 121 Tuft, Edward R, “Visual Explanations”, Graphics Press,
1991.

7 References

[ 131 McKinney, Kathleen, and Kim, Jennifer and Fischer, Martin,
and Howard, Craig, ‘‘Interactive 4 0 CAD”, Computing in Civil
Engineering, 1996, p383-389.

[I] Fukai, Dennis, “PCIS: A Piece based Constr~ction
Information System ”,Automation in Construction, Elsevier, 1996,
P 7.

[ 141 Yamaguchi, Takami and Liu, Hao, “Computational
Visualization of External and Internal Biological Flows with
Fluid-wall Interactions”, Advances in Bioengineering, American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, Bioengineering Division, V39,
1998, ~127-128.

[2] Ellis, Stephen E, ‘On the De.iign of Perspective Displays”,
Proceedings o f IEA 2000/HFES2000 44‘h Annual Meeting of the
Human Factors & Ergonomics Society, 2000.

[ 151 Aalami, Florian and Fischer, Martin, ‘‘Construction Method
Models: The Glue between Design and Construction”,
Proceedings of the 1998 International Computing Congress on
Computing in Civil Engineering, Boston, ASCE, 1998, p376-378.

[3] Wei, Dong and Kathleen Gibson, “Computer Visualization: an
integrated approach for interior design and architecture”,
McGraw Hill, 1998.

[ 161 Wemert, Eric A and Hanson, Andrew J, “A Framework for
Assisted Exploration with Collaboration”, In the Proceedings of
the IEEE Visualization Conference, 1999, p24 1-248.

[4] Wilson, John, “AutoCAD 2000: A Visual Approach”,
AutoDesk Press, 2000.

[ 171 Pierce, Jeffrey S, Conway, Matthew, Van Dantzich, Marteen,
Robertson, George, “Toolspuces and Glances: Storing, Accessing,
and Retrieving Objects in 3 0 Desktop Applications”, In the
Proceedings of the Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics, 1999,
p 163-168.

[5] Fukai, Dennis, “Beyond Sphere/and: 4 0 CAD in Construction
Communications”, In the Proceedings of the Conference of
American Society of Civil Engineers”, 2000.

[6] Wakita, Osamu A and Linde, Richard A, “The
Professional Practice of Architectural Working Drawings”,

[I81 Cohen, M and Wenzel, E M, “The Design of Multidimensional Sound Interfaces”, In W. Barfield & T. Fumess I11
(Eds), Virtual Environments and Advanced Interface Design,
Oxford University Press, 1995, p291-346.

John Wiley and Sons, 1985.
171 Fukai, Dennis, “Real-World, Real Time, Real Fast: Using a
Trainer in a Computer Mediated Classroom”, Presentation as a
fellow to the Materials and Technology Institute of the
Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture, Berkeley, CA,
1996.

[I91 Ellis, S R, “The Design of Pictorial Instruments in Human
Computer Interaction and Virtual Environments” NASA CP 3320,
NASA Langley Research Center, 1995, ppl3-24.

38 1

