Query by Attention: Visually Searchable Information Maps
Mark A. Foltz and Randall Davis
MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab
Cambridge, MA 02 139 USA
{mfoltz,davis}@ai.mit.edu

Abstract

Designers of information spaces would like to make the
same kinds of improvements to more complicated displays.
This paper explores the relationship between information
space design and visual search, in the hope that spaces can
be made that facilitate rapid visual queries. The preliminary
proposal is that they should be designed to make maximal
use of spatial selection through attentional control, and visual properties that pop out, i.e. require almost no effort to
find even in a display with many items.
In this paper, an information map is a display that spatially arrays graphical symbols representing information
items and their attributes in two dimensions. By information item we mean an object with attributes meaningful to
users, e.g. a movie, document, or historical event. The task
is to obtain the subset of items whose attributes match the
query criteria. For example, in the Beethoven symphony
map in Figure 2, we can find which pieces were composed
before 1808 by attending to the upper third of the map. Or,
we can find the symphonies in minor keys by attending to
the textured symbols. Once attention has been directed to
the subset of the items, further inferences can be drawn
about them (e.g., no symphony in C was composed after
1808). (This map is similar in layout to GlassEye, a visualization of Phillip Glass’ works [ 141, but was designed
independently.)

This paper explores how the design of information
spaces might be grounded in k,rzowledge of human visual
processing, notably what kinds of visual selection are most
efficient. Information maps spatially array graphical symbols representing items of information and their attributes.
Ideally, their users should be able to do query by attention:
answer questions about the inforwationquickly by controlling visual attention (i.e., through spatial selection and visual search), instead of manipulating an intelface. I propose a preliminary method for designing visually searchable maps based on experimental results about what kinds
of visual search are easy. The hope is that the resulting
maps will better employ the perceptual capabilities of their
viewers when they search. An example information map of
recent movies illustrates the approach.
Keywords: information maps, presentation design, visual
attention, visual perception, visual search

1. Information Maps and Visual Search
Reading a map like that in Figure 1 I to navigate the
Boston subway requires at least two episodes of visual
search: find the originating station, then find the destination. Could we improve the design of the map by using our
knowledge of what kinds of visual search are easiest?
A small visual stimulus that appears to be at a different depth relative to its surroundings “pops out” - it can be
found almost instantaneously [2:7, p. 391. We could add
such a stimulus to a map posted inside a station indicate
that station (Figure 1, right). Now a map reader (with an
appropriate legend) can locate the station by efficient visual
search, instead of scanning the text labels.
‘Color
versions
of
the
figures
are
available
http://www.infoarch.ai.mit.sadu/publications/.

1.1. Why information maps?
Information designs that use the position of graphical
primitives have long been used to concisely convey data [ 3 ] .
An advantage of these designs is that the user can 9uery by
attention - answer questions by controlling visual attention
(and receiving immediate feedback), rather than manipulating a database query interface and waiting for a server to
return results. The user can more rapidly explore the information space because he needs to alter only his visual
attention (and not the interface) to adjust the parameters of
the query.
Information maps, which give meaning to a item’s location, also engage their viewers’ capabilities for spatial im-

at

*Using Wolfe’s classification of search task efficiency [27]. A classic example of efficient search is locating a single x among 0 distractors.
Search time increases with display size with a very shallow slope (< 5
msfitem).

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

85

unordered set), integer, real, or textual.
A query is a set of restrictions on the values of an item’s
attributes that must all be satisfied for an item to match. An
example of a query in Figure 2 is Key = F AND Year
i 1 810. The user explores the information space bottomup - adding and removing restrictions to a working query
and seeing which items match.
These maps are a simple kind of information space that
set the context for this initial sketch of the constraints and
affordances that relate visual search to information space
design.

Figure 1. Left, part of the Boston subway map.
Right, an improvement using a depth cue to
highlight the nearest station.

2.1. A Design Method
We propose a four-step method for designing a visually
searchable information map:

agery and spatial memory. If the user remembers an item’s
location, he can return to the map and find it there, instead
of repeating a textual query or scanning a list. With the
right design, information maps are a less cumbersome tool
for querying and drawing inferences from the ever-growing
amount of information we are faced with daily.
Information maps have limits: there are a limited number
of independent visual properties that support rapid visual
search. And, using too many properties has its drawbacks.
A map that uses its symbols’ position, color, shape, depth,
and orientation to encode information risks overloading its
viewer’s ability to attend only to the properties relevant to
his information need, by the presence of multiple distracting
properties. Another risk is that the mapping of properties to
meanings must be retained in the viewer’s limited working
memory.
To get around the problem of a limited number of visual attributes, maps can be interactive (displayed on a computer). The user can obtain multiple views of the same information by selecting relevant attributes to display. If there
are too many items to display without crowding, he can prefilter the information in the map [ I ] or browse it with a hierarchy. These methods help to bridge the gap between query
by attention and query by manipulation.

1 . List the queries viewers are likely to make and the information attributes that are available to answer those
queries.
2. Propose a mapping of information attributes to visual
properties, using the design flowchart (discussed below) to suggest which mappings can be searched efficiently.

3. Produce an initial map and test it to see if users can
quickly and easily make the kinds of queries listed in
Step 1.
4. If some of the queries are slow, adjust the mapping of
information attributes to visual properties and repeat
Step 3 .
Of course the real difficulty in this method lies in Steps
- finding the initial mapping and adjusting it so
that the map is usable in practice. The design flowchart discussed below constrains the possible mappings in terms of
attribute types, but does not specify a unique mapping. Instead, this approach is iterative: using what we know about
the cognitive affordances for search, try an initial design
with these guidelines, then iteratively improve it with feedback from users. A good design solution will match the
user’s patterns of semantic attention across the information
with patterns of visual attention across the map.
Another difficulty is that the number of relevant attributes to display often exceeds the number of available
visual dimensions. In this case, the designer must consider
which attributes best support the user’s query goals. (Dimension reduction can also help, as discussed below.) Finding the best attributes often requires user input, iterative prototyping, and careful task analysis [ 121, which are beyond
the scope of this paper. Here we assume we are given a data
model and consider how to display it in a visually searchable form.

2 and 4

2. Designing for Query by Attention
Consider the common scenario in which a user wants
to explore a small database by posing a group of related
queries (a task that would ordinarily require several transactions with a textual interface). Assume that thc database
is small enough that a map can display all the items without
overcrowding.
The information is treated as a bag of items; adding or
removing an item would not substantially change the overall
meaning of the map. Each item has attributes, which are
variables that can be binary, enumerated (chosen from an

86

BEETHOVEN'SNINE SYMPHONIES

symphony No 5

Key
A

Svmphmv No I

Color

-

~

I

Symphony No. 8

Minor

1820

Texture

Major

j

I

1824

LENGTH IMINUTESI

Figure 2. An information1map of Beethoven's nine symphonies. Color and texture are used to indicate
the key of the composition.

3. Visual Properties

attention to different scales or regions, easily adjusting the
query.
An axis can also be subdivided to allow one spatial dimension to encode more than one attribute. (This approach
has been independently applied to graph multivariate functions [ 171.) A primary, enumerated attribute can partition an
axis into subaxes, and a secondary, continuous attribute can
be mapped onto each subaxis. For example, we could add
Beethoven's contemporaries to Figure 2 by partitioning the
X axis by composer, then plotting symphony length on each
subaxis. Although subdivision allows more attributes to be
represented at once, searches that require the secondary attribute but not the first require the serial examination of several disjoint regions of the map.

This section considers in more detail the visual properties available to represent a symbol in the map. We begin
with single visual properties that can define a symbol's appearance, then consider combinations of those properties
that can support efficient conjunctive search. This summary
is based largely on Wolfe's review of visual search experiments and results [27], and Feature Integration Theory [ 2 5 ] .

3.1. Single Properties
Research has shown that many visual properties can sup-

port efficient visual search. Below we consider visual properties that have been used to convey information in print information design [ 3 , 261, and atre also discussed in Wolfe's

Color. Color is widely used to distinguish symbols in maps.
The colors at the extrema of opponent processing [19, p.
1 131 (reagreen, blue/yellow, and blacklwhite) are considered good candidates for efficient search. D'Zmura proposes that a color will pop out if it is linearly separable in
CIE color space from distractors [9], while other work has
shown that search for a color target among as many as nine
distractor colors is efficient if the colors are spread far apart

review.

Position. A user can control visual attention to search
within a spatially delimited region, making it appropriate to
map to the X- or Y-axis attributes that are queried by range
(e.g. Find a l l j l m s in the 1980s). The user can quickly shift

87

in color space [22].
This suggests choosing colors that are symmetrical in a
ring of high saturation in color space, maximizing distance
and separability (Figure 3). If white is reserved for the background, then at least five colors are left for map symbols.
Color is best for enumerated attributes that can take two or
more values.
I
I
I

“1

depth planes is less likely to be efficient.

Other cues. Wolfe lists other basic features that can be
searched for efficiently: vernier offset, curvature, gloss,
size, etc. While these are also worth investigating as useful
for information maps, the cues discussed above - position,
color, shape, motion, and depth - have been investigated
thoroughly in the visual search literature. This initial proposal explores the possibilities they afford for information
map design.

3.2. Combinations of Properties

Figure 3. Left, a set of symbol colors (open
circles) chosen to approximate the extrema
of color opponent processing (indicated by
arrows). Right, colors chosen to maximize
separability. The triangle encloses the colors
displayable on a CRT monitor.

Shape. Because there are many parameters that determine shape, coming up with a fixed set of rules for finding shapes that can be searched for efficiently is difficult.
Some determining features include line termination (presencelabsence), closure, holes, and possibly intersection [27,
pp. 31-41, Most experiments described by Wolfe report efficient search with homogeneous distractors, so a conservative approach would map shapes like X and 0 to a binary
attribute. Orientation also supports efficient search, for example using bars oriented at 0 or 90 degrees.
Motion. Motion exhibits search asymmetry [21] - a moving target among stationary distractors is easy to find, while
a stationary target among moving distractors is not. Thus,
a map that uses motion to code a binary attribute is biased
against searches for the stationary value. However, the user
may choose to render a subset of the symbols as salient in
an interactive map, and search among them. This prospect
is appealing, because search for motion in conjunction with
other properties can be efficient (as discussed below).
Depth. Pictoral depth cues such as shading, occlusion, or
shadows can support efficient search [27, p. 391. This cue
is best used for binary features, as search in more than two
31t is important to note that 8 percent of men and I percent of women
are colorblind [19, p.1041, so visualizations that use colored symbols
should provide an alternate presentation of that information (e.g. with
shape).

The original version of Feature Integration Theory [25]
held that visual properties are preattentively and simultaneously processed into feature maps across the visual field.
Searching for a target defined by a single property is fast
because only one feature map is consulted to locate it. To
search a conjunction of features, however, information from
multiple feature maps must be bound together at item locations, and each location serially checked to see if i t possesses the target conjunction.
Later work has shown that for certain combinations of
distinct visual properties, subjects can perform conjunctive
searches efficiently. In particular, Egeth et al. as well as
others have shown that subjects can efficiently search a colored subset of items for a differently shaped target [IO].
Efficiency improves when the targets are far apart in color
space.
Other work has shown that visual search is efficient for a
moving stimulus among stationary distractors that also differs in depth, orientation, or shape [7, 8, 15, 161 (but as
mentioned, motion search is asymmetric).
Stereoscopic depth can also be used with color or orientation for efficient conjunctive search [ 181. Computergenerated stereo displays usually require special viewing
equipment, however.
These results are important because they su,g
U est a user
can query by at least four attributes, first by spatial selection
(using two real-valued attributes), and then by searching for
a conjunction (e.g., color and shape).

3.3. Summary
The flowchart in Figure 4 summarizes the suggested design combinations that afford efficient search. A mapping
is created by tracing a path from START in the graph, assigning visual properties to information attributes of the indicated types. The edge chosen to leave a visual property
node assigns its information attribute (e.g., placing s p phonyLength on the R edge leaving X means that the
map will have symphony length on its X-axis). Names or
other labels may be ordered alphabetically and treated like
integers in the flowchart, or included as text adjacent to map

b-

R
I

I

I

Color

Shape

Motion
B

Depth

B

Binary

E Enumerated or binary
R Real or integer

DONE

Figure 4. A design flowchart for visually searchable information maps. A map design traces a path
from START, assigning visual properties to information attributes along outgoing edges. X ’ and Y’
represent the subaxes created when the X and Y axes are partitioned by an enumerated attribute.
The path may terminate before reaching DONE.

shows some sample questions that might be asked by someone browsing for good, recent movies.
In these sample questions, both Year and Rating are
ordered attributes queried by range, so they are good candidates to map to axes. Oscar is binary and can be mapped
to two shapes, while Genre is enumerated over five values
and can be mapped to five colors.
Combining these observations, a possible design path is
shown in 5 , with the corresponding information in Figure
6. We can now predict whether users would be able to
answer the sample questions efficiently when using a map
with these assignments. The first question requires searching the symbol labels serially, because it uses the Title
attribute, which is not mapped to a searchable property in
this design. The remaining questions involve subsets of
attributes on the design path, and are predicted to require
quick visual search.

symbols. (For simplicity, the latter case is not included in

the flowchart.)

4. Example Information Maps
To illustrate the method, we first consider the problem
of designing an information map to visualize a database
of about 25 movies. Suppose the database contains the attributes shown in Table 1 .
Attribute

QPe

Example

Title
Year
Genre
Oscar
Review

textual
integer, 1900-2001
enumerated
binary
real, 0.0-10..0

Ti t anic
1999

Drama
Y
6.8

Table 1. Movie database attributes and example values. The review scores are from Internet Movie Database votes.

4.1. Mapping Mutual Funds
We illustrate the use of the flowchart with another
example (Figure 7), in this case to design information
maps of mutual funds. Suppose the available attributes
are Name, InvestmentObjective, YTDReturns,
5YearReturns,Beta,and NetAssets.
The first design (Figure 7, top) allows the user to weigh
the tradeoff between volatility and performance for funds of

The first step in the design procedure is to list the questions users might ask of the data. The questions in this
list depend on the motivation of the prototypical user (e.g.,
a video rental browser versus a film researcher). Table 2

89

Question

Query

Was “Aliens” any good?

Title = ’Aliens’
Year > 1 9 9 5 AND Genre = Comedy AND Review > 1 . 5

Which recent comedies are well-reviewed?
When have the Oscars made an unpopular choice?
What movies received Oscars in the eighties?

Has any horror film ever received an Oscar?

Review < 7 . 5 AND Oscar = Y
1 9 8 0 <= Year < 1 9 9 0 AND Oscar = Y
Genre = Horror AND Oscar = Y

Table 2. Sample questions a user might use a Movie Map to answer.

a given size and investment objective. It uses a partition of
the X axis to indicate the fund’s investment objective, and
a partition of the Y axis to indicate its size. Within each
partition, the horizontal and vertical position of the symbol
indicate its year to date and five year returns, respectively.
The shape indicates the fund’s volatility. In this way, five
aspects of the fund can be concisely conveyed and searched.
A second design (Figure 7, bottom) uses the performance
measures as the dominant selection criteria. The user can
optionally animate a subset of funds by investment objective. The use of the flowchart thus facilitates the exploration
of the map design space, suggesting multiple views that can
accommodate different sets of query goals.

alizations of the plan. These design suggestions could be
integrated into SAGE to assist its generation of information
graphics. VQE adds threads that connect multiple views
of the same data. Our proposal can be extended to accommodate multiple views by ensuring consistent visual semantics (e.g., never change the meaning of symbol colors across
views).
Review

Year
Released

Color

5. Related Work

Shape

Figure 5. A design for the Movie Map, which
is an example path in the flowchart in Figure
4.

Pirolli et al. have performed a study that tracks the eye
movements of users as they perform textual navigation in a
hyperbolic tree [20]. Their analysis finds that the size of the
user’s attentional spotlight is proportional to the local relevance of the text, and inversely proportional to the text’s
density. These results are relevant to creating information
maps with large data sets, where views that let the user focus
on a subset of information while retaining its context will
be needed to prevent unusable information densities. Also,
their theory focuses on how semantic (textual) cues serially
guide the attentional spotlight, while this work focuses on
perceptual, preattentive visual properties that the viewer can
process in parallel. Clearly these processes are complementary and research to integrate such models is needed.
Card and MacKinlay present a formal way of describing the mapping of information types to visual properties
[4]. Their goal is to analyze the structure of the larger information visualization design space, which includes trees,
graphs, and hyperbolic views. Their goal is analysis, not
design, but their representation would be useful if our work
were extended to describe the perceptual constraints in the
design of other types of information spaces.
Finally, the SAGE and VQE systems are part of a project
to create a presentation design expert system [ 13, 61. SAGE
creates a media-independent design plan that fulfills the presentation’s communicative goals. The design plan is given
to a media allocator that can generate textual or graphic re-

6. Conclusion
This report explores the relationships among spatial selection, visual search, and visualization design. It proposes a method for designing information maps that makes
use of experimental results regarding which kinds of visual
search are efficient for viewers. These results were obtained
from Wolfe’s review of the experimental literature on visual
search. The goal is to enable the map’s users to do query by
attention - answer questions by controlling visual attention
(and receiving immediate feedback), rather than by manipulating the interface. Visual search for information is preferred because it is better suited for people, while database
search remains better suited for computers.
While the application of experimental vision science
to information design can result in oversimplification of
both fields, we believe that useful design principles can be
gleaned. Traditional textbooks on information design proceed by examining and critiquing design examples [26], and
do not explicitly refer to results from vision science.

90

THE MOVIE MAP
1980

..............................

;

..................

ma 1

*.

mr.shi*,ng ................................

Drama

m

Action

Comedy

Oma~~ochin

',:

~.tmolm~.di

0

Horror

m

...........................................................................................

1985

; 0 Aliw

Oscar

..................................

X

NoOscar

a
1990

SciFi

.-.e

..................................................................................

T"

X

of m i Lambs

Bob Roberta
:-

i
1995

JurassicParh

x

0 Rlver Wlld

j

Forje.1Gump

.;... .....X.Brav*&

................................................

...........

2000

6

a

7

9

RATING

Figure 16. The Movie Map produced from the design path in Figure 5.

It remains to be seen whether this method can scale
to real-world design problems, as the number of items in
the map (IOO? 1,OOO?) and the number of attributes displayed increases. Techniques that give the user the ability
to dynamically filter the data by manipulating sliders and
toggles have proven effective for exploring large data sets
[ I 1, 2, 241. And, dimension reduction techniques such as
principal components analysis (cansimplify design (but only
if the reduced dimensions are informative to users).

derstanding the role of heterogeneous distractors will help
determine which visual properties can take more than two
values. Using the heuristics discussed here in more design
examples would further refine them, along' with usability
studies that can point out their shortcomings in practice.
It would also be worthwhile to see how well an
empirically-based model of search performance could predict the time needed to complete map usage tasks. However, visual search experiments are conducted in carefully
controlled conditions that may differ greatly from those in
the day-to-day use of an information visualization. Users
also tend to reformulate their information needs continuously. These factors would need to be taken into account in
such an evaluation.

Further investigation of our .visual capabilities can lead to
new design insights. It remains to be seen whether people
can search efficiently using arbitrary subsets of visual properties, so that more properties (such as texture, color, and
shape) can be used at once. Also, most visual search experiments present a single type of target and distractor; un-

A future plan is to implement this proposal with an in-

91

x

.

Objective

)
.

x-

Y
NetAssets
(small, medium,large)

SYearReturns

<

Y'

Shape
L

x-

YTDReturns

Y
J

v v

0

A

O

A
A

0

v

V

0

Objective/

v

Beta
6 - 1 7 1,

A

A

A

v
A

A

A

A

Shape

YTDReturns

Figure 7. Two designs of maps for mutual funds. In cases where a real attribute is used on an edge
marked E in the flowchart, the value ranges are shown in parenthesis. The figures at right suggest
the appearance of the maps.

References

teractive tool that allows a user to rapidly prototype an information map given a small database or spreadsheet. The
tool would let the user adjust the mapping of attributes to
visual properties, while applying the kinds of perceptual
constraints on efficient search presented here. (The tool's
function would be similar to VQE [6].)

I ] C . Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query filters with starfield
displays.

In Proceeditigs of CN/ '94: t h i n a n Fuc-

tors in Cortipufing Systems, pages 3 13-3 17, Boston, Massachusetts, 1994.

Efficient visual search in information maps is not possible in all cases. But maps that better employ our visual perception potentially have a great advantage over textual interfaces for understanding and managing information
[5, 231. I believe that visual information tools can benefit
from progress in vision science, by offering design guidance related to our perceptual capabilities.

21 C . Alhberg and E. Wistrand. WEE: An information visualization & exploration environment. In N. Cershon and S. G.
Eick, editors, Proceedings of the IEEE Syniposiurn on lnformation Ms~idizudon(InfoMs '95), pages 66-73, Atlanta,
Georgia, October 1995.
[3] J. Bertin. Semiology of Grapliicst Diagrams, Networks,
Maps [orig. Semiologie Grapliiqiie]. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI, 1983. Translated by William
J . Berg.
[4] S. K. Card and J. MacKinlay. The structure of the information visualization design space. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Synposiunz on Informution Visualizafion(InfoVts '97).

6.I. Acknowledgments

pages 92-99, October 1997.

[SI S. K. Card, J. D. MacKinlay, and B. Shneiderman, editors. Readings in Informution Wsuulizution: Using Vision
io Think. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1999.
[6] M. Derthick, J. Kolojejchick, and S. F. Roth. An interactive
visual query environment for exploring data. In Proceedings ofthe ACM Symposium on User Interface Sofrwure and
Technologs (UIST '97), pages 189-198, 1997.
171 J. Driver. Motion coherence and conjunction search: Implications for guided search theory. Perception and Psychophysics, S I ( 1):79-85, 1992.

We thank Michael OItmans, Tracy Hammond, Christine
Alvarado, Glenn Evans, and Howie Shrobe (all at the MIT
A I Lab) for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Thanks
to Bart Anderson at the MIT Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Department for his Visual Perception seminar that inspired
this work. I also thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful
feedback. This research is sponsored by the The MIT Ford
Motor Company Collaboration and MIT Project Oxygen.

92

[8] J. Driver. Reversing visual !search asymmetries with conjunctions of movement and orientation. Journal of Enp. Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18(1):22-33,
1992.
[9] M. D'Zmura. Color in visual search. Vision Research,
30(6):951-966, 1990.
[IO] H. E. Egeth, R. A. Vizri, and H. Garbart. Searching for
conjunctively defined targets. Journal of Exp. Psychology:
Human Perception and Perfoimance, 10:32-39, 1984.
[ 1 I ] S . Eick. Graphically displaying text. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 3(2):127-142, June 1994.
[I21 J. B. Ellis, A. Rose, and C. Pliiisant. Putting visualization to
work: ProgramFinder for youth placement. In Proceedings
of CHI '97: Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
502-509, Atlanta, Georgia, 1997.
[I31 N. Green, S . Kerpedjiev, and S . F. Roth. Generating visual arguments: a media-independent approach. In AAA I98
Workshop on Representations for Multi-modal HumanComputer Interaction, July 15198.
[14] H. Hocheiser. Browsers with changing parts: A catalog explorer for Philip Glass' Website. In Proceedings of ACM
Designing Interactive System.; Conference, pages 105-1 15,
Brooklyn, New York, 2000.
[I51 P. McLeod, J. Driver, and .I. Crisp. Visual search for
conjunctions of movement and form is parallel. Nature,
332:154-155, 1988.
[I61 P. McLeod, J. Driver, Z. Dienes, and J. Crisp. Filtering by
movement in visual search. Joumal of Exp. Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 17(1):55-64, 1991.
[I71 T. Mihalisin, J. Timlin, and J. Schwegler. Visualizing multivariate functions, data, and distributions. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 11 (3):28-35, 1991.
[ 181 K. Nakayama and G. H. Silverman. Serial and parallel processing of visual feature con.junctions. Nature, 320:264265,1986.
[19] S . E. Palmer. Vision Science: Photons to Phenomenology.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1999.
[20] P. Pirolli, S . K. Card, and M. M. V. D. Wege. Visual information foraging in a Focus+C:ontext visualization. In Proceedings of CHI 2001, Seattle, Washington, 2001.
[21] R. Rosenholtz. A simple saliency model predicts a number
of motion popout phenomena. Vision Research, 39:31573163, 1999.
[22] H. S . Smallman and R. M. Boynton. Segregation of basic
color in information displays. .Journal ofrhe Optical Society
ofAmerica A , 7(10):1985-1994, 1990.
[23] R. Spence. Information Visuar'ization. ACM PresstAddison
Wesley, 2000.
[24] Spotfire. http: //www.spotfire.com/.
[25] A. Treisman and G. Gelade. A. feature-integration theory of
attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12:97-136, 1980.
[26] E. R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press,
Cheshire, Connecticut, 1990.
[27] J. M. Wolfe. Visual search. In H. Pashler, editor, Attention.
University College London Prcss, London, 1996.

93

