Visualized Construction Process on Virtual Reality
Wooyoung Kim
Phd. Candidate,
Department of Architecture,
Seoul National Universiy,
beladomo@dreamwiz. com
Okkyue Kim
Assistant Professor;
Department of Architectural
Engineering, Chungbuk
National University,
okkim@chungbuk. ac.k

Yoon Ki Choi
Assistant Professor;
School of Architecture,
Soongsil University,
yoorikichoi@hotmail.com

Abstract

Hyun-soo Lee
Assistant Professo);
Department of Alrhitecture,
Seoul National University,
hslee@gong.snu.ac.kr

1. Introduction

The
proposed
Construction
Process
Visualization System ( 4 0 - VR, 4 Dimension Virtual
Reality) is applied to a large and complicated project
that requires milestone schedule management a d
detailed activity control. The 4 0 - VR has a soffivare
structure with five modules, which are 3 0 CAD
modeling, virtual reality modeling, schedule data
processing, linking graphic data with schedule data,
and visualization output modules. A field applicution
has been carried out on 4 0 - V R for a 27-stow
complex building project f o r an apartment and
commercial store in Korea. After analyzing the case.
we conclude that the 40-VR system can enhance the
communication ability behveen managers and
workers, arid help a project manager to reasonable
decision making j o r establishing the schedule.
Moreover, 4 0 - V R is effective f o r shortening the
schedule. showing the e.ract construction process and
making various presentations to co-workers related
to the project. This paper will show the status of
4 0 - VR technology in Korea and how to use it in real
project.

In the construction field, communication with
co-workers is important in a collaborative project
involving experts from various fields. It is difficult
for numerous co-workers to make decisions, because
they have different viewpoints on various subjects
and there are no communication tools such as project
process visual software. Reliable communication
tools are necessary in this situation.
Currently, a project involving various
subcontractors is typically coordinated using 2D
overlays. These overlays allow a project team to
identify spatial conflicts in the design. However, the
construction period can introduce entirely new spatial
conflicts that are very difficult to identify with 2D
overlays. This is particularly true for today's
complicated schedules that contain many concurrent
activities. Thus, 3D graphic environment is necessary
that evolves as the schedule changes.
The 4D-VR system has two key roles for
decision making and communication. First, the
system assists project manager with reasonable
decision altematives in establishing the schedule
based on his experience and knowledge. Second, the
system enhances the communication ability between
managers and workers. The functions of this system
are the virtual graphic processing dependent on the

Kqvword: Construction Process, Visualization,
Virtual Reality, 4D-VR, 4D-CAD

0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

Hyoung chul Lim
Construction Engineer,
R&D Dept., Daelim
Industrial Co. Ltd.,
hclim@dic. eo.kr

684

schedule, 3D walk-thmugh, and dynamic graphic
change with the changing of the schedule.
The objective of this research is to develop a
4D-VR system for enhancing project managers’
ability in decision making and communication with
site workers, and to assist the field manager in
understanding an entire: project that is complicated.
After developing the 4tl-VR system, we evaluate the
usefulness of the system through application to a real
project.

separate parts, 3D graphic and schedule data are
linked together.
Mostly, a VR tool has a self data format. If the
data format of the 3D modeling program is different
from the VR data format, the 3D modeled data
format can be transferred to the VR data format with
the graphic data standard. For example, the ‘dwg’data
file of AutoCAD can be transferred to the ‘nff data
file of WTK (WorldToolKit).
The schedule data are the field data of
MS-Project, Primavera or X-Pert/Nex-Pert. These
schedule data are exported through ODBC (Open
DataBase Connectivity) and linked to 3D graphic
objects. Before this linking action, 3D drawing data
are divided by the activities of the schedule.
As shown in Figure 2, an activity is a
combination of an element and an operation. As one
element can be combined with different operations,
graphic objects of the element have to be multiplied
by the number of operations combined with the
element, and must have colors or shapes different
from each other to identify the operation combined.
In order to link the graphic data to the activity
data, a sub-module for linking data is developed.
First of all, 3D graphic data are generated from CAD
data and transferred to the ‘nff data format. At this
transferring process, the VR graphic data files are
created and linked to the related activity data. The
key of the linking method is saving activity codes
and graphic file(nff file) names at specific records in
the linkage table.

2. Concept of the 4D-VR System
The 4D-VR system presents the status of a
construction project with 3D graphics in Virtual
Reality, and allows a walk-through of the entire
construction field and activity. The software used in
the development of the VR part is ‘WorldToolKit
Runtime License‘ of the ’Sense8’ company. It
supports all compilers of the C language for the
Windows system and also supports various platforms
from PCs to workstaticlns. WTK(WorldToo1Kit) has
been chosen because most construction sites in Korea
use PCs. This system will help managers handle the
schedule effectively, communicate smoothly with
others who may be concerned with the project, and
provide a useful tool for evaluating a schedule.
As shown in Figure. 1, the data for establishing
this system are broadly divided into 3D graphic and
schedule data. Generally, converting 2D CAD
drawings into 3D CAD drawings and establishing a
schedule are separate works. After creating the two

One Object to
One NFF File

I

Netwolk
Activity Code 8
NFF File name

Linkaoe
Process
Evaluating and Updating Schedule

Figure 1. Concept of the 4D-VR System

685

3. Evaluation through Field Application

After the two data sets are linked, the
environment of virtual reality is prepared to
simulate the entire schedule of a project. In the
4D-VR system, if some activity needs to start at a
specific time according to the schedule, the
system refers to the linkage table of the database
to find a related graphic object file which has the
same file name matched to the activity co,de in the
linkage table. Then, all the graphic objects are
displayed on the screen, which are linked to the
activities that have started at a specific time
,according to the schedule. As a result, 4D-VR can
show the construction status of a specific time
through 3D virtual reality, and the 3D graphic’of
virtual reality is changed according to the
schedule data.
If there is a problem in the schedule data
after evaluation, a new schedule can be suggested
by feedback to the scheduling phase shown in
Figure 1. After checking all the conditions of
scheduling with 4D-VR, problems can be solved
and construction will begin. This can be a useful
tool for evaluating the feasibility of a process
planning and communicating procedure between
managers and other persons concemed.

3.1. The status and characteristics of the
application project
The project named ‘Pusan Neospot’ is
located in Pusan city, Korea, a design consisting
of 27-stories and 170,503 m2 of total floor area for
commercial and residential use. This project is
composed of one high rise building with a
commercial area from the first to the fifth floor
and a residential area from the sixth to the top.
The Pusan Neospot project requires special
scheduling tools to make workers be convinced of
the preliminary schedule, because of its complex
structural composition of steel and reinforced
concrete, and its construction method, the
top-down method.
The top-down method is often applied to
underground in cities where there is little working
space on the ground. Although the cost of
underground work is double that of ground work,
the owners want to excavate as deep as possible
to make underground space for greater benefits
from his investment on the building, because the
density of building is high and there is a building
height limitation regulation in Korean cities. By

...
...

Top Floor

I

...

Form Work
Steel Work
Concrete Work

_.__

Operations

~

L................

-

3rd Floor Form Work
2nd Floor Steel Work

1 st Floor Form Work
1st Floor Steel Work

1 st Floor Concrete
2nd Floor Form
2nd Floor Steel
2nd Floor Concrete

.....
.....
.....

1 st Floor Concrete Work

Work
Work

Work
Work

Top Floor Form Work
Top Floor Steel Work
Top Floor Concrete Work

Figure 2. Linking Method of Graphic and Schedule Data
,

686

using 4D-VR, construction and site managers can
check the feasibility of the preliminary schedule.
It is good timing of adaptation when the first

3.2.The adaptation of the system
The original scheduling data of the site and
2D drawings made with AutoCAD were available
at March 1997, when we started to apply the
4D-VR system to this case project. First of all, we
analyze the schedule data to select activities
which should be presented on the screen to be
analyzed, and convert 2D drawings to 3D objects

preliminary schedule is made and earthwork is
just started.
with AutoCAD While converting the drawings,
3D objects should be separated and grouped
according to activities and transformed to the
'nff' format.
After creating the schedule and graphic data,
we link both data in the 4D-VR database. The
linkage method is to make an intersection table
which includes activity ID and related graphic
data ID.

Figure 3. Construction Process
by Initial plan at 16/Mar/97

Figure 4. Actual Construction Status
at 16lMarl97

Figure 5. Construction Process
by Initial plan at 29/Sept/97

Figure 6. Construction Process
by Changed plan at 29/Sept/97

687

Figure 7. Construction Process
by Initial plan at 15/Nov/97

Figure 8. Construction Process
by Changed plan at 15/Nov/97

On attempting'to adapt the 4D-VR 'system to
the site,,real progress,is delayed' 15 days from the
planned schedule. It is thus necessary to change
the schedule to recover the lost days. (Figures. 3
and 4) . ,In ..the original schedule, reinforced
concrete work ,on the apartment part is'started
after- the construction of the entire steel structure
for the com,mercial part - 1st to 5th floor - is
completed: These works and reinforcing steel and
pouring contrete .work for,the, apartment..section
. ..
... . :
are critical., .
By processing the 4D-VR system shown in
Figures. 7 'and 8, the changed plan of the
commercial area are behind the initial schedule,
but the situation of residential area is reversed. In
the changed schedule, residential work starts
when the concrete work o f the lower commercial
.
part is still progressing.
The 'two main; ideas for shortening the
schedule are as follows;,
First, all parties discard the stereotype that
reinforced concrete work at the apartment section
has to proceed after all steel structural work is
completed at the commercial area. This is the idea
that the reinforced concrete work can start on the
upper.':part,o f . the apartment area only after;the
installation of the:plo,werpart of the steel column
and the completion. of the top floor deck :of the
commercial ,area. ,So, it. becomes possible .to
exclude detaiMd steelwork at the lower part 'of the
commercia! area from the critical path. Second,
because this project. is organized around the
top-down method, the working speed of the
superstructure of the upper part of the building
depends on the working speed of the earthwork at

the lower part of the buildirig. However, we find a
new construction- method for the earfhwork by
means of the 4D-VR system. According to the
initial method, the soil can only be removed at the
opening area of each under floor by crane buckets,
but we find that the soil can be removed by trucks
which can drive into the earthwork area of each
under floor. The use of trucks would speed up the
removal of;soil, the most time consuming part of
earthwork. .. Thus .the substructure, is finished
earlier.
*
.
:. The main idea of shortening the schedule is
well presented in Figure I O . At the right side of
the building, the concrete work of the upper
residential area is in progress simultaneously
while the steel and concrete work of the lower
commercial area i s still in progress.

'I

I

.

j

.

4. Conclusion

,
:

. .

I

Communication between the persons relatFd
to a project is the most important,, part ' o f
establishing an effective schedule in the field.
There are many difficulties in understanding the
real field . conditions with 2D drawing . data,
especially when time is related. As of this,-some
problems occur in the information flow of:the
interface area ,with each related person, .which can
cause parti'al defects of the project. . . . '
Up'to now, many researches for solving this
problem have been suggested, which mostly
concern linking the schedule to 3D CAD.
However there are limitations in these researches
from the lack of detail of 3D graphic data, and if
there is a changing schedule, they have to wait for

688

'./

related experts can more readily understand the
construction process by the 4D’s walk-through time travel - and 3D visualization of the virtual
field.

a long time till the simulation is prepared. For
overcoming these limitations, we develop the
4D-VR system, linking the schedule to virtual
reality graphic techniques.
The 4D-VR system can enhance the
communication ability between managers and
workers, as it provides the walk-through function
in 3D virtual reality on the schedule. The system
can also help a project manager to reasonable
decision making for mtablishing the schedule.
The 4D-VR successfully links the 3D virtual
reality data to schedule data. Additional programs
have been developed for this linking work, so
each graphic object can be generated dynamically
on the virtual reality field.The 4D-VR system is
validated after adapting to the construction project
named ‘Pusan-Neospot’ in Pusan city, Korea. The
adaptation of the 4ID-VR system provides us a
new shortened schedule of 39 months compared
to the initial schedule of 43 months. The system
can also assist the construction manager in his
decision making at an earlier stage of the project.
After the implementation of the 4D-VR
system at the construction field, the system is
proved effective for a large and complicated
project. This means that the uncertainty in
scheduling and the difficulty of decision making
can be decreased in large and complicated
projects. The 4D-VR system proves to decrease
uncertainty by enhancing the imagination and the
definition of the construction process through 3D
visualization.
In addition, this system can be a useful tool
for presenting the construction methods and
technologies of the project to various interested
parties. That is, official staff, expected users, and

References
[I] Kyu-jae Lee, Yoon Ki Choi, Wooyoung Kim,
Ki-soo Song, Hyung-chul Lim. (1997. I). A Study of
Developing CAD-Based Simulation System for
Construction Process Management in Apartment
Project, Second Year Report, Ministry of Construction
& Transportation.
[2] Kyu-jae Lee, Okkyue Kim, Yoon Ki Choi,
Wooyoung Kim, Hyung-chul Lim. (1997. 9). A Study
on the Development of Construction Process
Management System Using 2D Interface, paper of
Architectural Institute of Korea, No. 107, pp.343-35 1
[3] Kyu-jae Lee, 11-doo Go, O w e Kim, Yoon Ki
Choi, Wooyoung Kim, Ki-soo Song. (1997. 10). A
Study on the Development of Construction Process
Visualization and Management System on Virtual
Reality, paper of Architectural Institute of Korea, No.
108.

[4] Bonsang Koo, Martin Fischer. (1998. 8). Feasibility
Study of 4D CAD in Commercial Construction, ClFE
Technical Report.
[5] Leen S. Kang, Boyd C. Paulson. (1998. 9/10).
Information Management To Integrate Cost And

Schedule For Civil Engineering Projects, Journal of
Construction Engineering and Management, Vol. 124.
NO.5, pp.381-389

689

