Automatic Curve Fairing System Using Visual Languages
Toshinobu Harada
Fujiichi Yoshimoto
Faculty of Systems Engineering, Wakayama University
fuji@sys.wakayama-u.ac .jp
harada@sys.wakayama-u.ac.jp
done to correct the curvature vectors of ogee parts in the
same normal direction, since measured curves do have
ogee parts unintended by the designer from the
measurement errors, etc. However, it is a big problem of
fairing that it takes a long time and requires a great deal of
labor.
In this paper, we propose an automatic curve fairing
system using visual languages. This system is composed
of the following five parts (see Figure 1).
1) Extraction of key-line data from a clay model by a 3Ddigitizer. Here, key-line means a crucial line or an accent
line that rules characteristic of a curved surface.
2) Approximation of the extracted key-line data by a
spline curve obtained with a genetic algorithm.
3) Division of the spline curve (key-line) into curvature
monotonic curves.
4) Analysis of the ”Characteristic” of the curve for each
curvature monotonic curve. Here, the “Characteristic” of
the curve is called C curve.
5 ) Substitution of each curvature monotonic curve by a
visual language [7] based on the result of the analysis
mentioned above, and reconstruction of each key-line by
the visual language. Here, the visual language is an
elemental curve having an aesthetic rhythm (The details
are given later.).
We generically call the operations from 1) to 5 ) an
“automatic fairing of the key-line”. Moreover, the range
of this research encompasses the development of the
automatic fairing technology. As a result, we are now able
to obtain the curve (key-line) that a designer intends in an
extremely short period of time compared with past fairing
work. In addition, we believe that we can also create an
aesthetic curved surface from this key-line by applying the
technology.
A few earlier studies [3,8,9] discussed what

Abstract
Generally, in the jierld of industrial design,
measurement data of a clay model are faired, and its
three dimensional model is mtide in CAD. However, it is a
problem that this fairing work take a long time and
require a great deal of labor. We propose an automatic
fairing system of a curve for the application to reverse
engineering technology. The system is constructed by the
following Jive steps. I) K e y - h e data are extracted from a
clay model by a 3D-digitizer. 2) The extracted key-line
data are approximated by a spline with a genetic
algorithm. 3) The spline curve (key-line) is divided into
curves of monotone curvatun?. 4) “Characteristic“ of the
curve is analyzed for each curve of monotone curvature.
5) Each curve of monotone curvature is substituted by a
visual language based on the result of the analysis
mentioned above, and each key-line is reconstructed by
the visual language. By this qstem, we can easily obtain
an aesthetic curve intended by a designer in a short time.

1. Introduction
An important theme at present not only in the
manufacturing industry (i.e. the production of product
model designs) but also in the entertainment industry (i.e.
the CG production of movies, TV programs, and CMs), is
how to efficiently create three-dimensional (3D) models
with a CAD system. CAD systems are occasionally used
to directly create more realistic 3D models, if the shapes
of the models are simple. However, the most general
approach is to make an actual model like a clay model. In
this approach, a layout machine (contact type
measurement device) or a 3D-digitizer (non-contact type
measurement device) makes measurements, and data of
high accuracy are obtained by fairing. “Fairing” is work

4.Analyze and remove
noise from the C curve

)

,

I

Figure 1 Flow chart of the automatic fairing of a key-line

0-7695-1195-3101
$10.00 0 2001 1E:EE
-

53

S . h t the ‘visual
language’back in its

)

- ,i :

I

characteristics are necessary to make an aesthetic curve.
For example, Pal and Nutboume [9] presented an
algorithm that generates a smooth curve through two data
points along with the specified curvature and tangent
directions at these points. They argued that a fair curve
needs a piecewise linear curvature profile constructed
from linear elements. On the basis of this fact, they said
that a fair curve form consists of arcs of Cornu spirals
(clothoids). In addition, Farouki [3] presented an
algorithm that generates a fair curve by the use of
Pythagorean-hodograph (PH) quintic transition curves.
In this paper, we develop a method for analyzing what
characteristics are necessary to make an aesthetic curve.
This method uses a relation between the length frequency
of the curve and the radius of curvature in a log-log
coordinate system. By using this method, we analyze
many sample curves on products (drafts) made and drawn
by designers. As a result, we clarify that there are a lot of
curves unable to be represented by only arcs of Cornu
spirals and PH spirals, and also that the designer controls
the curvature changes with self-affine properties. On the
basis of this finding, we develope an algorithm that
generates curves having self-affine properties. Then, by
using this algorithm, we get not only 'decelerating' curves
like spirals but also 'accelerating' curves with the same
parameters. To date, there had been no algorithm for
getting 'accelerating' curves and 'decelerating' curves
uniformly. We also get a new criterion for the faimess of a
curve with self-affine properties.

In this section, we give an outline of a quantitative
analysis method for the characteristics of a curve [ 5 ] . We
assume that the curve treated in our study, satisfies the
following four conditions:
1) plane, 2 ) open, 3) non-intersecting, and 4) curvature
monotonic.
We analyzed the design words expert car designers use
to find what characteristics of a curve they pay attention
to. We found some of the words to express the
characteristics of a curve. Some words were concemed
with curvature changes and the volume of a curve from
the viewpoint of mathematics. Here, the term 'volume' is
defined as the area bound by the curve and the straight
line binding the starting point and the ending point of the
curve (see Figure 2). Therefore, we define that the
characteristics of a curve indicate its curvature changes
and volume in this study. In fact, when the curvature
changes and volume are defined, the curve is fixed
reversely.
We developed a method to analyze curvature changes
and
the
volumes
of
curves
mathematically,
simultaneously, and intuitively. In this method, we first
interpolate a sample curve using a Bezier curve on a
computer. Then, we express the relation between the
radius of curvature at every constitutional point on the
interpolated curve and the "length" of the curve showing
the total length of segmental curves corresponding to this
radius of curvature in a log-log coordinate system. This
relation is called the "logarithmic distribution diagram of
curvature". Now, let us explain it in detail in the
following.
First, let us denote the total length of the curve bySol,,
the length of a segmental curve by s, , the radius of
curvature at a constitutional point a, by p, , and the
interval of the radius of curvature by
(the units are mm

2. Quantitative Analysis Method and Visual
Language

2.1 Quantitative Analysis Method

By linking the tops of the bar
graphs, the C curve is drawn.

4

Figure 2 Volume of a curve

a

m mal

-2 !I%,

:I !,I.1%:

-..-

C~I.IIII~I

:II.III)

!I.J!I,

:~.iiiiT--( I O o,

(loo)

Radius of curvature / Total length of curve

Figure 3 A method of extracting constitutional points

5j

Figure 4 A "logarithmic distribution diagram of curvature

54

dimensionlesscircular arc A

-

Figure 5 Two dimessionless circular arcs A and B

Figure 6 Relation of

and

SI

terms of the interval of the radius of curvature and the
length frequency i .
In addition, the horgontal axis shows the interval of
the radius of curvature p , which is the radius of curvature
p made dimensionless by dividing by the total length S,,
of the curve. The reason for this can be explained as
follows. If two circular arcs A and B having the same
curvature but different lengths as shown in Figure 5 are
shown on the "logarithmic distribution diagram of
curvature" without making p dimensionless by S,,, , the
locus of d s / d p will be shown at the same position for
both A and B. However, a designer will be able to
distinguish the difference between the volumes of
dimensionless circular arcs A and B. Therefore, by using
p made dimensionless by S,, for the horizontal axis and
drawing the locus of d; / d> , "logarithmic distribution
diagram of curvature" positions can be made to differ
according to the total lengths of the curves, even if they
have the same curvature. The difference between the
volumes of both curves is shown visually.
In this "logarithmic distribution diagram of curvature",
the way the curvature changes is shown by the locus of the
C curve, as shown in Figure 4, and the volume of the
curve is shown by point A and the distance between points
A and B as shown in the same figure. Here, if the distance
becomes shorter, the volume of the curve becomes larger.
Depending on the volume of the curve, if the curve is
interpolated by BCzier curves, the exact value of the
volume can be obtained directly by integrating the
interpolated curve. Therefore, this value is used to obtain
an accurate value of the volume. In the quantitative
analysis described in this paper, however, the definition of
the volume mentioned above is used as an index of the
relative changes of the volume, showing the volume
changes among the sections when the plural cross sections
of a curved surface are to be analyzed simultaneously.

in all cases.). The radius of curvature p, at constitutional
point a, on the curve is obtained by extracting
constitutional points ( a , ,U ; :,..., U,, ) at equal intervals as
shown in Figure 3 (e.g., at SUN= l O O m m , the constitutional
points were extracted at 0.1"
intervals (in actual
dimension), and therefore, n = IOOO), and by calculating
the respective radius of curvature ( p,,pZ,...,p.) at the
respective constitutional points.
Second,-let us denote 1he interval of the radius of
curvature p, b y the interval corresponding to the
quotient obtained b y dividing the c o m m o n
logarithm [-3 , 21 of.the value p, /$,,,[O.OOl,
1001 by
100 equally (determined ty surveying the range of c m e s
= [-3+0.05(m-I),
adoptdintoactual cars). In other words,
-3+0.05m] ( m is an integer between 1 and 100, i.e.,
l<m<100).
Third, we sum the nurnbers of occurrences of the
common logarithm values of p, / St,//,p2 / St,//,... ,p,!/ S,,,,
in each interval of
. From this value ( = N , ), we
calculate the length of segmental curve S , (= distance
between neighboring constitutional points N , ) in which

-

p, appears. This means that S(,// =SI + s2 +...+ ~ I O .O In
addition,
we
define
the
"length
frequency"
S,[=
log,,(s, /S,,)] representing the ratio of the length of
the segmental curve to the total length of the curve S<,//.
The "logarithmic distritlution diagram of curvature"
defined above can be obtained by taking
for the

-

horizontal axis and S , for the vertical axis, as shown in
Figure 4. In this figure, the numeric values of
pi / Slrll(magnification) ancl s, / S<,/,(YO)are additionally
shown in parentheses for convenience of understanding.
To draw such a "logarithmic distribution diagram of
obtain the locus of d s / d p in
cwmtm" means to IIB~MG~IY

55

In fact, the impressions of two curves were the same
irrespective of the "gradient", if the "gradient" signs of
both curves were 'plus'.
Consequently, we could systematize and classify
curves into the five types shown in Figure 8. Figure 8 also
shows the impressions of curves. Here, we shall call a
curve whose C curve has one straight line a 'monotonicrhythm curve' and a curve whose C curve has two straight
lines a 'compound-rhythm curve'. We also developed a
method to get any curve (any set of points representing the
locus of a curve) among the five types having any volume,
mathematically [6]. The curves shown in Figure 8 were
made by this method. We were unable to abstract a C
curve with more than three straight lines of some constant
"gradient". On the basis of this fact, we considered that
these curves were not aesthetic. Actually, the curvature
changes were complex.
Accordingly, we consider the aesthetic curves (limited
to curvature monotonic curves) that designers aim to draw
as belonging to one of the five types. Furthermore, we
propose a new method for curve design, where the five
types of curves shown in Figure 8 are used as 'visual
languages'. From this, an aesthetic curve is made by using
these 'visual languages'.

The parent curve

The curve corresponds
to the parent curve

Figure 7 Self-affine property

Furthermore, the "gradient" of the C curve in Figure 4
is defined by
"gradient"=di / dp=dY/dX= lim AY / AX
A140

=lim(Y,-, In this paper, the term "gradient" means the gradient
after transforming the coordinate system to an X-Y
rectangular coordinate system with the horizontal axis
representing X=
and the vertical axis representing

3. Key-line Extraction and Data Fitting by
GA Spline

-

Y = s j . When the "gradient" is a, the relation of the
interval of the radius of curvature p/ and the length
frequency

defined by
-is -

3.1 Shape Measurement by a 3D-digitizer
and Extraction of a Key-line

- - - -

iim(T - s z ) / ( p I - p 2 ) =
=iim(s,_, - s , ) / ( p / - , - p , )
=a (as shown in Figure 6).
Here, if the "gradient" is constant, then the curve has a
self-affine property (see Figure 7).

For non-contact type shape measurements, there are
active methods and passive methods. Inspeck3D-M (made
by Canada lnspeck Company) (see Figure 9), which was
used in this research, is a measurement device that uses an
active method. This method projects a fringe pattem light
on the target object to be measured while shifting thc
fringe pattem light where a halogen lamp is the light
source, and then takes in a picture of four sheets. Next, the
fringe of this picture of four sheets is analyzed and a
distance value is computed. The "phase shift method" is
adopted in the extraction of this distance image.
The following five characteristics characterized the
Inspeck3 D-M.
1 ) A short measurement time (0.3sec).
2) A small influence on the target object to be measured.
3) A high resolution (the pitch=0.5mm).
4) Difficulty in measuring lustrous objects and black
objects.
5 ) Inability to measure objects exceeding the camera
frame.
The necessary data in this research include the section
data that show the key-line of the target measurement
object. However, the measurement data by Inspeck3D-M

2.2 Systematization of curves and visual
languages
We analyzed more than one hundred sample curves
drawn by expert car designers by using this quantitative
analysis method, and studied what characteristics of
curves designers control to make aesthetic curves.
As a result of this analysis, we could classify these
curves into five typical types. We adopted the automobile
in this study, because it is known that the appearance of a
car is important for potential buyers, and hence, car
designers are very sensitive to curves.
Therefore, we could systematize curves for car design
on the basis of our results above. Concerning the
impressions of these curves, we confirmed that they
differed according to what the "gradient" sign was (i.e.,
'plus' or 'minus' or '0') mainly by analyzing many samples.

56

G s e t of points represent- The curve made from the
set of points
=he locus of the curve

The impressions

The impressions are expressed
by words like 'sharp','force-ful',
accelerating', etc.

The impressions are expressed
by words like 'stability',
'static',etc.
"

.

The impressions are expressed
by words like 'convergent',
'decelerating',etc.

The impressions are changed
from 'accelerating'to
'decelerating'at some point
in a monotonic curve.

The impressions are changed
from 'decelerating'to
'accelerating'at some point
in a monotonic curve.

Fl FT

"logarithmicdistribution diagram of curvature"

Notes:

horizontal

'minus'

'0'

'plus'

C curve
'PlUS+minUS'

'minus+plus'

Figure 8 The systematization of curves and their impressions: the five basic types of curves

is output as numeric data in the lattice points composing
the curved surface. Therefore, we have to arrange a row,
with a set of lattice points, on the section we want to
extract (hereafter, this is called the lattice arrangement
measurement). Concretely speaking, the position of the
target measurement object and that of Inspeck3D-M are
determined such that the section we want to extract
consists of the row with a set of lattice points, as shown in
Figure 10. Accordingly, the curved surface data of the
target measurement object is measured.
Next, the method of extracting the section curve we
want to analyze from the measured data, that is, the keyline, is described. First, we extract the locus of the curve
as a set of points forming the key-line by performing the
lattice arrangement measurement. Figure 11 shows the

extracted locus of a curve by a set of points from the side
direction.

3.2 Data Fitting Using a Spline Curve with a
Genetic Algorithm
3.2.1 What is Data Fitting Using a Spline
Curve?
Splines are piecewise polynomials constructed by
polynomial pieces joined together [I]. By using splines,
we can obtain smooth and flexible geometric
representations. Let us assume that the data to be fitted is
given in the interval [U, b] of the x-axis and is written by

F;

57

= f ( x , ) c & J ( j = 1 , 2 (...)N).

(1)

Figure 11 A set of points forming a key-line (side view)
Figure 9 Inspeck 3D-M

spline coefficients c, (i = 1,2,..., n + m ) are determined by
minimizing equation (4). In order to obtain a good model,
however, the number and locations of the interior knots
1,2, ...,n) should be determined as precisely as
possible.
Sometimes the data to be fitted is given as a set of
plane data, ( x , , y i ) c j = 1,2,..., N ) . Unfortunately, the
underlying function of the data is typically a many-valued
function. In this case, we introduce a parameter t , and
represent the given data set by ( t , , x i ) , ( t , , y , ) ( j = 42, ..., N) .
Here, ti means a point on parameter t . Since the
transformed data sets are single-valued functions, each of
the data sets can be approximated using a spline by the
method of least squares.

ti(i=

Figure 10 Lattice arrangement measurement

In this equation, ,f( I) is the underlying function of the
data (unknown), and E , is the measurement error. Let
5, ( i = 1 - m ,2 - m, _ _
n+
_m
, ) be the knots of a spline for
data fitting, where n is the number of knots
5, ( i = I, 2 ,.._,n) located in the interval ( a , 6 ) and ni is the
order (degree + 1 ) of a B-spline N,,,.,(x). At the ends of
the interval [ U , b] , we set

3.2.2 Segmentation of a Curve Using Data
Fitting with a Genetic Algorithm
As we mentioned above, in order to obtain a good
approximation using a spline, we have to place the knots
involved as precisely as possible. This naturally demands
dealing with the knots as variables, and we also have to
solve a multivariate and multimodal nonlinear
optimization problem [2]. Therefore, it is difficult to
obtain the global optimum.
Recently, Yoshimoto et al. proposed a method to solve
this problem using a genetic algorithm (GA) [12,13]. In
[ 131, by using real numbers as genes, they treat not only
data with a smooth underlying function but also data with
an underlying function having discontinuous points and/or
cusps. In this paper, we call the method GA spline fitting.
The algorithm is as follows.
Step I : Input the interval of fitting [a, b] and the data
to be fitted given by equation (1).
Step 2: Input the degree of the approximating spline
and the control parameters of the GA.
Step 3: Create an initial population by using random
numbers.

I

(2)
b=5,,+1 =...=5,,+,,,.
In this setting, the model function for f ( x) is given by

(3)
,=I

where c, is a B-spline coefficient [l].
Equation ( 3 ) is fitted to the data given by
equation ( I ) by the method of least squares. Then, the sum
of the squares of residuals Q is written by
(4)
,=I

where w I is the weight of the data and N > n + m . B-

58

Step 4: For each individual, compute the data fitting
with knots made by real-number genes, and obtain the
fitness value e. Save the besl: individual, i.e., that giving
the smallest fitness value.
Step 5 : Do selection by using the fitness values and
generate candidates for the individuals of the next
generation.
Step 6: For each individual, compute the data fitting
with knots made by real-number genes, and obtain the
fitness value e. Select the best fitness emlnand obtain the
average fitness 2 .
Step 7: Do crossover and generate candidates for the
individuals of the next generation.
Step 8: For each individual, compute the data fitting
that uses real number gene.s as knots, and obtain the
fitness value e. Select the best fitness emlnand obtain the
average fitness 2 . Save the best individual, i.e., that
giving the smallest fitness value.
Step 9: Do mutation and generate a set of individuals
of the next generation.
Step IO: For each individual, compute the data fitting
with knots made by real-nymber genes, and obtain the
fitness value e . Select the best fitness emlnand obtain the
average fitness . Save the best individual, i.e., that
giving the smallest fitness value.
Step 1 1 : Select the better individual between the best
individual of Step 8 and the best individual of Step I O .
Save the better individual between the selected individual
and the best individual of the :last generation.
Step 12: Have we arrived at the final generation? If yes,
output the best individual obtained so far and the result of
the data fitting for the individual, and then stop the
computation. Otherwise, go to step 5 .
Here, the recommendable values of the control
parameters mentioned in Step 2 are as follows. The order
of splines: 4 to 6 (third to fifth degree splines), the number
of individuals K : an even number between 50 and 150,
the number of final generations: 100 to 300, the number of
trials: 20 to 40, the minimum of the mutation rate: 0.01.
The algorithm generates random numbers distributed
uniformly in the interval of data fitting ( a , b ) by L times.
By permuting them in ascending order, it creates an initial
individual. The initial population consists of a set of K

&-I

0'
0

200

400

50

Im

191

I

Figure 12 Result of data fitting by C A spline

initial individuals, where K is the size of the population.
As our fitness function, we use Bayes Information
Criterion (BIC) [IO]. For our data-fitting problem, this
criterion is written as follows.
BIC = N log, Q+(log, N ) ( 2 n + m ) .
(5)
In this equation, N is the number of data, Q is given by
equation (4), and ( 2 n + m) is the number of parameters in
the model function ( 3 ) . In the second term on the righthand side of equation ( 5 ) , n + m and n stand for the
number of B-spline coefficients and the number of interior
knots, respectively. In equation ( 5 ) , the first term means
the fidelity of the model function to the data to be fitted,
and the second term means the simpleness of the model
function. Therefore, BIC can balance the fidelity with the
simpleness. By using BIC, we can choose the best model
among the candidate models automatically. The value of
BIC is called fitness.
As our method of crossover, we use a two-point
crossover approach. That is, we cut the interval of fitting
[a, b] at two points determined randomly, and exchange
the genes between the cut points for two individuals. Here,
the numbers of the genes exchanged are not equal in
general, but we can perform a crossover without any
problem. For mutation, we use a method that inserts or
deletes a gene (knot) in the interval of fitting [ U , b ] by
some probability. Here, the insertion and deletion
probabilities are the same. The crossover and mutation

e

0

1

600

800

1000

Figure 13 A set of points forming a key-line (side view of a clay model)

59

1200

probabilities are determined adaptively by the method of
Srinivas et al. [ I I].
By using the above method, we can perform data
fitting and segmentation of measurement data from a clay
model of a car.

In Figure 12, a result of GA spline fitting for the
measurement data of the key-line in Figure 1 1 is shown.
The key-line was obtained from a clay model of a car. The
curvature profile of the approximating curve is also given
in Figure 12. From the curvature profile, we can obtain
curvature monotonic curves for use in the analysis in
chapter 4.

3.2.3 Computation of the Values of an
Approximating Function and its Curvature
In geometric design, we frequently need both an
approximating function S ( s ) and its curvature. Let the
curvature be denoted by k . Then, the curvature of S(x) is
given by
k = S"(x)/ 11 + S " ( X ) ~/ 3 ' 2
Since B-splines have a local support property, we can
compute the value of S(x) by

4. Simulation
In this chapter, a clay model 114 the size of a car is
actually measured, the key-line in the OX section (the
central line of the car) is extracted, and an experiment
performed using substitution and rearrangement with a
visual language is summarized.
1 ) Measurement of a clay model
The 114 size clay model created by a certain automaker
was actually measured by the "lattice arrangement
measurement" using lnspec 3D-M mentioned in chapter
3.1. Here, since thc clay model was of a size exceeding
the frame of the camera, it was measured after being
divided into three parts: a bonnet part, a windshield part,
and a roof part. Figure 13 is the set of points data of the
key-line obtained by the actual measurement.
2 ) C A spline fitting
C A spline fitting was performed for the set of points
data. Consequently, the curve shown in Figure 14 was
obtained.
3) Division to curvature monotonic curves
First, the curvature of the curve obtained by the CA
spline fitting was computcd. Next, a scarch was made for
the inflection points and feature points of this curve on the
basis of the curvature ( mark in Figure 14). Here, the
feature points of the curve are the points for which the
curvature changes from a reduction to an increasc.
Betwecn these calculated inflections points or feature
points are curvature monotonic curves.

(7)
Moreover, the m-th derivative of S ( s ) can be
computed by

Using equation (8). we can compute the first and
second derivatives of S(s). By substituting the values into
equation ( 6 ) ,we obtain the curvature k of S ( s ) .
If we have the plane curve mentioned in section 3.2.1,
we can obtain its curvature by

k = {x'(t).v"(t)-

(11)

> j t ( r ) , Y y t ) } / / m .

3.2.4 Result of GA Spline Fitting
D

C

300
250

m
150

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

Figure 14 Curve obtained by CA spline fitting

60

sa,

lm

1100

st

.,
,
,I

-

3

7

-

I

0

1

sl i

"gradicnt"=O + singlcR

I

/

-

"gradient"=- 1

I

Figure 17 Analysis result of curve C

Figure 15 Analysis result of curve A

Interpretation 1

;;

InteZl,

2

"gradient"=U3
-

9

2

l

o

I

-

"gadwnt"=- 1

1
1

1

Figure 16 Analysis result of curve B

1

1

0

1

-

2

Figure 18 Analysis result of curve D

4) Analysis of the "characte:ristics" in each curvature
monotonic curve
The following results werl: obtained when the main
curvature monotonic curves A-D (see Figure 14)
constituting the key-line OX of the clay model obtained by
this experiment were analyzed by the quantitative analysis
method.
i) curve A: The analysis result of this curve is shown in
Figure 15. If an interpretation is made based on what the
intention was when this CUI-vewas created, the two
interpretations in Figure 15 can be considered.
Interpretation 1 is an often seen logarithmic distribution
diagram of curvature, when a parabola, etc., is analyzed,
and it is obtained by the bonnet of a common car.
Interpretation 2 is the occumnlg result, when some single
R tends to be connected and it proceeds to approximate a
curve like a parabola. Here, interpretation 1 is chosen. Of
course, the selection of the interpretation 2 is also possible.
When a curve is generated using interpretation 1, it comes
(see Figure 8) to have more of a convergent impression
than interpretation 2.
ii) curve B: The analysis result of this curve is shown in
Figure 16. This curve is clearly made from a single R. The
key-line of the windshield part is actually approximated in
many cases by a single R to facilitate the modeling work.
Generally speaking, moreover, a visual language with a
certain "gradient" of plus is used for the key-line of the
windshield part in many cases. Therefore, we temporarily
choose a visual language whose "gradient" is 213 in the
meaning of correcting what was produced in the
facilitation. Of course, we may choose to use the single R
as it is.
iii) curve C: The analysis result of this curve is shown in
Figure 17. It is supposed that this curve is made by a
curve whose "gradient" is -1. It is believed that a forceful

and sharp impression of the roof results from this curve
(see Figure 8).
iv) curve D: The analysis result of this curve is shown in
Figure 18. It is supposed that this curve is made by a
curve whose "gradient" is -1, like curve C. That is, it is
believed that a "sharp" and "forceful" impression of the
roof also arises from this curve (see Figure 8).
5) Substitution to a visual language and rearrangement of
each curvature monotonic curve
Using a curve creating system developed by writers on
the basis of the above-mentioned interpretation results, the
following items were input (into the system): "gradient"
(selection of a visual language) in each curvature
monotonic curve, volume, and position. Then, a curve was
created (see Figure 19). While the key-line by which the
line creation was camed out removed the noise from the
original key-line, the system made correcting the curve
simple in the stage of work assumed from Figure 19 (the
key-line in Figure 19 was rearranged by intentionally
shifting it so that it would be legible). However, this keyline by which the line creation was camed out gave only a
certain interpretation. It is also possible to reappraise this
key-line, to reinterpret "characteristics" of the curve, by
replacing it with new visual languages, and then carrying
out the re-creation of the curve.

5. Conclusion
The following results were obtained in this research.

1) Development of a lattice arrangement measuring
method for key-line extraction by a 3D-digitizer. A set of
points data tracing a key-line can now be obtained easily.
2) Development of an algorithm for GA spline fitting for
extracted key-lines. While obtaining a curve without ogee

61

parts, i.e., parts not intended by the designer,
this development divides the curve into
curvature monotonic curves easily.
3) Simulation of the automatic fairing of a keyline using a clay model, created by an
automaker, 114 the size of a regular car.
Consequently, the key-line was found to fit the
GA spline and the curve could be divided into
a curvature monotonic curve. To analyze the
"characteristics" of each curvature monotonic
curve, visual languages were substituted. It was
found that the key-line rearranged by the
curvature monotonic curves replaced by the
visual languages, was practical enough to use.
Therefore, by using this automatic fairing
system, it is possible to obtain curves designers
Figure 19 Key-line substituted by some visual languages
intend in a short period of time compared with
conventional fairing- systems.
In addition, we
.
[2] Dierckx, P., Curve and Surface Fitting with Splines,
believe that this system can also be used to create
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1993.
beautiful curved surfaces from key-lines replaced by
[3] Farouki, R. T., Pythagorean-hodograph quintic
visual languages.
transition
curves of monotone curvature, Computer-Aided
The following subjects remain as future work.
Design,
29(9),
1997,601-606.
1) This time, a key-line was extracted using Inspeck3D-M.
[4]
Goldberg,
D.E.,
Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization,
However, Inspeck3D-M was originally designed for
and Machine Learning, Addison-Wesley, 1989,412.
measuring curved surface forms and extracting them as
[5] Harada, T., Yoshimoto, F., Moriyama, M., An aesthetic
sets of points data. If it were possible to only measure a
curve
in the field of industrial design, Proc. of IEEE
key-line, a 3D-digitizer could measure every
Symposium
on Visual Language, 1999,38-47.
constitutional point of a curve with a sufficient accuracy.
T., Mori, N., Sugiyama, K., Algorithm for
[6]
Harada,
In the future, the room for improvement category will
creating a curve by controlling its characteristics, Bulletin
include a form measuring method along with
of Japanese Society for the Science of Design,41(4), 1994,
investigations on the measurement devices, etc.
1-8 (In Japanese).
2) Despite the many kinds of interpretations available on
[7]
Kepes, G., Language of Vision, Paul Theobald and
dividing a curve into a curvature monotonic curves, and
Co., Chicago, 1%
analyzing the "characteristics" of each curvature
[8] Nutboume, A. W., Martin, R., Differential Geometry
monotonic curve after visual language substitution, it will
Applied
to Curve and Surface Design Volume
be necessary to further acquire the know-how on which
1:Foundations, Ellis Horwood Limited, 1988,9-141.
interpretation to choose.
[9] Pal, T. K., Nutbourne, A., Two-dimensional curve
3 ) In the case of rearrangement involving curvature
synthesis using linear curvature elements, Computermonotonic curves replaced by visual languages, only the
Aided Design, 9(2), 1977, 121-134.
curve is arranged at present. However, if future utilization
[lo] Schwarz G., Estimating the dimension of a model,
is considered, it will be necessary to inquire further about
The Annals of Statistics 1978, Vol. 6, 461-464.
the connections between curves.
[ 111 Srinivas M., Patnaik L.M., Adaptive probabilities of
crossover and mutation in genetic algorithms, IEEE Trans.
Systems, Man and Cybernetics 1994, Vol. 24, 656-667.
Acknowledgement
[12] Yoshimoto, F., Moriyama, M., Harada, T., Automatic
knot placement by a genetic algorithm for data fitting with
a spline, Shape Modeling International'99, IEEE
This work was partly supported by a Grant-in-Aid for
Computer Society Press, 1999, 162-169.
Scientific Research of the Japan Society for the Promotion
[ 131 Yoshimoto, F., Harada, T., Moriyama, M. Yoshimoto,
of Science.
Y., Data fitting using a genetic algorithm with real number
genes, Trans. of the Information Processing Society of
References
Japan, Vol. 41, No. 1,2000, 162-169 (In Japanese).
[ l ] de Boor, C. , A Practical Guide to Splines, SpringerVerlag, New York, 1978.

62

