Intentions: Logical and Subversive
The Art of Marcel Duchamp,
Concept Visualization, and Immersive Experience

Richard K. Merritt
Assislant Professor of Computer Art, Design and Art History.
Luther College
Decorah, Iowa. USA
merritri @luther.edu
of higher dimensionality. Born in 1887 in Blainville
(Seine-Infiriuere) in Normandy to a notary's family with a
history of art, love of music literature and chess, Marcel
as well as his brothers Jacques Villon, Raymond
(Duchamp-Villon) and his sister Suzanne became artists.
Among his scientific ventures included the development
of the illusionistic "rotorelief", spinning circular
geometric patterns. Although Italian optical scientist
discovered and named this optical phenomena "the stereokinetic effect" in 1924, it is clear that Duchamp had
discovered the phenomena in early 1920. It is clear that
Duchamp understood the mathematics of this method of
producing the illusion of volume. He wrote, I only had
to use two circumferences--eccentric--and make them turn
on a third center". [ 1 I ]

Abstract
This paper examines the intersection of symbolic logic,
immersive experience [VR] and concept visualization in
the interpretation of the oeuvre of Marcel Duchamp.
Influenced by the mathematicians Henri Poincare' and
Elie Jouffret as well as his own intense practice of chess
and logic, Duchamp sought to merge the poetic and
visceral nature of the aesthetic experience with the logical
and systematic character of science. This convolution of
elements as disparate as chance, 3d and 4d space-time,
linguistics, logic and authorship does not allow for
comfortable definitive explanation but rather one, like his
work itseg that engages simultaneous "&-dimensional
thinking.

"

The history of art is filled with artists whose discoveries
and research were labeled or advocated as objet d' art and
whose scientific utility was not discovered until many
years often centuries later. However, it is the supposition
of this author, that no other artist cloaked his or her
intentions in deception as a tactic to subvert conventional
interpretation. Noted and controversial Duchamp scholar
Rhonda Shearer has garnered attention by a stunning
hypothesis about the many realms of Duchamp's work. In
1919 Duchamp drew a supposed impromptu mustache on
a reproduction of Leonard0 da Vinci's Mona Lisa and
titled it (L.H.O.0.Q). When these letters are read aloud
they say "Elle a chaud au CUI" or "She has a hot ass" in
French. Having created this work of art Duchamp stated
that it revealed a truth about his noted foregoer.

Duchamp questioned the purpose of 'retinal art', art
which is merely visually beautiful, and examined the
limitations of science as a singular method of interpreting
and communicating experience. The body of his work
stands as a systematic yet playfhd critique of deterministic
reasoning. Using symbolic logic to characterize the most
common interpretations of Duchamp's work, the author
suggests that Concept Visualization in 3d immersive
experience offers a unique method for exploring and
introducing the complex lartices of interpretation,
intention and concept in the work of Marcel Duchamp.

Introduction
Marcel Duchamp perhaps more: than any other artist in
history challenged the definition of art. Throughout his
life Duchamp maintained an interest in science,
mathematics, optics and art and more than any other
eminent artist of the twentieth century understood and
researched non-euclidean geometry and the mathematics

0-7695-1195-3/01
$10.00 0 2001 1E;EE

Duchamp championed the "ready-made", a manufactured
object transformed into art merely by its selection and
placement in an aesthetic gallery or museum context. In
so doing, Duchamp altered the significance of the objet d'
art as a precious commodity created by the artist.

233

theory such as Heisenberg uncertainty principle and the
Erwin Schrodinger equations.[8]

Duchamp often maintained complex documentation of the
purchase or discovery of his "found-objects". In the case
of L.H.O.O.Q, Duchamp asserts that it was purchased in a
postcard shop on Paris' rue de Rivoli. This notion that the
art object is defined and given value by its context not by
an empirical judgement of aesthetic value would
transform the art of the twentieth century, greatly
influencing Conceptual Art and Postmodern movements.
Duchamp's assertion that art is a matter of selection and
context was perhaps a precursor to Baudrillard's Second
Order of Simulacra.

Duchamp's systematic critiques were not limited to the
scientific thinking of the day but also confronted modes
of artistic production. Duchamp's disinterest in what he
referred to as "retinal art" or art which solely engaged the
reproduction of visual experience was methodically
deconstructed and supplanted by an art which focused on
the grey matter or existed in the realm of pure intellect.
"All through the nineteenth century thr phrase 'b&te
comme un peintre ' or 'as stupid as a painter"', Duchamp
said. "And it was true- that kind of painter who just puts
down what he sees is stupid." [12] For Duchamp,
traditional art making merely copied itself in kind of
mobius strip of mimesis and self reflection merely cloning
itself over and over again.

According to Shearer, Duchamp had another more
subversive objective. She asserts that Duchamp's
L.H.O.0.Q was in fact a creation of Duchamp- a
composite photograph of himself taken in 1912 and a
reproduction of Leonard0 Da Vinci's Mona Lisa.
Shearer's research suggests that not only was L.H.O.O.Q.
created by Duchamp or fabricated to his specifications but
so was the snow shovel in In Advance of the Broken Arm,
the bird cage in Why Not Sneeze Rose Se'lavy, the ampule
in Anipoule Contenant 50cc d'air Paris (Ampule
containing 50cc of Paris air), and the urinal in Fountain
signed R. Mutt (the famous object refused exhibition in
the Society of Independent Artists show in 1917). This
controversial theory is gaining greater attention in recent
years, although not without significant turmoil. The
notion of the "ready-made", would remain safe according
to Arthur Danto, art critic for the Nation, and Thierry di
Duve author of Kant After Duchamp as this concept of
"art object in context" has been an accepted convention of
art making and interpretation for three quarters of a
century. However if Shearer proves to be correct in her
assertions both Danto and the Immanent Duchamp
scholar and author Francis Nauman (Marcel Duchamp:
The Art of Making Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction) would find this a "grand act of deception."
[lo1

As the myth goes, Duchamp gave up art in favor of
playing chess throughout the world. "All chess players are
artists but not all artists are chess players." Duchamp used
chess as a kind of model for much of his work, using it in
his explorations of physics, mathematics and logic. This
does not mean that he solely engaged in a form of sublime
mathematically derived art. He continued his love of
semantics, word games and humor throughout his life one
sees this in L.H.O.O.Q. as well as his frequent use of the
alter ego Rrose Selavy (Eros is Life). Any complete and
singular interpretation of Marcel Duchamp's work is quite
impossible as it is a lattice manifesting complex
interweavings of intentions; mathematics, science, logic,
art, consumer critique word play and alter ego.

Parsing the Oeuvre
The human propensity for binary oppositional thinking
has been studied by psychologists and linguist and is
evident in a great portion of western philosophy from
Diogenes Laertus 200AD (lives and Opinions of Eminent
Philosophers) to the present. Nowhere is this more
apparent than in the discipline of art history, particularly
as practiced in the first half of the twentieth century.
Often art history has been essentially a historiography of
connoisseurship, determining why one body of work by
one artist is necessarily better than another body of work
by another artist. This reasoning was held together by the
supposition of progress, in the inevitable evolution of one
mode of artistic production to another. Though not the
subject of this study it is notable that when one examines
art historiography (or any historiography for that matter)
events, intentions and outcomes are often limited to
singular reasoning. The academy, when confronted by
opposing singular reasoning on any particular individual
or subject matter, results in imbroglio. Critical

Duchamp's work, particularly that which displays his keen
interest in science and mathematics is also garnering
attention outside of the disciplines of art history and art
criticism. New York University Physicist Jonathan
Williams postulates that Duchamp's deep play with
physics or what Duchamp and the playwright Alfred Jarry
referred to as "pataphysics", was a systematic way of
satirizing early 20th century deterministic systems of
scientific thinking.[8] Duchamp, according to Williams,
began this direction through his investigations of noneuclidean geometry, fourth dimensional space-time,
electro magnetism, and radiation. Duchamp's playful
explorations of these areas seems to be a harbinger, of
sorts, for some of the foundations of quantum mechanical

234

Symbolic Logic and Visualizing Concept in
the Work of Marcel Duchamp

interpretation of Duchamp's body of work and his
intentions is vested in this sort of competition between
singular theories.

The seemingly innate propensity of the human mind to
binary, "this not that thinking" may be fruitfully
illustrated by using symbolic logic in an interpretation of
the intentions of Marcel Duchamp. With symbolic logic
as a form of information or concept visualization one can
demonstrate the difficulty and visual complexity of
examining Duchamp's work using a deterministic system
of equivalences.

Duchamp consistently plays with these battles often
examining them through his own prism. As Duchamp
advocates the value of the "ready-made" he
simultaneously describes his intent to define existence
"through slightly distending the laws of physics and
chemistry."
By using his own form of "absurd
mathematics" he simultaneously critiques scientific
thinking, logic, the definition of art, the artistic mode of
production and aesthetic interpretation. Duchamp writes:

First let us use the most oft sited interpretations of
Duchamp's oeuvre and their corresponding significances
and assign to each a variable. The following is by no
means an exhaustive codification of the many
interpretations of Marcel Duchamp's works it ,is
essentially a categorization of a few of the major theories.

Calcul par I'absurde mathCmatique algCbrique SiA=intention 10.
B=Crainte 5
C=Desiron a une premikre equation
C=a-b
et une 2 Cquation
C=A x B
Math ces 2 Cq. Sont absurdes

A. The use of the "ready-made" or "found object" asserts
that by altering the context of a commonplace object it
can become art.

D. The statement A allows that Duchamp in challenging
the definition of the art object by exalting the primacy of
the idea over the creative act he subverted the modernist
convention of the artistlobject and viewer relationships

c=50I c = 5 I 2 c = 55 I 2=27.5
Si A = 101 B = 5 I C = 27.5
Si A = a = 9 I B=a/ 3 =3l C +33/ 2=16.5 [4]

B. The work was an exploration of the mathematics of
uncertainty pioneered by Henri PoincarC and ;he study of
the fourth dimensional space theorized by Elie Jouffret
(Trait6 Eltmentaire de Gtometrie B Quatre Dimensions
1903).

This formula demonstrates the limits of scientific
reasoning by illustrating its inability to explicate
immeasurable, highly personalized, data. By inserting
variable equivalences for intention, dread (crainte) and
desir (desire) Duchamp demonstrates the limits of
deterministic mathematics and hints at his attempts to
demonstrate the breakdown of rational models of
examining reality. Jonathan Williams in his article Pata
or Qitantitni the End of Detern/inistic Physics, likens this
propensity in Duchamp's work to the Schrodinger
equations which demonstrated that the behaviors,
qualities and position of quantum particles needed to be
expressed in terms of statistical probabilities thus
rendering vacant the possibility of determining that a
subatomic particle had any fixed quality at any given
point in time. Duchamp's continued fascination with
illustrating this notion also points out his interest in
expressing the difficulty that systems of logic have in
making distinct calculations of human emotional
variables. As one can see when examining the diversity of
Duchamp's work and intentions, traditional art historical
and art critical interpreters were and in many cases remain
befuddled.

H. The statement B. allows that Duchamp called into
question the discipline boundaries between art and
science and destroys the notion of the artist as creator of
'retinal art" or the aesthetic object.

C. The work was engineered to be reassembled by the
patron or viewer, who followed complex, often informed
by chance, instructions. This process is evident in
Duchamp's assemblage book works such as La BBite
Verte.
P. The statement C allows that Duchamp transformed the
boundaries between producer and consumer in the art
market and engaged the artist/manufacturer and viewer in
the process of creation.
We will next make a formula that contextualizes more
precisely the relationship between the upper level referent
variables A, B and C (in this case those variables that
refer to the condition of Duchamp's work rather than his

235

intentions). Supplanting a corresponding lower case
Greek letters, A becoming ?(alpha), B becoming L-(beta),
and C becomes ?(gamma) the following is the rule,
universal quantifier or binding of variables governing
their relationships.

@AP> A I+A,r>A

[l

Illustration

I.

-.lmW>l bl,

The above statement allows that there can only be a single
interpretation of the work of Duchamp. In accordance
with the current highly polarized arguments about his
work the equation illustrates that, of the contemporary
hypothesis, only one can be correct. The next equations
maintain that there can only be a single derived intention
from the overall statement of the condition of Duchamp's
work. In other words the statement: "The work is an
exploration of the mathematics of uncertainty pioneered
by Henri PoincarC and the study of the fourth dimensional
space theorized by Eiie Jouffret" may only be linked to
the intention, "Duchamp calls into question the discipline
boundaries between art and science and destroys the
notion of the artist as creator of 'retinal art' or the aesthetic
object". We may express this with symbolic logic in the
following:

A

A

-A

D

-D

A A

A A

A A A A A A A A

iD-Y
D P .D+
lllicstration 3.

D P7D.P

D P

q D +

D P

The statement A if and only if D proves logically
consistent. Next we have the hypothesis B, i f and only if,

H:

-D

H
Illustration 2.

The next section of this exploration of the work of Marcel
Duchamp through symbolic logic will determine the
consistency of each of the conditiodintention hypotheses.
First we will examine the consistency of the argument A,
if and only if, D:

A A

A A

A A A A A A A A

yH-4
H P .H+
Illits~ratiori4.

H P 1H.P

H P .H+

H P

Having proved the statement B if and only if H consistent
we address the theory C if and only if P:

236

also been used to critique symbolic logic. The discipline
itself relies on abstract patterns, its meaning determined
not from the symbols themselves but from the relationship
between the marks and other patterns and more
significantly cultural meanings.

P

iP7Z

P H iP 31

Duchamp's connection to logic is most clearly noted in
two of his most significant areas of concern: chance and
chess. As a chess master Duchamp was, on several
occasions, a member of the French championship chess
team. For Duchamp chess was an organized, integrated
and ordered whole, composed of rule based interactions
wherein outcomes were as influenced by unquantifiable
elements such as guile or desire as by systematic
reasoning. This led Duchamp to assert that complexity in
any system was inherently non-deterministic. We see this
questioning of aggregation, perhaps more clearly, in his
use of chance in aesthetic production.

-P

P H

-B

P H 3P.H

P

Duchamp's subversion of deterministic systems through
chance finds vent in his Trois Stoppages-Etalon,
1913(Three Standard Stoppages), He first measures three
sections of thread each precisely one meter in length and
drops them from a height of exactly one meter. He then
uses the curves of the threads to produce three templates
cut from a straight edge to produce the work. The
templates are then enshrined in a box and become the
piece Trois Stoppages-ktalon. This work and activity
albeit unusual, is a subversion of the concept of
immutable standards of measurement, thus questioning
the validity of a system based on a platinum-iridium bar
stored in a Parisian vault. His attention to chance not only
posited an alternative to early twentieth century "laws" of
science but also undermined early twentieth century
conventions about aesthetic production.

H

Illustration 5.

Having proved the consistency of all three hypotheses
given the a priori context that only one of them is correct
where are we left in this complex visual analysis of
Duchamp's intentions? His intimate knowledge of Henri
Poincart's theories and his use of chance in the
construction of many of his key works would seem to
indicate that Duchamp had been quietly challenging the
notion of deterministic reasoning in both the
interpretation of art and physical and experiential
phenomena. As PoincarC suggests in 1895;
Experiment has revealed a multitude of facts which can
be summed up in the following statement: it is impossible
to detect the absolute motion of matter, or rather the
relative motion of ponderable matter with respect to the
ether; all that one can exhibit is the motion of ponderable
matter with respect to ponderable matter.[2]

Le Penseur Multi-Dimensionnelle
Duchamp's work Nude Descending a Staircase ( 19 12)
was first displayed at the Cubist Exhibition at the Damau
Gallery in Barcelona and later at the Armory Show (New
York, 1913). This painting took the observational cubist
penchant of displaying an object from multiple spatial
vantagepoints and added a temporal element by rendering
a nude figure in motion. This work explored the
conceptual possibility of 2d painting, which displayed and
illustrates a 3 dimensional figure traversing time. The
piece arrives at a visceral form of multi dimensional
cognition.
Partial inspired by his interest in
chronophotography and the mathematics of Henri
Poincart Nude Descending a Staircase is perhaps his last
clear attempt to use a traditional modality of retinal art to
express a conceptual or gray matter art. It is also his first

In short, Poincart asserts that all quantifiable and
qualifiable information pertaining to any phenomena can
only be measured relative to other qualified and
quantified data. As the first to elucidate this "principle of
relativity" Poincart discerned that all explicit information
about any physical phenomena in motions is best
expressed in the form of a probability. PoincarC's critique
of determinism extends to other disciplines as well as he
states, "The science of history is built out of bricks; but an
accumulation of historical facts is no more a science than
a pile of bricks is a house." Thus kind of reasoning is the
bedrock of semiotics (meaning in language is ascertain
through the relationship betwleen the symbol and its
mean& relative to the -culture that produced it). It has

237

the fourth dimension a three-dimensional object may be
seen from all sides. From years of singular interpretations
of Duchamp's oeuvre art historians have safely ignored
Duchamp's multiple interpretations: one obvious and the
others subversive. When the work is proclaimed (by the
artist himself) and interpreted as a "ready-made" the
hidden intention with all of its possible significance is
obscured.

widely exhibited work to express his interest in the
merger of science and art.
His continued interest in multiple dimensions, though I
cannot prove this, is probably where we may find the
solution or at least a map to a clear understanding of his
work. Though we may never have a concise definition of
"what his work was about" Duchamp may have left us
clues as to how we may begin to "make sense" of his
intentions.

Duchamp disavowed models of reasoning, which relied
on singular definitions. This kind of one or twodimensional interpretation is inherently flawed when
attempting to ascertain his intentions. With this in mind,
Duchamp's work requires that any conceptual model of
his intentions necessitates three-dimensional thinking and
thusly is well suited to three-dimensional visualization.

Rhonda Shearer and Stephen J. Gould In their article
Boats and Deckchairs present the most profound example
of Duchamp's trickery and play with the multidimensional mathematics of Henri PoincarC and Elie
Jouffret. Inside Duchamp's 1967 piece White Box Francis
Nauman discovered a "commercial" postcard (1 914). The
postcard displays on its front three boats floating on a
placid lake or river and on the reverse some writing.
Nauman categorize d this discovery as a "random
notation" written on a "found object" citing that "on the
verso of a postcard, Duchamp notes 'a possible means by
which the fourth dimension could be visually established
through the optical illusion of two deck chairs'.'' This note
was accompanied by an illustration of parallel lines
bisected by a perpendicular. The true nature of this object
has never been addressed by art historians as the work
could be safely categorized as one of Duchamp's "readymades .

Immersive
Experience
Visualization

and

Concept

As demonstrated, the use of symbolic logic as a means to
visualizing concept in the work of Marcel Duchamp is
extremely difficult. Though I have not examined the use
of more advanced forms of symbolic logic (I am not a
logician) it is apparent that the data, as envisaged, is not
of the highest utility.
Clearly, Duchamp had multiple intentions and the
existence of seemingly inconsistent hypotheses about his
work point more to the human propensity for dualistic
thinking rather than to grasping a more pluralistic
possibility. Engaging data which is not quantifiable and
highly subjective is difficult to manage logically and
exceedingly difficult to graph. However if we create a 3d
cartographic form of the logic equations introduced
earlier in this paper, we make the data more intuitive and
thus cognitively manageable. Using interactive virtual
reality software[ the software we use in this example is
the Glass Virtual Reality Engine, created by the author]
one can have an immersive experience of the main
theories about Duchamp's work.

"

The piece is in fact, an original painting not a commercial
postcard. The curious parallel and perpendicular lines on
the back are in fact obscure instructions. Duchamp's
fascination with rotation and relative vantagepoints
indicates that a new dimension may be experienced
through altering ones position relative to an object. When
the postcard is turned 90" to the right the boats become an
orthogonal rendering of deckchairs viewed from a bird's
eye vantagepoint. The mysterious "random note" on the
verso is a plea to adjust your perspective when viewing
the postcard but also, when correlated with the image
from the front the piece becomes a profound statement
about the relationship between the second third and fourth
dimensions.
Like E. A. Abbot's famous book Flatland (1885) whose
main character, a square, is shockingly introduced to the
third dimension, Duchamp has demonstrated for us that
one can examine from a three dimensional vantage point
all sides of a two dimensional object. In turning the
postcard we are taking a clearly two-dimensional image
and viewing it from the third dimension wherein the
objects in question become something entirely different.
In postcard he begs the analogy: that when viewed from

238

deterministic system as the viewer governs the
experience. This model for information visualization
does not stand in opposition to symbolic logic, however it
does allow a form of concept visualization that merges
reason quantification, qualification and the visceral.

Conclusion
The body of work produced by Marcel Duchamp was a
programmatic, if playful, undermining of deterministic
thinking. He demolished arbitrary discipline boundaries
between artist scientist and mathematician. His clues to
altering our perspective were equally pertinent to viewing
and understanding his oeuvre as they were to viewing
individual works of art. His implicit and explicit call for
altering our vantage point relative to his intentions
inherently calls into question modernist singular
interpretations. Yet through concept visualization we can
allow for more exploratory modes of information
visualization; modes which allow for simultaneous
multiple dimensional thinking.
In an immersive
environment the viewer can experience a panorama of
Duchamp's intentions, one that does not enforce strict
rules of consistency, but nonetheless leads us to
comprehension of a poly-dynamic yet visceral logic.

Illitstration 6. Screen still from the author's Itnmersive Ducharnp

Concept World an interactive virtual reality computer art piece.

References
A., D'Harnoncourt, K., McShine, ed., Marcel
Duchamp, The Museum of Modern Art, New York,
NY. 1973.

C., Scribner, "Henri Poincare and the Principle of
Relativity",
American
Journal
of
Physics,
32,1964,~673.

Illfcstrmon 7. Screen still from the author's hrnersir8eDitcharnp
Concept World an interactive virtual reality computer art piece.

The virtual reality computer art piece Irrzrnersive
Ducharrrp Coricept World, presents the theories
concerning the artist's work. .4t the center of the virtual
space is the entrance point to the world. The immersant or
viewer may follow the map which branches off to various
nodal points. Each of these nodal points represents a
single theory. From the vantagepoint of the theory the
immersant sees the other possible theories through a fog
and translucent sheets, they are barely visible, as the
immersanthiewer
has
chosen
an
alternate
path[Illustration 6.1. Iri Irririversive Duchnnip Concept
World the immersant is also introduced to various
interactive media; readings of :Duchamp's Notes as well as
to still images and animations of his work and to the
writings of Henri PoincarC. If' the immersant chooses to
fly above the object it is from this vantagepoint the viewer
sees all of the theories as a totality[Illustration7.]. This
totality, is essentially a relativistic rather than a fixed

Clair, J., Sur Marcel Duchamp et la fin de I'art,
Editions Gallimard. Paris 2000.
Duchamp, M., Notes, Champs Flammarion- Centre
d'art et de culture Georges Pompidou, Paris, 1999.
Golding, J., Duchamp:The Bride Stripped Bare By
Her Bachelors, The Viking Press, New York, NY,
1973
Hodges, W., Logic, Penguin Books, New York, NY,
1985.
Ifrah, G., The Universal History of Numbers, John
Wiley and Sons, Inc. Newyork, NY, 2000.
J., Williams, "Pata or Quantum: Duchamp and the
end of Deterministic Physics", Tout Fait: The Marcel

239

Duchamp Studies Online Journal www.toutfait.com,
Dec. 2000.

[9] Reichenbach, H., Elements of Symbolic Logic, Free
Press, New York, NY, 1966.
[lO]S., Boxer, "Taking Jokes By Duchamp to Another
Level of Art", The New York Times, New York, NY,
Saturday March 20, 1999.
[ 1 I ] S.J., Could, R.,Shearer, "Boats and Deck Chairs",

Tout Fait: The Marcel Duchamp Studies Online
Journal www.toutfait.com, Dec. 1999.
[12]Tomkins, C. The World of Marcel Duchamp 18871968, Time Life Book,Alexandria, VA, 1977.

240

