A Helix Metaphor for Customer Behaviour Visualisation
Martin Hicks
BTexact Technologies, BT Adastral Park, UK
Email: martin.hicks@bt.com

Abstract

An innovative visualisation metaphor’ has been
developed as a method to present email transaction data
in a 3D visualisation. A helix metaphor is adopted as a
design solution to enable a comparison of, for example,
internet usage patterns for households employing ADSL
(Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line) or PSTN (Public
Switched Telephone Network) internet connections, or
differences in telephone calling behaviours across family
types.

This paper describes approaches to the visualisation
customer behaviour, and proposes an innovative
metaphor for information visualisation. The helix
metaphor is adopted as a technique to render behavioural
temporal data in a user interface design incorporating a
3-dimensional ( 3 0 ) representation. The helix metaphor
extends the conceptual model of a spiral representation
along a linear perspective, and accommodates the
visualisation of temporal data by exploiting the cyclical
nature of the data. A set of user task requirements was
identified, and a brieJ informal series of task-based user
trials revealed that these tasks were supported by the
helix representation. Requirements for further design
iterations of the helix representation were also proposed.
of

1

In this paper, the visualisation concentrates on internet
usage data, and uses either the total email transactions, or
the average byte counts received for both ADSL and
PSTN connection types, for a specified month. It is
possible that with further enhancements, the helix
metaphor could be adapted to incorporate other data
attributes, thus accommodating bivariate, or trivariate
data. However, before presenting the helix metaphor as a
technique to visualise temporal data, it is useful to
consider other visualisation techniques related to temporal
data.

Introduction

With increasing competitiveness within the UK
telecommunications industry, it has become particularly
relevant to gain a better understanding of the domestic
customer’s behaviour and attitudes towards all aspects of
communications usage in the home. To address this issue,
BT is carrying out a longitudinal study of around 1,000
UK households, which uses novel and innovative research
techniques to gather data about technology mediated
information consumption and communication within the
home. Such tcchnologies include telephony, email, online
services, PC, television, and any other products that
emerge during the study period [I].

2

One main issue in information visualisation, is
whether to use a 2D or 3D representation. A number of
authors concur that the type of representation adopted is
dependent upon the task [6] [8] [9]. Some previous work
towards the visualisation of call data within Digital
Living research has already been performed. Figure 1
illustrates a time-series 2D representation showing the
average number and duration of outgoing voice phone
calls between October 1998 to June 1999.

A substantial amount of quantitative behavioural data
has been accumulated since the start of the study. The
data, in the form of temporal call records and
internevemail usage logs, allows a number of differences
to be identified in usage behaviour, across for example,
family type, gender, or age and work segments. With the
accumulation of such temporal data, there is a
requirement for a visualisation tool that can enable
rescarchers to readily identify patterns and differences in
usage behaviour that occur over time. In this context, the
visualisation of behavioural data could support the
analysis of intrinsic and extrinsic (lifestyle) triggers for
communication, as well as marketing initiatives to
stimulate communications.

It is possible to gain an indication of peak calling
behaviour for average call duration for this period,
whereas the average number of calls per household shows
only a slight variation. However, for a more detailed
analysis, such as weekly or hourly pattern usage, a 2D
representation can become unworkable across larger data
sets. As the number of data points within the
representation grows, it is typically harder to identify
temporal variations in calling behaviour across a large
information space.

’

BT patent application ‘Fly Through Helix’ (application ref
003 10535.0) filed.

22
0-7695-1195-3/01 $10.00 0 2001 IEEE

Related Work

Average number

a durallon

invisible and can distort the user’s perception of the data
set.
Although 2D presentations such as value bars offer
perceptual cues to aid height comparisons in data sets,
their inclusion in a 3D linear representation suggests that
the information itself cannot be readily derived from the
available 3D space. In this sense, 3D linear
representations are not optimised for information
processing at a more precise level of detail, but support a
global overview of the data.

of calls per day from

Oclober ‘98 l o Julie ‘99

I

-

-

hueraw number 01 C a l l s per
--

______

___I____-

Figure 1: Average number and duration of outgoing
calls from Oct. ‘98 to June ’99 for a group of 400
households demographically representative of the
UK
Previous Digital Living research into call data
visualisations has also included 3D representations. The
‘Visualisation Generator’ [2] i s a visualisation tool that
enables a static 3D visualisation of call data using input
from a number of selection categories and options. A
working prototype of the tool was developed using
Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML), to show
differences in calling behaviour between different groups
of people, and changes in call behaviour patterns over
time. Figure 2 shows an example of the Visualisation
Generator, showing number of calls logged to Internet
Service Providers (ISP’s) during October 1997. This
representation uses 3D surface rendering or plotting,
which raises usability issues when attempting to analyse
the temporal data. Such issues arise from the data being
presented in 3D space in linear form. Although a floor or
a grid provides a strong linear perspective cue,
visualisations of this type do not always ensure optimal
use of space available within the 3D view. This issue
bccomes particularly apparent when navigating or
attempting data comparisons across larger data sets. For
example, where temporal data is ordered chronologically
in weekly cycles, certain tasks may involve comparisons
between the beginning and the end of the month, or time
of day. As a result, the user is often required to spend a
significant amount of time navigating 3D space in order
to vicw distant, or occluded data objects.

f
l

Figure 2: ISP call traffic from selected households
during October 1997 (MacLeod, 1997)

3 Temporal Behavioural Data and User
Requirements
The temporal behavioural data generated by the
Digital Living project can be characterised as temporal
call records and internet usage logs. Internet usage logs,
for example, include totals for transaction count,
transaction duration, and number of bytes sent and
received. Other data, such as telephone call data, include
call duration for both incoming and outgoing calls for a
given household, family type, incoming/outgoing call
indicator, household identifier, and age and work
indicators. All data tables are organised chronologically,
including a date and time marker for each transaction
type, or for each call made or received. These data
structures allow a number of comparisons to be made for
each data attribute over time. For example, telephone
usage data tables can be characterised by the attribute
‘call duration’, which can then be averaged for incoming
and outgoing calls for a specific date and time marker.
Further comparisons between the average call duration
across family types (e.g., households with or without
children, different age and gender groups) may indicate
different calling behaviour across these groups. Internet
transaction data tables are characterised by attributes such
as total email transactions or total number of bytes sent or
received, which can then be averaged for a given date and
time period. Comparisons between transactions

These problems are typical drawbacks inherent in 3D
representations - the difficulty of comparing patterns,
widths and heights that are at different ‘distances’ from
the user [8]. The inclusion of 2D value sidebars as
illustrated in Figure 2, provides perceptual cues to support
height comparisons between the data represented in the
3D surface plot. However, for !specific data points, object
occlusion is more problematic, particularly when the
information space is dense. In ‘such cases, data points are

23

originating from households using ADSL or PSTN data
connections, for example, may indicate whether the
availability of an increased communications bandwidth
encourages an increase in data traffic flow. Further
comparative studies will identify whether factors such as
geographical location, ethnicity, etc., influence broadband
Internet usage, both in the UK and in European countries.

analysing spatial views, for example, relational views
within a 3D environment, as well as the seven basic tasks.
According to- this framework, if temporal data is
presented in a 3-D World, then the user tasks can be
derived from a combination of the temporal and 3-D
World data types, plus the seven basic tasks. The
associated problems or user costs include those inherent
with 3D displays, notably, data occlusion, disorientation
and navigation [5] [9]. To promote usability and support
these user tasks within a 3D display, the type of
representation or technique adopted in a design solution
should reduce associated user costs, and address issues
pertaining to the related work previously discussed.

General user tasks associated with the analysis of
Digital Living data involve a comparative usage analysis
between data attributes. These tasks can be expanded to
determine user requirements for the visualisation of
temporal data within a 3D environment. According to
Shneiderman .[5], it is possible to specify a taxonomy of
visualisation data types, including temporal and 3-D
World, and the associated user tasks for each of these data
types that need to be supported (see Table 1). Frequent
tasks associated with temporal data include finding all
events before, after, or during a time period or moment,
plus ‘seven basic tasks’
Data Types

1-D Linear
2-D Map
3-D World

Temporal
MultiDimensional
Tree
Network

User Task & Data Type Description
Finding items or attributes within textual

documents, program code, alphabetical
lists
Finding adjacent items and paths between
items with planar or map data
Analysing spatial views, i.e., relational
views within a 3D environment with
biological data, architectural data, object
representations
Finding events before, after, or during a
time period within time lines
Finding pattems, clusters, correlations

among variables i.e., within relational,
statistical databases
Analysing structural properties and levels
within hierarchies or tree structures
Analysing paths between linked items,
data traffic

Seven Basic
Tasks

Task Description

Overview
Zoom
Filter
Details-ondemand
Relate
History

Gain an overview of the entire data set
Zoom in on items of interest

Extract

In order to define an optimal representation for
temporal data within a 3D display, some generalisations
can be drawn from visualisation techniques associated
with other application domains, such as spatially defined
databases [9]. Spatially organised databases or
information spaces typically define the proximity of the
data set according to the application domain. In the case
of users communicating on a network, proximity can be
expressed in terms of the number of links joining a pair of
nodes. Generally, the benefit of spatially defined
information spaces is that the data set is positioned closer
together, allowing the user to consider the data ‘in a
single glance’, or with minimal time spent navigating the
information space [9]. A spatially defined database can
also adhere to the layout principles of relatedness and
sequence of use [4] [IO]. These display principles can be
applied and incorporated in a display representation of
temporal data. Temporal data is cyclical, and the
sequence of each cycle of data, in the case of behavioural
usage data, can be expressed in terms of daily, weekly or
monthly cycles. A spatially defined information space
incorporating temporal data can exploit the cyclical
nature of the data by presenting the information in closer
proximity within a spiral representation. Further, it is
suggested that the conceptual modcl, such as a spiral
representation, should be made explicit, in order to
support the user task requirements previously
characterised in the context of Digital Living data sets.
According to Mayhew [ 3 ] , people are experienced in
organising knowledge according to patterns and rules. If a
small number of rules are built are built into an interface,
it will convey a simple, yet powerful conceptual model of
the system. In addition, the use of real world metaphors
can inform users about possible actions, or how to
accomplish tasks.

Filter out items not currently of interest

Select an item or group and get details
won reauest
View relationships among items
Keep a history of actions to support undo,
replay
Allow extraction of subsets of data and of
the query parameters

4

(Shneiderman, [5])

The Helix - A Visualisation Metaphor

The incorporation of a helix metaphor as a
visualisation technique extends the conceptual model of a
spiral representation along a linear perspective. Figure 4

The seven tasks are at a high level of abstraction and
can be mostly applied to the other data types in the
taxonomy, including ‘3-D World’. Users’ tasks involve

24

consist of a maximum of 84 cylinders2, which is derived
from each of the 7 daily segments comprising 12 twohourly cylinders. Accordingly, the total number of
potential data points or cylinders for a helix containing
five weeks is 420. The location of each of the cylinders
on the helix is calculated according to their x, y, and z
coordinates within
3D space, using
standard
trigonometric functions. Figure 5 shows examples of
more
densely
populated
helix
representations,
incorporating call usage behaviour for family type 'Alone
over 55' across male and female g o u p s (top and bottom
representations respectively). It can be seen from a
comparison between these representations that call usage
is higher for females than males for this family type.
Subsequent manipulations of these representations may
reveal further differences in usage behaviour for specific
date and time periods.

shows a rotated view of the helix representation, showing
the total emails received by 20 households using an
ADSL internet connection. The helix consists of a
number of spirals each rotating through 360". In the
present example, each spiral represents one week, and is
further divided into seven equal parts, equating to seven
days. A darker shaded segment denoting night divides
each day, with the centre of the darker segment denoting
midnight. The two coloured segments within each spiral
denote weekends (the application of colour is discussed in
the following section). The rotation of each spiral is
indicative of the temporal direction from a point of origin.
In this example, days of the week are incremented along
each spiral being rotated in a clockwise direction, or
moving forward in time from the point of origin. It is also
possible to decrement days of the week along each spiral
being rotated in an anti-clockwise direction, or moving
backward in time from the point of origin. The helix
metaphor exploits the cyclicall nature of the data by
presenting temporal data along the directional rotation of
each spiral. The adoption of simple patterns in the
representation, such as shaded m d coloured segments to
denote daylnight and weekend cycles, supports both the
comparative analysis of behavioural data across daily and
weekly usage, and the design principles proposed by
Mayhew [ 3 ] . These characteristics of the representation
are assessed in a formative evaluation described in
Section 5.

Figure 4: Helix representatioi?:Total emails received
over a month by 20 UK households with broadband
(ADSL) internet access (rotated view)

Figure 5: Helix representations: Male (top) and
female (bottom) call usage for family type 'Alone
over 55'(rotated views)

4.1 Populating the Helix

4.2 Colour Application

Each spiral within the helix has a finite number of
potential data points. From the examples shown, a 'data
point' can be defined as either average call duration,
email transactions, or number 01- bytes received for a twohour period. A data point is depicted in the representation
as spikes, or cylinders. In the present implementation,
each cylinder represents 21 two-hourly segment.
Consequently each 360" revolution of the spiral can

The application of colour in visualisation and
interfaces involves a wide range of theoretical issues and
application areas [8]. The implications most relevant to
the application of colour in the helix representation are
now briefly discussed. The primary role of colour and
A maximum of 84 cylinders can be plotted on each spiral of the helix.
HOWKVKr, if no calls were made for any two-hourly period, then the
cylinder is not plotted

25

reveal underlying goals, strategies, decisions, and other
cognitive components during task performance.
The content of these tasks was designed to reflect the
user tasks associated with the temporal and 3-D World
data types, plus the seven basic tasks as identified by
Shneiderman [ 5 ] . The trial tasks included determining
average email transactions or number of bytes received
for a given datehime marker, or a comparative usage
analysis between specific hourly, daily or weekly cycles.
For example, ‘For each Monday in the month, what is the
total of all the transactions received between 10 and
11:59pm?’ Participants were informed that speed and
accuracy measures would not be assessed; the purpose of
the trials was to determine the usability and the suitably
of the helix representation with respect to the specified
tasks. However, no information was provided regarding
the significance of the shaded or coloured segmentation
within each spiral of the helix, only that a cylinder
represented the average email transaction, or number of
bytes received for a given datehime marker. Information
relating to the transaction data i.e., date and time markers,
transaction type and length, or number of bytes, was
displayed as text at the bottom of the web browser
window3 whenever the pointing device was positioned
over a data point. A zoom function could also be
activated to zoom-in on selected data points (see Figure
7). Four predefined viewpoints Of the helix were
incorporated to allow front, rear, left- and right-side

shading within the helix representation is to distinguish
weekdays, weekends, and the day-night cycle. Similarly,
the two coloured segments within each spiral are used to
denote weekends. The minimal use of colour on the helix
to denote weekdays is based upon the lack of any real
world colour convention associated with days of the
week. Another distinction that needs to be made explicit
within the display is the night-day cycle, represented by
white-grey-black monochromatic segments within each
daily cycle, as illustrated in Figure 6 .

Figure 6 : Helix representation: Total emails received
by 20 households with a broadband (ADSL) internet
connection (front view)
A degree of caution should be exercised when
incorporating colour in information spaces. For example,
the colour coding of graphical objects typically requires
between six to twelve colour codes, whereas a scatter plot
application requires many more colour dimensions [8].
Another important issue is that a percentage of users may
suffer from colour deficient vision.

5

Evaluation of the Helix Representation

A brief, informal series of task-based user trials were
performed, primarily to assess the usability, and the
suitably of the helix representation with respect to the
user tasks previously identified. Each trial consisted of
tcn tasks, incorporating helix representations showing
either monthly average transactions received, or average
number of bytes received for ADSL connections. The
presentation of these two representations was
counterbalanced across the trials.

Figure 7 : Helix representation: Zoom function with
text displayed at bottom of web browser
Following the series of tasks, a brief scale-based
questionnaire was administered to measure subjective
judgements about the helix representation. Rated items
included ease of use, efficiency, support, control,
learning, error recovery, and affective experience. Two
concluding open questions were included, relating to
previous experience encountered with 3D worlds, if any,
and additional comments. Generally, the responses

A group of six reviewers (three males, three females)
aged between 23 to 48 participated in the evaluation. All
reviewers were BT rcsearchers with limited, or no
experience using 3D worlds. Each trial commenced with
a practice session, allowing reviewers to gain experience
using the controls by navigating a simple 3D world thus
minimising learning effects during the trials. During the
trial proper, reviewers were asked to think out loud as
they performed a brief series of ten tasks in order to

’

Text is presented at the bottom of the web browser as VRML does not
currently support ‘pop-up’ messages within a 3 D world - VRML
Billboard node supports text output, but is not ideal with larger data sets
due to text occlusion problems

26

received were favourable, with participants indicating for
example, that the helix repreisentation became easier to
use as the trials progressed. Indeed, by performing
comparative tasks between a number of data points, four
out of the six participants were able to discern weekend
and diurnal cycles via thLe coloured and shaded
segmentation on the helix. Further, by keeping the helix
slightly rotated, or ‘a little off:set’, participants were able,
for example, to align all of the Mondays or Saturdays in
the month along a linear perspective (i.e., see Figure 4).
This feature allows relationships to be viewed among the
data, as in Schneiderman’s [ 5 ] task taxonomy, with
minimal manipulation of \:he helix and occlusion
problems.

the amount of ‘work’ required by visual attention in
alternating between textual material and the graphic [7]
[9]. Integrating text with data, for example as a ‘pop-up’
message whenever the pointing device is positioned over
a data point, could reduce visual search and support the
recognition of data specific information. In addition,
further design iterations of the helix representation could
implement an interactive, rather than static visualisation,
incorporating such features as:

.

Tasks relating to Schneiderman’s temporal data type
were accommodated by requiring participants to find
relevant information during, or after a specific time
period, for example, ‘How many transactions were
received after 28Ih May’?’. In this instance, participants
either adopted a search strategy by checking the data via
the front view of the helix, or ,317 occasion, changed to the
rear view of the helix via the. controls. Participants also
exploited the zoom function to zoom-in on distant data
points. However, certain participants avoided rotating the
helix during task perforrnance as they became
‘disorientated’. As a result, the representation was
assessed with an overall lower questionnaire ‘control’
rating, with certain comments attributing this outcome to
a slower computer speed rather than the type of
representation, or the controls incorporated.

6

7

References

I ] Anderson, B., McWilliam, A., Lacohee, H., Clucas, E., and
Gershuny, J. Family Life in The Digital Home: Domestic
Telecommunication at the end of the 20th Century. BT
Techriology Jortrtial (January 1999) Vol. 17 No 1. p 85-97.

Available at UUL: litt~://www.bt.~oni/htti/vol17no1/8S.odf
21 MacLeod, A. Call Data Visualisation: An investigation and
creation of tools to allow easy access to call data
visualisations ( 1 997). BT Digital Living Research report

(unpublished).

Conclusions and Future Work

[3] Mayhew, D. J. Principles arid guidelines iri software user
interface design (1992). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice

Generally, the tasks associated with the temporal and
3-D World data types, and the seven basic tasks identified
by Schneiderman [ 5 ] were well supported by the helix
representation and the VRML plug-in controls. Although
the significance of the colour and shading used in the
helix was not immediately apparent, each user was able to
discern the pattern of weekend and diurnal cycles as the
trials progressed.

Hall.

[41 Seidler, K. S., and Wickens, C. D. Distance arid
orgariiiation in riiirltifurictiori displays ( 1992). Hurnari
Factors, 34, 555-569.

[5] Shneiderman, B. Designing

the User Interjace-Strategies
for EfSective Hiiriiciri-Corn~~uter-1titera~tioti,
(Third Edition)

(1998). Addison-Wesley Longman Inc.

The size of the data sample presented was small,
affording a visible distinction between each data point on
the helix with minimal occlusion problems. The trials
should be repeated with a larger data set to ascertain
whether information could be readily derived from a helix
representation that is densely populated, and whether an
increase in data size presents usability issues such as data
occlusion, and disorientation.

[6] Spence, U. Itfortnation Visitalizatiori (2000). Longman

Higher Education.
(71 Tufte, E., U. The Visual Display of Quantitative
hiforniation (1983). Graphics Press.
[ 81 Ware, C. Infonnatioti Visualisation

- Perception for
Desigri (2000).Academic Press. Morgan Kaufmann.

The inclusion of data specific textual information at
the bottom of the web browser gave a higher than average
‘effort’ questionnaire rating. This outcome may relate to

[9] Wickens, C. D., Gordon, S. E., and Liu, Y. An Introduction
to Hitinuti Factors Engineering (1 997). Addison-Wesley.

27
-

A tool to compress or expand the spirals within the
helix to position data items of interest within a closer
proximity in 3D space.
The facility to filter data items of a particular group
or size. For example, only display temporal data for a
specific time period, or transaction length.
Data items to change colour when selected and
deselected by the user to enable a visible distinction
of the item of interest from the data set (as proposed
by evaluation participant).

[IO] Wickens, C.D., and Seidler, K. S. Information access in a
dual task context ( I 997). Journal of Experimental

Psychologv: Applied, 3, 1-20.

28

