DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01976.x
Eurographics Symposium on Rendering 2011
Ravi Ramamoorthi and Erik Reinhard
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 4

An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model
Eugene d’Eon

Guillaume Francois

Martin Hill

Joe Letteri

Jean-Marie Aubry

Weta Digital

Abstract
We present a reflectance model for dielectric cylinders with rough surfaces such as human hair fibers. Our model
is energy conserving and can evaluate arbitrarily many orders of internal reflection. Accounting for compression
and contraction of specular cones produces a new longitudinal scattering function which is non-Gaussian and
includes an off-specular peak. Accounting for roughness in the azimuthal direction leads to an integral across the
hair fiber which is efficiently evaluated using a Gaussian quadrature. Solving cubic equations is avoided, caustics
are included in the model in a consistent fashion, and more accurate colors are predicted by considering many
internal pathways.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism—Shading

1. Introduction
Accurately accounting for the reflectance from hair and fur
is of considerable importance for the realistic image synthesis of believable characters in film and video games. The
first step towards achieving this goal is possessing an accurate model for the reflectance from an individual hair strand.
The seminal work on this subject, due to Marschner et
al. [MJC∗ 03], presents an analytic factored model based on
an internal refracted pathway analysis. This model is widely
successful but is based on several simplifying assumptions
that limit its accuracy for low-absorbing hair (such as light
blond and white hair), for grazing angles of illumination, and
for high surface roughness. Nearly a decade ago approximations were chosen to yield the most efficient model possible that was capable of matching measured data. Today, we
find it practical to revisit the application of Marschner et al.’s
model to rough surfaces, deriving more complex scattering
functions that have several desired properties.
2. Related work
In this paper we focus exclusively on physically-based analytic fiber reflectance models. Kajiya and Kay [KK89] presented the first such model. It has been improved upon significantly by Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] by considering variation of reflectance in the azimuthal directions and accounting for internal absorption and caustics. The methods of
Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] have been extended in several
c 2011 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ,
UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

papers. Zinke and Weber [ZW07] introduced the formalism of Bidirectional Curve Scattering Distribution Functions (BCSDFs) and a near-field model, important for close
rendering of hair fibers and global illumination. They also
presented a far-field model which is very similar to the azimuthal component of our new model, but with a different
treatment of azimuthal roughness.
Zinke et al. [ZRL∗ 09] found that adding a non-physical
diffuse term and a parameter to scale the primary reflectance term improved the accuracy of fitting the model
of Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] to measured data. Sadeghi et
al. [SPJT10] presented an artist friendly model which simplifies the use of the Marschner model. These modifications
are useful in practice but do not provide a globally energyconserving model, which is the goal of this paper.
Ogaki et al. [OTS10] present a simulation-driven approach to generating hair reflectance functions based on
photon tracing through translucent user-modeled hair-fiber
micro-geometry. The resulting reflectance data is stored
in tables such as those proposed by Nguyen and Donnelly [ND05] for real-time hair rendering. This method creates energy-conserving models but lacks the control of an
analytic parametrized model and requires the user to measure and model the micro-geometry of the desired hair type.
Our model can be efficiently integrated within previous
methods for computing multiple scattering within hair volumes [LV00, MM06, ZYWK08, SSD∗ 10]. For an extensive

1182

E. d’Eon, G. Francois, M. Hill, J. Letteri, & J.-M. Aubry / An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model

all such component scattering functions S p
∞

S(θi , θr , φ) =

∑ S p (θi , θr , φ)

(1)

p=0

each of which is factored into a longitudinal scattering function M p (Figure 1a) and an azimuthal scattering function N p
(Figure 1b)
S p (θi , θr , φ) = M p (θi , θr )N p (θi , θr , φ).

(2)

Figure 1: Refracted pathways through a hair fiber.
Single Reflectance (R), double transmittance (TT), and
transmission-reflection-transmission (TRT). Our model incorporates a new TRRT term (shown in green).

For a circular fiber with a smooth surface, the first four scattering functions S p can be solved for exactly. Effects from
elliptical hair fibers, surface roughness, and tilted cuticle
scales are introduced approximately by modifying the idealized model in an appropriate fashion.

review of hair shading, animation and modeling techniques
we refer the reader to the survey by Ward et al. [WBK∗ 07].

4. Longitudinal Scattering

3. Factored Hair Reflectance Models
A rich set of phenomena is predicted by the analytic model
of Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] by decomposing the reflectance into separate modes of propagation. They present
solutions for the first three modes—the direct reflectance
(R), the double transmittance (TT) and the set of pathways
with exactly one internal reflection (TRT) (Figure 1). We review the factored pathway analysis of Marschner et al. for
smooth hair fibers, which forms the basis of our new model,
and subsequently investigate the method of treating surface
roughness.

In this section we consider the thought experiment of observing a non-absorbing hair fiber in a uniform, white environment. The 1/η2 solid angle compressions and contractions cancel and all paths lead to white, making the hair indistinguishable from the white background. The analysis of
this problem (or, specifically, an equivalent reciprocal problem) is used to show that previous extensions of Marschner
et al. [MJC∗ 03] to rough hairs are not energy-conserving for
all roughnesses and angles of illumination/viewing. We use
the same analysis to demonstrate the energy conservation of
our new proposed scattering function.

4.1. The Gaussian M p Longitudinal Scattering Function

We adopt the notation of Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] for
parametric hair reflectance models described as a function
of incoming and reflected directions, denoted ωi and ωr , respectively. The local coordinate system of the hair, {u, v, w},
has u tangent to the hair in the direction of growth and the
plane spanned by {v, w} is called the normal plane. Symmetry permits a parametrization in terms of longitudinal inclinations to the normal plane, θi and θr , together with the
relative azimuth, φ = φr − φi . Notation is simplified by referring to the longitudinal difference angle θd = (θr − θi )/2
and half angle θh = (θr + θi )/2. The index of refraction η of
the hair is typically fixed at 1.55. Absorption inside hair is
primarily caused by two pigments: eumelanin and pheomelanin with concentrations ρe and ρ p respectively. Given the
absorption cross-sections for eumelanin σa,e and pheomelanin σa,p for each wavelength of light (see Section 6.1), the
spectral absorption coefficient is µa = ρe σa,e + ρ p σa,p .

Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] propose an efficient method for
simulating reflectance from a hair fiber with a rough surface. In the idealized case of a smooth circular hair, light
arriving along a single incoming inclination θi produces reflected light restricted to the specular cone θr = −θi (Figure 2 left). This yields a longitudinal scattering function
M p = δ(θr + θi ) for all p and is energy conserving. To
simulate deviation of reflected directions out of the perfect
specular cone due to roughness on the surface of the hair,
Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] propose using a Gaussian function of the half-angle,

A factored reflectance model S(θi , θr , φ) exploits the Bravais properties of an idealized smooth circular hair fiber. The
total reflectance is decomposed into a sum of contributions
indexed by the number of path segments p inside the hair before exiting, p ∈ {R = 0, T T = 1, T RT = 2, T RRT = 3, ...}
(see Figure 1). The total reflectance function S is the sum of

is a normalized Gaussian of longitudinal inclination θ, β is
a roughness term (specifically, the standard deviation of deflection out of the specular cone in the longitudinal direction), and α p is a simple function of the tilt of the cuticle
scales (Figure 1). The angular redistribution of radiance in
Equation (3) is non-conservant for several reasons:

M p = g(β p ; θh − α p ),

(3)

where
2

g(β; θ) =

e−θ /(2β
√
2πβ

2

)

(4)

c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

E. d’Eon, G. Francois, M. Hill, J. Letteri, & J.-M. Aubry / An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model

Figure 2: Rays reflecting off a smooth cylinder are restricted
to a single specular cone (left). The longitudinal scattering
functions M p simulate scattering into non-specular cones
due to a rough surface. The compression and contraction of
these cones involves a net change in radiance. For deflection
into angles toward the normal plane (right) the same number
of photons enter a wider cone and the radiance decreases.

• The Gaussian in Equation (4) is normalized with respect to θ ∈ {−∞, ∞} but it is evaluated with θh ∈
{−π/2, π/2}. Also, the use of θh instead of θ doubles the
reflected energy on average (Figure 3).
• Deflection of light from one specular cone −θi into another θr involves a compression or contraction of the
cones when θi = −θr (see Figure 2). This is only approximately accounted for by a 1/ cos2 θd term in Marschner
et al. [MJC∗ 03].
• Deflection near grazing illumination angles moves considerable energy into angles outside of the range θ ∈
{−π/2, π/2} (angles that will never be received, thereby
losing energy).
A characterization of this non-conservant scattering can
be seen by considering the total reflectance of an absorption
free (µa = 0) hair fiber under unit monodirectional illumination. To simplify the analysis, we observe the behaviour of
MR only by having R return all the energy (setting the index
of refraction to ∞). The total reflected energy is then
Z π

H∞ (θi ) =

−π

Z π/2
−π/2

NR (φ)

MR (βR , θh )
cos2 θr dθr dφ
cos2 θd
(5)

where
NR (φ) = (1/4)| cos(φ/2)|

(6)

is the azimuthal scattering function for R and MR =
g(βR ; θh ) [MJC∗ 03]. Plots of the total refelctance for various levels of surface roughness are shown in Figure 3. The
Gaussian M p function creates extra energy for grazing angles. For small roughnesses, the total energy is near 2 for
most values of θi (due to using θh with a distribution function normalized over θ). This energy doubling was removed
by switching to MR = g(βR ; 2 θh ) [ZW07, ZYWK08]. However, the Gaussian still yields extra energy at grazing angles
and energy loss for high roughnesses. The same behaviour
arises in other terms, such as TT and TRT. Indeed, Equation (5) is equivalent to considering the total reflectance of
an index η = 1.55 hair, provided µa = 0 and α p and β p are
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1183

Figure 3: Total reflectance from cylinders with η = ∞ and
various roughnesses β due to unit incoming radiance at a
single angle θi . Gaussian longitudinal scattering functions
are not energy-conserving. Our new model produces a total
reflectance of 1 for all θi and β.

constant for all p (the longitudinal functions M p are then all
equal and factor out, leaving the unit-integral azimuthal distribution function ∑∞
p=0 N p (φ) to replace NR (φ)).
4.2. An Energy-Conserving Longitudinal Scattering
Function M p
We derive a novel longitudinal scattering function that conservatively redistributes reflected radiance amongst directions on the sphere. This is achieved by employing sphericalGaussian convolution. For use with a factored reflectance
model, we derive a purely-longitudinal function by averaging the behaviour in the azimuthal direction. We consider
the spherical Gaussian convolution of a Dirac circle on the
surface of a sphere. The longitudinal profile of the resulting distribution is our new scattering function. We refer the
reader to Appendix A for a complete derivation. The resulting function is
csch(1/v) sin(−θvi ) sin θr
cos(−θi ) cos θr
I0
e
2v
v
(7)
where v = β2 is the roughness variance and Io (x) is the
modified Bessel function of the first kind. The shape of the
new longitudinal scattering function is shown in Figure 4 for
various incident angles. It is asymmetric about the specular
cone angle, exhibiting an off-specular peak similar to planar
BRDFs, and for all roughnesses is energy conserving:
M p (v, θi , θr ) =

Z π

H∞ =

−π

Z π/2
−π/2

NR (φ)M p (v, θi , θr ) cos θi dθi dφ = 1.

Note that all incidence and exitance factors are contained in
the one reciprocal function (Equation 7). This is convenient
in a rasterization framework, the contribution of a given fiber
to a given pixel being proportional to its coverage C of the
pixel and to the final scattering function S (Equation 1),
C S(θi , θr , φ). The unprojected length of the hair within a
pixel, the hair width, the cos θi and cos12 θ factors required of
d
previous models are absent. The transformation to a BCSDF
is straightforward.

1184

E. d’Eon, G. Francois, M. Hill, J. Letteri, & J.-M. Aubry / An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model

Figure 4: Shape of our energy-conserving longitudinal scattering function (Equation 7) as a function of
exitant direction θr for fixed incident directions θi ∈
{−1, −1.1, −1.2, −1.3, −1.4} (radians). The specular cone
directions are indicated in orange to illustrate the asymmetry and off-specular peak for large θ. Roughness is fixed at
v = 0.02 (β = 8.1◦ ).

5. Azimuthal Scattering
Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] analyze the azimuthal scattering
behaviour inside a fiber independently from the longitudinal
behaviour by exploiting Bravais properties of smooth
cylin√
η2 −sin2 θ

d
ders. Using a modified index of refraction η =
,
cos θd
the general analysis can be restricted to an equivalent analysis in the normal plane only. The net change in azimuthal
direction Φ is related to the offset h ∈ {−1, 1} from the hair
fiber (Figure 1b) and p, the mode of reflection being considered, by

Φ(p, h) = 2 p γt − 2 γi + pπ,
where γi = arcsin(h) and

γt = arcsin( ηh

(8)

).

One method of applying this analysis is the method
of solving for h. Given Equation (8), Marschner et
al. [MJC∗ 03] solve for all values h that result in light exiting
the hair towards the camera (finding h such that Φ(p, h) = φ).
Absorption, Fresnel and derivatives of Equation (8) produce
the outgoing radiance along this discrete set of paths. For
the R reflection mode, the final N function is simply a cosine
(Equation 6). The complexity increases rapidly for higherorder terms. For TT, the single exact h solution is
hTT =

sign(φ) cos (φ/2)
1 + a2 − 2a sign(φ) sin (φ/2)

where a = 1/η . For the TRT paths, either one or three values
of h exist for a given φ, specifically the solutions of
2 3

sin(φ/2) = −h + 2a h + 2ah 1 − h2

1 − a2 h2

(9)

which exist in closed form, but are quite involved and inconvenient to implement. Closed-form solutions exist for TRRT
but not for TRRRT. With significant absorption the higherorder terms p > 2 are negligible but for hairs with very low
absorption (such as white hair) almost 15% of the reflected

Figure 5: Total reflectance from a white hair fiber as a function of incoming direction θi . Previous models only compute
the first three modes of reflectance, R, TT, and TRT, missing almost 15% of the energy at grazing illumination angles.
Our new model easily adds additional terms like TRRT.

energy is due to TRRT and higher-order terms when the angle of incidence is high (Figure 5).
Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] use a cubic approximation of
Equation (8) when solving for h, reducing the complexity
of higher-order terms and offering an approximate method
of solution for any desired reflection mode p. However, the
accuracy of this approximation has not been validated for
large p or for low relative indices of refraction (which arises
for hair under water).
In addition to the complexity of requiring root solvers, the
approach of solving for h is further limited by singularities
caused by caustics, requiring ad-hoc user-defined parameters to control them. Additionally, the consideration of discrete azimuthal paths independent of roughness cannot account for the spreading of exitant directions and color shifts
that occur as roughness increases. We present an alternative
azimuthal scattering function that extends easily to higher
order scattering terms, includes caustics in a consistent stable fashion, and exhibits roughness-dependent color shifts.
5.1. Roughened Azimuthal Scattering Functions N p
We simulate the effects of surface roughness by assuming
a Gaussian distribution of deflections in the normal-plane.
Each offset h on the fiber produces a continuous distribution of exitant azimuths D p (φ−Φ(p, h)). These distributions
are Gaussian in φ and centered about the discrete azimuths
Φ(p, h) predicted by a smooth hair (Figure 7). The total exitance is found by integrating over the entire fiber
N p (φ) =

1
2

Z 1
−1

A(p, h)D p (φ − Φ(p, h)) dh

(10)

where A(p, h) is the attenuation along each path due to absorption and Fresnel [MJC∗ 03]. We employ a specialized
normalized Gaussian function D p with an equivalence of all
multiples of 2π. Detection at all multiples of 2π is important in order to account for all exitant light, which may undergo several complete azimuthal revolutions inside the hair
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

E. d’Eon, G. Francois, M. Hill, J. Letteri, & J.-M. Aubry / An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model

Figure 6: Rough azimuthal scattering NTT (φ) with θd = 0.8,
βTT = 25◦ , and µa = 0. Previous methods [ZW07] (dashed)
transmit approximately half of the expected light in the forward directions φ = π = −π. This is corrected by using our
new Gaussian detector (Equation 11).

1185

Figure 8: Azimuthal transmittance color NTT for a smooth
hair (top) vs. a rough hair (bottom). Including roughness in
the azimuthal direction spreads energy wider. The continuum
of absorption lengths contributing to each exitant direction
φ causes a roughness-dependent color shift.

where F(η, θ) is Fresnel reflectance and is evaluated using
the half-angle for physical consistency. We note that the Bravais Fresnel terms proposed by Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03]
are unnecessary—all other terms can use
A(p, h) = (1 − f )2 f p−1 T (µa , h) p

(13)

which share a common classical Fresnel evaluation
f = F(η, arccos(cos(θd ) cos(arcsin(h))).

Figure 7: Rough azimuthal scattering (TT): for each offset
h from the hair fiber the exact azimuth Φ(p, h) predicted by
a smooth hair is used to create a Gaussian distribution of
exitant azimuths D p (φ − Φ(p, h)).

for p > 1. We found that the treatment of Zinke and Weber [ZW07] did not completely resolve this effect (for example, the proximity of the values such as π − ε and −π + ε
was not handled, see Figure 6). We call this new distribution
function a Gaussian detector
∞

D p (φ) =

∑

g(β p ; φ − 2πk).

(11)

k=−∞

The roughness in the normal plane can use the same standard deviations β p used with the longitudinal functions or
use separate parameters for producing anisotropic roughness. As the roughness β approaches 0 the Gaussian detector approaches a Dirac delta function and the scattering
functions of Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] are recovered starting with Equation (10). In addition to spreading light wider,
roughness-dependent color shifts are exhibited when using
our new azimuthal scattering function (Figure 8).
6. Final Model and Implementation
For completeness, we provide the remainder of the model
(which differs from Marschner et al. [MJC∗ 03] in some respects). The attenuation term for R is a special case
1
A(0, h) = F(η, arccos(ωi · ωr )).
2
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(12)

(14)

The absorption term T (µa , h) = exp(−2µa (1 + cos(2γt )))
uses the reduced absorption coefficient µa = µa / cos(θt ).
Effects of cuticle scale tilting can be added by evaluating the
longitudinal scattering functions with M p (v p , θi , θr − α p ).
Note that this is only approximate—the change in length
of successive internal bounces due to tilted scales (shown
in Figure 1a) is not accounted for. The Gaussian detector
(Equation 11) has a closed form representation in terms of
the third Eliptic Theta function. In practice it is easiest to implement it with a finite range of k, since higher order terms
are negligible for reasonable roughness levels (β < 80◦ ). We
use the following series expansion to evaluate I0
10

I0 (x) ≈

x2i

∑ 4i (i!)2 .

(15)

i=0

We evaluate Equation (10) using a Gaussian quadrature.
We found a quadrature of order 35 is sufficient for all but
very smooth hairs (β < 2◦ ). The N p functions can be precomputed in 2D tables for each desired combination of µa
and β p [ND05]. Furthermore, symmetry can be used to reduce cost by integrating over h ∈ {0, 1} and extending the
Gaussian detector to detect at both φ and −φ. Non-Gaussian
roughness can be simulated by approximating a general deflection distribution function as a Gaussian sum.
6.1. RGB Melanin Absorption Cross-Sections
Starting with the analytic approximations for melanin absorption cross-sections given by Donner and Jensen [DJ06],
we computed absortion colors using 40 spectral bands,
mapping to sRGB based on a D65 illuminant. We found
that RGB cross-sections could closely, but not perfectly,
match the colors predicted by the spectral model. The values we found are σa,e = {0.419, 0.697, 1.37} and σa,p =

1186

E. d’Eon, G. Francois, M. Hill, J. Letteri, & J.-M. Aubry / An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model

Eumelanin

Pheomelanin

Figure 9: Transmitted color through eumelanin and
pheomelanin mixtures as a function of thickness (increasing to the right). Strips at the top and bottom show pure eumelanin and pheomelanin, respectively, with the top half of
each strip showing the spectral reference, and the bottom
half showing the RGB approximations.

Figure 11: Light hair rendered using (left) Gaussian longitudinal scattering and (right) our method.

from spectrally-matched melanin concentrations, shown in
Figure 10. Figure 12 shows a further example of natural, physically-based color, also demonstrating energyconservant glints that do not require any smoothing controls. Glints can easily be adjusted by modifying the physical
properties of the hair fibers, such as rotation and eccentricty
similar to Marschner [MJC∗ 03].
Figure 10: A range of results using our model with varying
mixtures of eumelanin and pheomelanin. The top row shows
pure eumelanin, the bottom row shows pure pheomelanin,
and total concentration of both increases to the right.

{0.187, 0.4, 1.05} (with units proportional to R2 such that
concentrations near 1/R3 give black hair; R being the radius of the hair). The resulting colors are shown in Figure 9. The horizontal bars at the top and bottom of the figure
compare spectral absorption calculations to the approximate
RGB equivalents. The match is quite close, making the horizontal edge between the two difficult to notice.
7. Results
In this section we present images obtained using a Pixar
Photorealistic Renderman implementation of our model.
We compute multiple scattering using the Dual Scattering method [ZYWK08] into which our model integrates
seamlessly. Figure 11 compares a Dual Scattering simulation of light hair using both Gaussian longitudinal functions (MR = g(βR ; 2 θh ) to avoid energy doubling) and our
spherical Gaussian convolution longitudinal function. Light
spreads farther into darker regions with our new scattering function because Dual Scattering approximates multiplescattering events as a single computation with a large effective roughness. Such high roughnesses are where the Gaussian longitudinal function loses signifant energy (for most
angles, as seen in Figure 3).
We demonstrate a full range of hair colors derived

8. Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented a new factored reflectance model for human hair fibers. Our parametric model is energy-conserving
for all roughness and absorption levels and for all angles of
illumination. The implementation of our model is straightforward and extends easily to all orders of internal reflection
without the requirement for root solvers. We have demonstrated realistic results with our model and implemented it in
both real-time and production pipelines. An area for future
work is phenomenological comparisons with this new model
and its easy extension to non-uniform chromophore distributions, such as including a non-absorbing medulla. Preliminary experiments with this idea led to subtle shifts in color,
requiring measurements to validate its practicality. The energy analysis of TRRT and higher order terms suggests that
these are not the cause for diffusive colored reflectance observed in hair, as previously suggested. We believe this phenomena must arise due to inner-core scattering, which also
desaturates the primary terms. A possible extension to feathers seems promising (Figure 13).

9. Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to Geoffrey Irving for the trig expansion yielding Equation (9) and for useful discussions related to Section 5. We would also like to thank Jedrzej Wojtowicz, Paolo Selva, Paul Roberts, Michael Nielsen, Luca
Fascione, Sebastian Sylwan and the anonymous reviewers.
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

E. d’Eon, G. Francois, M. Hill, J. Letteri, & J.-M. Aubry / An Energy-Conserving Hair Reflectance Model

1187

Figure 12: Various natural hair colors using our new reflectance model with Dual Scattering. Glints are exhibited in an energyconserving fashion with no extra control parameters.

K., N ISHITA T.: A simplified plane-parallel scattering model and
its application to hair rendering. In 2010 18th Pacific Conference
on Computer Graphics and Applications (2010), IEEE, pp. 85–
92.
[WBK∗ 07] WARD K., B ERTAILS F., K IM T., M ARSCHNER S.,
C ANI M., L IN M.: A survey on hair modeling: Styling, simulation, and rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (2007), 213–234.
[ZRL∗ 09]

Z INKE A., RUMP M., L AY T., W EBER A., A N A., K LEIN R.: A practical approach for photometric acquisition of hair color. ACM Trans. Graph. 28 (December
2009), 165:1–165:9.
DRIYENKO

Figure 13: Future work will consider applying our findings
to the rendering of realistic feathers.

References
[DJ06] D ONNER C., J ENSEN H. W.: A spectral BSSRDF for
shading human skin. In Rendering Techniques (2006), pp. 409–
417.
[KK89] K AJIYA J., K AY T.: Rendering fur with three dimensional textures. In Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 89) (1989), vol. 23, ACM, pp. 271–280.

[ZW07] Z INKE A., W EBER A.: Light scattering from filaments.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
(2007), 342–356.
[ZYWK08] Z INKE A., Y UKSEL C., W EBER A., K EYSER J.:
Dual scattering approximation for fast multiple scattering in hair.
ACM Trans. Graph. 27 (August 2008), 32:1–32:10.

Appendix A: Derivation of the M p function
The normalized spherical Gaussian of variance v centered in
csch(1/v) P·x
P ∈ S2 is the function: x → g(x, P) =
e v . Averag2v
ing along the circle at latitude θr ∈ (− π2 , π2 ) yields

[LV00] L OKOVIC T., V EACH E.: Deep shadow maps. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 2000 (2000), ACM Press/ACM SIGGRAPH, pp. 385–392.

G(x) :=

1
2π

Z 2π

g(x, P)dφr .
0

[MJC∗ 03] M ARSCHNER S. R., J ENSEN H. W., C AMMARANO
M., W ORLEY S., H ANRAHAN P.: Light scattering from human
hair fibers. ACM Trans. Graph. 22 (July 2003), 780–791.

where P = P(θr , φr ) in spherical coordinates. If x = x(θi , φi )

[MM06] M OON J. T., M ARSCHNER S. R.: Simulating multiple
scattering in hair using a photon mapping approach. ACM Trans.
Graph. 25 (July 2006), 1067–1074.

hence

[ND05] N GUYEN H., D ONNELLY W.: Hair animation and rendering in the Nalu demo. In GPU Gems 2 (2005), AddisonWesley, pp. 361–380.
[OTS10] O GAKI S., T OKUYOSHI Y., S CHOELLHAMMER S.: An
empirical fur shader. In ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2010 Sketches
(2010), ACM, p. 16.
[SPJT10]

S ADEGHI I., P RITCHETT H., J ENSEN H. W., TAM R.: An artist friendly hair shading system. ACM Trans.
Graph. 29 (July 2010), 56:1–56:10.
STORF

[SSD∗ 10]

S HINYA M., S HIRAISHI M., D OBASHI Y., I WASAKI

c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

x · P = cos(θi ) cos(θr ) cos(φi − φr ) + sin(θi ) sin(θr )

G(v) =

csch(1/v) e
2v

sin(θi ) sin(θr )
v

2π
sin(θi ) sin(θr )

Z 2π

e

cos(θi ) cos(θr ) cos(φr −φi )
v

dφr

0

2π cos(θi ) cos(θr ) cos(φr )
v
csch(1/v) e
v
e
dφr
2v
2π
0
csch(1/v) sin(θi )vsin(θr )
cos(θi ) cos(θr )
=
I0
e
2v
v

Z

=

Incidence at angle θi creates a specular cone at −θi (thus,
the negations in Equation 7).

