DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01949.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

WaveMap: Interactively Discovering Features From Protein
Flexibility Matrices Using Wavelet-based Visual Analytics
Scott Barlowe1 , Yujie Liu1 , Jing Yang1 , Dennis R. Livesay2 , Donald J. Jacobs3 , James Mottonen3 , and Deeptak Verma2
1 Dept.

of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
3 Dept. of Physics and Optical Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA

2 Dept.

Abstract
The knowledge gained from biology datasets can streamline and speed-up pharmaceutical development. However, computational models generate so much information regarding protein behavior that large-scale analysis by
traditional methods is almost impossible. The volume of data produced makes the transition from data to knowledge difficult and hinders biomedical advances. In this work, we present a novel visual analytics approach named
WaveMap for exploring data generated by a protein flexibility model. WaveMap integrates wavelet analysis, visualizations, and interactions to facilitate the browsing, feature identification, and comparison of protein attributes
represented by two-dimensional plots. We have implemented a fully working prototype of WaveMap and illustrate
its usefulness through expert evaluation and an example scenario.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.5.5 [Pattern Recognition]: Implementation—
Interactive Systems

1. Introduction
Understanding the physical characteristics of protein structures is of great importance in developing new pharmaceuticals. Knowing how a protein will react under given circumstances will allow scientists to more finely tune drugs
to specific diseases and genetic therapies to individuals. As
many other fields in the biological sciences, researchers in
this area increasingly rely on computational models to describe and predict physical phenomena. For example, protein
prediction models have been used to understand the physical
flexibility of local or regional subunits (residues) which alter
overall protein structure. Since structure is the most important factor influencing protein behavior, insights from these
models are crucial in predicting a protein’s function.
Computational models can be quickly changed based on
new domain knowledge or used to examine the effect of
varying parameters. The large number of possible outputs
often obscures important differences in model settings. It is
these subtle and unexpected variations which can be the most
important in relating model construction to a desired physical behavior. The number of different model outcomes is
only limited by the number of variables encoded as model
parameters. A single model output often reflects the behavc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

ior of several hundred residues per parameter set where each
residue may be responsible for influencing overall structure and function. Clearly defining the relationships among
residues for one model output in the midst of perhaps hundreds of different parameter set combinations is a challenging problem. Methods that aid in clearly defining the relationship between residue flexibility parameters and model
outputs will greatly advance biomedical knowledge.
In this paper, we present a novel approach in applying visual analytics in an effort to aid scientists in the browsing
and understanding of large-scale two-dimensional flexibility data resulting from a protein prediction model. Our work
integrates automatic analysis and coordinated visualizations
to help guide domain analysts to important features hidden
in the data. In the following sections, we first provide background knowledge in protein structure and function. Second,
we describe a currently used protein prediction model and
list the necessary high-level visualization tasks for effective
model usage. Third, we present related work from the image analysis and the visualization communities. Fourth, we
present our visual analytics approach that connects feature
extraction techniques with a highly interactive interface to
address the identified high-level tasks. Finally, we show the

1002

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

Figure 1: (a) A typical flexibility-response plot showing allosteric response for the CheY protein [MJL10]. A color index at i, j
is the response of residue j occurring due to a perturbation at residue i. (b) Analyzing subtle patterns within flexibility measures
for a single plot are difficult and placing them in context makes the problem worse. The plot to the left is highlighted in green.

effectiveness of our approach through expert evaluation and
an example scenario.

2. Protein Structure and Function
Proteins are composed of linear chains of amino acid building blocks connected by chemical bonds [PSW∗ 06]. These
polymers can consist of 20 different possible amino acids
(residues) and vary greatly in length and sequence across
different proteins. The spatial arrangement of these residues
determines the biological function of the protein. Although
understanding the relationship between molecular structure
and function is important, there are few global scale connections that correlate specific structural changes to function
[KJB00].
One of the main obstacles in understanding changes in
proteins is the vast number of possible spatial configurations
that may occur under numerous environmental conditions.
This set of possible configurations is referred to as a protein’s conformation space [NHL07]. Most prediction methods search this space for the structure having the lowest energy (an indicator of structural stability), making energy one
of the primary variables to be examined. Although important in protein changes, the energy function is often difficult to explore. Exploration is complicated by multiple local
minima and an energy function’s dependence on many interrelated terms. Furthermore, differences in the underlying
chemical structures complicate analysis.

3. The Distance Constraint Model and Allostery
Because of the complexities associated with exploring a protein’s conformation space, researchers rely on models to understand and predict changes in protein structure. The Distance Constraint Model [JD05], [LDWJ04] is an example
of a model that has proved helpful in understanding protein
function. The Distance Constraint Model (DCM) is based on
free energy decomposition and mechanical constraints. The
premise of the DCM is to relate free energy and mechanical constraints with a graph topology which can be calculated in linear time. Like any model that retains relevance,
the DCM is constantly evolving and the need to quickly examine changes in parameters is crucial for efficient model
development. The DCM outputs a large set of mechanical
and thermodynamic descriptions of the target protein.
The data resulting from the Distance Constraint Model
[JD05], [LDWJ04] are flexibility indices which quantify the
ability of a residue to change its structure and, as a result, its function. One example use of flexibility indices is
the measurement of allosteric response. Allosteric response
measures how a change (perturbation) in one residue may
induce flexibility changes in other residues [MJL10]. In
many cases, the perturbed residue may not be spatially adjacent to the responding residue. Furthermore, the resulting change may require a coordinated effort among multiple
residues spanning the entire protein. Being able to investigate and compare the different allosteric responses for many
parameter sets will allow scientists to more speedily recognize biochemical mechanisms necessary to achieve a desired
biomedical result.
Flexibility changes for allosteric response can be prec 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

sented as an n x n asymmetric color plot where n is the
number of residues that make up a protein. The residues
that comprise the protein are ordered according to the
three-dimensional residue sequence giving significance to
both local and regional characteristics. A typical flexibilityresponse plot [MJL10] is shown in Figure 1(a) for the
128-residue CheY protein, revealing the protein’s change in
flexibility for a given set of model parameters for the DCM
[JD05], [LDWJ04]. In this plot, a color index at i, j is the
expected flexibility change of residue j occurring with a perturbation at residue i. Values are normalized between -1 and
+1. Values less than zero result in increasingly darker shades
of blue and indicate increased rigidity. Values greater than
zero result in increasingly darker shades of red and indicate
increased flexibility. White areas indicate no change.
Figure 1(b) shows the flexibility-response plots of the
CheY protein for different sets of model parameters. Examining just a few plots is difficult and comparing hundreds of
them proves to be a daunting challenge. In this case, there are
over 6 million data points (128 residues x 128 residues x 75
parameter sets) of often small, subtle changes that need to be
analyzed. Patterns that emerge within and among flexibility
plots give insight into the mechanisms important for biological function. Interesting patterns include the size and location of similar or dissimilar regions, and any outliers where
a certain residue may unexpectedly differ from its neighbors
or from a consensus over the parameter space. The various
types of DCM outputs, when taken together, provide both
local and global descriptions of protein dynamics.
4. Tasks
The work presented in this paper has been motivated by
the data analysis needs of the BioMolecular Physics Group
(BMPG) in the Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics
at UNC-Charlotte. The researchers in this group have been
conducting extensive research in protein prediction models, primarily the design, development, and evaluation of the
DCM [JD05], [LDWJ04]. Although the DCM has proven to
be a powerful computational model, only a very small portion of the DCM can be used at once because of the limited
capability of analyzing the flexibility plots. Usually, analysis
consists of manually examining one plot at a time. The researchers expect that a visual analytics tool that allows them
to effectively conduct the tasks on a much larger scale will
greatly advance their understanding of how the DCM predicts protein flexibility.
To identify the visualization needs, the visualization experts have observed the weekly BMPG meetings on a regular
basis for over two years. During this time span, the visualization experts and the BMPG researchers also conducted
more than 25 face to face meetings to discuss the visualization needs of DCM scientists and to provide feedback for the
visualizations developed. According to the long-term observation and continued collaboration, several high-level visuc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1003

alization tasks of DCM researchers when using flexibility
plots have been identified. The tasks are presented below to
explain the motivation for the design of our visual analytics
tool.
• Analyzing spatial relationships and numeric trends of
flexibility measures within proteins. Protein dynamics
can be altered by either a local group of residues, larger
regional groups, or the concerted effort of multiple areas
of varying sizes. Locating and identifying those regions
of interest which contribute to change is necessary before
the roles of individual subunits can be identified. For example, a region with an isolated change in flexibility is
highlighted in the example scenario (Figure 2). This area
can be studied in greater detail so that it can be compared
to other regions within the same protein. Any differences
within a single protein can explain why certain areas have
a greater propensity for change and result in a given overall structure.
• Studying parameter influence and grouping parameter sets. Parameter refinement within a model is a reflection of evolving expert knowledge for a specific protein
and environmental condition. For a fixed parameter set,
a comparative analysis between different proteins and/or
environmental conditions can help discover new spatial
relationships and numerical trends. Grouping model outputs by parameter sets will allow scientists to understand
what combination of parameter settings result in the greatest or most unexpected change for a single or group of
residues. From this knowledge, domain experts can refine
the model or investigate ways to take advantage of these
differences.
• Pruning parameter sets and residues Clearly defining
relationships among residues and parameters of interest is
best accomplished if redundant or uninteresting data items
are excluded from consideration. This can take the form
of excluding entire parameter sets, entire proteins, or individual residues based on domain knowledge or thresholding. Additionally, scientists need to be able to start with
a well-studied individual residue, group of residues, or
overall structure that is accurately reflected by model outputs and then eliminate parameter sets based on similarity
(or dissimilarity) from the established item.
According to BMPG members, the above tasks are significant and frequently encountered. For example, clamping
is an application where these tasks are needed. Clamping is
the restriction of a single residue’s flexibility. As the clamp
is moved systematically along the protein’s structure, flexibility is recalculated. The scientists must compare the flexibility trends for specific regions before and after each clamp.
Researchers would then like to see how similar the responses
are at different clamp positions, and for different model parameters. Unexpected clamp responses among multiple plots
will be isolated for further analysis.

1004

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

Figure 2: (a) A section of the Jigsaw layout is identified for further analysis based on similar global features (2 decompositions).
A known plot is highlighted in green. (b) Closer examination of features reveals noticeable differences. Circled regions indicate
a point of difference in one parameter set (lower right). (c) The coordinated lens reveals the pattern that the features emphasize.
(d) A larger view of the lens shown for clarity. (e) Plot coordinates for the region of interest are found during reconstruction. (f)
Detailed analysis allows further mapping of flexibility values to residue numbers among multiple plots.

5. Related Work
5.1. Visualization
Currently, scientists lack effective tools to conduct the above
tasks for large flexibility data sets. Existing methods heavily depend on manual inspection of enlarged flexibility plots
using Heatmaps [MXJL09], [MJL10]. Subtle but important relationships and patterns may remain hidden even with

zooming and distortion interactions. The large number of
plots and the subtle differences both within each plot and
among parameter sets are almost impossible to distinguish.
These obstacles greatly hinder knowledge discovery. To the
best of our knowledge, our work is among the first efforts
from the visualization community addressing entire flexibility data sets and automatically guiding users to potential areas of interest. Note that we chose to keep the current color
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

and arrangement scheme for visualizing the original flexibility values since they are ingrained into current workflows
and convey important spatial information.
Heatmaps are widely used in bioinformatics besides
protein flexibility data visualization. Specifically, they are
the most common representation for gene expression data
[GOB∗ 10]. Many of them can guide users to patterns such
as clusters and outliers within the data. For example, HCE
[SS02] and Java Treeview [Sal04] enable users to identify
clusters in microarray experiment data sets using hierarchical clustering algorithms and interactive visual exploration.
Visualization methods developed for matrix data [TLKT09],
[SM07] also allow users to find patterns through interactive
visual exploration. However, the above techniques would
not work for protein flexibility data visualization because of
their heavy reliance on similarity grouping. Not only does
each i,j value have a color-coded flexibility measure but also
carries spatial significance reflecting residue ordering along
the three dimensional protein structure. Any reordering or
rearranging of rows, columns, or individual measures would
disrupt the spatial context in which any flexibility measure
occurs. Moreover, a large number of plots need to be examined simultaneously in our application while most of the
above techniques only consider one matrix or array at a time.
5.2. Image Analysis
Many image analysis techniques for extracting features can
be applied to flexibility plots so that difficult to detect patterns can be identified. For example, Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) [Jol02], [Dun89] can be used to summarize features by finding the linear combinations of variables and then ordering the resulting components by variance [YR01]. It has been used in many image processing applications such as face recognition [PKP10] and edge detection [QPA08] but can be computationally taxing [VRP09],
[EYND10]. Additionally, the results can be difficult to interpret [ZHT06]. Fourier analysis [GW01] is another popular
image analysis technique applied to many areas including
feature extraction and dimension reduction [JH07]. Fourier
frequencies can be linked to pixel value changes where
low frequencies are associated with slowly varying pixel
changes and high frequencies are associated with abrupt
pixel changes [GW01]. A major drawback to this type of
analysis is that frequency and spatial information cannot be
conveyed at the same time.
Our approach uses wavelet lifting [Swe96] for automatic feature extraction. Wavelet analysis is based on small
signals (waves) of limited duration and varying frequency
[GW01]. This type of transform allows the same frequencybased processing of pixel values as Fourier analysis. However, wavelets provide simultaneous frequency and spatial
information with a multi-resolution approach that allows
normally hidden features to be revealed. Wavelet lifting
[Swe96] is an improvement to traditional wavelet analysis.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1005

An iterative process which uses no more memory than required for the original data matrix improves computational
efficiency. Additionally, the results of lifting can be reversed
by simply reversing the discrete steps used in transformation
[JCH01]. This property enables the original data to be directly and quickly accessed from any level of decomposition.
Wavelets have been integrated into visualization tools for
brushing applications [WB96], text analysis [MWBF98],
and many scientific applications [FHH03], [Bon97].
We chose wavelet lifting because of its capability to provide simultaneous frequency and spatial information in a
multi-resolution approach, the ease of reversing the transform, and efficient implementation. Other approaches are
possible and we plan to explore them in the future.
6. WaveMap
We propose WaveMap (Figure 2), a visual analytics approach that integrates wavelet lifting [Swe96] with visualization to address the needs mentioned in section 4. It
consists of an overview to display the entire data set, a feature window to examine selected plots, and a detailed analysis window to perform closer examination. In the overview
(Figure 2(a)), features extracted by wavelet lifting are visually presented to users to help them locate global trends or
local areas where trends are interrupted. Subtle trends that
are hard to discover in the original data become visible in
the feature space. To study parameter influence, a set of plots
in the original data or extracted features can be viewed in
a clustering or sorting layout from which the global trends
across parameter sets, as well as clusters and outliers of plots
can be observed. Users can interactively retrieve groups of
interesting plots so that further examination and comparison can reveal the relationships among residues and parameters (Figure 2(b)). Features can be filtered based on their
type and magnitude and are intuitively mapped to the original data (Figures 2(c) and (d)). The feature window allows
examination of interesting regions for a subset of interesting plots (Figure 2(e)). The detail window facilitates coordinated, residue-level analysis among multiple plots (Figure
2(f)). In every view, specific regions for given parameter sets
can be exported for insight management and exchange.
6.1. Feature Extraction
Wavelet lifting is first applied to extract varying plot features at many resolutions. During each application to a discrete, two dimensional signal (or decomposition), the data
is separated into the high and low frequency components.
The result is a series of four data matrices each of which is
one-quarter the size of the original data matrix. The results
include the high frequency components in both directions
(HH), low frequency components in both directions (LL),
low frequency along rows and high frequency along columns
(LH), and high frequency along the rows and low frequency

1006

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

• HL: Averages along columns and change detection between rows preserve residue behavior along columns
while revealing differences among neighboring residues
along rows.
• HH: Change detection along rows and columns reveal
differences in residue response along both rows and
columns.

Figure 3: Three cooperativity correlation plots
[LJ06], [MXJL09] depicting the correlation of flexibility changes. Original correlation values are shown on the
top row. Blue indicates co-rigid regions and red indicates
co-flexible regions. The data after wavelet transformation (3
decompositions) are on the bottom row and corresponding
regions are bounded in red. Orange highlights positive correlation changes and green highlights negative correlation
changes in all except the last pair. (a) Row patterns are
preserved while indicating changes along columns. Because
this data set is symmetric, the LH and HL subbands are
redundant. Only the LH subband is shown here. (b) Areas
of change along both rows and columns are detected. (c)
Coarse-grain characteristics are preserved for the entire
data set.

along columns (HL). One of the components is chosen to be
fed to the input of the next stage and the process repeats.
Wavelets come in varying families and can be designed to
extract desired features. We use a lifting implementation of
the widely-applied Debauchies 4 wavelet [JCH01] but other
wavelets can also be used. Because the data is halved along
the rows and columns during each application, we linearly
interpolate the original data set so that each row and column is a power of two. The interpolated data is only used
in application of the wavelet algorithm and is never visible to the user. After each decomposition, any given feature
represents a larger neighborhood in the original data. Feature magnitude can be mapped to color so that the degree
of change between adjacent locations can be visually represented. The components, or subbands, and the characteristics emphasized in the data that are important for our work
include
• LL: Averages along rows and columns preserve regional
residue responses.
• LH: Averages along rows and change detection between
adjacent columns preserve residue behavior along rows
while revealing differences among neighboring residues
along columns.

It may seem that the total amount of data has been significantly increased because each original data plot is now
represented by four different subbands. However, each decomposition results in each subband being only one-quarter
of the input data size. Additionally, the subbands and multiple levels of resolution produced are different perspectives of
the original data. This allows experts to choose the appropriate prism through which domain knowledge can be applied.
Figure 3 illustrates how features for each subband emphasize various characteristics present in cooperativity correlation flexibility plots for a TRX protein [MXJL09]. The
data is slightly different from the allosteric response in that
each index is a correlation measure between two flexibility measures. The top row is the original data and the bottom row is the transformed data after wavelet analysis and
filtering. Original plot values (top row) are displayed with
the red-white-blue scheme currently in use by domain scientists. The features for all subbands except for the averaging features (LL), use a different color scheme because
features capture the change occurring between plot regions
and not the original plot values. We chose a feature color
scheme ranging from green (negative changes) to white (no
change or below a threshold) to orange (positive changes).
The red-white-blue scheme was kept for the averaging features because they visually relate original data information
at varying resolutions (Figure 3(c)). In Figure 3(a) coarsegrain behavior along rows is preserved and differences along
each column are detected so that general residue behavior is
preserved along the rows but changes in residue behavior between adjacent column are detected. Figure 3(b) shows the
detection of changes along both rows and columns revealing where residue behavior changes from adjacent residues
in both the row and column direction. Figure 3(c) preserves
course-grain behavior in both directions. Although the features highlighted in the top row are easily detected and represent symmetric data, such features can be much harder to
detect in other datasets without the help of the transformed
data. We will show in Figure 2 how the transformation applied to the asymmetric and much more subtle allosteric response data can ease analysis.
We briefly introduce a formal user study that confirmed
the effectiveness and efficiency of the feature displays in
guiding users to identify and compare subtle features in flexibility plots. Eight student subjects (no domain knowledge
was required in the tasks) conducted the study one by one.
The task was a matching game that required the subjects to
find a flexibility plot in a set of 12 plots that had the most
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

1007

Figure 4: Clustering features for a section of the (a) MDS and (b) Jigsaw layouts. The HH subband after 2 decompositions
identifies places of change along both rows and columns while simultaneously reducing the number of data points. In both
configurations, the data is separated into areas with plots having many points of change (left side of each layout) and plots with
fewer points of change (right side of each layout).

similar patterns to a given plot in the highlighted sub-region.
The subjects conducted the task with and without the feature displays and the order was balanced. The results showed
that all the subjects conducted the task successfully with the
help of the feature displays while only one subject succeeded
without the feature displays, even when enlarged flexibility
plots were provided. The subject rating after the study revealed that the perceived difficulty was much greater without the feature displays and subject confidence that they had
chosen the correct plot was higher with the feature displays.
6.2. Overview
Wavemap allows users to explore a large number of original
or transformed plots in an overview. The positions of the
plots in the overview visually reveal their similarities. Users
can interactively set similarity measures, which can be the
covariance between the original plots or desired subbands
at the level of decomposition of interest. When clustering is
based on the covariance of features, plots sharing common
subband features are considered similar.
The overview provides three layouts to reveal the similarities among the plots:
• Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) layout: MDS allows
viewers to interpret overall plot similarity as visual distances [BG09], [CC00]. In the MDS layout, similar plots
are close to each other while dissimilar plots are far away
from each other (Figure 4(a)). When parameter set labels are turned on, analysts can see if a relationship exists
between any parameter sets and if any parameter combinations result in outliers. Plot size can be interactively
reduced to minimize overlap.
• Jigsaw layout: The jigsaw layout [Wat05], [YHW∗ 07]
allows users to examine plot clusters and outliers without
overlap. It is a grid layout where similar plots are placed
close to each other and boundaries among clusters of similar plots can be detected (Figure 4(b)).
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

• Sorting layout: The plots are ordered by their similarities
to a selected plot so that users can examine their similarities in relation to the selected plot.
Users can display any subbands through a drop-down
box and any decomposition level through a slider. They can
also select similarity measures independent from how the
plots are displayed. This flexibility allows the user to explore many clustering and display configurations based on
desired characteristics. Users can manually select plots or
automatically select plots whose similarities to a given plot
are larger than a threshold the users set up. The selected plots
are placed on a clipboard and carried to other views for detailed exploration.
6.3. Feature Exploration Window
Features can be examined in detail for plots placed on the
clipboard in the feature exploration window. WaveMap provides a coordinated lens so that users can associate features with the corresponding original values without extra
eye movement. When users sweep the lens over the features,
the averages (LL) are displayed at the current decomposition
level in the lens to associate features to the underlying original data (Figure 5(a)). Lenses are displayed on all plots under
exploration at the same position. Whenever users move the
lens over one of them, all the other lenses will also move to
the corresponding position in their plots to allow comparison. The users can interactively change the size of the lens.
Reconstruction further extends the effective and efficient
association of extracted features with the original values
(Figure 5(b)). We allow users to select a plot from the clipboard as the focus of the feature exploration window and inspect its feature plot and original plot side by side. Users can
interactively navigate in the feature plot by moving a bounding box using directional buttons or a snap function that automatically positions the box to the nearest feature with a
magnitude above a threshold. Once a feature is accessed,

1008

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

Figure 5: (a) A coordinated lens allows simultaneous examination of multiple plots while relating features to the original data.
(b) Reconstruction further bridges the feature and original data. Coordinates are marked in the large plot showing the original
data and in the context window. A bounding box marks where the features occur in the data before transformation. Coordinates
are propagated to the detail view. (c) Detailed analysis occurs for a column section across multiple plots. Left, right, up, and
down buttons facilitate navigation during reconstruction and detailed analysis.

the original data values responsible for that feature value are
bounded in the original plot and in a resizable zoom-in display of the original plot. Plot coordinates of the bounding
box are displayed at the corners of the zoom-in display. Context of the feature being examined is maintained by a smaller
window showing the entire plot. Within the context window
a green rectangle shows the bounds of the visited features.

6.4. Detail Analysis Window
Plots on the clipboard are also available for detailed analysis (Figure 5(c)). In this view, a column segment is shown
for each plot. Each segment is composed of color rectangles
that represent the changes in flexibility for residues in the
column. The residue number for the current column is shown
in the top left of the window and row numbers are shown to
the left of the series of cells. Exploration in this view can
begin at the plot origin or from the coordinates propagated
from the feature exploration window. As during feature exploration, a window showing an entire plot of interest accompanies the detailed analysis window. A green bar indicates the current residue segment being displayed. Residue
columns are navigated by directional buttons or by entering
coordinates into text fields so that a detailed sweep across the
plots can be performed. Clicking in a column makes the corresponding plot the focus of the context window. Removing
an item from the clipboard removes it from the feature exploration and detail analysis windows and allocates the extra
space to the remaining plots. Normalization to the range between -1 and +1 occurs only for plots in the display so that
column segments can be more accurately compared. Users
can also display residue name abbreviations within the segments to further connect residue sequence information with
flexibility values. Users can save the residue segments under exploration into an image file for records and insight exchange.

7. Evaluation by Experts
The BMPG researchers have taken an active part in this
work from the early requirement analysis stage to the design, development, and evaluation of Wavemap. Before any
significant visual analytics approaches, views, and interactions were added into Wavemap, their potential usage was
discussed with the BMPG researchers to make sure that they
fit the high level needs of the domain experts. After a view
or a major interaction became live in the system, feature inspections were conducted. In an inspection, the new view
or interaction was demonstrated to the BMPG researchers
and they examined its usability and discussed scenarios in
which the features can be used in their applications. Features
were often refined according to feedback from the inspections. The BMPG researchers are quite excited by the current features supported in Wavemap, especially the wavelet
analysis guided feature inspection, the overview that allows
them to evaluate their parameter set grouping hypothesis,
and the multi-resolution approach that allows them to efficiently identify patterns of interest from a large data set and
quickly dive into fine details.

8. Scenario
We now present an example scenario that illustrates how
WaveMap can be utilized for better understanding of flexibility data. It specifically highlights the utility of our approach
in detecting a small but significant area among a set of similar allostery response plots. A good reason for performing
such analysis is to find model parameter sets which result in
similar overall response but exhibit a small difference which
could explain subtle variations in behavior. The data set used
in the example represents flexibility response measures from
the CheY protein.
A protein scientist pre-selects a set of parameters (ie a
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

plot) which exhibit a desired global behavior. The analyst
suspects that other parameter sets globally similar to the selected plot have differences which may explain subtle variations in behavior. However, the values and residue region
resulting in this behavior are unknown. The analyst searches
for the known plot in the overview by entering the identifier
into a search box and it is highlighted in green. Places of
flexibility trend changes within this parameter set indicating
possible differences are difficult to locate in context of other
similar plots. The analyst moves the slider which changes the
level of decomposition and examines the resulting features
(Figure 2). When the wavelet features are displayed after two
levels of decomposition and after the elimination of features
having a small magnitude, the analyst sees a pattern of interest within the known plot indicating the changes in flexibility. He/she uses the Jigsaw layout [Wat05], [YHW∗ 07] and
identifies several adjacent plots with similar features to the
known plot to ensure global similarity. The group of plots
are placed on the clipboard for further examination.
After pruning the parameter sets, the analyst proceeds to
the feature exploration window. In this window, the analyst
easily compares corresponding regions of the selected plots
with the help of the coordinated lens (Figures 2(b)-(d)). It is
confirmed that the feature plots are similar but have noticeable differences. Of particular interest is the feature present
in all but the bottom, far-right plot in Fgure 2(b). The coordinated lens (2(c) and 2(d)) reveals that the area of interest
highlights a sharp change in flexibility (a small blue section
in the middle of red) except for the one parameter set.
To more accurately define the region of difference, the
location is visited (Figure 2(e)) and the residue numbers
marking the area of change are revealed. The coordinates
are propagated to the detail analysis window (Figure 2(f))
and the differences in response can be mapped to the specific residue numbers. The analyst can now further examine
the physiochemical properties found in the plot lacking the
small blue area to see if this region is perhaps responsible for
variations in behavior or if the model should be modified.

9. Discussion
9.1. Extensions
The initial purpose of the proposed approach was to help
computational biologists investigate outputs from the Distance Constraint Model [JD05], [LDWJ04]. As the approach
was refined and the data set was better understood, we realized that biologists often need to visually describe data in
context of spatial arrangement. Our approach helps locate,
identify, and evaluate both local and regional factors influencing global behavior. However, any data set where the
items can be arranged in a row/column layout that remains
consistent across data items will benefit from our approach.
If the data is in matrix form where order has spatial or other
meaning, the interactions between variables can be revealed.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1009

The index i, j would represent the value of an output i for
a parameter j. Each row (or column) is useful for evaluating many model or experimental responses for a single variable and each column (or row) reflects a single result for
the combination of interdependent variables. Other domains
that would benefit include microarray analysis [Liu09], economic forecasting, engineering simulations, and many more.
9.2. Limitations
During experimentation a couple of limitations were found.
First, the effectiveness of this approach is influenced by the
wavelet used. Each wavelet feature is the result of a correlation between two signals (data signal and wavelet signal)
[LLZO02] and changing the wavelet alters its correlation to
the data signal. This means that, for a different wavelet, the
interpretation of the extracted features in relation to the underlying data may be different. Our initial implementation
relied on a well-known wavelet technique and serves only as
an initial attempt. Refinement and study are needed to develop custom wavelets so that more specific feature sets can
be targeted and better defined in terms of biological significance. Second, our technique is meant for identifying localized neighborhoods which cumulatively result in a feature
and not a precise data point. Finding a precise data point
of interest may take additional exploration because of shifting during transformation and artifacts from noise. Boundary conditions can also lead to inaccurate representation of
the underlying data near plot extremities and is an active area
of research in signal processing [CA04], [GS00].
10. Conclusion
We have introduced a novel approach designed to ease the
location and navigation of protein flexibility plots. WaveMap
leverages strengths from signal processing and visualization
in a single, coherent environment. Our initial evaluation with
domain experts suggest that Wavemap is promising in supporting high level flexibility data exploration tasks such as
analyzing spatial relationships and numeric trends, investigating parameter influence and the grouping of parameters,
as well as pruning parameter sets and residues. Long-term
user studies with domain experts are being planned to test
our approach in depth. In addition, we would like to apply our approach to entire protein families and to other domains, both related and non-related to biological data. Experimentation with other feature extraction techniques, including custom-designed wavelets, is also of great interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was performed with partial support from NIH
grant R01 GM073082 and the DHS Visual Analytics for
Command, Control, and Interoperability (VACCINE) Center
of Excellence, under the auspices of the Charlotte Visualization Center.

1010

Barlowe et. al. / WaveMap: Exploring Protein Flexibility Data

References
[BG09] B ORG I., G ROENEN P.: Multidimensional Scaling: Theory and Applications. Springer, 2009. 7
[Bon97] B ONNEAU G.-P.: An introduction to wavelets for scientific visualization. Scientific Visualization Conference (dagstuhl
’97). (1997), 16. 5
[CA04] C AI W., A DJOUADI M.: Minimization of boundary artifacts on scalable image compression using symmetric-extended
wavelet transform. International Conference on Information
Technology: Coding and Computing 1 (2004), 598 – 602. 9
[CC00] C OX T., C OX M.: Multidimensional Scaling., second ed.
Chapman and Hall, 2000. 7
[Dun89] D UNTEMAN G. H.: Principal Components Analysis.
Sage Publications, 1989. 5
[EYND10] E LSHENAWY L., Y IN S., NAIK A., D ING S.: Efficient recursive principal component analysis algorithms for process monitoring. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 49, 1 (2010), 252–259.
5
[FHH03] FARIN G., H AMANN B., H AGEN H.: Hierarchical and
Geometric Methods in Scientific Visualizations. Springer, 2003.
5
[GOB∗ 10] G EHLENBORG N., O’D ONOGHUE S., BALIGA N.,
G OESMANN A., H IBBS M., K ITANO H., KOHLBACHER O.,
N EUWEGER H., S CHNEIDER R., T ENENBAUM D., G AVIIN . A.:
Visualization of omics data for systems biology. Nature Methods.
7 (2010), S56–S68. 5

[MJL10] M OTTONEN J., JACOBS D., L IVESAY D.: Allosteric
response if both conserved and variable across three chey orthologs. Biophysical Journal 99, 7 (2010), 2245–54. 2, 3, 4
[MWBF98] M ILLER N., W ONG P. C., B REWSTER M., F OOTE
˚ wavelet-based text visualization system.
H.: Topic islandsUa
Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Conference on Visualization (1998),
189–196. 5
[MXJL09] M OTTONEN J., X U M., JACOBS D., L IVESAY D.:
Unifying mechanical and thermodynamic descriptions across the
thioredoxin protein family. PROTEINS: Structure, Function, and
Bioinformatics 75, 3 (2009), 610–627. 4, 6
[NHL07] N IGHAM A., H SU D., L ATOMBE J.-C.: Characterizing
protein conformation space. Singapore and MIT Alliance (SMA)
Symposium (2007). 2
[PKP10] PATIL A., KOLHE S., PATIL P.: 2d face recognition
techniques: A survey. International Journal of Machine Intelligence. 2 (2010), 74–83. 5
[PSW∗ 06] P OTZSCH S., S CHEUERMANN G., W OLFINGER M.,
F LAMM C., S TADLER P.: Visualization of lattice-based protein
folding simulations. Proceedings of the Information Visualization (2006), 89–94. 2
[QPA08] Q AZI S., PANETTA K., AGAIAN S.: Detection and
comparison of color edges via median based pca. IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2008.
(2008), 702–706. 5
[Sal04] S ALDANHA A.: Java treeview-extensible visualization.
Bioinformatics. 20, 17 (2004), 3246–3248. 5

[GS00] G UTIERREZ A., S OMOLINOS A.: Influence of wavelet
boundary conditions on the classification of biological signals.
Proceedings of the IEEE 26th Annual Northeast Bioengineering
Confernece (2000), 25–26. 9

[SM07] S HEN Z., M A K.: Path visualization for adjacency matrices. Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization.
(2007), 83–90. 5

[GW01] G ONZALEZ R., W OODS R.: Digital Image Processing.
Prentice Hall, 2001. 5

[SS02] S EO J., S HNEIDERMAN . B.: Interactively exploring hierarchical clustering results. Computer. 35 (2002), 80–86. 5

[JCH01] J ENSEN A., C OUR -H ARBO A. L.: Ripples in Mathematics. Springer, 2001. 5, 6

[Swe96] S WELDENS W.: The lifting scheme: A custom-design
construction of biorthogonal wavelets. Appl. Comput. Harmon.
Anal 3, 2 (1996), 186–200. 5

[JD05] JACOBS D., DALLAKYAN S.: Elucidating protein thermodynamics from the three-dimensional structure of the native
state using network rigidity. Biophys J 88 (2005), 903–915. 2, 3,
9
[JH07] JADHAO D. V., H OLAMBE R. S.: Feature extraction
and dimensionality reduction using radon and fourier transforms
with application to face recognition. International Conference
on Computational Intelligence and Multimedia Applications. 2
(2007), 256–260. 5

[TLKT09] TALBOT J., L EE B., K APOOR A., TAN D.: Ensemblematrix: Interactive visualization to support machine learning
with multiple classifiers. CHI 2009. (2009), 1283–1292. 5
[VRP09] VARSHNEY S. S., R AJPAL N., P URWAR R.: Comparative study of image segmentation techniques and object matching
using segmentation. International Conference on Methods and
Models in Computer Science. (2009), 1–6. 5

[Jol02] J OLLIFFE I.: Principal Component Analysis. Springer,
2002. 5

[Wat05] WATTENBERG J.: A note on space-filling visualizations
and space-filling curves. Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization. (2005), 181–186. 7, 9

[KJB00] K ESKIN O., J ERNIGAN R., BAHAR I.: Proteins with
similar architecture exhibit similar large-scale dynamic behavoir.
Biophys J 78 (2000), 2093–2106. 2

[WB96] W ONG P. C., B ERGERON R. D.: Multiresolution multidimensional wavelet brushing. Proceedings of the 7th IEEE
Conference on Visualization (1996), 141–148. 5

[LDWJ04] L IVESAY D., DALLAKYAN S., W OOD G., JACOBS
D.: A flexible approach for understanding protein stability. FEBS
Lett 576 (2004), 468–476. 2, 3, 9

[YHW∗ 07]

[Liu09] L IU Y.: Wavelet feature extraction for high-dimensional
microarray data. Neurocomputing (2009), 985–990. 9
[LJ06] L IVESAY D., JACOBS D.: Conserved quantitative stability/flexibility relationships (qsfr) in an orthologous rnase h pair.
PROTEINS: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 62 (2006),
130–143. 6
[LLZO02] L I T., L I Q., Z HU S., O GIHARA M.: A survey on
wavelet applications in data mining. SIGKDD Exploration 4
(2002), 49–68. 9

YANG J., H UBBALL D., WARD M., RUNDEN E., R IBARSKY W.: Value and relation display: Interactive visual exploration of large datasets with hundreds of dimensions. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13, 3 (2007), 494–507. 7, 9
STEINER

[YR01] Y EUNG K., RUZZO W.: Principal component analysis
for clustering gene expression data. Bioinformatics. (2001), 763–
774. 5
[ZHT06] Z OU H., H ASTIE T., T IBSHIRANI . R.: Sparse principal
component analysis. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics. 15 (2006), 265–286. 5

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

