DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01936.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations
Daniela Oelke1 , Halldor Janetzko1 , Svenja Simon1 , Klaus Neuhaus2 , and Daniel A. Keim1
1

Data Analysis and Visualization Group, University of Konstanz, Germany
Chair of Microbial Ecology, Technical University of Munich, Germany

2

Abstract
Pixel-based visualizations have become popular, because they are capable of displaying large amounts of data
and at the same time provide many details. However, pixel-based visualizations are only effective if the data set is
not sparse and the data distribution not random. Single pixels - no matter if they are in an empty area or in the
middle of a large area of differently colored pixels - are perceptually difficult to discern and may therefore easily
be missed. Furthermore, trends and interesting passages may be camouflaged in the sea of details.
In this paper we compare different approaches for visual boosting in pixel-based visualizations. Several boosting
techniques such as halos, background coloring, distortion, and hatching are discussed and assessed with respect
to their effectiveness in boosting single pixels, trends, and interesting passages. Application examples from three
different domains (document analysis, genome analysis, and geospatial analysis) show the general applicability
of the techniques and the derived guidelines.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and
Techniques—Standards; I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation—Display Algorithms

1. Introduction
Nowadays, in many applications there is a need to analyze
huge amounts of data. Among the popular techniques for visualizing large amounts of data are pixel-based approaches
because they are able to display large data sets at a high resolution (see e.g., [Kei00, KSS07, LGP∗ 07]). In the context
of this paper, under ’pixel-based visualizations’ we understand visualizations that use some small area to encode one
data item. Note that the areas do not necessarily have to be
display pixels but small rectangles. Pixel-based visualizations have been applied in many different domains including
but not limited to geography [PSKN06], network and sensor
data analysis [RG10,FN05], and document analysis [KO07].
Although very powerful, the technique comes with the disadvantage that interesting values or passages may easily be
missed if the data is sparse. Besides, interesting details may
be camouflaged in the sea of details.
Imagine you search for a term in a document and you are
interested in the text passages which include this term. Typically you would use the find functionality of your favorite text viewer and the program would highlight the search
terms. If we want to visualize the whole document with a
pixel-based visualization (e.g., to fit it on the screen) and apc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

ply a term-based search, we have to somehow highlight the
search results. We call this highlighting of pixels boosting.
According to what we want to boost – single pixels (e.g.,
found search terms), passages (e.g., coding regions in genome data), or trends (e.g., the overall readability of sections
while showing the complexity of each single word) – different boosting techniques perform best.
In this paper we discuss a number of approaches for visual boosting of pixels, passages, or an inherent trend. We
distinguish between two definitions of importance. First, the
importance of a data item can be defined by the numerical
data value itself. In this case, the importance of a pixel is already encoded by the color-mapping, e.g., a single red pixels
in an area of green pixels. Thus, we boost information that is
already present in the pixel-based representation but not yet
visually salient enough. In the following, we refer to such
cases as image-driven boosting. Second, importance of a
pixel can be defined in terms of external meta-information.
In this case, the importance is not already represented by the
color-mapping and needs to be encoded in the first place. An
example is the boosting of a passage with highly divergent
values or e.g., boosting of pixels that represent a noun - something that is only known by meta information. We refer

872

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

to such cases as data-driven boosting. One characteristic of
this type of boosting is that the values that have to be boosted usually span across the whole color scale - a fact which
prevents using boosting techniques that are based on an adaption of the color scale.
This paper introduces and discusses different approaches
for boosting pixels or passages. The techniques are reviewed with respect to their capability to amplify a single item, a
passage, or a trend. Chapter 2 introduces different techniques
for boosting and discusses their strengths and weaknesses.
Next, in chapter 3 we describe the perceptual issues as the
theoretical foundation for visual boosting. This is followed
by an application section that exemplifies visual boosting by
analyzing data from three different domains: document analysis, genome analysis, and geospatial data analysis. Chapter
5 classifies the different boosting techniques according to the
application tasks they are most useful for.
2. Boosting Techniques
Much research has been conducted in the domain of cognitive science to find out how eye movement works and what
makes some objects stand out against others (see for example [War08]). It is assumed that we preprocess scenes by
means of low-level properties such as color, shape, orientation etc. to decide where to direct our view. This can be
exploited, for instance, in a search scenario in which the object has known properties that discriminate the item from
the rest of the scene (e.g., when searching for a tomato, we
search for a red object). The higher the feature-level contrast
between the object and its surroundings, the easier it becomes to spot it.
In the following, we review some of the fundamental visual properties mentioned by Ware [War08] with respect to
their applicability for boosting in pixel-based visualizations.
Please note that many of the following techniques like distortion or hatching are highly dependent of the size of the pixel
representation and cannot be applied to very small pixels.
2.1. Boosting with Halos
Size is an efficient and intuitive way to enhance the visibility
of interesting or important pixels.
However, in most cases we do not
want to change the layout of the pixel-based visualization
and thus have to overplot neighboring pixels. We therefore follow Colin Ware’s suggestion of adding a surround color [War08]. To differentiate the halos from the neighboring
pixels, it is best to use a less saturated or semi-transparent color. Using transparency comes with the advantage that even
in overlap areas all halos are visible but may lead to blended
colors that are difficult to interpret. Figure 1 exemplifies the
different variants.

Pixel
Halo

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Visual boosting with halos. Halos may be painted with semi-transparent or opaque colors. As the halos
may overlap each other, the painting order is important. (a)
Without visual boosting, (b) Boosting with semi-transparent
halos, (c) Boosting with opaque halos.

In most cases it is advantageous not to overpaint pixels representing a value in order to avoid camouflaging them. But
still in areas in which several colored pixels are close to each
other, their halos may overlap. In this case, the painting order
is important. This is especially true when non-transparent
halos are used but also for transparent ones, since the last
color will be the most salient one.
For determining which pixels to boost, we can often measure a degree of importance. Boosting with halos has the advantage that the degree of boosting can be controlled. Changing the size of a halo has an immediate effect on the visibility of the boosted pixels.
2.2. Boosting with Colors
There are two possible ways to
use color for boosting interesting
or important pixels. The first way
is to adapt the color scale in a way
that important values are represented by a color with a high
perceptual contrast compared to the less important data values. Thus, the boosted pixels are colored in a way that they
are pre-attentively visible. We therefore change our colormap and represent values which should be boosted with a
color that has a high perceptual contrast to the non-boosted
values. Contrast colors can be found with the help of color wheels (for instance in Adobe Kuler [ADO10] or Color
Scheme Designer [Sta10]) or by measuring their perceptual distance (e.g., in the CIE color space [CIE78]). The more
heterogeneously colored the visualization is, the larger the
perceptual distance of the boosting color has to be to ensure a good boosting effect (see [War08]). An easy way to
achieve this is to use a black and white colormap and color
important pixels with another color (e.g., red or yellow).
If the data set is sparse, not every pixel will be colored in the visualization. This means that we have empty pixels that do not encode
a value. The second approach exploits this by coloring the
empty pixels according to the value that should be boosted.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

Typically, the boosted value represents the local or global
trend (e.g., the average value) and is visualized by a less saturated color. As a consequence, pixels with colors similar to
the background color become less salient. This is why it is
advisable to use the technique only to represent a trend that
is present in the data anyway.
2.3. Boosting with Distortion
Distortion of pixels can be seen
as another way of using size as visual property. By shrinking or enlarging pixels according to a userdefined importance measure, the focus is shifted to the larger ones while preserving the context, which is important for
many application scenarios. This comes with the advantage
of increasing the scalability because less space is used for
unimportant passages.
We may also distort single rows
or columns according to the number of boosted pixels or according
to the sum of their importance values. This is only reasonable if a row or column is a meaningful and coherent unit. The distortion of columns, for example, would be reasonable if each column represents one
point in time and each row shows a particular variable over
time.
In other applications, such as geospatial analysis tasks, it
may be favorable to distort the local neighborhood of the
pixels to be boosted. This can help to decrease overlap that
is for instance caused by enlarging important pixels in the
geographical space. In section 4.3, we illustrate this for an
example from the domain of geospatial analysis.
2.4. Boosting with Hatching
Hatching is a boosting technique
which can only be used if the data values are mapped to small areas and not single pixels of the display. By using different hatching directions it is possible to
distinguish several semantically connected groups of pixels.
For instance, the two diagonal lines or vertical and horizontal lines may be used for hatching. Apparently the difference between vertical / horizontal lines is much more visible than the different diagonals, which may be a result
from our culturally-inherited reading directions. Typically,
the amount of hatching is also used to represent a quantitative value. However, this does not make sense for pixel-based
visualizations where not many different degrees of hatching
can be used due to the limited amount of space.
2.5. Boosting with Shapes or Glyphs
It is easy to spot one triangle in a set of rectangles or to
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

873

spot the destination in a route planner when it is marked
with a flag. But glyphs or shapes have one major problem:
They occupy a different area than the original pixels. This
results in different local contrasts and – even worse – in different color perceptions. It is therefore difficult to use colored pixel representations combined with different shapes
while preserving the proper color perception. Furthermore,
both glyphs and the usage of a different shape (non-rectangular) requires that the pixel representation
is large enough.
2.6. Other boosting techniques
In the previous sections, we introduced several techniques
for boosting in pixel-based visualizations. Guided by the different visual properties presented in [War08], we selected
the methods that seemed most applicable for enhancing the
visual saliency of pixels, passages or trends. Nevertheless,
the list is far from being complete. For instance, a user study
that was conducted by Kosara et al. suggests that blurring of
unimportant data points could be effective as well in a boosting task (see [KMH∗ 02]). The study shows that sharp objects in a blurry background can be perceived preattentively.
Purposefully misaligning specific pixels might be effective as well but can only be used if there are gaps between the
pixel rows. Other visual properties such as joined lines or
curvature, which are mentioned in [War08] as well, are not
usable for pixel-based visualizations.
Animations are one of the most eye-catching boosting
techniques, as motion detection is hard-wired in our peripheral vision system. It is therefore possible to use, e.g., flashing of pixels to highlight important values. But animation
has to be used very carefully as it can be very annoying if for
instance many items on the screen are animated.
More interesting approaches for visual boosting using
scatterplots are described by Pritzkau et al. in [PRSB10].
The paper describes the use of animated jittering in order
to show coherent clusters in a pre-attentively manner. Additionally, the authors suggest to use illusionary motion to
visually group data-points. This rotation effect is created by
special shading techniques. For pixel-based visualizations,
this technique is not well scalable (with respect to the size of
the pixels), but could still be useful if only few pixels are to
be displayed.
3. Perceptual issues
When using boosting techniques it is very important to consider the perceptual impact of changing the visual properties when boosting certain pixels. For example, when using
background coloring, we have to be aware that the additional color will influence how the single colored pixels are
perceived. In general, it can be said that it is best to use different visual channels (shape, color, motion) to let certain

874

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

aspects pop out [War08]. If the same visual channel is used
for boosting, a larger change in the feature space has to be
made to make the object visually distinct. The same applies
if the background is inhomogeneous, which is usually the
case when working with pixel-based visualizations.
What does this mean for visual boosting? When coloring
the background in sparsely populated visualizations, pixels
with similar color will be more difficult to spot. At the same time, the larger the deviation of a pixel’s color is from
the background color, the more salient it becomes. In some
cases this is exactly what we want to achieve because pixels that depict similar values compared to the background
are already represented well enough. In all other cases, it
is recommendable to use less-saturated colors for the background, which implies that we must use a color scale for
coloring the pixels that is homogeneous with respect to the
saturation.
Another boosting technique in which the perception of colors can interfere with the boosting are the glyphs. Since glyphs are often larger than the pixel itself, they may overlap
with neighboring pixels. If the color of these pixels does not
contrast with the glyph color, this decreases their effectiveness in terms of visual boosting.
Some of the boosting techniques work well for large pixels, but their effectiveness decreases for smaller scaling factors or the technique even becomes useless if single display
pixels are used for each data value. For instance changing the
shape of some of the pixels from rectangles to circles results
in the fact that only part of the available area is filled. Otherwise put, part of the rectangular pixel area is filled with the
background color. On small scale humans tend to mix these
colors. Thus, red circles surrounded by a white background
color will look brighter than rectangular pixels with the same color. The scalability of the different boosting techniques
is further discussed in section 5.
Finally, literature on conjunctions of the visual properties
must be taken into account. Ware [War08] states that for “rapid pop-out searching” not more than two different symbols
should be used because otherwise spotting the differences
will not be pre-attentive anymore. Since pixel-based visualizations already use color per default as one visual property,
using several different boosting techniques at the same time
to stress different aspects must be advised against. However,
it can be very helpful to use a combination of different techniques to boost the same aspects, as this further increases the
visual saliency of the pixels.
4. Application Examples from Different Domains
In this section we show application examples from three different domains, where boosting can help to increase the usefulness of a pixel-based visualization. Each application scenario exemplifies a different aspect discussed in the paper.
The presented document analysis tasks show the challenges

that a sparse data set comes with. Additionally, in the case of review analysis the inherent trend is important but not
easily obvious. When analyzing genome sequences, the distinction between passages that encode a gene and those that
have no known functionality is important. Genome analysis
therefore is an example for enhancing the visibility of passages and for data-driven boosting. Finally, geospatial analysis
has been chosen because of the restrictions that it poses on
the placement of the pixels which increases the problem of
overplotting and prevents using some of the techniques.
4.1. Document Analysis
In the following, two examples from the domain of document analysis are given. The presented applications are typical representatives of pixel-based visualizations in the sense
that the task does not require a special layout of the pixels
(except for the sequential nature of the data). In the scenarios below, the sparseness of the data is the most challenging
aspect in the visualization process.
4.1.1. Review Analysis
Customer feedback data is a valuable resource for both potential customers and companies. In contrast to overall ratings of a product, reviews come with the advantage that they
reveal the strengths and weaknesses of a product in detail by
commenting on certain product features. Various algorithms
exist for identifying product features in natural language
comments as well as to determine the sentiment that was expressed on them (e.g., [PL08, TM08, DL07, KH06, PE05]).
Figure 2 shows a visualization of customer feedback data. Each review is represented by a block of pixels where
each pixel represents a word. Color is used to highlight negative (red) or positive (blue) mentions of product features.
Different levels of brightness are used to encode the strength
of the expressed opinion. Note that [OBK∗ 08] uses a pixelbased visualization for review analysis, too. But in contrast
to our scenario they display the data on review level instead
of word level which results in a dense data set.
In figure 2(a) no boosting was applied. Although all the
necessary information is present, it is difficult to identify
trends and outliers in the data set. Figure 2(b) shows the
same data with boosting by background coloring and halos.
The background color is mapped to the average sentiment
in the review, permitting to spot the trend of each document
at a glance. Halos are used to make single colored pixels
more salient. This allows the user to investigate if the
trend is caused by a set of opposing opinions or by very
similar ratings for all features. Using halos as a boosting
technique permits to influence the boosting strength of each
pixel separately. In this case, we decided to determine the
halo sizes locally (for each review separately) and bias the
visibility of the pixels towards outliers (rare colors). An
alternative would have been to give the strongest boosting
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

(a) Without visual boosting

875

(b) Local boosting with background coloring and semi-transparent halos

Figure 2: Visual boosting of customer feedback data. Positively mentioned features are colored in blue, negatively mentioned
ones in red. In (b) background coloring is used to emphasize the local trend and outliers are boosted with halos.

weight to the pixels whose values deviate most from the
trend.

4.1.2. Highlighting Search Terms
Part of a scientific paper is visualized in figure 3. Each pixel
represents a word and words are grouped into sentences. In
this case the task is to spot passages that are dense with respect to certain search terms. Pixels that represent the term
“visual” are colored in purple, findings of the search term
“human” in orange, and occurrences of “multimedia” are
marked in green. Again the halo technique is used for boosting. But this time, halo sizes are determined globally. The
rarer a search term is in the document, the higher is its boosting factor. Globally seen, even the most frequent term “visual” is still sparse. This is why we boost the occurrences
of this term, too. The parameters of the halo technique permit to determine how much the boosting should be biased
towards rare occurrences. In this case, the boosting factor of
the rarest term is chosen to be about four times as large as
the one for the most frequent search term.
4.2. Genome Analysis
The genome of an organism is its hereditary information and
represents (together with the cellular machinery) the ’construction plan’. The genome is a sequence over an alphabet
of four letters (A, C, G, T - nucleotides). There are regions
(genes) which code for known functional entities (proteins).
However, for some sections it is not known if they code for a
(new) protein or whether this section is indeed non-coding.
To produce a protein, a gene containing segment of the genome is transcribed in a blueprint, called messenger RNA
(mRNA). This mRNA is translated by the cellular machinery to the encoded protein.
With further development of sequencing technologies
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(next-generation sequencing technologies), it is now possible to sequence the whole transcriptome (all RNA) of a
cell, RNA-Seq(uencing) [Met10, WGS09]. Since mRNAs
are translated in proteins, it is possible to infer from this transcriptome, at least to some amount, the protein content of the
cell, and to possibly identify new coding regions.
Thus, RNA-Seq is a promising new technique, but there
are problems in data analysis. Due to technical reasons, only short segments of, e.g., 50 nucleotides of the RNAs can
be sequenced using the SOLiD system [Met10]. The RNA,
which can be a few thousand nucleotides in length, is therefore fragmented before sequencing. Each 50 nucleotide read,
of which a few millions are produced in a sequencing run,
has to be mapped to the genome. Sections of the genome that
receive coverage from such reads are transcribed at this position. Because the reads from a certain long mRNA-molecule
are obtained statistically, the coverage of a transcribed genomic region can be uneven or interrupted.
We use those RNA-Seq data as example of a task that requires data-driven boosting of passages. In figure 4, each pixel represents a nucleotide and the mapped color is dependent on the coverage. Thus, this reflects the relative amount
of different RNA molecules that were found in the cell at the
time of the analysis. The start and stop positions of known
genes are given as meta-information. These gene stretches
are marked with backslashes ’\’.
Figure 4(a) shows the transcription of a segment of a genome. The coverage of the first gene depicted in the graphic is uneven and interrupted, but the transcription level is
quite high compared to the background level. The surrounding regions are also transcribed which is common for most
genes since those regions contain further information about
where to start and stop protein synthesis of a gene on the
mRNA. Interestingly, transcribed regions without annotated
or suspected genes exist. Biologists are interested in finding

876

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

(a) Without visual boosting

(b) Global boosting with semi-transparent halos

Figure 3: Visual boosting of search results. The visual saliency of sparse pixels is increased by halos.

and describing those regions because they might contain new
genes (or represent regulatory RNA). The last gene shown on
the genome segment is apparently not transcribed.
Figure 4(b) shows the same segment using distortion to
compress regions which are no genes and which are not
transcribed. Furthermore, we use a bipolar colormap here
to further emphasize the distinction between transcribed regions with and without annotated genes. Distortion is used
to reduce to some extent the challenge of displaying long
genomic sequences. Passages in which no transcription takes place are not interesting for the analysis. However, if
we would remove them completely, the context information
(gene neighborhood, length of the transcriptional gap, etc.),
which is necessary for the analysis, would be missing. By
shrinking these passages, the context is retained, but at the
same time larger scalability and an emphasis of the important areas is achieved.

4.3. Geospatial Analysis
Boosting interesting or important data points in pixel-based
visualizations of geospatial datasets is different from the previously described application examples. These datasets come with a geographical information, which inhibits the use
of arbitrary layouts. Thus, geospatial datasets are not sequential but two-dimensional.
Some of the boosting techniques introduced in section 2
can easily be applied to geo visualizations such as halos,
glyphs, or animation. Other techniques, such as hatching or
changing the shape of pixels, might be less applicable because they require regular, closed areas of pixels to become
dominant. In the following, we show an example of applying

Figure 5: Boosting of single points with circular halos. This
approach induces overplotting, which has to be dealt with in
more dense data sets.

the halo boosting technique to a geographical data set and
point out how the special challenges this comes with can be
addressed.
Figure 5 shows an example of boosting three single locations on a world map using circular halos. This works nicely
because the data set is very sparse. However, in many application scenarios the data is not equally distributed across
the earth but accumulates in certain regions. Imagine an earthquake data set that contains information about the location and strength of all occurring earthquakes in a certain
time period. In regions of the world that are more likely to
be struck by earthquakes, overplotting can easily occur in a
pixel-based visualization. The problem is exacerbated if we
use a boosting technique that needs space around the original
pixel such as adding a halo or using glyphs.
One possibility to deal with the overplotting issues in a
geographic dataset is to apply a local pixel replacement strategy. [KPSN03] and [KHD∗ 09] present approaches for pic 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

877

(a) Visual boosting of passages that represent gene stretches by hatching.

(b) Additionally, uninteresting passages that do no represents genes and are not transcribed are deemphasized by compression.

Figure 4: Visual boosting of transcriptome data of Escherichia coli O157:H7 EDL933 using the SOLiD 4.0 technology. Shown
are genes L7065 overlapping L7066, and L7071 from the plasmid pO157 (NC_007414). Bacteria were grown in M9 minimal
medium.

xel replacement. The key idea is to slightly shift pixels from
their original position to some empty space if they overlap
with some other pixel(s). Thereby, the geospatial topology
is preserved as well as possible. Figure 6 was drawn using
an adaptation of the methods that can deal with pixels of different sizes. Pixels with halos are placed first (as they are the
largest ones and therefore most difficult to place). Pixels that
would be overplotting if placed at their original position are
then relocated to the nearest empty space.
Note that using semi-transparent halos would not help here
because the local density of the points is too high. This inevitably would result in significant overlap between the halos
with difficult to interpret blended paint.

Halos are used to boost the visibility of the strongest earthquakes. The color scale shows the three different colors that
are used to encode the magnitude of the earthquake together
with their (less saturated) halo colors.

Figure 6 shows a visualization of an earthquake data set,
captured by the United States Geological Survey during a
period from May 26th, 2010 to June 2nd, 2010 [USG10].

In this section, we compare the different boosting methods
of section 2 and present a guideline when to use which visual
boosting method in pixel-based visualizations.

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

If the data set is even denser, relocation might not be possible anymore without enlarging the geographic region that
the points are to be mapped to. The geo visualization community developed many local distortion algorithms that can
be useful in such a situation. See [Tob04] for an overview of
cartogram algorithms or [KPSN03] for an example that uses
distortion algorithms to allow for better pixel placement.
5. Comparison of Boosting Techniques

878

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

Figure 7: Comparison of different boosting methods. + means the technique is well applicable for the specific task and o denotes
medium effectiveness. Boosting techniques rated with - should not be applied to the respective application problem.

the effects of the applied boosting technique to the layout,
i.e. how much the layout has to be changed.
The best way to assess the effectiveness of the different
techniques would be to conduct a large user study. Ideally,
the different boosting tasks (image-driven, data-driven) and
the type of data (sparse, dense) should be treated separately. Furthermore, combinations of boosting techniques should
be taken into account as they may interfere with each other.
Such a large study is clearly beyond the scope of this paper.
Instead, we systematically collected the different aspects that
have to be taken into account - thereby paving the way for
further in-depth studies. Furthermore, we classified and assessed the techniques theoretically by taking the literature on
perception into account. While for some aspects the decision seems to be clear (e.g., background coloring can only be
used for comparably sparse data), other questions need to be
answered by a future in-depth user study.
Figure 6: Boosting of the strongest earthquakes with halos
while reducing data- and halo-induced overlap. Color was
mapped to magnitude, halos use less saturated colors.

Figure 5 shows the resulting comparison table, part of
which is discussed below.
5.1. Some additional comments

Boosting methods can be applied to increase the visual saliency of single pixels and passages or can be used to boost
a trend. Furthermore, when assessing the effectiveness of a
boosting technique, we also have to take into account if the
data to be shown is sparse or dense. This is an important characteristic of the data because some techniques require empty space around a pixel. In addition, we distinguish imagedriven and data-driven boosting as introduced in section 1.
In addition to the general suitability of the boosting method
under different conditions and for different use cases, we assess the methods regarding their resolution dependency and
the strength of the boosting effect. We additionally consider

Although shapes can be considered as a special type of glyphs (see section 2.5), it is reasonable to make a distinction when evaluating their strengths and weaknesses. Glyphs
cross the border of the boosted pixel while the different shapes (circles, triangles, etc. instead of rectangular pixels) stay
inside the pixel boundaries. Hence, glyphs work best with
empty surrounding pixels whereas shapes are not affected
by the density of the data.
Another technique that is in need of special explanations
is animation (or blinking). Animation certainly has a high
effectiveness as a boosting technique. Nevertheless, we decided to downrate the value of animation because many people
feel annoyed if too much of a scene is blinking. It is therefore important to use it with care. Furthermore, blinking coc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

mes with the disadvantage that it affects the color perception
if the background color is visible from time to time. Another
aspect that has to be taken into account is that animation can
only be used in interactive applications and not for static media.
Finally, it has to be mentioned that distortion is a boosting
technique that requires a change in the layout. This may decrease the users ability to follow the course of the values in
an interactive application.

879

perception of some methods depends on the rate of occurrence. One hatched pixel is significantly less salient than
a whole sequence of hatched pixels. The same is true for
distortion which benefits from the visual accumulation of a
whole sequence of compressed or enlarged pixels. In contrast, most glyphs are visually very dominant. Besides, they
usually cross the border of a pixel which means that displaying them in a sequence can easily result in a cluttered
representation. If glyphs are applied for boosting passages,
special glyph symbols for this task have to be developed.

5.2. Sparse vs. dense data sets

5.5. Boosting of trends

The distinction between sparse and dense data sets is important for all techniques that use the space around the pixel
for boosting. This is the case for halos, many glyphs, and of
course background coloring. Halos and glyphs can be painted across neighboring colored pixels. However, this inevitably results in obscuring part of other pixels.
When boosting passages we do not have to make the distinction between sparse and dense because the considered
segment of the data set is per definition not sparse.

There are several methods to boost pixels or passages, but
there is only one good method to boost trends in data sets:
the background coloring technique. Partly, also halos can be
used for visualizing trends. If the most frequent values instead of rare values are enhanced with halos, this results in
an effect similar to background coloring. Note that this can
only be done if the trend can be represented with the existing pixels and does not require additional calculations such
as averaging the values. Since both techniques work best for
sparse data, none of the introduced techniques can be recommended for displaying an inherent trend of a dense data set.

5.3. Image- vs. data-driven boosting
Image-driven as opposed to data-driven boosting visually
strengthens information that is already present in the original plot. It is basically a redundant encoding for part of the
pixels which is the reason why adapting the color map does
work for image-driven boosting but not for data-driven boosting. In the latter case, every adaption of the color map would
inevitably destroy the information that was mapped to color
or at least significantly impede reading the visualization. Similarly, using background coloring in a data-driven scenario
would mean to use the visual property color twice, once for
the values themselves and second for a summary measure or
to encode some meta-data.
For the visual property shape, the difference between
image- and data-driven boosting has another reason. Changing the shape usually results in empty space around a pixel.
Recall that we inscribe circles or triangles into the rectangular space reserved for the pixel. Thus, especially for small
scale representations the color perception is affected because we tend to mix the colors of small neighboring areas with
each other. Since in image-driven boosting all pixels with a
specific color are changed, the distortion of the color perception is not as severe as it is for data-driven boosting.

6. Conclusion
In this paper we addressed the problem of visually boosting
interesting or important data points in pixel-based visualizations. Several boosting techniques such as halos, coloring,
distortion, and hatching were systematically reviewed and
compared to each other. Furthermore, we discussed perceptual issues that come with applying the presented techniques.
Another contribution of the paper is the evaluation of the different boosting techniques with respect to their applicability
in different tasks. We could show that tasks should be classified as working on sparse or dense data sets and with respect to the boosting task (boosting of pixel, passages, or a
trend). Furthermore, a distinction between image-driven and
data-driven boosting is important where image-driven refers
to boosting that visually enhances information that is already
present in the plot (redundant encoding) whereas data-driven
boosting relies on importance measures that determine important pixels based on some meta-information or function.
Several application examples were presented to show the wide applicability of the techniques and to exemplify the derived guidelines.
Acknowledgement

5.4. Boosting single pixels vs. boosting passages
Some methods work well for boosting single pixels but not
for boosting passages. The reason is that even sparse data
is not sparse in terms of boosting if it contains continuous
sequences of pixels. This impacts all methods that are in
need of empty neighboring pixels. On the other hand, the
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

This work has been partly funded by the German Research
Society (DFG) under the grant GK-1042, Explorative Analysis and Visualization of Large Information Spaces, Konstanz
and the SPP 1335, sub-project Spatiotemporal Analysis of
Movements as well as SPP 1395, sub-project Finding Overlapping Genes. Thanks to Richard Landstorfer (TU Munich)
for providing the transcriptome data.

880

D. Oelke, H. Janetzko, S. Simon, K.Neuhaus & D. Keim / Visual Boosting in Pixel-based Visualizations

References
[ADO10] Adobe kuler. http://kuler.adobe.com/, 2010.
Adobe Systems Incorporated. 2
[CIE78] C.I.E. Recommendations on uniform colour spaces, colour difference equations, psychometric colour terms. Supplement No.2 to CIE publication No.15 (E.-1.3.1) 1971/(TC-1.3.)
(1978). 2
[DL07] D ING X., L IU B.: The Utility of Linguistic Rules in Opinion Mining. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR)
(2007), ACM, pp. 811–812. 4
[FN05] F INK G. A., N ORTH C.: Root Polar Layout of Internet
Address Data for Security Administration. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Workshop on Visualization for Computer Security (VizSEC)
(2005), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 55–64. 1
[Kei00] K EIM D. A.: Designing Pixel-oriented Visualization
Techniques: Theory and Applications. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG) 6, 1 (2000), 59–78.
1
[KH06] K IM S.-M., H OVY E.: Extracting Opinions, Opinion
Holders, and Topics Expressed in Online News Media Text. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity
in Text (2006), ACL, pp. 1–8. 4
[KHD∗ 09] K EIM D., H AO M., DAYAL U., JANETZKO H., BAK
P.: Generalized Scatter Plots. In Information Visualization Journal (IVS 2009) (2009), Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 6
[KMH∗ 02] KOSARA R., M IKSCH S., H AUSER H., S CHRAM MEL J., G ILLER V., T SCHELIGI M.: Useful properties of Semantic Depth of Field for Better F+C Visualization. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Data Visualisation 2002 (2002), VISSYM ’02, Eurographics Association, pp. 205–210. 3
[KO07] K EIM D. A., O ELKE D.: Literature Fingerprinting: A
New Method for Visual Literary Analysis. In Proceedings of the
2007 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST ’07) (2007), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 115–122.
1

[PRSB10] P RITZKAU A., R ADLOFF A., S CHUMANN H., BARTZ
D.: Scattering and Jittering : Using Real and Illusionary Motion
for Better Visual Scatterplot Analysis. Presented at the Poster
Session at IEEE Information Visualization Conference 2010 (InfoVis), Salt Lake City, USA, 2010. 3
[PSKN06] PANSE C., S IPS M., K EIM D. A., N ORTH S. C.: Visualization of Geo-spatial Point Sets via Global Shape Transformation and Local Pixel Placement. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG) 12, 5 (2006), 749–756.
1
[RG10] RODRIGUES P., G AMA J.: A Simple Dense Pixel Visualization for Mobile Sensor Data Mining. In Knowledge Discovery
from Sensor Data, Gaber M., Vatsavai R., Omitaomu O., Gama
J., Chawla N., Ganguly A., (Eds.), vol. 5840 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 175–
189. 1
[Sta10] S TANICEK P.: Color Scheme Designer 3. http://
colorschemedesigner.com/, 2010. 2
[TM08] T ITOV I., M C D ONALD R.: A Joint Model of Text and
Aspect Ratings for Sentiment Summarization. In Proceedings
of ACL-08: HLT (2008), Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 308–316. 4
[Tob04] T OBLER W.: Thirty Five years of Computer Cartograms.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94, 1 (2004),
58–73. 7
[USG10] U.S. Geological Survey, Latest Earthquakes: Feeds &
Data. http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/
catalogs/eqs7day-M1.txt, 2010. 7
[War08] WARE C.: Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufmann, 2008. 2, 3, 4
[WGS09] WANG Z., G ERSTEIN M., S NYDER M.: RNA-Seq: a
revolutionary tool for transcriptomics. Nature Reviews Genetics
10, 1 (2009), 57–63. 5

[KPSN03] K EIM D., PANSE C., S IPS M., N ORTH S.: PixelMaps: A New Visual Data Mining Approach for Analyzing Large
Spatial Data Sets. In IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM) (2003), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 565–568. 6,
7
[KSS07] K EIM D. A., S CHNEIDEWIND J., S IPS M.: Scalable
Pixel Based Visual Data Exploration. Springer, 2007, pp. 12–14.
1
[LGP∗ 07] L ÉVY P., G RAND B., P OULET F., S OTO M., DAR AGO L., T OUBIANA L., V IBERT J.: Pixelization Paradigm: First
Visual Information Expert Workshop, VIEW 2006, Paris, France,
April 24-25, 2006: Revised Selected Papers. Springer, 2007. 1
[Met10] M ETZKER M. L.: Sequencing technologies - the next
generation. Nature Reviews Genetics 11, 1 (2010), 31–46. 5
[OBK∗ 08] O ELKE D., BAK P., K EIM D. A., L AST M., DANON
G.: Visual Evaluation of Text Features for Document Summarization and Analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST 2008) (2008). 4
[PE05] P OPESCU A.-M., E TZIONI O.: Extracting Product Features and Opinions from Reviews. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (2005), ACL, pp. 339–346. 4
[PL08] PANG B., L EE L.: Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends R in Information Retrieval 2, 1-2
(2008), 1–135. 4

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

