DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01986.x
Eurographics Symposium on Rendering 2011
Ravi Ramamoorthi and Erik Reinhard
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 4

A Physically Plausible Model for
Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects
A. Wilkie1 and A. Weidlich2
1 Charles

University in Prague
AG, Munich

2 RTT

Abstract
The emissive properties of glowing solid objects appear to be something that the graphics community has not
considered in depth before. While the volumetric emission of plasma, i.e. flames, has been discussed numerous
times, and while the emission characteristics of entire luminaires can be handled via IESNA profiles, the exact
appearance of glowing solid objects appears to have eluded detailed scrutiny so far. In this paper, we discuss the
theoretical background to thermally induced light emission of objects, describe how one can handle this behaviour
with very little effort in a physically based rendering system, and provide examples for the visual importance of
handling this in a plausible fashion.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism—Color, shading, shadowing, and texture

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, the computer graphics community
has invested considerable effort in deriving or adapting
mathematical models for many physical effects that relate to
the propagation of visible light in scenes, and its interaction
with matter. This means that, for predictive rendering purposes, physically accurate, or at least very plausible, models are available for a wide variety of phenomena. However,
somewhat surprisingly, the first stage of the lighting pipeline
(emission → interaction with objects → perception), i.e. the
actual processes that govern the emission of light from objects, seem to have received comparatively little attention
within computer graphics so far.
Which is at least partially understandable, since for most
graphics applications, modelling lightsources from first principles is not a sensible engineering approach. Even for Predictive Rendering tasks with demanding accuracy goals, using measured luminaire data [Ill02] is usually a considerably more efficient (and saner) option than modelling the
involved lamps down to individual lamp filaments (although
this is in fact sometimes done to pre-calculate light distributions from lamps). But apart from luminaires, there is actually another class of light-emitting object that would, if
one were after high degrees of visual accuracy, require an
in-depth approach: glowing objects that emit energy in the
c 2011 The Author(s)
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ,
UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

visible range, such as pieces of iron that are being forged,
flows of lava, or the exhaust of an engine running at power.

Figure 1: A photograph of two coins heated to approximately equal temperatures on a gas stove. At room temperature, the coin that glows red is silvery in appearance (nickelplated steel), while the coin that glows yellow-orange is
made of gold. Note the considerable hue difference.
As can be seen in the photo in Figure 1, which shows two
glowing coins heated by a gas flame, glowing objects at similar temperatures can exhibit quite dissimilar glow colours.

1270

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

What is not clearly visible in that photo is that the directional
behaviour of the emission is also dependent on the surface
finish of the involved object – a polished object will emit
light differently from a diffuse one. Also, glowing objects
can, under certain circumstances, emit partially polarised
light – a photograph of this phenomenon can be seen in Figure 8. None of these aspects can be simulated with traditional measured data files for luminaires, or using a naive
combination of unmodified blackbody radiation and a diffuse emission characteristic. But all three (hue, directional
behaviour, polarisation) are potentially relevant for accurate
simulations, such as those needed for luminaire design.
In this paper, we first discuss the physical background of
glowing objects, discuss how such objects should be really
modelled, and show the visual difference in colour, emission
strength and polarisation this can make.
2. Background and Related Work
Current physically based rendering literature assumes that
matter, when heated to a certain temperature, emits electromagnetic radiation of an exactly determined distribution and
intensity [Gla95, PH04] – which is only true if the object
in question is a blackbody in the physical sense. Also, in
these publications, the emissive characteristics of a glowing
object are apparently assumed to be diffuse. However, for
real glowing objects, neither assumption is actually correct.
In fact, the appearance of glowing objects is determined by
two phenomena: the fundamental emission characteristics of
matter at a given temperature (i.e. blackbody radiation), and
the influence of the surface properties of the object’s material on this basic emission spectrum (via Kirchhoff’s law of
thermal radiation).
The latter fact has actually been implicitly known in Computer Graphics for quite some time: both [HK93] and [DJ05]
discussed scattering processes in layered materials. They
both mention that the upwelling radiance which emerges
from a scattering medium has to be attenuated in a way that
is related to the reflectance properties of the material in question. Since the emission that emanates from a glowing object
is also upwelling radiance from within, similar considerations have to apply. So the findings presented in this paper
deal with the same underlying mechanism, albeit in a different context – previous graphics literature did not explicitly
deal with upwelling radiance in self-luminous objects.
2.1. Blackbody Radiation
In physics, a blackbody is an idealised object that absorbs all
electromagnetic radiation that falls on it [SH01]. For such
an object, its temperature-dependent emission behaviour is
comparatively easy to specify. Per unit solid angle it is, in
dependence of wavelength λ and temperature T , given by:
2

I(λ, T ) =

2hc
1
hc
λ5 e λkT
−1

(1)

As shown in Figure 2, with increasing temperatures this formula yields successively higher peak wavelengths for the
resulting spectral emission distribution. The temperature at
which matter starts to glow visibly is the so-called Draper
point, at 798 K. A group rendering of ideal blackbodies of
increasing temperature can be seen in Figure 3.
2.0 1014

1.5 1014

1.0 1014

5.0 1013

0

0

500

1000

1500

Figure 2: The spectral composition of blackbody radiation
with increasing temperature, with the visible range indicated
by the rainbow shaded area. The progression of the peak
frequency towards shorter wavelengths with rising temperatures corresponds to the colour sequence seen in Figure 3.

Figure 3: Rendering of a group of perfectly diffuse, neutrally coloured blackbody emitters. Temperature starts at
1000K, and rises in 500K increments up to 5500K, with the
last two at 6500K and 8000K. The emission has been normalised, so they are of equal luminance; otherwise the difference in brightness between them would be huge.

2.2. Kirchhoff’s Law
All objects that are at some non-zero temperature radiate
electromagnetic energy. If they are a perfect black body, they
diffusely radiate energy according to the blackbody radiation
formula discussed in the previous section. However, black
bodies are a theoretical concept, and rarely, if ever, encountered in nature. In reality, the emission of a solid, opaque
object can be described as a simple extension of blackbody
radiation, though. Kirchhoff’s law of thermal radiation states
that [SH01]:
At thermal equilibrium, the emissivity of an object equals its
absorbance.
In this context, the absorbance is the fraction of incident light
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

that is absorbed by the body/surface. A well-known corollary to this law is that
At a given temperature, no object can radiate more energy
than an ideal blackbody at this temperature.
In other words, all real objects radiate less than an ideal
blackbody – how much less only depends on their absorbance. This follows since blackbodies are, by definition,
perfect absorbers – no object, real or theoretical, can absorb
more. A practical consequence of this is that the lower the
reflectivity of a real object, the closer it gets to blackbody
behaviour, i.e. the higher its capability to lose energy via radiative emission. This is responsible for a lot of engineering
decisions where the colour of an object is determined by the
need to either retain or dissipate heat effectively, like e.g. the
black colour of the underside of the Space Shuttle.
2.3. Practical Relevance of Kirchhoff’s Law in the
Visible Range
Kirchhoff’s Law predicts that all coloured objects glow with
hues that are different from the "standard" reddish-orangeyellow blackbody glow colour sequence associated with the
phenomenon. As we can see in Figure 1, but also in the (idealised) simulation shown in Figure 7, there are cases where
this behaviour can account for significant differences in appearance. But in general, colour changes compared to an
"expected" glow colour, and markedly directional emission
patterns, actually appear to be quite uncommon phenomena.

1271

diffuse cuprous oxide – which then diffusely emits radiation
that is very close to unmodified Blackbody behaviour (see
Figure 4 for a photo of coins that have been heated). And
there is not even a need for flames to be present for oxidation
to take place - for instance, molten iron oxidises very rapidly
when in the presence of air. In some conditions, this can lead
to a layer of rust particles floating on molten iron almost immediately after it is poured from a furnace. According to
Kirchhoff’s Law, such a layer of highly absorbing particles
obviously strongly alters the emission characteristics of the
glowing matter, and would have to be taken into account if a
prediction of such a scene were desired. In this regard, noble
metals such as gold are easier to handle, since no oxidisation
takes place. This means that "abnormally" coloured glowing
objects are not as common as Kirchhoff’s law would suggest - but since there are plenty of scenarios, such as protective atmospheres, or thin, heat-resistant transparent coatings,
which prevent oxidisation, any engineer working with Predictive Rendering should be aware of the phenomenon.
Also, there is at least one other phenomenon that affects
the appearance of hot matter: the fundamental optical constants of substances, such as their complex index of refraction, change with temperature – usually also in the direction
that the material becomes less colourful [Aks77].
3. Modelling Glowing Surfaces in Computer Graphics
In computer graphics, the options to describe the light L received at a viewpoint x from a point x on a glowing object
of temperature T are (in order of increasing realism):
3.1. Approach A – Diffuse Emission Only
The simplest option, which we only mention here for completeness’ sake, and because it seems to be implicitly assumed in some older literature [Gla95], is to assume a glowing object of temperature T to be a diffuse emitter I(T ):

LA (x, ω) = I(T )
Figure 4: The upper three coins in this photo were heated in
a gas flame, as shown in Figure 1. The left and middle coins
(nickel-plated and copper-plated steel) exhibit marked oxidisation, which turned them both into neutrally coloured objects – and they both glowed with the same reddish hue. The
gold coin on the right did not oxidise at all when held into the
flame, and as a consequence, glowed with a markedly different hue from that of the others. The copper coin in front is
there for comparison with the oxidised copper coin.
The main reason why the phenomenon is rarely noticed
is that the majority of materials rapidly oxidise, as soon as
they get very hot – and that this change is usually towards
a colourless, diffuse appearance. If a shiny, reddish copper
coin is held into a flame, it starts to glow, but it is at the same
time also immediately covered by an opaque layer of black,
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Advantage: extremely simple, and easy to sample efficiently. Even though it is unrealistic (cf. fig. 3), this is still
arguably the standard for area lightsources in a lot of GI rendering systems these days.
Disadvantages: noticeably unrealistic appearance. Since
real glowing objects do not exhibit perfectly diffuse emission, no gradual transition from a cold (i.e. purely reflective)
to a glowing state as seen in our test images is possible, and
the colour of glowing objects can be quite wrong.
3.2. Approach B – Simple Additive Combination of
Reflectance and Emission
If one wants to add the capability to describe the intermediate stages between cold and fully glowing objects, one only

1272

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

has to combine the integrated reflectance ρ of the object in
its cold state multiplied with the incident radiance L , and
the blackbody radiation for the desired temperature I(T ):

limited applicability of approach A is demonstrated by the
unrealistic appearance of the spheres in Figure 3.
4.1. Description of the Test Settings

Z

LB (x, ω) = I(T ) +

L (x , ω ) · ρ(x, ω, ω )dω

Ω

Advantages: simple, and gradual transitions between cold
and glowing are possible. This is arguably one of the standard approaches when modelling weakly glowing, reflective
objects in contemporary production CG.
Disadvantages: as with approach A, both the colour and the
brightness of the glowing object can be wrong, as well as the
directional behaviour of the radiation.
3.3. Approach C – Combination According to
Kirchhoff’s Law
The consequence of the physics background discussed in
section 2 is that in order to describe a glowing object, one
has to attenuate the blackbody radiation associated with its
temperature with the absorbance a of the surface at the point
of interest. This attenuated energy is then used in exactly the
same way as with approach B:
LC (x, ω) = I(T ) · a(x, ω) +

Z

L (x , ω ) · ρ(x, ω, ω )dω

Ω

Since the conservation of energy dictates that the energy reflected by an object, and the energy absorbed by it, have to
be equal to the flux of incident energy, the absorbance a is
easily computed as 1 − f if one knows the reflectivity f of
an object.
Advantages: still simple (certainly not a lot more complicated than approach B), but considerably more realistic.
Disadvantages: none, at least in principle. There is one large
caveat that goes with approach C, though: obviously, the results obtained with such a technique are only as accurate as
the BRDF model used for the reflectance f of the glowing
object. And in a lot of cases, this is a non-trivial problem as
soon as very hot substances are involved (see section 2.3).
It is very important to note that the approach introduced
in this section is not restricted to purely specular surfaces.
The "one minus reflectance" constraint has to hold for all
sorts of surfaces, so it directly applies to glossy or diffuse
surfaces as well. In particular, microfacet-based BRDF models like Torrance-Sparrow can be immediately used together
with this technique. The only reason we restricted the rendered images in this paper to perfectly smooth surfaces was
in order to keep the number of test cases down.
4. Results
To demonstrate the effect that correct modelling of glowing
surfaces can have, we concentrate on highlighting the difference between approaches B and C from section 3 – the very

For our comparisons, we use opaque objects that are capable
of being heated to temperatures where significant glow is noticeable without disintegrating, discolouring, or bursting into
flame, i.e. we focus on at least theoretically realistic usage
cases for predictive rendering purposes, such as the appearance of glowing or molten metal, and of glowing dielectrics
such as glass or quartz with temperatures of up to 1600 K. In
this temperature range, the material constants which govern
reflectance and absorbance (e.g. in the case of the Fresnel
equations, the refractive index) are still reasonably close to
their room-temperature values as they are usually quoted in
literature. At higher temperatures, these do actually change,
usually in the direction that the colourfulness of the material
decreases [Aks77]. We also concentrate on opaque objects
only because we want to discount volumetric effects, and
discuss the surface appearance of glowing objects. But the
principles of emission modelling discussed here also apply
unchanged to transparent glowing substances, such as glass.
The scene we use contains only simple geometry –
spheres of increasing temperature, arranged in a circle on
a diffuse base surface. Regardless of the material of the
spheres, which changes between images, their arrangement
is always the same: the coolest sphere, at the 11 o’clock
position in the circle, is heated to 1050 K, with 50K increments in anti-clockwise direction – the hottest sphere at the
12 o’clock position is at 1600 K. All spheres are assumed
to be optically smooth, so their reflectance is governed by
Fresnel reflectance [BW64].
We use the following materials as test cases: Silver as representative of a neutrally coloured, reflective metal, and copper and gold are examples of bright, coloured metals that affect the emission colour. Black quartz is a dielectric that is
still solid at the given temperatures, and also of a material
that is very dark (i.e. close to blackbody behaviour). Finally,
selenium and platinum are used as intermediate cases of
sorts - darker materials that consequently exhibit markedly
stronger glow than their more shiny counterparts. Material
constants were taken from literature [Pal85], and all images
were rendered with a path tracer with 8 spectral samples.
Simplifying Assumptions in the Test Settings
The setting in which we place the glowing objects is idealised in two important respects: first, we assume a protective atmosphere that prevents oxidisation (see section 2.3) so
that the surfaces of the objects retain their material composition regardless of temperature (incandescent light bulbs with
their glowing metal filaments are filled with inert gas for this
very reason). And secondly, the scenes shown in Figures 5,
6, 7 and 10 are just a snapshot of a scene in which the various heated objects have been placed at the very moment the
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1273

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

and potential magnitude of the impact that the inclusion of
Kirchhoff’s law has on the modelling of glowing objects.
4.2. Changes in Emission Strength

(a) Quartz, approach B

(c) Quartz, approach C

(b) Silver, approach B

(d) Silver, approach C

Figure 5: The difference in glow intensity between modelling approaches B and C. The whitish glow of the hottest
sphere in images a), b) and c) is a tone reproduction artefact
due to its comparatively high brightness.

(a) Platinum

(c) Selenium

The most noticeable effect of using approach C to model
emission is that the brightness of the resulting glow can be
significantly less than with approach B – this is in full accordance with the theory outlined in section 2. Figure 5 shows a
comparison between approaches B and C for two materials
of very different albedo: black quartz and silver.
As expected, in the case of black quartz, no large differences between approach B and C are visible. The objects are
relatively dark to begin with, and are therefore reasonable
approximations of blackbodies. But note the discrepancies
around the circumference of the spheres - if diffuse emission is simply added to the reflectance, this results in errors
at the edges of the spheres. By contrast, the difference in
brightness is very large for silver, in fulfilment of the "good
reflectors are bad emitters" rule. However, good emitters do
not automatically have to be dielectrics: selenium, a semiconductor which has a dark appearance in the visible range,
glows almost as nicely as the black quartz specimen (see
Figure 6).

(b) Gold
(a) Quartz

(b) Gold

(c) Silver

(d) Copper

(d) Copper

Figure 6: The difference in glow intensity between various
materials. Note the correspondence between the albedo of a
material, and the intensity of the glow. The white sphere in
c) is a tone reproduction artefact.

image is rendered. Without any external source of heat, the
spheres would of course all rapidly cool down as time progressed, and decrease their emission. Moreover, they would
of course also transfer heat between each other, and to the
ground they are placed on. But neither of these two simplifying assumptions is relevant to demonstrate the nature
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 7: Demonstration of how the absorbance of a glowing material affects glow colour. Note that without ambient
illumination, the tone reproduction operator automatically
reproduces the images at roughly similar brightness levels.
Also, compare the colour of the gold and copper emissions
with Figure 6 – there, the ambient illumination partially (but
only partially) masks the altered emission hues.

4.3. Changes in Emission Colour
Figure 7 shows four images which demonstrate the colour
changes that attenuation of the underlying blackbody radi-

1274

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

(a) ↔ horizontal filter

(b)

vertical filter

(a) Fig. 5c – Quartz, ambient(b) Fig. 5d – Silver, ambient light
light

Figure 8: Photograph of a polished, glowing gold coin taken
through a linear polarisation filter. (a) a horizontally oriented
filter cancels out part of the emission, while (b) a vertically
oriented one enhances it. This is exactly the opposite effect
that a linear polarisation filter has on reflected light, and consistent with the rendered results shown in section 4.4, and in
particular those visualised in Figure 11.
(c) Fig. 7a – Quartz, w/o ambient (d) Fig. 7c – Silver, w/o ambient

4.4. Emission Polarisation
A characteristic feature of thermally induced emission from
smooth to moderately rough surfaces, which is totally lost if
approach B is used, is that of emission polarization [San65,
RPL99], a photograph of which can be seen in Figure 8. In
the infrared region of the spectrum, where practically all objects emit some sort of "glow" even at room temperatures,
the characteristic differences in polarisation behaviour between dielectric and conductors can be used to identify the
basic material class seen in an IR image [WLT98], and the
development of accurate models for the thermal emission
polarisation of rough surfaces [AZ08] is an active research
topic. These citations are just starting points into a very large
and active field of research in the areas of thermal imaging and computer vision. Since both areas deal with electromagnetic radiation (albeit in different wavelength brackets),
computer graphics can utilise some of the techniques developed there. Note that the issues described in section 2.3 also
apply: the rapid oxidisation of many visibly glowing mate-

conductor, n=1.12, k=2.6
1.0

Reflectance

As expected, for the left two images (quartz and silver)
the directional emission behaviour of the spheres is somewhat different, but the colour is roughly the same. The reflections from both silver and quartz are more or less neutrally
coloured, so for rising temperatures the emission from both
corresponds to a largely unmodified progression of blackbody colours. On the other hand, the emission from the
glowing gold and copper spheres shows a markedly different hue than the reddish glow one would expect there. For
coloured metals, this effect actually becomes even more pronounced at higher temperatures, where the underlying blackbody radiation contains more and more short wavelengths.

dielectric, n=1.9
1.0

0.5

F
F

0.5

avg.

F
0.0

0.0
0

30

60

90

1.0

0

30

60

90

0

30

60

90

1.0

Emission

ation with the absorbance of object material can cause. If
approach B were used, all the spheres in these images would
be of the same basic colour.

0.5

0.0

0.5

0.0
0

30

60

90

Figure 9: Top: Degree of polarisation plots [WW10] for images 5c, 5d, 7a and 7c. Left column: black quartz. Right
column: silver. Note how reflected ambient light is capable of canceling out emission polarisation. Bottom: the corresponding reflection vs. emission plots. The lower set of
curves is the inversion of the reflection functions: 1 − F.
How much a given material polarises incident or exitant radiation is not solely determined by the difference between
the two Fresnel components (cyan bars), but by the ratio of
this difference to the unpolarised component of the interaction (orange bars). As a consequence, a dielectric that totally
polarises reflected light at Brewster’s angle will only emit
weakly polarised light in that direction (plots on the left).

rials, along with the attendant increase in roughness, means
that emission from visibly glowing objects is considerably
less likely to be polarised than IR emission at room temperature. But non-reactive noble metals, such as gold, can be
expected to exhibit considerable emission polarisation.
Since we used a polarisation-capable spectral rendering
c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1275

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

(a) No polarisation

(b) With polarisation

(c) CIE L∗ a∗ b∗ ∆E

Figure 10: Reflections of glowing spheres in a black glass surface without (a) and with (b) polarisation taken into account. If
polarisation is taken into account, the appearance of the reflections is noticeably altered. The weak differences on the glowing
spheres themselves are due to direct inter-reflections, which are also slightly altered. (c) shows the difference image.

system to generate the test images in this paper, visualising
the emission polarisation present in the test scenes is no extra
effort. For the two Fresnel reflectance components F⊥ and
F , the absorbance is computed separately as 1 − F⊥ and
1 − F ; this automatically yields polarised emission.
Figure 9 shows the overall degree of polarisation for two
materials – black quartz and silver – with and without ambient illumination. It is worth noting that the presence of ambient illumination of roughly similar strength to the glow of the
objects (as seen in Figures 5 and 6) cancels out much of the
intrinsic emission polarisation, and that the emission is only
clearly polarised if the ambient illumination is switched off
(as in Figure 7). The orientation visualisation of the linear
emission polarisation shows that, as expected, it is rotated
by 90 degrees relative to the reflection polarisation. Also
note that one can clearly see something that is mentioned in
polarimetry literature: the emission polarisation of metals is
stronger than that of dielectrics because the reflective polarisation is weak, and vice versa. The plots in the lower half of
Figure 9 demonstrate why this seemingly counter-intuitive
behaviour is in fact directly determined by the behaviour of
the Fresnel reflectance functions.
4.4.1. Reflections of Glowing Objects
One of the effects of this phenomenon can be seen in Figure 10. Since reflections from smooth phase boundaries are
governed by the Fresnel terms which, amongst other things,
also predict varying reflectance based on input polarisation,
it stands to reason that the mirror image of a glowing object should look different when polarisation is taken into account. Figure 10 shows that under certain circumstances, this
effect can be strong enough to be directly visible. This fact
is important in the prototyping of e.g. lamps where a bright
light source is put into a strongly reflective environment.
4.4.2. Emission Characteristics of Incandescent Sources
Apart from more or less weakly glowing objects like
the ones discussed so far, it is also interesting to conc 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

sider the polarisation characteristics of incandescent lightsources, i.e. very brightly glowing objects. The literature
about this phenomenon goes in two directions: some authors attempt to characterise the emission polarisation of
entire luminaires [Spo72, Kos80], while others attempt to
measure the emission polarisation of a single glowing filament [BCC∗ 09]. The findings of the former two papers
could be replicated in a polarisation-capable renderer, but
most of the polarisation in that case would be due to interaction of the emitted light with the glass enclosure of the actual
luminaire (i.e. polarisation via refraction and reflection).

(a) Fig. 5c – Quartz, ambient

(b) Fig. 7c – Silver, dark

Figure 11: A plot of the direction of the overall linear polarisation (cf. [WW10]) found in some of the test images. Note
that as expected, the orientation of the emission polarisation
is rotated 90 degrees from that of the reflection polarisation.
More pertinent to our work is the latter paper, which deals
with the emission of a single Tungsten filament. Their measurements, as well as their calculations, show that the diameter of the wire affects both the overall degree of emission
polarisation, as well as its orientation. Apparently, the characteristics of strong incandescent emission from a thin wire
can not be sufficiently described by application of Kirchhoff’s law to a model of a long, thin, metallic cylinder. However, it is important to note that the orientation change of the
emission polarisation for decreasing wire diameter (cf. Figure 1 in [BCC∗ 09]) takes place in a realm where other assumptions break down, and not necessarily the approach we

1276

A. Wilkie & A. Weidlich / Light Emission from Glowing Solid Objects

present in sections 3.3 and 4.4. Recall that the Fresnel terms,
which are normally used to model reflectance from smooth
metallic objects in a graphics setting, are derived under the
assumption that electromagnetic radiation is reflected from
a planar phase boundary of infinite extent. This assumption
is obviously not met for a cylinder with a diameter on the
same order of magnitude as the wavelength of light. In this
case, a different mathematical approach [BCC∗ 09] which is
capable of yielding variable emission polarisation dependent
on the wire diameter is needed instead.
For larger wire diameters, the behaviour reported in literature [BCC∗ 09] actually agrees with our results; this scenario
is referred to as the "thick wire case". If one uses the formulas presented in section 4.4 on an emissive cylinder, the
linear polarisation direction is correct: the reflective polarisation caused by a cylinder is aligned with the cylinder axis,
so the emission polarisation is orthogonal to it – which again
is in agreement with measurements found in cited literature.
4.4.3. Capturing Polarisation Profiles
As noted earlier, it is usually not feasible to model lamps
down to the level of individual filaments when it comes to
simulating light transport in a large, generic scene. But it is
worth noting that the emissive polarisation profile of a lightsource (such as the patterns seen in [Spo72]) could easily be
included in a generalised extended luminaire description format. The contents of such profiles could either be measured,
or precomputed using the method outlined in this paper.
Such an approach would allow the inclusion of the effects described in this paper without having to deal with
the inner workings of each luminaire during rendering. For
Predictive Rendering purposes, this attention to detail can
be necessary in some cases: emission polarisation information can be essential when trying to accurately predict
the appearance of scenes that include many specular interreflections [WUT∗ 04].
5. Conclusion and Outlook
We demonstrated the benefits of using Kirchhoff’s law
of thermal emission and its influence on emission colour,
strengths and polarization to derive a physically plausible
description of glowing surfaces. In terms of procedure, the
difference to the state of the art (i.e. simple addition of the reflective and emissive components) might not seem large, but
the proper combination proposed in this paper yields significant improvements in the capability to predict the appearance of glowing objects. Also, while all results in this paper
were generated with an offline spectral renderer, nothing precludes use of this technique in realtime rendering settings.
As noted in sections 2.3 and 3, the "1 minus reflectance"
approach to attenuating blackbody emission presented in this
paper has one potential achilles heel that is rooted in the nature of the problem: an accurate description of reflectance for

hot objects can, under certain circumstances, and for certain
materials, require quite different models than those needed
at room temperature. This potential complication does not,
however, invalidate the fundamental approach presented in
this paper. In the future, we plan on investigating this aspect
further, and to derive models for complex molten substances
APPROVED

References
[Aks77] A KSYUTOV L. N.: Temperature dependence of the optical constants of tungsten and gold. Journal of Applied Spectroscopy 26 (1977), 656–660. 10.1007/BF00611851.
[AZ08] A N C., Z ERINGUE K.: Emission polarization from rough
surfaces. Polarization: Measurement, Analysis, and Remote
Sensing VIII 6972, 1 (2008), 69720O.
[BCC∗ 09] B IMONTE G., C APPELLIN L., C ARUGNO G., RUOSO
G., S AADEH D.: Polarized thermal emission by thin metal wires.
New Journal of Physics, 11 (2009).
[BW64] B ORN M., W OLF E.: Principles of Optics. The Macmillan Company, 1964.
[DJ05] D ONNER C., J ENSEN H. W.: Light diffusion in multilayered translucent materials. ACM Transactions on Graphics
24, 3 (July 2005), 1032–1039.
[Gla95] G LASSNER A. S.: Principles of digital image synthesis. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, California
(1995).
[HK93] H ANRAHAN P., K RUEGER W.: Reflection from layered
surfaces due to subsurface scattering. In SIGGRAPH (1993),
ACM, pp. 165–174.
[Ill02] I LLUMINATING E NGINEERING S OCIETY: ANSI/IES LM63-02: ANSI Approved Standard File Format for Electronic
Transfer of Photometric Data and Related Information, 2002.
[Kos80] KOSTUK R. K.: Polarization characteristics of dxw-type
filament lamps. Applied Optics 19, 14 (1980).
[Pal85] PALIK E. D.: Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids.
Academic Press, 1985.
[PH04] P HARR M., H UMPHREYS G.: Physically Based Rendering: From Theory to Implementation. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2004.
[RPL99] R ESNICK A., P ERSONS C., L INDQUIST G.: Polarized
emissivity and Kirchhoff’s Law. Appl. Opt. 38, 8 (1999), 1384–
1387.
[San65] S ANDUS O.: A review of emission polarization. Appl.
Opt. 4, 12 (1965), 1634–1642.
[SH01] S IEGEL R., H OWELL J. R.: Thermal Radiation Heat
Transfer, 4th Edition. Taylor & Francis, New York, NY, 2001.
[Spo72] S POONER D.: Polarization pattern of a high intensity
incandescent lamp. Applied Optics 11, 12 (1972).
[WLT98] W OLFF L. B., L UNDBERG A. J., TANG R.: Image
understanding from thermal emission polarization. In Image Understanding Workshop (1998), pp. 747–754.
[WUT∗ 04] W ILKIE A., U LBRICHT C., T OBLER R. F., Z OTTI
G., P URGATHOFER W.: An analytical model for skylight polarisation. In Eurographics Symposium on Rendering (Norrköping,
Sweden, 2004), Keller A., Jensen H. W., (Eds.), Eurographics
Association, pp. 387–397.
[WW10] W ILKIE A., W EIDLICH A.: A standardised polarisation
visualisation for images. In Proceedings of the Spring Conference on Computer Graphics 2010 (SCCG 2010) (May 2010).

c 2011 The Author(s)
c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

