DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01955.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in
Dynamic Social Networks
Khairi Reda, Chayant Tantipathananandh, Andrew Johnson, Jason Leigh, and Tanya Berger-Wolf
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA

Abstract
Social network analysis is the study of patterns of interaction between social entities. The field is attracting
increasing attention from diverse disciplines including sociology, epidemiology, and behavioral ecology. An
important sociological phenomenon that draws the attention of analysts is the emergence of communities,
which tend to form, evolve, and dissolve gradually over a period of time. Understanding this evolution is
crucial to sociologists and domain scientists, and often leads to a better appreciation of the social system under
study. Therefore, it is imperative that social network visualization tools support this task. While graph-based
representations are well suited for investigating structural properties of networks at a single point in time, they
appear to be significantly less useful when used to analyze gradual structural changes over a period of time.
In this paper, we present an interactive visualization methodology for dynamic social networks. Our technique
focuses on revealing the community structure implied by the evolving interaction patterns between individuals. We
apply our visualization to analyze the community structure in the US House of Representatives. We also report on
a user study conducted with the participation of behavioral ecologists working with social network datasets that
depict interactions between wild animals. Findings from the user study confirm that the visualization was helpful
in providing answers to sociological questions as well as eliciting new observations on the social organization of
the population under study.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): H.5.m [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Miscellaneous—

1. Introduction
Social networks are abstract representations of social interactions between individuals. They can be used to capture a wide range of interactions and relationships between
social entities. As such, social networks have attracted attention from sociologists [WF94, Fre04], epidemiologists
[Het00, And99], ecologists [KLJ09], and political scientists
[ZFT∗ 08], among others.
Graphs are considered the de facto tool to computationally
model and visually depict social networks. Nodes represent
individuals and edges represent interactions between these
individuals. The majority of social network models aggregate interactions over the entire observation period without
regard to their chronological order, representing the network
using one static graph. But thanks to technological developments that have allowed sampling of populations at temporally high resolutions, a new paradigm has been emerging in
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

the social network analysis community in the recent years.
Scientists are transitioning from static to dynamic models
that incorporate time, and emphasize the importance of the
temporal ordering of interactions [Car03]. These new models offer an arguably better approximation to social systems,
which more often than not are characterized as being dynamic. They have also enabled scientists to address questions relating to dynamic social processes, such as spread of
diseases and rumors.
Visualization has always played a central role in social
network analysis [Fre00]. Yet in spite of this, visualization
techniques have not kept pace with the recent developments
in the field. Most visualization tools used by social network
analysts are based predominantly on automatic graph layout
algorithms. Although there is a large body of literature on
the layout of static graphs, dynamic graphs have received far
less attention. Moreover, there appears to be a consensus that

1062

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

dynamic graphs face significant challenges to overcome before becoming a standard tool for visualizing dynamic social
networks [BdM06].

We discuss current limitations and suggest future research
directions in section 7, and conclude the paper in section 8.

Sociologists have long recognized an important phenomenon in social systems, namely, the emergence of communities characterized by groups of individuals who interact frequently [Fre93, NBW06]. The identification of communities often reveals profound knowledge about the social
system. Therefore, an important goal of social network visualization is to facilitate the discovery of communities and
patterns that govern their evolution. While many tools have
been developed to visualize communities in static social networks, the problem remains largely unresolved in dynamic
networks.

2. Related work

In this paper we introduce an interactive visualization
methodology aimed at dynamic social networks. In contrast to earlier work, our technique can be used to obtain
a stable and coherent view of the evolving social structure
while enabling the user to inspect the dynamic network at
the finest temporal scale. We preprocess the network using a community identification framework to detect persistent communities. Individuals are represented with threads
that join together forming tight bundles which in turn represent communities. This depiction enables analysts to uncover individual-community association patterns, as well as
observe the evolving community structure as it emerges from
the collective interactions of individuals. To illustrate our
technique, we use it to visualize voting records of legislators in the US House of Representatives and analyze the resulting community structure. We also describe a user study
we conducted with the participation of behavioral ecologists.
Results from the user study reveal that the new visualization
was helpful in providing answers to sociological questions
as well as eliciting new observations. In summary, the contributions of this paper are:
• An interactive visualization methodology for dynamic social networks with a focus on revealing the community
structure implied by the observed interactions, and how
that structure evolves over time.
• A real-world case study in which the visualization was
used and evaluated by a team of behavioral ecologists who
regularly work with dynamic social network models of
animal behavior.
We believe that a fresh look at the problem of dynamic
networks visualization will not only benefit sociologists, but
will also be of interest to the wider community of domain
scientists who increasingly rely on dynamic social network
models. The rest of the paper is divided as follows. We survey the literature in section 2. We introduce our visualization
in section 3 along with a discussion of task requirements.
The implementation details including the layout algorithm
are discussed in section 4. In section 5 we use our visualization to analyze the community structure in the US House
of Representatives. We present the user study in section 6.

The majority of literature on social network visualization
is based on static graph drawing. A good survey of graph
layout algorithms can be found in [BETT99]. Fewer techniques have been proposed to visualize dynamic networks
that explicitly contain a notion of change over time. Perhaps
the most straightforward method is to produce an animation
to depict the evolving structure by drawing the network at
different timesteps using standard graph layout algorithms
[MMBd05]. Minimizing movement of nodes throughout the
animation has been shown to contribute to clarity for some
tasks, a principle that has been referred to as maintaining the
‘mental map’ [FE02,PHG07]. Extensions to straightforward
animation have been proposed. For example, Kumar et al.
combined dynamic graph layout with clustering and edge filtering to reveal more prominent structural changes [KG06].
Although there is some evidence to suggest that animation
could help the viewer perceive structural change in the network [MB06], these results were limited to small datasets
with few tens of nodes. It remains to be seen whether animated graphs are effective for visualizing large dynamic
social networks with hundreds or even thousands of individuals. However, evidence points to limitations of animation when used to illustrate trends in the data [RFF∗ 08].
Moreover, there is usually a conflict between maintaining
the mental map and other agreed upon aesthetic principles
such as minimizing edge crossing [SP08], potentially resulting in poor local layouts throughout the animation.
An alternative to animation is unrolling the dynamic network in space [UC03]. In these techniques, the network
is drawn on a translucent plane at each timestep using a
graph layout algorithm. The planes are stacked on top of
each other, simulating passage of time. This method however is limited to visualizing few timesteps, as simply stacking up slices indefinitely makes it difficult to see ones that
are further back in time. Moreover, this representation leads
to substantial redundancy with each individual (or cluster)
encoded independently at every snapshot, placing sharp constraints on the scalability of this method. A common extension to stacked graphs is the ‘tube’ or ‘worm’ metaphor
which is used to link nodes or clusters across time slices to
make them salient [GHW09, ADM∗ 04]. These extensions
however typically employ a force-directed layout or some
form of a simple 2D euclidean-space clustering to group individuals in every time slice independently. This usually results in suboptimal clustering of nodes, and potentially an incoherent layout across time slices. Moreover, the 3D layout
typically used in stacked graphs suffer form artifacts such as
occlusion and perspective distortion.
Some techniques have been proposed to address the limitations of stacked graphs. Shen et al. describe a hybrid
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

visualization that combines graphs with ‘behavior rings’
[SM08]. This technique can be used to study activity patterns
within communities. However, one cannot use this technique
to observe structural changes that led to the formation of
these communities in the first place. Falkowski et al. detect
similar groups across different timesteps, drawing a link between instances of the same community [FBS06]. This technique enables the viewer to notice major structural changes,
but makes it difficult to observe slow, long-term evolution
of communities. Ogawa et al. detect and visualize clusters
at each timestep, representing them using Sankey diagrams
and drawing edges only when individuals leave their cluster to join a new one [OMB∗ 07]. Our visual representation
is semantically similar with its focus on revealing communities. A potential problem with Ogawa et al’s approach is
their time-insensitive clustering of every snapshot independently, which could introduce abrupt changes to the structure and obscure smooth transitions. We overcome this problem using a community identification framework, which produces a temporally fine-grained but coherent view of the
structure. Variations of the Sankey diagram have also been
used to visualize multi-dimensional data. The Clustergram
shows data points moving between clusters under various
clustering conditions, with the X axis representing the number of clusters and the Y axis representing the cluster centroid [Sch02]. The Clustergram however can not be used to
show time-varying data. Our visualization adapts this layout
to dynamic social networks by employing an adaptive clustering algorithm instead of varying the number of clusters.
This frees up the X axis, which we use to depict time.
Our technique is also visually similar to parallel coordinates diagrams [Ins09], some variations of which have been
proposed to visualize time varying data with the horizontal
axis depicting time. Examples include History Flow which
visualizes the evolution of Wikipedia documents to illustrate trends in collaborative editing [VWD04]. Another notably similar visualization is TimeNets, which visualizes genealogical data emphasizing the temporal ordering of marriage, divorce, and consanguine relationships [WKCH10].
Individuals are represented using lines, which converge together to depict marriage and diverge to depict divorce. Our
design utilizes the same metaphor and extends it several individuals who converge to depict a formation of a community.
In contrast to earlier dynamic social network visualization
tools which attempt to adapt existing clustering and graph
drawing algorithms to dynamic networks, our technique employs a community identification framework specifically designed for dynamic social networks to derive a high-level description of the social structure. This framework offers a sociological interpretation of the raw interactions, which tend
to be noisy and incoherent, providing a better approximation to the social reality. The visualization exploits those interpretations to offer a coherent, yet temporally fine-grained
depiction of the evolving social structure.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1063

3. Design
In this section we first formulate the design goals and describe the decisions we took when designing the visualization. We also briefly describe the community identification
process that precedes the visualization. We then introduce
our visual metaphor and describe the interactive features of
the visualization. We motivate the discussion by outlining
the challenges analyst face when working with dynamic social networks and justify our design decisions by addressing
the requirements of sociologists and other domain scientists
working with social networks.
3.1. Design goals
One phenomenon social scientists are interested in is the
emergence of communities in social networks, which manifest as groups of individuals interacting closely and frequently with each other [Fre93,NBW06]. Communities tend
to evolve gradually as opposed to forming and disbanding
spontaneously [BHKL06]. Therefore, it is important for social network visualizations tools to facilitate the analysis of
community structures, and how these structures evolve over
time. A related task is identifying patterns that govern community evolution in the social system under study. Thus, our
main goal is enabling the user to quickly perceive the various communities present in the network at different times.
The design should also facilitate perception of patterns with
respect to community evolution.
The passage of time by itself however does not necessarily provide a compelling explanatory narrative. A secondary
goal is a design that allows the integration of additional domain data that could help explain how and why the observed
social structure evolved in the way it did. We represent the
temporal dimension in space, which makes it easier to encode both static and time dependent individual or group attributes. This also makes it possible to represent important
events on the timeline. For example, the visualization of the
US House of Representatives community structure in section 5 depicts the political party of legislators using color.
The user can also see a description of the resolutions being
voted on by hovering the mouse pointer over the timeline. In
section 6, we describe how we added a second view depicting the movement of groups of animals in the environment
alongside the social structure. This coupling turned out to be
helpful to behavioral ecologists who were able to integrate
their understanding of the habitat and come up with ecologically plausible narratives that explain the observed communities in Grevy’s zebras.
3.2. Challenges with dynamic social networks
Dynamic social networks present a number of challenges.
A significant number of interactions captured by the network could be purely incidental. For example, a network
that derives ties from physical proximity of subjects might

1064

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

A

C

B

Q

X

R

Y

A

C
B

T1

T2

Q

X

R

Y

A

C

B

Q

X

R

Y

T3

Figure 1: Simplified example of community identification. In timestep T1 there are two communities: orange and purple. In
timestep T2, C remains affiliated with the orange community despite its transient interaction with Q and R. On the other hand,
X and Y split from the purple community to form the green community

contain a large number of unintended interactions between
individuals simply because they happen to get close to each
other with no intention to interact. While it might be interesting to analyze these incidental interactions in some circumstances, social scientists are often interested in persistent interactions that recur frequently between closely-knit social
groups [Fre93]. Identifying and visualizing these groups is
not a straightforward task. In a static network, the analyst
resorts to applying one of many available graph clustering
algorithms. Alternatively, she/he can visualize the graph using a force-directed layout to reveal clusters by automatically moving highly linked nodes close to each other. In dynamic networks on the other hand, applying a clustering algorithm to snapshots of the network at different timesteps
results in independent clusters that are hard to link across
timesteps. Since most communities tend to evolve gradually over time as opposed to forming and disbanding spontaneously [BHKL06], clustering snapshots of the network independently imposes artificial discretization, making it more
difficult to analyze the evolution of communities spanning
multiple timesteps.

3.3. Community identification
To filter out transient interactions and deduce a higher-level
interpretation of the data, we preprocess the input network
using the community identification framework proposed in
[TBW09]. The framework infers persistent social groups in
the network and establishes a stable labeling for instances of
these groups across all timesteps. The dynamic groups are
referred to as ‘communities’. A community is a fluid grouping of individuals that persists and evolves over time, allowing new members to join and existing members to leave. An
individual can be affiliated with different communities over
the observation period, however the individual can only be
affiliated with a single community at a particular point in
time. Figure 1 illustrates this through an example. We give
an overview of the community identification framework below. Complete description can be found in [TBW09].
Given a set of N individuals {I1 , I2 , . . . , IN } and a sequence of M timesteps, the input to the algorithm comes in
the form of an interaction sequence < H1 , H2 , . . . , HM > over

M timesteps. Each element Ht = {gt,1 , ..., gt,k(t) } is the collection of disjoint groups of individuals that were observed
at timestep t. At every timestep, an individual can be in only
one of the groups gt,i , although not all individuals are required to be present at a given timestep. This makes the
framework robust when the sampling fails to locate all individuals. The algorithm detects communities that are latent in
the interaction sequence and generate a community interpretation. The community interpretation is essentially a table
with rows listing timesteps (T1 . . . TM ) and columns listing
individuals (I1 . . . IN ). A cell (t, i) is a single integer value
indicating the community ID with which the individual i is
affiliated at timestep t.
Calculating a community interpretation is formulated in
terms of a combinatorial optimization problem. Costs are assigned to the actions of individuals over time. Three types
of costs are defined: switching, visiting, and absence costs,
which are treated as input parameters to the algorithm. An
individuals who switches his/her community affiliation incurs a switching cost at every switch. Individuals at times
do interact with groups outside their communities, in which
case they incur a visit cost. Lastly, an absence cost is incurred when an individuals is absent from his/her community. The optimal community interpretation is the one the assigns individuals to communities at a minimum cost observing the condition that an individual can be in one community
only at a given time. The three parameters (switching, visiting, and absence costs) allow the algorithm to be used to
model a wide range of social systems with varying degrees
of dynamism. For example, in some social settings such as
informal parties, it is acceptable for strangers who are not
members of the hosting community to attend, although attending a party in most cases does not necessarily imply that
the individual has has been accepted as a member of that
community. In this social setting, the visiting cost could be
set to a low value where as the switching cost (that is the cost
of joining a new community) could be set to a relatively high
value. In other settings such as legislatures, voting against
the party’s stated position can have several consequences for
a party member. Therefore we expect equally high visiting
and switching costs in political social networks of legislators.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

1065

One limitation of the current community identification algorithm is the assumption that individuals interact in disjoint
groups at every point in time, though these groups can and
do change over time. While this limits the type of networks
that can be visualized using our tools, the constraint of disjoint interaction groups holds in a wide range of commonly
studied social activities such as academic co-authorship relationships.

House of Representatives between March 3 and 18, 2010.
The visualization can be manipulated using conventional
scaling and translation. Zooming in allows one to see the
composition of communities in detail. It also enables the analyst to focus on a shorter period of time. Figure 4 shows a
detailed segment of the 2010 House of Representatives. The
diagram can also be scaled none-uniformly in the time dimension. This is equivalent to adjusting the aspect ratio in a
time-series chart to make trends more obvious.

3.4. Visual metaphor

Another way to inspect the network is by looking at the
community affiliation patterns of individuals. We allow the
user to select an individual by brushing its corresponding
thread. This causes other threads to be drawn translucently,
emphasizing the selected individual. Although other threads
fade out, community bundles remain visible, allowing one
to see the affiliation pattern of the focal individual in relation to the community structure without loosing context.
Figure 5 illustrates this feature. One can identify the various
communities an individual chose to affiliate with by tracing
its thread. A straight, horizontal thread indicates that the individual remains affiliated with its current community. When
an individual leaves its community and joins another one, its
thread starts to separate from its community to join the new
one. Selection of multiple individuals is possible by holding down the shift key and clicking more individuals, or by
drawing a selection box. This feature can be used to compare
affiliation patterns of multiple individuals.

The layout of our visualization is similar to a timeline chart
depicting a time series. We use the X axis to represent
time, while the Y axis is used to position individuals in
their appropriate communities. This allows us to use the
vertical space in the chart to group individuals rather than
drawing edges between them. The inspiration for our visual
metaphor was a Randall Munroe chart depicting the proximity of movie characters throughout the narrative [Mun]. Social scientists often use the term ‘social fiber’ when referring
to the cohesiveness and persistence of relationship between
individuals in a particular social setting. Expanding on this,
we can think of individuals as thin threads that are intricately
woven together to form the social fiber. As ties between individuals strengthen, their threads join together to form thicker
bundles, which in turn represent communities. We use a single thread to visually plot the community affiliation of an
individual over time. When a group of individuals form a
community, their threads come together forming a bundle,
which we use to denote that community. When a community
starts disbanding, its threads start to separate join other communities. This phenomenon is evident in the visualization in
the form of gradual thinning of communities over time. Figure 2 visualizes the dataset presented earlier in Figure 1.

Figure 2: Visualization of the example presented in Figure 1.
There are two communities at timesteps T1 and T2. At T3
two individuals, X and Y, leave their community to form a
new community at T3.

3.5. Interaction
The default view of the visualization shows an overview of
community structure throughout the entire observation period. Figure 3 shows the community structure of the 2010 US
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

4. Implementation
After preprocessing the network with the community identification framework (Section 3.3), the layout algorithm calculates a vertical position for each community, as well as vertical offsets for the threads of individuals within communities.
The ordering of communities is based on an influence factor,
which we define as the cumulative number of individuals affiliated with the community over all timesteps (individuals
may appear more than once in this count). The communities
are then assigned to rows. A single row can contain multiple communities as long as they do not overlap in time. We
loop through all communities in decreasing order of influence and assign each community to the first available row,
taking care to not overlap with existing communities. New
rows are added as needed to accommodate all communities.
This results in large and active communities being placed
closer to the top of the visualization. The layout algorithm
also orders the individual threads inside each community.
To allow the viewer to make correlation between community structure and other domain variables, we have chosen
to order the threads based on individual attributes. For example, in the visualization of congressional voting record,
individuals were grouped according to their party (Republicans, Democrats, then independents), and within each party
individuals were ordered alphabetically. On the other hand,
in the visualization of animal communities used in the user

1066

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

Figure 3: Portion of US House of Representatives roll call votes covering the period of March 3 through 18, 2010. Red threads
represent Republicans while the blue threads represent Democratic representatives. Hovering over the timeline with the mouse
brings up a description of the proposed resolution at the highlighted timestep.

study, we ordered individual animals based on the code assigned by the ecologists during data collection. This allowed
the ecologists to find an individual quickly and relate their
previous knowledge of that individual’s behavior. While the
current layout algorithm does not optimize the view for minimum thread crossing, earlier experiments have shown that
optimizing the layout for minimum thread transition often
resulted in poor local layouts where some areas suffer form
excessive crossings. Instead of implementing optimizations,
we included a feature that allows the viewer to interactively
manipulate the vertical position of communities. This accomplished by holding down the control key on the keyboard
while dragging and dropping the desired row, causing it to be
and moved vertically to the new position. This feature turned
up to be useful while inspecting the interactions happening
during a short period of time. In these cases, the viewer can
interactively arrange the communities to obtain a good local
layout that minimizes thread crossings.
During our experiments, we varied the size of the individual threads based on the size of the dataset. We used thin,
translucent threads to depict legislators in the congressional
voting records dataset in order to depict all of the 434 members of the house. In the visualization of animal communities, we increased the thickness of the threads to make them
salient, as the ecologists were interested in the behavior of
individual animals and relating it to the overall community
structure. The spacing between the lines was also increased
to make the individual threads more clear.
5. Example: analyzing legislature voting record
In this section we show how our visualization can be used to
analyze a dynamic social network that consists of ‘hidden’
communities embedded in larger groups. In a typical legisla-

tive body such as the US House of Representatives, legislators cast their votes (supporting, opposing, or not voting) on
proposed resolutions. This activity can be regarded as a form
of social interaction and can be represented with a dynamic
social network. Legislators who cast the same vote on a particular issue can be thought to be interacting with each other.
Their collective interaction results in the emergence of various communities representing different political or opinion
groups in the legislature. Identifying these groups from the
voting record is a daunting task. This is because, taken together, the voting record shows only three groups (Yes, No,
and not voting). The various opinion groups are embedded
in this larger context. Moreover, observing how these opinion groups evolve yields insights into the dynamics of the
legislature.
The input dataset was obtained from the clerk office of
the House of Representatives [Cle]. The dataset contains
434 individuals who cast 500 roll call votes on the house
floor from January 13 to July 30, 2010 . For each vote,
representatives were grouped into 3 groups: Yes and No
groups, and those who voted present or were absent during the vote. In each of the three groups, representatives
were considered to be interacting with each other forming
3 disjoint cliques. Each vote was considered to be happening in a distinct timestep. Representatives were color coded
according to their political party. Red threads represent Republicans while blue threads represent Democratic representatives. Figure 3 shows an overview of the resulting community structure between March 3 and 18, 2010.
A look at the 2010 House of Representatives in Figure 3
reveals two major communities corresponding to members
of Democratic (blue) and Republican (red) party. A small
group of conservative Democrats who vote more closely
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

with Republicans can be seen in community E. Community H on the other hand contains progressive Democrats
who have a distinct voting record from more establishmentleaning Democrats (communities D and F). At times,
Democrats and Republicans converge into a single community, reflecting agreement between the two major parties. At
other times, the community structure reveals more diverse
opinion groups within the Democratic party. An example of
this happens in the period between March 9 and 11, leading up to a resolution proposed by Democratic representative Kucinich of Ohio who is known for his liberal views.
The proposed resolution directs the president to withdraw
American troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2010. Although the resolution was seen as largely symbolic since it
was almost guaranteed to fail, the events leading up to it
were seen as a measure of the house of representatives’ view
on president Obama’s Afghanistan troop surge announced
in December, 2009 [Hul10]. The vote on whether to consider Kucinich’s resolution for debate comes on March 10 in
roll-call #95. The majority of Democrats voted in favor of
starting the debate, and can be seen in community F. All Republicans alongside some conservative Democrats were opposed to even debating the resolution and voted No, forming
an opposing opinion group that can be seen in community
E. However, one can also see a relatively small splinter of
Democrats who branched off from community E to form a
short lived community in row A (top circle in Figure 3). This
community depicts a second opposing opinion group comprised of moderate and centrist Democrats who normally
vote with the party’s establishment but thought the Kucinich
resolution was too radical to even qualify for debate, and
thus voted against considering it. The opinion group in community A was very short-lived, and formed only in opposition to the controversial resolution. Thus it was distinct from
the more persistent opposing opinion group in community E.
Both parties converge to a single community F on votes #96
and #97 for a ceremonial recognition and an act to prevent
fraudulent census materials, respectively. The actual vote on
whether to approve the Kucinich resolution comes in rollcall #98. At this point, Republicans joined the majority of
Democrats in community F to vote against the resolution.
However, this time a group liberal Democrats diverged from
community F to join progressives in community H (bottom circle), including representative Kucinich (Figure 5) and
voted in favor of the troops withdrawal resolution.

Figure 4 on the other hand shows a detailed look at the
period between March 11 and 15. The first vote was a ceremonial gesture recognizing Greece independence anniversary. At this point, the two parties form one bundle. One
March 12, the combined community split again into 4 opinion groups only to converge again on March 15 for another
ceremonial vote.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1067

Figure 4: Detailed view of the community structure of the
House of Representatives between March 11 and 15, 2010.

6. Case study: visualizing animal community structure
To evaluate the usefulness of our visualization to domain scientists, we conducted a user study with the participation of
a team of behavioral ecologists studying the social behavior of two endangered species: Grevy’s zebra (Equus grevyi)
in Laikipia, Kenya and Onagers (Equus hemionus) in the
Kutch desert, Gujarat, India. The two species exhibit distinctively different social behavior due to ecological and phenotypic variation. The datasets consisted of geographically
tagged sightings of animals. Census loops were driven ap-

Figure 5: Selection of a single thread enables one to see the
corresponding individual’s affiliation over time within the
context of the community structure.

1068

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

Figure 6: The visualization environment used in the user study showing the Grevy’s zebra dataset. The left view is the spacetime cube showing movement of zebra communities in space-time, while the view on the right shows the community structure
timeline. Color pins in the community structure timeline (to the left of community labels) associate a unique color with every
community for cross-reference with the space-time cube. Individuals were labeled with an ID number followed by their sex code
(F/M). The size of individual lines have been increased to make them more clear.

proximately 5 times a week to sample the population. 35
Grevy’s zebra individuals were observed over a period of
3 months in 2002, and 41 Onagers were observed over 5
months in 2003. Individuals were uniquely identified from
their striping patterns and other unique features, and their location and time of sighting was recorded. A dynamic social
network was constructed from these observations. Animals
who were in close proximity were considered to be interacting with each other at the time of sighting.
The visualization environment consisted of two views
(Figure 6). The view on the right shows the community
structure. Individuals were color coded according to their
reproductive state (Bachelors, Stallions, Lactating and Nonlactating females colored with green, orange, red, and navy
blue, respectively). To integrate additional domain data, a
second view employed a space-time cube [Kar03], showing the movement of communities in space and time over an
aerial photograph of the landscape. A cross highlighting feature was added to allow points/regions selected in one view
to be automatically highlighted in the other. We hypothesize
that this integration of movement trajectories for communities helps ecologists in asking and finding answers to questions about to the environmental and ecological factors that
influence the social structure.
Four researchers studying the social behavior of Grevy’s
zebras and Onagers used the environment to explore their
datasets. The participants were not asked to perform any
specific task. Rather, they were encouraged to freely interact with the visualization to explore the datasets and discuss observations among themselves. The study lasted for
approximately two hours, and was video/audio taped. Participants were accustomed to looking at a variant of stackedgraphs illustrated in [TBW09] to depict the social behavior
of animals in their datasets, and thus were familiar with the

notion of a dynamic community. The new visualization provided them with an alternative perspective that encoded the
community affiliation of individuals along with their reproductive status. Although this encoding of domain attribute
could be achieved with stacked graphs, the community structure timeline allows the viewer to easily correlate structural
changes in the network with these attributes. For example,
during the user study, the ecologists were able to quickly find
individuals who shift their community affiliation by visually
searching for crooked lines. They were then able to correlate
patterns of affiliation shifts with the reproductive status of
individuals. One participant had the following comments:
“We are looking at a different projection that
shows the individual by [reproductive] state moving in and out of the community.” “This says what
the males, lactating, and non-lactating females are
doing. It is a very powerful analysis to see when
the switch happens.”
One problem with stacked graphs is their inherently unstable layout causing nodes to shift their position over time
even in the face of small structural changes, and making it
difficult to follow the group affiliation of individuals across
time. The community structure timeline provides a more stable layout, with individuals shifting their vertical position
only when their community affiliation changes. There is evidence that participants found the community structure timeline easy to interpret, suggesting that the new visualization
is more intuitive to domain scientists than stacked graphs:
“Once we know this is a community, to see the
individuals aligned very consistently like this in
almost what looks like a British subway map with
simple angles is very useful.” “This is a very clean
depiction of community membership”.
The coupling of the space-time cube and the community
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

structure timeline enabled new observations about the data
that would have been difficult to perceive otherwise. For instance, two Grevy’s zebra communities attracted a participant’s attention after looking at their movement trajectories in the space-time cube. These two communities seemed
to oscillate periodically between two sites in the landscape,
which the ecologists identified as a grazing and a drinking
site. Although the two communities were sharing the two
sites and moving between them periodically, there movement was one day apart. Furthermore, looking at the community timeline confirms that these communities remained
separate for some time before merging together to form a
third community.
“Even though these communities lineup in space
very close to each others, they are off by a day.
This is very robust at telling us they are avoiding
each others.”
The user study provided evidence that combining the community timeline with additional domain data (in this case,
group movement) helped scientists in generating and testing
hypothesis that attempt to explain how and why the observed
social structure emerged and evolved in the way it did. One
participant had the following comments on the visualization:
“[This visualization] finally put time and space together. This allows us to understand the physical
decision making that lead to the shaping of communities. The dynamic community analysis gave
us a better picture for understanding zebra dynamics. The space will give us even a better picture of
that temporality.”
We conclude from the user study that the community structure timeline was effective at conveying a dynamic picture
of the changing social structure to the participants. There is
evidence that the visual encoding was easily perceived, suggesting that it is more effective than stacked graphs. Moreover, the integration of additional domain data (namely, the
space-time cube) was helpful in illuminating additional observations, and in shedding a light on external factors not
necessarily captured by the social interaction model, but nevertheless have some influence social behavior.
7. Limitations and future work
The user study suggests that the visualization could be useful for social network analysts and other domain scientists,
however there are some important limitations that need to be
addressed. One potential issue is scalability. While the visualization appears to scale well with the number of individuals, scalability seems to be influenced by the relative stability of community membership. Our experience shows that
the visualization can cope well with about 20-30 communities at a given time with moderate membership changes.
However in social systems where a large portion of individuals switch their community affiliation often, the visualization will suffer from excessive thread crossing, resulting in a
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1069

cluttered view. One potential solution in these limiting the
number of switching threads (when individuals move between communities) to a subset of individuals. This subset
could be selected based on a degree-of-interest criteria. Alternatively, the user could interactively specify this subset.
For datasets with a large number of communities (over 30
communities), a multi-level hierarchical community timeline (based on hierarchical parallel coordinates [FWR99])
could be used with the lowest level showing individuals and
the highest level showing collectives of communities. Another limitation stems from the one-community-at-a-time affiliation model. In complex social system such as human societies, an individual is more likely to affiliate with multiple
social groups simultaneously. To depict this phenomenon,
the individual’s thread could split into branches that join different communities.
The feedback we received during the user study was positive, however there is a need for further evaluation and assessment. We intend to continue working with domain scientists who use dynamic social network analysis in their research to refine the visualization and carry out further evaluation. In particular, we intend to follow up with a long-term
study similar to [PS08] to evaluate how domain scientists
use the visualization over an extended period of time. We
also plan to perform a controlled perceptual evaluation of
the community timeline and compare it against stacked and
animated graphs using a task-oriented study.
8. Conclusions
Visualization has been a central theme in the field of social
network analysis since its inception. While graphs have been
viewed as the de facto method for visualizing social networks, they have inherent limitations when applied to dynamic networks. We introduced a visualization methodology for dynamic social networks in an attempt to provide a
new perspective on this problem. The visualization depicts
the evolution of communities using a simple visual representation which employs a commonly used visual metaphor.
Our technique enables the exploration of the network at the
finest-temporal resolution, while maintaining good scalability along the number of individuals and timesteps in the network. We applied our method to visualize political social
networks, yielding interesting observations into the dynamic
of the US House of Representatives. A user study also provides evidence that the technique is useful to other domain
scientists, especially when the visualization is enriched with
additional domain data.
Acknowledgements
This publication is based on work supported in part by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) awards CNS-0821121
and OCI-0943559. We would also like to thank Dan Rubenstein, Siva Sundaresan, and Ilya Fischhoff for access to their
data and for their help in evaluating the visualization.

1070

Reda et al. / Visualizing the Evolution of Community Structures in Dynamic Social Networks

References
[ADM∗ 04] A HMED A., DWYER T., M URRAY C., S ONG L.,
X IN W U Y.: Wilmascope graph visualisation. IEEE Symp. on
Information Visualization (InfoVis 2004) (2004), r4. 2

[MB06] M C G RATH C., B LYTHE J.: Do you see what i want
you to see? the effects of motion and spatial layout on viewers’
perceptions of graph structure. Journal of Social Structure 5, 2
(2006). 2

[And99] A NDERSON R. M.: Epidemic models and social networks. Math. Scientists 42 (1999), 128–147. 1

[MMBd05] M OODY J., M C FARLAND D., B ENDER - DE M OLL
S.: Dynamic network visualization. American Journal of Sociology 110, 4 (2005), 1206–1241. 2

[BdM06] B ENDER - DE M OLL S., M C FARLAND D. A.: The art
and science of dynamic network visualization. Journal of Social
Structure 1, 2 (2006). 2

R.:
Movie
narrative
[Mun] M UNROE
http://xkcd.com/657/. Retrieved 11-27-2010. 5

[BETT99] BATTISTA G. D., E ADES P., TAMASSIA R., T OLLIS
I. G.: Graph drawing: algorithms for the visualization of graphs.
Prentice Hall, 1999. 2
[BHKL06] BACKSTROM L., H UTTENLOCHER D., K LEINBERG
J., L AN X.: Group formation in large social networks: Membership, growth, and evolution. In Proc. SIGKDD ’06: 12th Int’l
Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2006). 3, 4
[Car03] C ARLEY K. M.: Dynamic network analysis. In National
Research Council workshop on Social Network Modeling and
Analysis (2003), Breiger R., Carley K. M., (Eds.), The National
Academies Press. 1
[Cle] House of representatives, office of
http://clerk.house.gov/. Retrieved 11-27-2010. 6

the

clerk.

[FBS06] FALKOWSKI T., BARTELHEIMER J., S PILIOPOULOU
M.: Mining and visualizing the evolution of subgroups in social networks. In Proc. of 2006 Int’l Conf. on Web Intelligence
(2006), IEEE. 3
[FE02] F RIEDRICH C., E ADES P.: Graph drawing in motion.
Journal of Graph Algorithms and Applications 6, 3 (2002), 353–
370. 2
[Fre93] F REEMAN L. C.: On the sociological concept of “group”:
a empirical test of two models. American Journal of Sociology
98 (1993), 152–166. 2, 3, 4
[Fre00] F REEMAN L. C.: Visualizing social networks. Journal of
Social Structure 1, 4 (2000). 1
[Fre04] F REEMAN L. C.: The Development of Social Network
Analysis: A Study in the Sociology of Science. Empirical Press,
2004. 1
[FWR99] F UA W.-H., WARD M. O., RUNDENSTEINER E. A.:
Hierarchical parallel coordinates for exploration of large datasets.
In Proc. Visualization ’99 (1999). 9
[GHW09] G ROH G., H ANSTEIN H., W ÖRNDL W.: Interactively
visualizing dynamic social networks with dyson. In Proc. of the
IUI’09 Workshop on Visual Interfaces to the Social and the Semantic Web (2009). 2
[Het00] H ETHCOTE H. W.: The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Review 42 (2000), 599–643. 1
[Hul10] H ULSE C.: House rejects plan to leave afghanistan by
year’s end. New York Times March, 10 (2010). 7
[Ins09] I NSELBERG A.: Parallel Coordinates: Visual Multidimensional Geometry and Its Applications. Springer, 2009. 3
[Kar03] K ARRAK M.: The space-time cube revisited from a geovisualization perspective. In Proc. of the 21st Int’l Cartographic
Conference (2003). 8
[KG06] K UMAR G., G ARLAND M.: Visual exploration of complex time-varying graphs. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 12, 5 (2006), 805–812. 2
[KLJ09] K RAUSE J., L USSEAU D., JAMES R.: Animal social
networks: an introduction. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
63, 7 (2009), 967–973. 1

charts.

[NBW06] N EWMAN M., BARABÁSI A.-L., , WATTS D. J.: The
Structure and Dynamics of Networks. Princeton University Press,
2006. 2, 3
[OMB∗ 07] O GAWA M., M A K.-L., B IRD C., D EVANBU P.,
G OURLEY A.: Visualizing social interaction in open source software projects. In Proc. 6th Int’l Asian-Pacific Symp. on Visualization (2007), pp. 25–32. 3
[PHG07] P URCHASE H. C., H OGGAN E., G ÖRG C.: How important is the "mental map"? an empirical investigation of dynamic graph layout algorithm. In Proc. GD ’14: 14th Int’l Symp.
on Graph Drawing (2007), vol. 4372 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer. 2
[PS08] P ERER A., S HNEIDERMAN B.: Integrating statistics and
visualization: Case studies of gaining clarity during exploratory
data analysis. In Proc. of the 26th annual SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems (2008), ACM, pp. 265–274.
9
[RFF∗ 08] ROBERTSON G., F ERNANDEZ R., F ISHER D., L EE
B., S TASKO J.: Effectiveness of animation in trend visualization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14,
6 (2008), 1325–1332. 2
[Sch02] S CHONLAU M.: The clustergram: A graph for visualizing hierarchical and non-hierarchical cluster analyses. The Stata
Journal 3 (2002), 316–327. 3
[SM08] S HEN Z., M A K.-L.: Mobivis: A visualization system
for exploring mobile data. In Proc. PacificVis ’08 (2008), IEEE,
pp. 175–182. 3
[SP08] S AFFREY P., P URCHASE H.: The “mental map” versus
“static aesthetic” compromise in dynamic graphs: a user study.
In Proc. AUIC ’08: 9th conference on Australasian user interface
(2008), vol. 76. 2
[TBW09] TANTIPATHANANANDH C., B ERGER -W OLF T.:
Constant-factor approximation algorithms for identifying dynamic communities. In Proc. SIGKDD ’09: 15th Int’l. Conf.
on Knowledge Discovery and Data mining (2009), ACM,
pp. 827–836. 4, 8
[UC03] U. B., C ORMAN S. R.: Visual unrolling of network evolution and the analysis of dynamic discourse. Information Visualization 2 (2003), 40–50. 2
[VWD04] V IÉGAS F. B., WATTENBERG M., DAVE K.: Studying
cooperation and conflict between authors with history flow visualizations. In Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems (2004), CHI ’04, ACM, pp. 575–582. 3
[WF94] WASSERMAN S., FAUST K.: Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications (Structural Analysis in Social Science). Cambridge University Press, 1994. 1
[WKCH10] W OOK K IM N., C ARD S. K., H EER J.: Tracing genealogical data with timenets. In Proc. AVI ’10: Int’l Conf. on
Advanced Visual Interfaces (2010), ACM, pp. 241–248. 3
[ZFT∗ 08] Z HANG Y., F RIEND A. J., T RAUD A. L., P ORTER
M. A., F OWLER J. H., M UCHAM P. J.: Community structure
in congressional cosponsorship networks. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications 387, 7 (2008), 1705–1712. 1

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

