Collaborative Visualization:
New Advances in Documenting Virtual Reality with IGrams
Ellen Sandor, Janine Fron, Kristine Greiber, Fernando Orellana and Stephan Meyers
n
(art) Laboratory
847 W. Jackson Blvd., 6th Floor, Chicago, IL 60607 USA
artn@artn.com
Dana Plepys, Margaret Dolinsky, and Mohammed Dastagir Ali
Electronic Visualization Laboratory
University of Illinois at Chicago
851 S. Morgan St., Room 1120, Chicago, IL 60607 USA
dana@eecs.uic.edu
Abstract
n

(art) Laboratory and the Electronic Visualization
Laboratory (EVL) at the University of Illinois at Chicago
have collaborated on the development of the first realtime, stereoscopic hardcopy output of virtual reality
applications - the ImmersaGram (IGram). The results of
this new technology directly address a broad range of
information visualization issues along a wide spectrum of
disciplines from art, architecture, and science, to
medicine, engineering and education.
Keywords: Virtual Reality, Art, Science, lenticular,
PHSCologram, autostereography

1. Introduction
How can virtual reality applications be documented
and shared outside the virtual environment without the
use of expensive computer hardware, access to limited
resources, simulators, etc.? What medium is available for
artists/scientists to record their work in-progress to
contemplate, assess and evolve without direct access to
the virtual reality system? Is there a way to extend one’s
artistic expression beyond the virtual application itself?
An underlying answer to these and many other questions
is the IGram - a virtual reality snapshot.
Among the more principal and critical concerns has
been the ability to capture a fleeting moment or state
within a virtual reality experience. Video and
photographic documentation of virtual reality participants
and environments has yielded only marginal results; the
interactive nature of the experience can be documented,
though image quality is significantly compromised due to

resolution loss, monoscopic display and difficult lighting
circumstances. High-resolution digital slides or photographs can be created, but do not record the stereoscopic
nature of the event, and cannot be generated in real-time.
IGrams address these problems by providing a low cost,
real-time method for printing three-dimensional virtual
imagery to an 8"x10" or 11"x14" stereo transparency.
Larger format 20"x24", and 20"x40” medium priced
IGrams are viable with a Hewlett Packard Design Jet
2500CP. Other printing variations are optional and
currently being explored.

2. Aesthetic background
n

IGrams are a direct outgrowth of (art) Laboratory's
computer
interleaving
process,
known
as
PHSColograms®. The results of computer interleaving
provide an archival three-dimensional photograph from
computer rendered content. PHSCologram is an acronym
for photography, holography, sculpture and computer
graphics. In search of new artistic paradigms, the
PHSCologram founding artists synthesized the arts of
sculpture, photography and computer visualization.
PHSColograms are made from a series of 10-65 (or more)
snapshots of a virtual environment that are photographed
inside of the computer. This series of frames is then
combined inside of the computer, output to film and
viewed with a barrier screen or lenticular lens [1].
PHSCologram artistry traverses frontiers of science and
medicine, as well as educational and historical
documentation while remaining true to the fundamentals
of fine aesthetics and new technology.

n

(art) ’s body of work in PHSColograms created a
unique dialogue between photography and sculpture in
computer graphics and virtual reality [2].
The
PHSCologram process draws on earlier advances in
photography, including daguerreotypes, photogravures
and gelatin silver prints. Rodin was among the first
sculptors to use photogravures to publish his "Monument
to Balzac" in the famous Camera Work quarterly [3].

Figure 1, Balzac-The Open Sky, 1911, Edward J. Steichen,

photogravure, from The Sandor Family Collection

Brancusi and David Smith are also known for using
photography to document their works. Brancusi’s
photographs show his vision of the artist in the studio;
Smith’s photographs reveal the artist in the landscape [4].
The documentation produced by these artists are strong
n
works in their own right. It is (art) ’s vision for IGrams to
inspire a new aesthetic consciousness in virtual environments that encourages artists to explore photography
and sculpture in their own work.

3. The IGram system
IGram development has addressed the desire to better
document virtual reality environments created for EVL’s
CAVE™ virtual reality system [5]. The CAVE is a fully
immersive 10'x10'x10' cubic room, where stereo images

are projected onto three walls and the floor. A participant
wears LCD shutter glasses, equipped with a tracking
device to create the stereo effect and define the user's
location within the environment. A three-dimensional
'wand' is used to navigate and interact with virtual objects
within the space. IGrams are created within the CAVE
system - virtually – while exploring and manipulating the
three-dimensional space.
Any 'Performer-based' CAVE application can be used
to capture IGrams. The three-dimensional scene is ported
to the IGram utility and displayed in the CAVE, where the
user manipulates (translates, rotates and scales) the scene
within a virtual three-dimensional frame representative of
the IGram (hardcopy) output area. The 'depth-of-field' is
controlled by changing interleaving values/distances with
the 'wand', which affects the stereo perspective projection.
In this process, the CAVE itself is akin to a virtual
camera, the virtual frame in 3-space - the camera's viewfinder, and the wand - the lens/aperture controls.
Interleaving is the digital simulation of the
n
photographic combing procedure. (art) ’s autostereographic process is a result of interleaved computer
graphics based on the concept of binocular disparity.
Following the virtual 'positioning' of a digital setting,
individual images are captured at slightly different angles
across the scene in a straight line from left to right. Each
of the images is broken up into rows and columns of
n
pixels. (art) Laboratory's proprietary software combines
these rows and columns of pixels, and arranges them into
a single image. The image is output onto a piece of film
or paper. The result is a blurred image on transparency
film. A barrier screen is placed over this image to
complete the 3-D effect. In the case of IGram production,
once virtual "positioning" of the scene is complete, ten
individual images are captured, interleaved and displayed
full scale in the CAVE for technical and aesthetic
evaluation before committing to final hardcopy output.
When cropping and framing results are satisfactory,
interleaved IGram images are sent to the Epson Photo EX
color inkjet printer to transparency material and final
processing.

4. Experiences
Early on in the development cycle of the IGram
CAVE utility, virtual 'art' environments were selected as
the initial focus [6]. Capturing the virtual art experience
and extending the application beyond the walls of the
CAVE environment was an obvious choice. A creative
and aesthetically pleasing scene was selected for
development, in order to assess whether or not the IGram
could capture the essence of the virtual experience,
preserve the sense of immersion, and act as an extension

of the original artwork into the domain of virtual
hardcopy.

accessible hardcopy to analyze the interrelationship of
objects and composition within a specific area of the
scene is incredibly beneficial. Access to the virtual
display environment can be limited to application review.
Scenes are developed in a simulator on the workstation,
then checked in the virtual display environment. Going
back and forth between writing code to displaying the
results can be somewhat disconcerting and indirect for the
creative process. The artist’s ability to 'study' the scene
with some consistency and accessibility can be vastly
improved by using the IGram as a working 'sketch' from
which to develop and enhance the artwork when not at a
workstation or in the virtual system.

5. Conclusion

Figure 2, Blue Window Pane (with Man Ray detail),
Margaret Dolinsky and Dana Plepys, Electronic
Visualization Laboratory, Stephan Meyers, Ellen Sandor,
n
Janine Fron, Fernando Orellana and Nichole Maury, (art)
Laboratory: 1998, 8"x10" Vintage IGram, framed in a
wooden lightbox

Results of early experiments were somewhat
enlightening. Of concern was how to capture a vast space
within a limited frame. Since virtual space can be
infinite, objects within the scene can be located at great
distances from each other. The ability to quickly move
from place to place in virtual reality minimizes this
distance, yet in trying to document the scene in time, does
not necessarily yield visually appealing results. To
address the spatial considerations, it became obvious
additional control over the environment position and scale
was required. These features are inherent to the IGram
program, and are used to compose or select the most
representative portion of the virtual scene for archival. A
sequence or series of IGram ’snapshots’, as in any
’photographic’ medium, most readily documents states in
time, as well as vast space not easily captured in a single
image.
An unexpected discovery was that the artist could use
an IGram as a creative development tool. Having an

The primary goal in developing the IGram hardcopy
was to archive the virtual environment, while creating a
derivative art form or document that can stand on its own
merit, tell a story or evoke an emotion. Clearly, it was not
developed strictly to document artistic and creative virtual
reality applications, but the wide range of virtual reality
application areas. In the case of scientific, engineering or
medical applications, the IGram can reveal an important
feature or aspect of a data set. For architecture/design
applications, the IGram can be used for design review,
client presentations, as well as recording 'stages' in the
production cycle. As virtual reality applications evolve,
the IGram will continue to play an important role in
preserving and enhancing the exchange of information
and recording of technology across a diverse and
expanding audience base.
Author Stephan Meyers is presently a Senior Research
Engineer
at the Nokia Research Center in Tampere, Finland.
n
(art) Laboratory would like to thank Nokia Corporation for
their support.
[1] S. Meyers, E. Sandor and J. Fron, PHSColograms and
Rotated PHSColograms. Computers & Graphics 19.4
(July/August 1995): 513-522
[2] M. Neal, More then Science, More than Art. Computer
Graphics & Applications. 8.6 (November 1988): 3-5
[3] E. Steichen, Camera Works 34/35 (April/July 1922):7-11
[4] Pachner, J. David Smith Photographs 1931-1965. San
Francisco: Fraenkel Gallery, New York: Matthew Marks Gallery
& San Francisco: Fraenkel Gallery, 1998
[5] C. Cruz-Neira, D. J. Sandin, T. A.DeFanti, R. V. Kenyon,
and J. C. Hart, The CAVE: Audio Visual Experience Automatic
Virtual Environment, Communications of the ACM 35. 6 (June
1992): 65-72.
[6] M. Dolinsky, Creating art through virtual environments,
Computer Graphics 31.4 (November 1997): 34-5

