Organizing and Visualizing Related Work Events on
Personal Information Management Systems
Akira ABETA
Department of Computer Science and
Electronics Kyushu Institute of Technology
680-4 Kawazu, Iizuka, Fukuoka, 820,Japan.
Kyushu Hitachi Maxell Ltd.
4680 Ikata, Houjou,Tagawa, Fukuoka, Japan
abeta@macross.cse.kyutech.ac.jp

Kaoru SATOH and Ken’ichi KAKIZAKI
Department of Computer Science and
Electronics Kyushu Institute of Technology
680-4 Kawazu, Iizuka, Fukuoka, 820,Japan.
kakizaki@cse.kyutech.ac.jp
satoh@cse.kyutech.ac.jp

Abstract

automatically extracts relations between events by analyzing the records of user's operations and organizes related
work events based on the relations.
When recording the user's reference operations, the user
is usually just viewing events on his or her calendar without
involving input device operations, so determining the user
target event and time of reference is difficult. In order to
record the user's reference behavior, we introduced a balloon-help function (as the solid ellipse in Fig.1) for support
of reference to detail information of an event. We ran a trial
prototype PIM with this function, and confirmed [3] that
our method can record a user's reference actions efficiently.
In this paper, we outline the method for organizing and
visualizing related work events, and discuss the results of
trials with the prototype PIM. This visualization method
represents the organized related work events using a twodimensional connected graph that indicates events with
nodes and relations between events with links. Furthermore,
in order to visualize collaboration among some users, we
use a three-dimensional connected graph. This places each
user's connected graph on the side planes of a threedimensional multi-angular prism. We discuss actual collaboration among the users in these trials using a sample
view drawn by our method.

This paper proposes a method to automatically organize
and visualize related work events as a work-project structure. This is accomplished by accumulating and analyzing
the target event and time of the user's operations such as
registrations and references on a Personal Information
Management system (PIM). Our processes for organization
are : (1) extracting relations between events from the records of user's reference operations using balloon-help
function, (2) intensifying the relations between events during interaction with the user by visualizing the relations
and presenting them to the user, (3) making connections
between events based on the extracted relations. Our visualization method represents the organized work events as
connected graphs in which nodes and arcs indicate events
and relations between events, and in which the intensity of
the relation is represented with arcs of width in proportion
to the intensity. Furthermore, in order to visualize a structure of collaboration among several users, our visualization method places each user's connected graph on the side
planes of a three-dimensional multi-angular prism.

1. Introduction

2. Schedules as process of work projects

In order to improve the process of work projects, it has
become important that we analyze how to perform our work
project such as the details and timing. This paper proposes
a method that visualizes a user's work-project structure by
organizing related work events during a user's ordinary use
of a PIM [1,2].
In a PIM, a work project consists of some detailed tasks
that are called "events". Users input the events of our work
and update them in progress. The sum of these inputs and
modifications may, in fact, represent the process of a work
project. From this viewpoint, we propose a method that

2.1. Problem
Fig.1 shows a calendar view on an ordinary PIM. A PIM
user inputs events such as appointments and tasks in the
calendar view, and will refer to this information as needed.
Events for a work project are relations among them. But an
ordinary PIM just shows the individual events on a calendar
and doesn't manage the relations between events. Therefore it is impossible to present the user a structure of a work

-1-

project including the relations between events.

3. Organizing related work events

2.2. Relations between events on a PIM

3.1. Extracting relations between events based on
sequential references

A PIM user imagines the relations between events
shown as connecting solid or dotted lines on the calendar in
Fig.1, thus the user grasps the process of work projects from
the information of the PIM. Our ideal PIM should discern
the user’s understanding of relations and group related
work events to produce a PERT diagram [4] like that of
Fig.1. Our PIM should also return the structure of the work
project including relations between events so that the user
can analyze the user's own work projects.

In our ideal PIM, users can easily make sequential references to events on their calendar with the balloon-help
function (as shown solid ellipse in Fig.1). Therefore, our
method can get many records of a user's sequential operations. Based on our hypothesis, we think that users frequently make sequential references to events of a work
project. A user may occasionally make only a single sequential reference, but we find the relation between events
when the user frequently makes sequential references to
those events. Therefore, we extract relations between two
events by calculating the frequency of sequential reference
operations between their events.
When the duration between two operations is shorter
than a certain value, we regard the two operations to events
as a sequential operation. Then, as shown in Fig.2, the
duration between two operations doesn’t include duration
of operations.

10/1998
SUN

MON

TUE

WED

THU

FR I
1

5

4

6
Start Paper

11

12

My
Birth day
18

9

10

Write

Give NotROM Code ice of DoD
Write OrderDocs
1 ) C h ec k Ma s k Op tio n s

20
Practice
Speech

26

8

3

13 2 ) C h ec k14Dat a Fo r15
16
17
mat
3 ) C h ec k Med
i a Fo r mat
Write
Paper
Submit
Make
Order Docs
Deadline Order
OHPs

19

25

7

SAT
2

27

21

22

Gi ve No ti ce
o fApp
Do D Green
Get
roval
S ub mi t Or de
r Do c s Light
Ge t Ap pr o v al o f Pro c

28

29

Gr ee n L ig h t Co n ta ct

23

24

30

31

Sequential

Not Sequential

Conference

Time

Star t Paper

Write
ROM
Code

Give
Notice
of Do D

W rite
Order
Docs

Pap er
Deadlin e
Subm it
Order
Docs

Practice
Speech

Duration between operations

C onfe re nc e

Make
OHPs
C heck
C ontr act
or Do cs

Get
Appro v
al

Duration of operations

Figure 2 Detecting sequential operations.

Green
Light
Contr acto r

3.2. Grouping related work events
Our method groups related work events by connecting
events when the value for relations between events is high.
We explain our method for grouping related work events
by using graph theory [5] in Fig.3. It shows a timesequential series of events registered on the PIM. In this
figure, the small circles and the number of each circle indicate events and the number of each event. When a value for
a relation between two events is higher than our chosen
value, they are connected by an arc. So, as shown in Fig.3
(a), we get a disconnected graph, which can isolate some
connected components. These connected components
allow us to make groups of related work events. Furthermore, we identify which groups are work projects as distinct from individual events (such as Fig.3(a) events No.3
and No.10-11) by deleting isolated circles and connected

Figure 1. Relations between events on a calendar.

2.3. Relations between events in user’s actions
During confirmation of event schedules, a user's changes
of eye point or instructions by mouse are performed based
on relations between events as the user understands them.
We believe that the user signals relations between events in
the way he or her uses the PIM. We frame a hypothesis as
follow.
• Hypothesis: Users make sequential references to related work events frequently.
Based on this hypothesis, we extract relations between
events and organize related work events.

-2-

components of circles with less than our chosen value
(Fig.3(b)).
Time

Connected component
1

4

2

5

6

8

9

10

7

3

indicate the frequency of sequential references to the events.
So, when this value is high, a user frequently made sequential references to their events. The user would frequently
make sequential references to their events in the future.
Therefore, our method lists events where the value of relation against the target event is high, and indicates in order
of the value in the related event list. This makes the user
easily find the event to refer to from the list.

11

13

14

12

(a) Disconnected graph
4

10
5

1
2
3

4.3. Encouraging sequential references
11

When the related event which the user intends to next
refer to is registered in same month, the user can easily refer
to the related event without turning a leaf on the user's
calendar. On the other hand, when the related event is
registered in another month, the user can’t refer it without
such operations. In additions, when the user doesn’t grasp
where the target event is registered, the user has to seek for
it through each month. So, the user is discouraged from
referencing the related work event.
Using the related-reference-support function, a user can
check related work events in the list box including events
registered in other months of those events. Therefore, this
function encourages the user to make sequential references
that the user had hesitated to make, and our method can
obtain relations between events registered in other month
with high accuracy.

6
7

8

9

12

13

14

(b) Connected graph

Figure 3 Process of grouping related work events.

4. Support of user’s sequential references and
intensifying the organization of work events
Users' sequential references are either:
References to related events, or
References to unrelated events.
There are events for work projects and individual events
in a calendar. So, there are sometimes sequential references
to unrelated events in records of reference extracted by
analyzing records of sequential references using balloonhelp. That is, groups of events extracted by our method
may include unrelated events. In order to organize related
work events correctly, our method needs a mechanism to
sort out related work events from unrelated events. Therefore, we introduce a function that supports a user’s reference only to related work events.

5. Evaluation
5.1. The trials
In order to confirm the efficiency of our method, we developed our prototype PIM, and held a trial with 6 persons.
In order to evaluate separately the efficiency of the balloon-help function (shown as solid circle in Fig.4) and the
related-reference-support function (shown as broken circle
in Fig.4), we first held a two-month trial of the prototype
PIM with the balloon-help function. Next, a one-month trial,
adding the related-reference-support function, was held.
The users could register, change, and refer to events on
the calendar view (shown in Fig.4). Using a detailed window for the information of an event, the users could input
and refer to the information such as necessary resources and
noteworthy points for an event. Alternatively, users could
refer to the same information using our balloon-help function. Our system recorded the target events and reference
times by balloon-help.

4.1. Related-reference-support function
When a user clicks an event on his or her calendar with
reference to the target event, our PIM shows a list box for
events related to the target event as shown by the broken
ellipse in Fig.1. In addition, when the user selects the event
out of the list, this function automatically moves the user's
mouse pointer to the event that the user chose.
Using this function, the user can check a list-box which
concentrates related work events that may be scattered all
over the calendar. So, the user comes to make many sequential references to related work events spontaneously.

4.2. Creating the related event list
The related event list function needs to show the event
that the user intends to refer to next. In addition, it is desirable that the user can easily find the event on the list. Our
method assigns a value of relation between two events to

-3-

Table 1 Frequency of sequential operations(1st trial).
Users

A

293
88%
Unrelated sequential 39
references
12%
All sequential
332
references
Related sequential
references

B

C

D

E

F

288
90%
32
10%

53
76%
17
24%

110
38%
175
62%

45
49%
47
51%

10
42%
14
58%

320

70

285

92

24

5.2.2. Efficiency of related-reference-support function
Table 2 for next a month trial shows the results of the
same type evaluation as shown in Table 1. As shown in
Table 2, they made about twice the frequency of sequential
references compared to the first trial period. In addition, it
is apparent that they made sequential references to related
work events more as well.
Therefore, we confirmed that this function encouraged
users to make sequential references to related work events,
and our hypothesis becomes useful against all users.

Figure 4. Calendar view of the prototype PIM.

Table 2 Frequency of sequential operations(2nd trial).

5.2. Evaluation of the relation based on sequential
references--verification of hypothesis

Users

A

619
90%
Unrelated sequential 67
references
10%
All sequential
686
references
Related sequential
references

During this trial, for all users, we regarded two operations as being sequential when the interval between the
user’s two operations was less than twenty seconds. We
adopted this value for the interval because it resulted in the
best correspondence to the groups of truly related work
events as the user intended.
5.2.1. Efficiency of the balloon-help function
In order to verify our hypothesis, we evaluate whether
the users made correctly sequential references to related
work events. Table 1 for first two months trial shows the
number of the sequential references to events which the
users understand to be related or unrelated to particular
work projects.
In the case of the three users A, B and C, the frequency
of sequential references to related work events which they
understand was very high. But, in the case of the three
users D, E and F, the frequency of sequential references to
related work events was very low.
We interviewed them on this result. The first three users
said that they made sequential references to related work
events as they used our PIM for practical use while managing their work projects. In this case, we confirmed that our
hypothesis is useful. We heard from the last three users that
they only used our PIM within the set time as their duty in
our trial, not for meaningful work. Our hypothesis is less
useful in such cases.

B

C

D

E

649
91%
69
9%

191
80%
49
20%

425
61%
269
39%

193
61%
124
39%

718

240 694

F
230
69%
102
31%

317 332

5.3. Evaluation of the method organizing related
work events
5.3.1. The method for evaluation of the grouping results
We asked the users to group their events manually, and
to compare and verify the groups made by them with the
groups extracted by our system.
When an event is contained in our system-extracted
group and also appears in the same group which the user
identified manually, we say that our system correctly
grouped the event. If a event contained in our systemextracted group isn’t contained in his group, we say that our
system incorrectly grouped the event. Conversely, if the
event contained in his group isn’t contained in our systemextracted group, we say that our system-extracted group
was short of the event.
Fig.5 shows a sample view when our prototype PIM
connected related work events based on relations between
events. For all users in these trials, our method connected
events when values for relations between events were
higher than three.

-4-

international conference paper" such he surveyed books for
reference of his paper and arranged them, and introduced
them at a meeting. In this case, by looking such connected
lines between those events, we can find that here No.122 :
"Write paper" branched off from the main project and he
did No.134 : "Survey books for reference", No.136 : "Make
documents of books for reference" and No.135 : "Introduce
of books for reference", and understand a series of events
for the subproject.
Thus, in such cases that our method grouped events of
some work projects as a group of a work project, users can
determine their events for two different work projects or for
the subprojects in one main project and understand the
individual relations between events of each work projects
by presenting them with a connected graph including relations between events. Therefore, we believe that a user
may learn how to perform a work project by examining and
comparing their own connected graph with an experienced
worker's.

Figure 5 Sample view of disconnected graph.
5.3.2. The evaluation of the grouping results
Table 3 shows the grouping results for the three users A,
B and C. Our method could put their events in each correct
group - as high as 80 percent of the total events, and improve all ratio for the three users. Therefore, we confirmed
that our method can correctly group related work events for
the three users A, B and C who used the PIM for their actual
work scheduling.
Table 3 Grouping results against each user.
Users

A

B

C

A,B and C

Manually grouped by user

10

5

5

20

Groups identified by user

9

4

3

16

All events

77

46

65

188

Events correct by PIM

68

37

47 152(81%)

Events incorrect by PIM

9

9

18

36(19%)

Events short by PIM

9

5

8

22(12%)

Figure 6 Sample view of connected graph.

6.2. Representing intensity of relations between
events

6. Visualization of the organized work events

Fig.7 shows a sample view of our PIM connecting
events in proportion to the value of relations between
events. A wide connection line indicates that a user frequently made sequential references to events. So, we believe that these wide connection lines, such as those from
No.46: "Practical speech" to No.40: "Presentation" and
from No.51: "Write paper" to No.38: "Paper deadline" in
Fig.7, are critical. So, our method may allow users to visually understand the degree of importance of relations between events.

6.1. Presentation of the organized work events
including relations between events
It is important that our method presents the user with related work events as a work-project structure representing
by a connected graph including relations between events.
In our grouping results, there were some cases in which our
method incorrectly linked events of some work projects to
another work project. Fig.6 shows a sample of such connected graphs. In Fig.6, our PIM made the group including
the events of two works as "Write international conference
paper" in the solid frame (1) and " English Lesson " in the
solid frame (2). We interviewed the user on this result. We
found that because he had his paper for the international
conference corrected by his English teacher, there were
some relations between some events of "Write international
conference paper" and some events of "English Lesson " (as
shown two arrows in Fig.6). In real work projects, there are
sometimes weak relations among the events of different
work projects, so we simply can't separate their events.
The broken frame in Fig.6 was a subproject of "Write

Figure 7 Indicating the strength of relations.

-5-

In SemNet, K. M. Fairchild clarified some basic problems in three-dimensional visualization. One of these is
three-dimensional layout of elements. The problem is that
users can't grasp the structure of information, because it is
too complex when each element of information is randomly
assigned to a position. But the events on our PIM are
placed based on their execution dates, and each member's
connected graph is given a semitransparent plane as a guide.
In this way, our method deal effectively with this problem.
In Fig.8, a method that stacks a plane for each member’s
graph is shown. However, it is difficult to grasp connections between members (such as A and B) because the
planes of other members interfere with their connections as
shown bold broken lines in Fig.8.

7. Representing a structure of collaboration
among group members
These trials included some cooperation among some users. So, we represent their cooperation using connected
graphs. When our method shows a work project by a single
user, it can represent the spread of the work project using a
two-dimensional connected graph. On the other hand,
when our method shows a work project among several
members, it needs to show multiple two-dimensional connected graphs for them. Therefore, it is difficult for our
method to represent the structure of cooperation on a twodimensional plane. In order to solve this problem, our
visualization method represents the structure of cooperation
among group members as three-dimensional graphs in
three-dimensional space.

7.3. Use of a multi-angular prism
In order to show each member's graphs, our visualization
method uses a three-dimensional multi-angular prism with
multiple side planes. For example, when we show the
structure of cooperation among six co-workers, as shown in
Fig.9, our method provides a semitransparent multi-angular
prism with six side planes to place each worker’s threedimensional graph on one side plane. The method takes the
time axis from one side base to the other side base, and puts
balls for events in date order of the events. The method
shows sticks between the balls for relations between events.
In addition, the method shows arcs for relations between
events of different workers as broken lines in Fig.9. Using
this method, when showing connections between members,
the arcs for the connections don't go through other members' planes. Therefore, the method can indicate the connections more clearly than the layer display method.
One more of the problems in visualization referenced by
Fairchild are that users often get lost their position and
viewpoint in three-dimensional space when they explore.
As concerning this problem, using our method, users can
easily grasp a time axis by a spindle of the multi-angular
prism, and their position and viewpoint by shape of the
multi-angular prism.

7.1. Three-dimensional graphic representation
Using direction of depth, nodes can be placed in a 3D
space more than on a two-dimensional plane. In addition,
nodes can always be assigned to positions such that no arcs
intersect, when the viewpoint can be moved so that the arcs
no longer appear to intersect. Furthermore, the perspective
view makes nodes nearer the viewpoint appear larger,
helping the user to examine local neighborhoods more
effectively. SemNet [6], used to visualize a large knowledge bases, is a pioneer using three-dimensions graphics to
indicate graph structure. There are Perspective Wall [7]and
FSN[8] using perspective view.

7.2. Three-dimensional connected graph
representing method
Our 3D connected graph representing method indicates :
an event as a ball (sphere).
a relation between events as a stick (cylinder).
a value of relation as a thickness of a stick (cylinder).

Figure 9 Side-plane display of threedimensional connected graph.

Figure 8 Layer display of three-dimensional
connected graph.

-6-

7.4. Representing attributes of graphs using the
dimensions of side planes
When analyzing the process of a work project, it is important that we grasp not only time-schedules but also labor-hours or costs of the tasks. Our method can show such
information in each member’s graph by assigning sideplane dimensions in proportion to the value for the information. Then, indicating this information as the dimensions of side planes, we can visually grasp the degree of
each worker's contribution (labor-hours or costs) just by
looking at the size of the graph.

7.5. A example view of three-dimensional
connected graph
Figure 11 Difference in size of side planes in
proportion to the number of events.

We developed a function that outputs VRML graphs for
the users' related work events organized by our method.
We can view the VRML graphs with a web browser (as
shown in Fig.10). This allows users to grasp connections
between members from the various angles by operating the
browser interactively. Fig.10 shows when users see the
connected graph from inside to future on time axis. Thus,
we can explore the connected graph of the work project
among users from inside or outside of the multi-angular
prism.

In Fig.12, member A performed "conference presentation", and members B and C helped him with the work
project. First, we'll discuss each user's connected graph.
Our method shows the value of relations between events as
a thickness of the stick, so we can visually grasp the
strength of relations between events. For example, the stick
between member A's "OHPs deadline" and "conference" is
thick, so we can see that the relation between their events
are tight. Because the sticks between member B's "help to
make videos" and "conference", between member B's "help
to make OHPs" and "conference", and between member C's
" help to make OHPs" and "conference" are thick, we confirmed that member B and C cooperated with member A in
"conference", in order to finish the OHPs or videos for
member A by the date of the conference.
Next, we discuss the connections between members. In
Fig.12, when the three users registered the same title events,
for example "conference", we connected solid lines between them. In addition, based on the relations between
other members that we found in interviews with the three
users, we connected member A's "make OHPs" and member C's "make OHPs", between member A's "practice presentation" and member B's: "practice presentation", between
member A's: "make videos" and member B's: "help to make
videos", and between member A's: "OHPs deadline" and
member B's: "help to make OHPs". As shown in Fig.12, we
can understand the cooperation among three members in
order to support member A's work project of "conference"
by interactively exploring the VRML browser.

Figure 10 A sample view in a WWW browser.
In order to discuss cooperation among three users in these trials, we use our visualization method. Our method
outputs the VRML code for the connected graphs of the
three users. We can view them with a web browser as
shown in Fig.11 or Fig.12.

-7-

Figure 12 3D connected graph for the structure of collaboration.
Therefore, we believe that we can use our method as a
tool to analyze the structure of cooperation among coworkers in detail. Because users can explore and grasp a
structure of relations between a user's events and between
co-workers' events, they can use our PIM as a tool to
understand how they may perform a work project.
Fig.11 illustrates the difference in the size of side planes
for three members. In this figure, the number of each member's events is substituted for labor-hours. As shown in
Fig.11, A's side plane is largest. We can visually grasp the
degree of his contribution against all labor-hours needed for
the work project.

8. Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a method that automatically
extracts relation between events by analyzing sequential
references from user’s operations records, and organizes
related work events based on the relations between events.
We also showed a method that visualizes the organized
work events as a user's work-project structure. We have
developed a prototype PIM and tested it. We confirmed that
our method can automatically organize related work events
as a connected graph including relations between events. In
addition, we visualized actual collaboration among three
users in the trials using three-dimensional connected graphs
on multiple side planes of a multi-angular prism. We confirmed that our method is useful for examining collaboration among users. Hereafter, we will redesign and develop
our system so that users may interactively explore the
structure of their work projects.

References
[1] Lotus Development Corporation: Organizer Users Guide,
(1995).

-8-

[2] Now Software, Inc: Now Up To Date -- Reference Manual,
Version2.1, Seiwa Systems, Ltd. (1991). (in Japanese)
[3] Abeta, A. and Kakizaki, K.: Operation Record based Work
Events Grouping Method for Personal Information Management System, Proc.COMPSAC98, IEEE, pp. 548-555 (1998).
[4] Sekine,T.: PERT-CPM, Nikkagiren (1965). (in Japanese)
[5] Ore, Oystein. and Wilson, R.: Graphs And Their, The
Mathematical Association of America, (1990).
[6] Fairchild, K. M., Poltrock, S. E. and Furnas, G. W. : SemNet :
Three-dimensional graphic representation of large knowledge bases, In R. Guindon (ed.): Cognitive Science And Its
Applications For Human-Computer Interaction, pp.201-233,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, (1988).
[7] Mackinlay, J. D., Robertson, G. G. and Card, S. K.: The
perspective wall: Detail and context smoothly integrated,
Proc. ACM CHI'91, pp.173-179 (1991).
[8] Silicon Graphics, Inc. : FSN: File System Navigator, online
manual, (1992).

