Designing a Computer-Aided-Learning application using multimedia
to train inexperienced Building Surveyors in Building Pathology
M. Shelbourn,1 G. Aouad,1 M. Hoxley,2
1
2

Research Centre for the Built & Human Environment (BUHU), Time Research
Institute, The University of Salford, United Kingdom
Division of Property & Construction Management, Business School, Staffordshire
University, United Kingdom
Email – m.a.shelbourn@surveying.salford.ac.uk
ABSTRACT

Computer Aided / Assisted Learning (CAL)
systems aim to provide learners with both a
rich set of learning resources and tools to help
them navigate through such structures. The
advent of high quality graphics and
multimedia has enabled learning styles that
were previously impractical to be developed
and supported by state of the art CAL systems.
This paper will concentrate on how multimedia
can be used as a Computer-Aided-Learning
medium in training inexperienced Surveyors in
Building Pathology.

Keywords Computer-Aided-Learning,
Building Pathology, Multimedia, VirtualReality

1.0

Introduction

Multimedia technology is a powerful way
of presenting information so that it can be
easily navigated and easily understood. One of
the reasons multimedia has gained popularity
is because information that appeals to multiple
senses is more easily assimilated and is
generally more interesting than that presented
in one format.
Multimedia provides the user of an
application the freedom to view information at
the touch of a button rather than searching
through many texts and publications. The use
of visual graphics, video, sound, animation,
and small amounts of text mixed together
provides more interesting viewing for the user.
The invention of multimedia has given
application developers in all fields of life the

opportunity to give more interesting ways of
teaching the uninformed as well as the socalled well trained. This section describes how
multimedia has influenced education, and
shows some example applications.
“...I hate the idea that novels are not
interactive. I’ve got 26 symbols and a handful
of punctuation and I can create in your mind
sounds and visions and people and scenery and all this is specific to each individual...”
[Pratchett 1991 pp. 12-18]
and,
“...our experience of life is multisensory...so multimedia is a highly appropriate
way of presenting it” [Wilson 1994 pp. 219228]
There have been many arguments about the
usefulness of multimedia in education and
whether its implementation is actually worth
the expense and extra training that would
accompany it. Of course multimedia could not
be said to be the only answer to education and
learning, but if properly implemented it can
certainly help. Outlined in the next three
sections are practical implementations of
multimedia in education:
1. Creating multimedia projects.
Multimedia is particularly effective in
schools. Potentially it develops not only
student’s knowledge but also their research
and reasoning skills. Students work in-groups,
thereby experiencing awareness of different
viewpoints, flexibility and teamwork. They
create multimedia databases that they know
could be used by subsequent pupils, thereby
developing their sense of responsibility and
self worth.

2. Multimedia as a support to teaching.
Potentially a CD-ROM can store 550 Mb
of data, which is equivalent to 300,000 pages
of information in a book or 12 encyclopaedias.
The advantage of the CD is that it presents it in
a far more interesting fashion! Jonathan
Butters and Charlotte Corke developed a CD at
Liverpool John Moores University that
describes and reflects upon the documenting of
a major school-based development project on a
CD-ROM. [Butters and Corke 1998] The
project is called SISP (Supporting Innovation
in Schools Project). This was a three-year
project, which aimed to enhance the secondary
school curriculum through the promotion of
innovation and the development of creative
skills, primarily in the Design and Technology
subject area.
However, there are limitations on a
multimedia tool such as a CD-ROM. Even
though it can be described as interactive in that
the user can pursue what he / she wants, it is
not interactive at all, in that the most basic of
educational questions, WHY?, may not be
answerable. There is no knowledge of an
information field beyond what is presented and
there is no adaptation of presentation to the
user and the user’s knowledge base. Hence it
must be used as a support tool for a teacher
who, potentially, can fill in the blanks. As such
it has great potential, holding student interest
for longer and providing more information
than the limited budgets of libraries can
normally provide.
3. Multimedia as an alternative to teaching.
The third use of multimedia in education is
potentially the most expensive and certainly
the most difficult to obtain, however, when it
works, it is most effective. A knowledge-based
simulator developed at the University of
Massachusetts for teaching about cardiac
resuscitation
provides
spoken
advice,
Emergency Room (ER) sound and graphic
representations of ECG (electrocardiograms),
blood gases and vital signs. The student has
one goal, to save the patient by implementing
the correct procedure. The tutor, based on
expert knowledge, grades student performance
and even customises the problem according to
a previous student’s achievement. The students
who have used the system have valued it as
being equal to “working one on one with an
ER physician.” The system makes things a lot
clearer than text, but it is obviously less
daunting than working with real patients and
facing potential lawsuits whilst techniques are
perfected!
There is still along way to go before this
kind of expert multimedia system can be
implemented in all areas of education. With

medicine, there are definite right and wrong
responses that can be covered by expert
knowledge; Building Surveying is far more
vague.

2.0

Computer-Aided-Learning
(CAL)

The first CAL program was developed in
1954, but it did not really become common
place until the mid-sixties. In 1966 Patrick
Suppes developed the first adaptive CAL
program and predicted that it would “…change
the face of education in a very short time.”
[Suppes 1966 p.215] It was not until the early
1980’s
when
micro-technology
made
computers more affordable that they became
more prominent in educational use. In 1981,
Seymour Papert, author of LOGO, a
programming language designed to help
children learn geometry by “doing”, declared
that the “worksheet curriculum” could be
confidently abandoned to allow “children’s
minds to develop through the exploration of
computer simulated microworlds.” [Papert
1981] By 1985, 80% of UK secondary schools
and 95% of primary schools had some level of
computing. [Jackson et al. 1986] A 1986
survey by Bleach [1986] concluded that,
although generally welcomed by teacher’s
computers were little used, sometimes
remaining idle for 80% of the available time,
and certainly used significantly less than
television in primary schools. The major affect
reported by teachers was a change in the
furniture. Despite their potential, the greatest
use is still in automated practice and testing
routines similar to established teaching
techniques and CAL has produced a polarity of
views among teachers.
The advent of high quality graphics and
multimedia has heralded an increased research
effort in this area. Learning styles that were
previously impractical are now being
developed and supported by state of the art
CAL systems.
The basic assumption upon which most of
the CAL tradition has been based is that the
principles of programmed instruction or
generative CAL provide an automation of the
most essential step of giving the learner, at an
appropriate moment, the next piece of
information to learn or the next problem to try.

2.1

Computer-Aided-Learning –
Existing in a Vacuum?

The design of CAL material often seems to
proceed, and to be considered, far away from

any consideration of where it will be used, by
whom, and in what institutional context. This
is perfectly acceptable as long as each
application is to be seen as a specific local
initiative, but it gives the lie to the grander
claims that are made for CAL, such as
Suppes’s view that it could provide for every
child:
“...the personal services of a tutor as wellinformed as Aristotle...” [Suppes 1966]
and Reinhardt’s claim that:
“...this generation of technology promises
more than just an improvement in educational
productivity: it may deliver a qualitative
change in the nature of learning itself...”
[Reinhardt 1995]
It is necessary to know where the
technology is being, and is going to be, used. If
it is to be brought by those who can afford it,
in the form of “edutainment”, or primarily by
employers as part of their fine-tuning of their
employee’s skills, the effect will be very
different to if it becomes a central part of mass
compulsory education.

2.2

What are the Obstacles to the use
of CAL?

The first and obvious obstacle is the lack of
the necessary material resources. This lack of
material resource becomes even more pressing
when the revolution in CAL is seen as coming
through networking, connection to other
schools and to the Internet. Carol Twigg
[1995] refers to “the installed base of
telecommunications technology in the schools,
80% of which is obsolete.”
The second and more serious obstacle is
that the hardware is the simplest and least
expensive of the problems. The Liberal
Democrat spokesman may have promised “...a
computer on every child’s desk...” but that is
meaningless. The computer is not a magic
machine that works itself. Passey and Ridgway
[1994] state the appropriate levels of human
support have been grossly underestimated.
Teachers will need a large amount of support if
they are able to incorporate CAL properly into
their practice, Passey and Ridgway suggest as
much as 100 hours training per year may be
the level required. There is little evidence that
schools are prepared to expand the necessary
time for training or expense of providing
adequate ancillary support, especially given
the increasing pressures from government
requirements (National Curriculum, etc.)
The third obstacle is the present lack of
very good educational software. Carol Twigg
quotes Peter Drucker as saying that for nay
new technology to be successful, it must do the

job ten times better, [Twigg 1995] as for
example word processing does over handdrafting a document.

2.3

Is Education the place for CAL?

This brings a fourth and, possibly, the most
crucial obstacle to the widespread use of CAL
in primary, secondary and tertiary education.
The promise that CAL holds out is that of
individualised learning. Where does this fit
into schools? As Seymour Papert says:
“In the 1980’s...I caught myself telling
school establishments and administrators that
what I’ve got with this technology is what they
need. Wow! It’s not what they need at all. It’s
the kiss of death. It’s the end of education as
an organised entity - of the schools as we’ve
known it....Is there any reason to believe that
the school - with its structure of classroom,
organisation by age, and so on - will exist in
fifty years? [Papert, Grillos, Norman et al.
1994]
That is, the promise that CAL offers just
does not fit in with education as it is presently
organised as institutions. Therefore, bits of
CAL will be bolted on to the present practice,
to little effect, or, for CAL to work properly,
policy changes for how education is to work
must act as a pressure from outside the
institutions themselves. These are political
decisions as to the purposes and requirements
of public education. They need to be addressed
explicitly, unless the possibilities that CAL
offer will wither on the stony ground of
institutional incompatibility.

3.0

The Building Pathology CAL
Application

Building Pathology is a term particularly
associated with the field of Building
Surveying. It simply means identifying faults /
defects in buildings. This said, it has been
difficult to train young inexperienced
surveyors in this practice due to insurance and
logistical problems of enabling a large group
of students to visit a property where defects
can be found. Many employers of young
surveyors are now recruiting directly from
higher education rather than traditional
apprentice type applications. This means that
the employers expect their new recruits to have
a wider knowledge of surveying buildings than
in previous years.
To overcome these problems a project is
being devised, at the University of Salford,
[Shelbourn, Aouad & Hoxley 1998] that
enables young and inexperienced surveyors to

gain skills in diagnosing defects in buildings
without leaving the confines of a computer
desk. The architecture of the system is shown
below. The project incorporates a number of
different fields of expertise that are outlined
below.

Figure 1 Architecture
application

3.1

of

the

CAL

Types of Survey

There are three reasons why a survey can
be undertaken on a property. The first is
required by a prospective purchaser of a
property. There are four different types of
survey available to the purchaser. These are
outlined below.
1. Building Surveys
This survey is often called a “Structural” or
“full” survey where a surveyor is expected to
look at all “accessible areas” of the building
without risking damage to the building or
themselves. “All accessible areas” is defined as
“areas from the ground, floors, fixed stairways
or other vantage points. All hatches, access
traps, manholes etc will be inspected if they
can be safely reached.” The report is
individually hand crafted for each property,
and lists how the building is constructed, what
condition it is in, the reasons for any problems,
and recommendations for current and future
maintenance. If a specialist is required to
further survey certain aspects of the property
then they should also be included in the report.
2. Mortgage Valuation
This type of survey is often called a
“Building Society Survey” and is only termed

a survey in the loosest of terms. The main
purpose of a mortgage valuation is to assure
the bank or building society who are lending
the money that the building is good security
for the amount wanting to be borrowed. The
report will be no more than two pages, and
gives a general idea of the condition of the
property.
3. RICS Home Buyers Survey & Valuation
This survey is halfway between the two
above. It is most suited to 20th century housing
and flats. The report is more substantial than a
mortgage valuation but not as detailed as a
building survey. It mainly covers the current
condition of the building, without giving
advice on specialists required and maintenance
to the property.
4. Single Issue Report
This type of survey is often asked for after
a Building Survey has highlighted the need for
a specialist’s report to a specific problem with
the property. The detail of the report is the
same as a building survey, but only on the
specialist requirements given.
The second reason for undertaking a survey
on a property is to enable parties to agree the
condition of a property when they are entering
into a lease. There are two types of lease that
are entered with each requiring different types
of survey. These are outlined below:
1. Full Repairing & Insuring Lease
The responsibility of putting the building
into full repair, and to give it back in full repair
is that of the tenant regardless of the condition
it was in when they took it. In order to
understand the extent of this a Building Survey
report is generally advised.
2. Schedule of Condition
A Schedule of Condition is needed where
the lease require the tenants to hand back the
property in a no worse condition from that
when they took it. The report will not contain
advice on reasons or remedies to problems, but
details on cracks, dampness, weathering and so
on.
The third reason for undertaking a survey is
to enforce repairing clauses through a
Schedule of Dilapidations. This is a report
prepared by the landlord’s surveyor describing
the current condition of the building and
setting out the work necessary to bring the
building into repair.
The CAL application will be based solely
on the Building Survey requirements, as this is
the most common type of survey that an
inexperienced surveyor is likely to undertake.
Details on how to undertake such a survey will
be included within the CAL application.

3.2

Building Defects

Perhaps the most recognised person within
this field is Professor Malcolm Hollis, who is
currently researching a number of topics at the
University of Reading in the UK. He has made
a number of educational videos and written
countless texts on different ways to survey a
property and diagnose defects within
buildings. One of the major aspects of his
work is testing the knowledge of surveyors
that are currently practising within the
industry. A good example of this was shown
on a well-known television current affairs
programme. Professor Hollis was asked to
show how some surveyors were not carrying
out their duty to members of the public when
they were asked to survey a property.
Professor Hollis spent nearly 4 hours in the
property and highlighted at least 10 defects
that would cause him concern. The programme
secretly filmed three separate surveyors on
their surveys of the same property and the
results seen were quite startling! Only one of
the three surveyors spent more than 1 hour in
the property, with the least time spent being 55
min. All three surveyors were very poor in
diagnosing the problems that Professor Hollis
had highlighted. All of them only found 1 out
of the 10 problems highlighted. No reason was
actually given in the programme why this had
occurred as the surveyors concerned were not
given a chance to speak, so reasons for their
not diagnosing the problems have to be second
guessed. Perhaps one of the main reasons for
this was inadequate training, another may be a
busy schedule, etc. The main reason that the
project is interested in is the lack of training
was highlighted in the programme, hence the
design and implementation of this system.
Professor Hollis’s techniques will be the
basis used in this application to help the users
learn how to survey a building properly. His
techniques are well publicised and the one to
be used is taken from his book “Surveying
Buildings”. [Hollis 1992]

3.3

Information Technology - Virtual
Reality

The use of Virtual-Reality in this project is
very important as it gives the user a visual
portrayal of a defect in a building. A typical
19th century property is used that has
characteristic features such as bay windows
and not so modern building techniques
associated with it. The virtual environment is
developed using the “Superscape - VRT”
software. It is relatively easy to use with a

number of different editors for the designer to
use when developing their worlds.
The environment will show the property
with tags on certain elements of the building.
If a user clicks on these tags a number of
defects will be shown to them highlighting the
type of defect that may affect that element. The
defects themselves are taken from real-life
examples obtained from partnerships with
local surveying practices. The photographs are
taken using a digital camera so that they are in
a format that can be easily recognised by the
VR software. This reduces problems of
scanning the photographs where quality of the
picture can be reduced. The VR environment
forms the main basis of the application, as this
is the main view that the user has of the
application.

Figure 2 Screen shot showing the
development of the VR world
The screen shot above is taken during the
development of the building in the VR
software. It shows the world with objects that
make up the property, and the warehouse box
that enables users to add objects, create and
add sounds, and texture objects in the VR
world.

3.4

Information Technology-CaseBased-Reasoning

The Case-Based-Reasoning software is
programmed into the application to provide the
different defects to be portrayed within the VR
environment. Each individual defect is stored
as a separate case within the software. As
some defects are associated with others these
provide the basis of specific cases. The CBR
software can then show different case
scenarios for the same element within the

property. This means that the user does not get
used to which particular element of the
building has a defect associated with it, and so
makes them concentrate every time they use
the application.
This particular approach has been used on
another CAL application within the University
of Salford. A CAL application was developed
using VR as the interface to identify whether
or not different scaffolds on a property
complied with current statutory requirements.
[Oliveira et al. 1997] Each individual scaffold
was saved a single case and when the
application was loaded a new type of scaffold
was portrayed within the VR environment for
users to comment upon to see whether or not it
complied with current statutory requirements.
Some of the application’s fundamental designs
have been incorporated into the building
pathology application.

4.0

Conclusions

This paper has described the fundamentals
of multimedia technology. It has highlighted
the advantages of how information technology
and in particular multimedia can be used to
produce educational training material in a wide
variety of professional disciplines. The paper
has described a brief history of the origins of
Computer-Aided-Learning and when best to
use such CAL systems has also been shown.
Some advantages and disadvantages of CAL
systems have been discussed, along with some
of the debates that are common to
implementing CAL systems.
The paper has shown in some detail how
multimedia can be used in conjunction with
other technologies to produce CAL training
material in building pathology. It has shown
information on surveying properties, how the
defects for the application are gathered and
recorded in the case-based-reasoning software.
Finally it has shown how the development of
the application has progressed, and how virtual
reality will play a large part in this.

References
1. Bleach, P, (1986), The use of Computers in
Primary Schools, University of Reading;
2. Butters, J and Corke, C (1998), Supporting
Innovation in Schools Project –SISP-,
Information & Visualisation Conference
Proceedings, Southbank University, IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California;
3. Hollis, Malcolm, (1992), Surveying Buildings,
3rd edition, RICS Books, London, UK;
4. Jackson et al, (1986), A Survey of
Microcomputer use and Provision in Primary
Schools, Journal of Computer Assisted
Learning, Issue 2;
5. Oliveira, L., Watson, I. and Retik, A., (1997),
Case-based-reasoning in virtual reality: an
application for training on inspection of scaffold
structures, Dept of Surveying, Uni. of Salford;
6. Papert, S, (1981), Mindstorms - Children,
Computers and Powerful Ideas, Harvester Press;
7. Papert, S, Grillos, J, Norman, D, et al,
(Nov./Dec.1994), Transforming and Preserving
Education (round table discussion), EduCom
Review No. 29;
8. Passey, Don, and Ridgway, Jim, (February
1994), The Current Impact of Information
Technology, Computer Education No. 76;
9. Pratchett, Terry, (1991), Amazing Possibilities,
Educational Computing and Technology;
10. Reinhardt, Andy, (March 1995), New ways to
Learn, Byte Issue 20;
11. Shelbourn, M et al, (1998), An Integrated
Virtual Reality and Case-Based Reasoning
Model for Training in Building Pathology,
Information & Visualisation Conference
Proceedings, Southbank University, IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, California,
p.44-49;
12. Suppes, P, (1966), The Uses of Computers in
Education, Scientific American;
13. Twigg, Carol, (Jan./Feb.1995), Man Bites Dog,
EduCom Review, No. 30, page 1;
14. Wilson, Martyn, (1994), Educational and
Training Technology International, Vol. 31.

