Enhancement of Decision Support Process in Road Administration Domain with
the Use of GIS Technology
Nenad CuS BabiC, Danijel Rebolj
Fmxlty @‘Civil Engineering
Uniwrsity qf A4urihor
Nenad@Computer. erg
Cveto Gregorc
OMEGA Consult
C’veto. C;regorc@OMEGAconsult..si
searching. The component can also be used iii other
information systems that use BCP.
Geography is essential attribute of a road. In business
information system. data about current state of road
sections, events and planned activities are connected to
road network through unique road section ID and offset.
From this data several reports about state of the road
sections can be generated \vith standard SQ12. As an
example, you can get report about C~I- accidents on
selected road sections or report u ith index of road surface
state on selected road sections. Such reports are a base fol
road section’s reconstruction planning process. Ilowever.
tabular data are some times hard to follow. If we want to
check correlation bet\\een road surface state index and
car accidents on a road section. this is not eas)’ to figure
out from tabular data.
(ieographic
information
significantly increases the value of attribute data. When
same example is diapla! cd on a map. correlation is
immediately evident. l‘hcI-efore. in road administt-ation
department has been using pmllcl GIS s> stem. Custom
maps have been prepared OH demand. Nevertheless. this
solution has several deliciencies. ‘To name just two of
them, as a rule decisioll-mal,ers do not use sophisticated
GIS tools and data stored in business database and spatial
database are not connected. Every time when map is to be
rendered, it is necessary to import current data. Therefore,
we decided to implement a component. which will enable
decision-makers to work with geographic data fi-om
environments they arc familiar \\,ith and which will
connect spatial and business clntabasc.
GeoPlS is an ActiveX component and can easily be
used in any program environment that supports this
standard. For example. it is possible TV il~cIu(i., (ieoPIS
into MS Access database or MS Word document or MS
Excel spreadsheet. Also. you can i n c o r p o r a t e t h e
component into Visual Basic application. Application

1. Introduction
This article describes a component named GeoPIS.
W ith this component it is possible to visualise geographic
and attributive data from Road database (BCP) which is
used by Slovenian road administration. The component is
an upgrade of their business information system, which
includes BCP. by adding geographic dimension.
Geographical
data
can
significantly
improve
understanding of road attributive data and information

160
O-7695-0210-5/99 $10.00 0 1999 IEEE

communicates with the component through well-defined
interface of properties and methods. Principal tasks of the
component are graphical representation of road network
on the specified area and visualisation of an attribute from
a table related to or included in the BCP database.
GeoPlS can also communicate with Road life-cycle
environment RO (Rebolj 1998). This environment
includes methods for Road body model (MCT) data
manipulation such as: perspective 3D visualisation of a
road section (Rebolj et.al. l998), emission calculation and
visualisation (Rebolj 1995, Rebolj et. al. 1997), tracking
of land acquisition process (Kovacic and Rebolj 1997)
etc. Direct connection to detailed constructional data of
the selected road section defined by MCT is provided
through the road network presented in GeoPIS.

2. System architecture
Geographical road section network is a foundation for
GeoPIS operation. This network is stored into spatial
database. At this moment, it is possible to use ARC/INFO
cover or Arc/View shape format. Every road section has
to be labelled with a unique identifier that enables
connectivity with relational database.
Two additional thematic layers from spatial database
are handled in special way. These are municipals layer
and road companies layer (maintainers of roads). You can
add some additional thematic layers like terrain raster for
example, to variegate a map.

attributes of the tables are optional. Two sorts of tables
are foreseen. These are:
I. Tables, which attributes are valid for whole road
section. For example. these are road width. traftic flow,
etc. On a map, attribute value is displayed as a line. Width
of the line depends on attribute value and selected scale.
2. Tables, which attributes are valid on a part of the
road section (bridges IOr example). These records must
have defined start and end stationary of the object. These
objects are displayed as lines of different width on a road
section and cover the road section partially. As
previously, width of the line depends on attribute value
and selected scale.
GeoPIS is directly accessing attributive data in
relational database. This is possible after specifying

database location, table and attribute name.
User activates the component with a set of road
sections identifiers. The component displays attribute
values for selected road sections in a form of dynamic
segments on a map. The map is zoomed to the selection.
User can add or remove road section to/from selection.
On exit the component returns modified selection.
Methods and properties of GeoPlS are described in
further detail in a separate section (Interface description).
Constructional data of a road section are stored in
Road life cycle RO database in a form detined by Road
body model (MCT). In this database, there is no road
section identifier, but project name instead. Therefore,
this identifier can not be used as a key for accessing the
data. We implemented an interface module to overcome

Application

H

c

!1.

,

View format) I

_II

Figure 1. Component integration with other parts of the information system

this discrepancy.
In attributive database, existence of unique road
section identifier has to be provided in the tables. Other

3. Component design
4. Interface description
G e o P l S i s d e v e l o p e d in Visual Basic RAD
environment, and it is compiled to ActiveX component.
Further information about component technology reader
can find elsewhere (Krajnc et. al. 1997). User interface
includes main window with a map and a couple of dialog
boxes. On the main window, central component is digital
map form ESRI MapObjects (ESRI 1996).

GeoPIS is 32 bit ActiveX component. Programmers
can use this component in various development
environments on Windows 9.5, 98 or NT platform. In
most of development environments, the component is
imported to some kind of a component toolbar. From this
toolbar, programmer drags the component to a form from

Izbor(odseki as variant) as variant

DlgMap = main window with a map
DlgGeoPisOptions = options dialog box
GeoPisOptions = options class implements storing and retrieval of options
Selection = collection of currently selected road sections
CoIlElement = selected road section
DlgAtributeVallnput = query dialog for road sections searching

Figure 2 Class diagram
where this component is going to be used and adjust
component properties at design time (Figure 3).
Also, programmer can interact with the component
programmatically. Adjustments made in a code will
override design time settings, of course. More about
methods and properties of GeoPIS reader can find in
GeoPIS user manual (Rebel.j and Cus-Babic 1998).
In current version GeoPlS component itself is invisible
at runtime and has to be activated in event handler of
some other component (button for example). On
activation, component displays modal window. In the
future, we are planing to modify the component in a way
to be visible at runtime. This will enable inclusion of the
interactive map in a document (like MS Chart for
example).

Functionality of GeoPIS is designed to support specific
BCP environment. Also general GIS functionality of
MapOb.jects is preserved. GeoPlS integrates objects
presented in the following class diagram (Figure 2).
From implementation viewpoint, some of these classes
are implemented as class modules and some of them as
components (controls in Visual Basic jargon). Main
window is dIgMap. This window displays digital map at
GeoPlS activation. Other windows are displayed on user
request.

User activates GeoPIS functionality in two ways. End
user calls functions through user interface menus and
functions
can
also be
called
toolbars.
All
programmatically when incorporating the component into
some application.

162

User can add some road section to the current selection
or remove selected road sections from belectiun. User can
also interactively modif), konponent properties through
options dialog. Properties and selection changes are
propagated to program code.
Functionality of GeoPlS can be reached interactively
through three toolbars: general, selection and attributes.
General toolbar aggregates general GIS functionality:
l Show entire map
l Adding and removing of thematic layers
l Copy the map to clipboard
l Print the map
l Display Options dialog (Figure 3)
l Confirm selection changes and exit
l Reject selection changes and exit

GeoPlS is activated with method GeoPIS.lzbor where
desired selection of road sections is passed as an
argument. Main window with a map showing current
selection is displayed (Figure 4).

On Selection toolbar user can choose from different
kinds of selection methods like single road section
selection, selection by municipality, etc.
F r o m A t t r i b u t e toolbar user can turn attribute
rendering on and off. refresh display, change attribute
displayed on the map and change scale for attribute
rendering.

Figure 3 Options dialog

Figure 4 GeoPlS main window

163

5. Example of GeoPis usage
6. Conclusion
As mentioned above, GeoPIS can be used in any
application, which supports ActiveX components. One of
these environments is MS office. In the following

___.I7 : 131:12

13ou

.l -;I:1

3 :.,yly
__“ji __!_I

u

6517

_--”
I ,.x ,__. ” . ..__.__
14 ’ 4 ! ) )j:j.5heetl ,$Jqt?t~ ,~Shee&~~

In this article, we presented essential features of
GeoPIS component. During short period of use, users

VARNOSTNIH OGRPJ NA CESTI M IO1.684.233,OO 10/1039-1033-DVOLETNA
2415-96-50121
PGD, PZI M IO-10/1036,1037 zELlN 10~.840.150,00 SPODNJA IDRIJA
2415-96-5012[
,, . ,_

Ready
Figure 5 Spreadsheet with data, which will be displayed on a map
example, we u s e d t h e c o m p o n e n t i n M S Excel1
spreadsheet.
This spreadsheet contained financial data about road
section maintenance (Figure 5). We added GeoPIS to the
spreadsheet and set basic properties.
In this example, our source of attributes was not a
database. The component also enables rendering of values
passed to it on activation as parameters coupled with road
section identifications. Since all the data are in the
spreadsheet we simply past them to the component. To do
that, we wrote a procedure in Excel VB for applications.
User selects data about desired road sections in
spreadsheet and activates the component. Result of this
action is new window with map containing selected road
sections (Figure 6).
Like in this example, users can also apply the
component easily in other environments. This enables
geographical display of data from various sources.

reported that geography dimension is important
information for them. This new dimension significantly
raises the level of decision support process quality. Also
the use of component technology proved to be suitable
decision for this kind of software because it is possible to
use the component in various interactive environments.
This resulted in component application for the tasks not
anticipated at the beginning. III the future, we expect
users will find this component even more useful when
they start to build custom applications.

164

Figure 6 Data from spreadsheet (Figure 5) displayed on the map
energetiku, Univerza v Mariboru. Maribor-SI, 1995, pp.
c/135-143

12. References
[l] A.B. Smith, C.D. Jones, and E.F. Roberts, “Article
Title”, ./ournal, Publisher, Location, Date, pp. l-10.

[5] Rebolj, D., Sturm, P. in Hausberger,
dolocanje in vizualizacija onesnaienja,
cestni promet”, Zbornik
Sestegu
p o s v e t o v u n j u KOI~~Z~MLI/I~CI energetiku,
Mariboru, Maribor-SI, 1997. pp. C/7 I-80

[2] Jones, C.D., A.B. Smith, and E.F. Roberts, Book Tit/e,
Publisher, Location, Date.
[l] ESRI, Building Applications with MapObjects,
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI), Inc.,
Redlands, 1996

S., “Dinamicno
ki ga povzroca
medilurodnegu
Un iverza v

[6] Rebolj, D., “Integrated information system supporting
road design, evaluation and construction”, C’omputerAided Civil and lr$astructure Engineering, Blackwell
Publishers, MA, Vol. 13. 1998. pp. 179- 187

[2] KovaEiC, B., Rebolj, D., “Uporabnost programskega
okolja RO za urejanje lastninskih razmerij pri gradnji
test.“, Geodetski vestnik, Zveza geodetov Slovenije, let.
41, St. 3, 1997, str. 211-217

[7] Rebolj, D., CuS-Babic, N. in Tibaut, A., “Automatic
visualization of the road design”, Proceedings of the 77th
Annual meeting qf the Trrrnsportution Reseorcl7 Bourd,
Washington D.C., 1998, CD-ROM

[3] Krajnc, M., Krajnc, A., Kline, A., “Komponentna
tehnologija - nadgradnja objektne tehnologije.“, Objektna
tehnologiju v Sloveniji OTS’97, Univerza v Mariboru,
Maribor-SI, 1997, pp. 43-5 1.

[8] Rebolj, D. in CuS-BabiE. N., frogrumsku komponentu
GeoPIS I. 1. Nuvodilu XI ztpnrubo, F a k u l t e t a z a
gradbenibtvo, 1998, Maribor.

[4] Rebolj, D., “Simulacija Skodljivih emisij prometa s
pomocjo dinamicnega emisijskega modela”, Z b o r n i k
Cetrtegu
mednurodnegu posvetovunju Komunulnu

165

