The Mathematics of Shape-Geometry Approach To The Analysis Of Curve Profile

Dr. Farzad Khosrowshahi, School of Construction, South Bank University, London, UK

Abstract
It has been previously shown that the visual
approach to the analysis of the behaviour of growth
patterns can provide a viable solution to the
understanding of the physical behaviour of the
subject matter. Also, it has been demonstrated that
the shape of the profile can be defined in terms of a
number of characteristics some of which are general
for all profiles and others are specific to individual
circumstances. These characteristics, referred to as
shape-parameters, are used for the analysis of the
profile. Also, they are used for construction of the
profile that the phenomenon is likely to assume. The
method was validated by applying it to construction
project expenditure pattern forecasting and further
validation was undertaken by the use of statistical
technique, namely, Principal Component Analysis.
In this paper, the mathematics of the model is
represented, whereby, for a given set of shapeparameters, the precise profile is mathematically
generated.
Due to its complex nature, the problem is
decomposed into separate modules each satisfying a
number of requirements. The modules operate
independently but when combined, the overall
boundary requirements are also satisfied.

growth, contains characteristics that are descriptive of
the behaviour of the pattern (Khosrowshahi 1998).
The work applied the concept to construction project
expenditure pattern and showed that a forecast of
expenditure pattern can be generated by constructing
the shape of the pattern from which monthly
valuation figures were derived. The parameters
defining the shape consist of Peak time (Xp), Peak
cost (Yp), Initial Slope (ISLP), End Slope (ESLP),
Intensity (INT), Distortion(s): [Position, duration,
intensity and type].
As shown in Figure 1, It was noted that with
these variables, the shape of project expenditure
pattern could be constructed. Since the bahviour of
construction expenditure pattern is one of, growth
nature, the concept is applicable to all phenomenon
displaying the behaviour of growth. Examples include
human physical growth, population growth, and the
growth and decay of radioactive isotopes.

Keywords: Mathematical Models, ShapeParameters, Curve Profile, Visualisation, Forecasting

Introduction
Often, the behaviour of a phenomenon, over
time, is represented by means of a graph and analysed
accordingly. The visual analysis of such graphs
provides an insight into the behaviour of the subject
matter. It has been previously demonstrated that the
profile of many phenomenon displaying behaviour of

Figure 1. Shape Parameters
Having identified the parameters defining the
shape of the profile, the next logical step was to
acquire a mathematical expression, which, for a given
set of values, for shape-parameters, generates the
profile. The effort commenced by a thorough search

among current expressions. These included growth
models that were developed for particular
applications and were tailor-made to the relevant
data. These models proved to lack any use for
subjects other than the one for which they were
generated. Also, many general models representing
growth patterns were examined. However, they tend
to rely on simple exponential expressions which
simulate only the underlying pattern of growth. All
other efforts to find a suitable model from current
expressions or indeed probability distribution
functions
(PDFs)
were
also
unsuccessful.
Subsequently, a new expression was developed.
This paper will introduce the mathematical
expression which, on the one and, fulfills the
objectives of the research for which it was developed
- simulation of construction expenditure patterns. On
the other hand, the expression is of adequate generic
nature for it to be applied to other phenomenon
displaying the behaviour of growth. These include
several areas from various disciplines.

Requirements of the Mathematical
Expression
For the expression to satisfy all requirements it
has to comply with the following;
a.

b.

c.

d.

It must comply with the general characteristics of
growth profile, as described by Khosrowshahi
(1998).
It must comply with specific characteristics of
the diversity of shape profiles (Khosrowshahi,
1998).
It must be independent of data [unlike methods
such as regression, where data and the expression
are integrated.
The parameters of the expression must be fully
interpretable.

It was somewhat apparent that the incorporation
of all requirements into one expression was a nearimpossible task. To this end, the problem was divided
into modules each represented by a separate
mathematical expression. Therefore, each module
was responsible for fulfilling a number of
requirements relating to shape-parameters.
A precondition for the modular approach was
that each module should operate independently from
other modules, but their combination must satisfy the
overall requirements without violating a single one.
Also, each module should contain parameters

allowing full control over the behaviour of the
variables that they generate. A brief description of
each module is given below:
i. Control Module: this module is a single curve
representing the underlying pattern of growth.
ii. Kurtosis Module: this module consists of two
independent curves which adjust the initial and end
slopes, as well as the curve-intensity (total sum of all
values from the origin to the main peak point).
c. Distortion module: this module consists of one
or more curves which simulate distortions of the
underlying curve

Control Module
By its nature the control module should be able
to reflect the properties of growth, hence, it is highly
likely that its mathematical expression will assume an
exponential form. Indeed, an attempt to develop a
polynomial expression proved to be unsuccessful.
Basically, the module is a two-phased single,
smoothed, continuous and monotonic curve.
The control module is required to comply or
control the following:
i. Comply with general conditions of growth profile.
ii. Full control over the position of the peak point on
the X-axis.
iii. Full control over the position of the peak point on
the Y-axis.
iv. With zero initial slope and with zero end slope.
v. With zero initial value and zero end value.
Since all modules are eventually superimposed,
any alteration in the value of the parameters of any
one module would alter the total area under the curve
(or the total sum of all Y-values). Therefore, another
responsibility of the control module was to make
adjustments for the total area-requirement (total area
under the periodic curve must be unity). Therefore,
vi. Full control over the area under the periodic
curve (total sum of all Y-values).

Mathematical Expression for Control
Module
It had been hoped that amongst all growth
expressions or PDF's there could be at least one
which would satisfy part or all of control module
requirements. The search proved informative but
unsuccessful. In the absence of an off-the-shelf

model, a new mathematical expression needed to be
developed. All attempts such as Polynomial fitting
proved to be fruitless, subsequently, the focus was
turned to exponential functions.
Due to the complexity of the model it was
decided to generate / simulate the periodic pattern
rather than cumulative pattern, thus requiring only
one order of differentiation. In conjunction with the
aforementioned requirements, the structure of the
module had to satisfy the following;
1.
f(0) = 0
2.
f(1) = 0
3.
Contain a parameter for controlling Xp
4.
Contain a parameter for controlling Yp
5.
Contain a parameter for controlling the area
under the curve
Therefore, the model should be structured in
such a way as to comply with 1and 2 above and it
should have three parameters each facilitating control
over one of the specific requirements (3, 4 and 5
above). As the result of extensive analysis of current
expressions and through an evolutionary path, the
following expression was developed;
a
d
Yc = ebx (1− x ) − 1

(1)

Where, Yc represents the periodic value as a
proportion of unity and x is the proportion of period
number over the number of periods. Here, x(1-x)
satisfies 1 and 2, also, 3, 4 and 5 are implemented
through a, b and d.

parameterisation is introduced: a and b are constant
parameters as part of the equation, but also, a
parameter can be a variable as a function of the
constant parameter(s). This use of parameter is
referred to as parameterisation (see Jeffery, 1985).
Let Xp = R

and

Yp = Q

Parametrisation of a and b in terms of R and Q
yields the following equations;

a=

dR
1− R

b=

Log (1 + Q)
R a (1 − R ) d

Parameterisation of d proved to be an impossible
task. Solution for d could not be obtained through
fundamental theorem of calculus. Therefore, the only
solution was by the use of numerical methods. To this
end, an improvised method was adopted which used a
series of iterations aiming for the solution by
narrowing down the steps at each stage. Also,
research has shown that the relationship between the
value of d and total value can be represented by a
polynomial. Therefore, in order to improve the speed
of the operation, initially, the approximate position of
the solution is determined by fitting a polynomial to
the data.
The expression proved highly satisfactory:
Figure 2, shows values of Xp ranging from 0.01 to
0.99 at increments of 0.05. It is evident that the
module can generate profiles with extreme flexibility
and sensitivity towards changes in the position of the
peak point on the X-axis.
Control Module: periodic pattern
Yp @ .1, Xp varying from .01 to .99

The derivative of (1) gives Î
a
d
Y ' c = bx[b(1 − x) − dx ](1 − x ) d −1 ebx (1− x )

For Y'c = 0 at X = Xp gives

a
a+d

(2)
Y-Axis

xp =

For X = Xp gives

Yp = e

bX p a (1− X p ) d

−1

(3)

It is evident from equations 2 and 3 that both Xp
and Yp are expressed in terms of both a and b This
implies that Xp and Yp can not be independently
controlled. In order to overcome this problem,

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

X-Axis

Figure 2. Control Module: full control over
the position of Xp

Figure 3, shows a range of curves for varying
values of Yp. It is evident from the figure that the
model is highly sensitive in reflecting Yp on the
profile. Again because it is mathematically defined,
the accuracy is to the degree of complete precision.
Control Module: periodic pattern
Xp @ 0.4, Yp varying from .01 to .9

Kurtosis Module
Basically, the kurtosis module controls the
peaked-ness of the profile: how convex or concave
the curve is. While the peak point conditions are
satisfied by the control module and the distortion
properties by the distortion module, the kurtosis
module is responsible for the remaining shapeparameters. These consist of the following;

Y-Axis

i.
ii.
iii.

Control over the value of the initial slope
Control over the value of the end slope
Control over the value of curve-intensity
(total values from the origin to the peak
point).

The kurtosis module is a single curve consisting
of two parts connected at the main peak point.

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Xp

1

X-Axis

Figure 3. Control Module: full control over
the position of Yp
In Figure 3, the impact of changing Yp on the
total area has not been taken into account. This
adjustment is carried out through parameter d. Figure
4, shows that for fixed values of Xp and Yp, the total
area (value) decreases with d and that the model is
highly sensitive towards changes in d.
Control Module: periodic: Yp @ 0.5, Xp @ 0.3

d varying from 1(area=1.45) to 100 (area=0.2)
0.045
Yp

Mathematical Expression for Kurtosis
Module
The simulation of the kurtosis module requires
identification of the variables associated with the
module. These are the initial slope (IS), end slope
(ES) and curve-intensity (INT). Since this module is
divided into two parts connected at the peak point,
two separate curves are generated: the first curve
starts from the origin to the peak point and the second
curve starts from the end reversing towards the peak
point. The general mathematical expressions for these
parts are identical. They are based on a new
polynomial expression that is developed from the first
principal. Since there are five conditions, the degree
of polynomial is selected as 4, with five parameters.
The expression is given below;

Yk = k(X) =
= a1X4 + a2 X3 + a3 X2 + a4 X1 + a5 (4)

0.04
0.035
0.03

Where Yk is the periodic values for kurtosis and
X is the proportion of the period number over total
kurtosis periods (n - origin to Xp or end to Xp). The
conditions are as follows;

0.025
0.02

Y-Axis

0.015
0.01

k(0) = 0,
k'(0) = g (where g is the initial slope)

0.005
0
0

0.2

0.4
Xp

0.6

0.8

1

X-Axis

Figure 4. Control Module: full control over
the total sum of values- parameter d

For the two curves to meet smoothly at the peak
point, their values and slopes must both be zero.

Hence,
k(1) = 0 and
k'(1) = 0
The curve-intensity h is measured as follows;

i = Xp
∑ Yi = h = Na1 + Ma2 + La3 + Ka4 +
i =0
Where;
X14 + X24 + X34 + . . . Xn4 = N
X13 + X23 + X33 + . . . . Xn3 = M
X12 + X22 + X32 + . . . . Xn2 = L
X11 + X21 + X31 + . . . . Xn1 = K

(5)

.

The above equations (4 and 5) are used to find
the parameters a1, a2, a3, a4 and a5 as follows;
a5 = 0
a4 = g (initial/end slope)
a3 = [ h + g (3M -2N -K) ] / (N + L -2M)
a2 = - (2a3 + 3g)
a1 = - (g + a3 + a2)
Slope values can be measured numerically or,
based on the percentile system, the slope values are
grouped into categories namely, 'extremely low',
'low', 'moderate', 'high, 'very high' and 'extremely
high'.
Figure 5, shows a number of curves with
different initial slopes and curve-intensity.

Y-values

Fixed Intensity
End slope=0, Initial slope from 0.1 to 12.00

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

introduction of events and 'abnormalities', the result
of which is a distortion on the underlying pattern. For
example, in construction projects, if the production
rate is increased for fast track projects or if the rate is
decreased due to weather conditions, then a distortion
maybe generated. The size of the distortion can be
significant enough to produce a trough and a bimodality (secondary peak). A curve may have more
than one distortion.
A distortion has a position of application,
duration, type and intensity. The position of the
trough is the position of the distortion and the
distance between the successive peaks is the duration
of the distortion. The type distortion can be Retarding
(reducing the rate of change) or accelerating
(increasing the rate of change). Also, a distortion has
an intensity which is the sum of all distortion values,
(Khosrowshahi, 1998).

Mathematical Expression for Distortion
Module
The mathematics of distortion simulation is
rather similar to that of kurtosis module. The main
differences are due to different conditions and
requirements. The mathematical expression for the
distortion module - given below - is subject to the
following five conditions suggesting that the degree
of polynomial should be 4.
d(0) = 0 zero initial state
d(1) = 0 zero end state
d'(0) = 0 zero initial slope
d'(1) = 0 zero end slope
Total control over total value - distortion intensity I
(slopes are maintained at zero, in order not to
interfere with kurtosis module)

X-values (duration: origin/end to peak point)

Yd = d(x)
= a1X1 + a2 X2 + a3 X3 + a4 X4 + k
(6)

Figure 5. Kurtosis Module: full control over
the value of initial slope.

Distortion Module
The work has relied on the basic assumption that
the underlying pattern of growth is smooth and
continuous. Any deviation from this is due to the

Where Yd is the value of distortion at
proportional period X and k is a constant.
Given the intensity of the distortion I, the
following applies;
1
1
1
1
X 1 + X 2 + X 3 + . . . . Xn = K
2
2
2
2
X 1 + X 2 + X 3 + . . . . Xn = L
3
3
3
3
X 1 + X 2 + X 3 + . . . . Xn = M
4
4
4
4
X 1 + X 2 + X 3 + . . . . Xn = N
Then

a 1 K + a2 L + a 3 M + a 4 N = I
The above are used to find the parameters a1, a2,
a3 and a4 as follows;
k=0
a1 = 0
a2 = - (a3 + a4)
a3 = -2a4
a4 = I / (N - 2M +2L)
The extreme flexibility of the
expression is demonstrated in Figure 6.

distortion

and straightforward: both relied on fresh development
of two 4-degree polynomial equations each
complying with different requirements. The
expression for the control module, however, proved
rather challenging. Eventually, an exponential
function consisting of three parameters satisfied all
requirements of the module. The control over peak
point co-ordinated and total area under the curve was
facilitated through parameterisation. Subsequently,
full control over the requirements was achieved.
The sensitivity of the model was measured, in
terms of the behaviour of the curve in response to
variations in the value of the shape-parameters and
shown graphically.

Y-values

Intensity Ranging from -30 to +30
position

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

References

X-values

(duration of distortion)

Figure 6. Distortion Module: full control
over distortion's intensity.

Conclusion
This paper built on the product of a previous
paper in which the significance of visual approach to
the analysis of curve profiles was demonstrated. The
earlier work had shown that the curve profile of time
series data inherent features that describe the
behaviour of the subject matter. Therefore, the work
provided means for constructing the profile through
identification of the parameters that define the shape
of the profile, namely, the shape-parameters.
The aim of the current paper, was to identify the
mathematical expression that would facilitate
generation of the profile. Failing to find the required
mathematical expression in whole or in part, a new
set of mathematical expressions were subsequently
developed consisting of three modules, namely,
control module, kurtosis module and distortion
module. Each module was responsible for satisfying a
number of requirements. The expressions for the
kurtosis and distortion modules were rather simple

Brandon, P. S. and Newton, S, (1986). Improving the
forecast. Chartered Quantity Surveyor, may, pp. 24-7.
Gompertz, B., (1825), On the nature of the function
expressive of the law of human mortality, Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. Xxxvi, 513-585.
Jeffery, Alan, (1985) Maths for engineers and scientists,
Van Nostrand Ranhold, UK, p55.
Khosrowshahi, F. (1986), Database value/time related
project information for construction projects, Interim report
II, South Bank Polytechnic.
Khosrowshahi, F. (1996), Value profile analysis of
construction projects, journal of financial management of
property and construction, vol. 1, no. 1. Feb, 55-77.
Khosrowshahi, F., (1998), A visual approach to the
analysis of curve profile: a case in construction industry,
ProceedingsofInternational Conference on Information
Visualisation, IV'98, IEEE, 321-326.
Preece and Baines (1978)
Rektorys, K.(1969), Survey of Applicable Mathematics.
Stone, R. (1980), Sigmoids, Bulletin of Applied Statistics,
7(1), pp. 59 - 119.

