PosadaSpace: a Skeletal Fine Art Virtual Environment

by Mike Mosher cmikemosh@well.com>
and Tim McFadden <tim.mcfadden@thinkone.com>
Abstract:

viewer’s attention is thus focused upon a clearly-designed
center. With more limited visual information the eye also
better follows movement of a sprite. Limited visual
information may also aid the viewer in spatially locating
oneself as the viewpoint moves. Smoothness of navigation
may give the greatest experience of real-world veracity,
not the detail of rendering of the objects depicted. Lowresolution depiction on screen may have additional
performance benefits (1). and economy of rendering might
free up processing power to be better applied to
responsiveness and refresh rate.

The 1998 artwork PosadaSpace is a virtual world
exhibited in a decorated computer kiosk. Mike Mosher and
Tim McFadden built it around the historic cartoot
imagery of Jose Guadalupe Posada (and some other
Mexican art) to investigate the appeal and narrative
power of simple 20 sprites in defnillg and populating an
interactive 30 world.

I. Preface:

For these reasons it was decided the team would create a
3D world containing 2D JPEGs, nearly-monochromatic
cartoon figures standing like flat cut-outs. A visually
appealing JPEG of a painting, drawing or photograph can
be positioned vertically in a virtual world creates the
metaphor of an environment with muralized wails.(2)

In the spring and summer of 1998, Mike Mosher and Tim
McFadden created a fine arts VR kiosk artwork called
PosadaSpace. Mike designed its environments and
component JPEGs, and painted an external facade for its
computer. Tim programmed the world in VRML and
JavaScript, as well as programming three predetermined
paths for the viewer. This work however was the fruition
of discussions between the two-an artist and a software
engineer-dating back to the First Conference on
Cyberspace in Austin, TX, in April 1990.

III. Content:

II. Aesthetic issues:
Art can be said to be the subtle manipulation of
limitations. Mike has long held that too many 3D worlds
remain kitsch, overly-complicated, overdetermined and
overdesigned, splendidly serving to demonstrate the
capabilities of a computer’s hardware and software but
little else. These interactive 3D virtual worlds could best
be constructed not by attempting a debatable “realism” of
every detail, but by emphasis on selected onscreen objects
(sprites) and diminution of detail on others. Lessons are to
be learned from the early low-resolution videogames like
“Tank Commander” circa 1980, where the interactive
experience is probably enhanced rather than diminished by
the economy of visual information on the screen. The

O-7695-0210-5/99 $10.00 0 1999 IEEE

519

PosadaSpace used JPEGs of imagery drawn by JosC
Guadelupe Posada (1852-1913), a hardworking illustrator
for forty years of nearly 20,000 cheap, popular broadsides
and handbills in Mexico City (3). He frequently used the
motif of the calavera, or skeleton, to illustrate humorous
social or political commentary. Skeletons were presented

dressed in the garb of their owner’s role when livingbishop, businessman, fashionable lady, Zapatista
revolutionary, etc.-or carrying on activities such as
reading, eating, bicycling etc. They are visually simple yet
powerful and memorable, as the best cartoons and comics
artwork must be. (4).
Posada was a significant inspiration for Diego Rivera and
his generation of Mexican muralists and painters. Mike
took the liberty of including Diego’s wife the painter Frida
Kahlo in the artwork, using Posada’s busy skeletons and
exaggerated figures as metaphor for the tensions within
their marriage. Three tours through the PosadaSpace were
designed in hopes in proximity they convey a certain
evocative narration whose imagery links artists, love
and death.

The first tour carries the viewer from an opening
“gateway” with a portrait of Posada, the title and
explanatory paragraph hovering in space to a “sculpture
garden”. The viewer moves between the sprites in a sort of
star pattern, moving close to investigate each one. Two
walls that share a vertex to form a corner are fairly ornate,
one having Rivera’s “Dream of a Sunday Aftertoon in
Alameda Park” mural (which alludes to Posada’s
calaveras) mapped upon it, for a free-standing complex
graphic image becomes a muralized wall within the
architecture of cyberspace.

The painted, cut-out facade designed to surround the
computer in which PosadaSpace is exhibited is intended to
give the work a certain carnival-ride attraction (5). Yet it is
also hides or masks the machine, for if the computer is to
become more a servant of daily life and become absorbed
within other appliances it should certainly do so within
artworks as well. It is hoped that works like this then take
their place as part of a continuum of complex narrative
figurative artwork that includes the architectural frescoes
of Michelangelo and Rivera, rather than inhabitant of a
separate category “computer art”.

520

The second path moves from the gateway towards the
sculpture garden, then veers sharply to the left where it
moves towards what appears to be a gravestone or
monument. The viewer then descends, the visible walls of
the “elevator” proving to be Diego Rivera’s mural of
millionaires dining. Upon reaching the bottom, the viewer
turns to see “Frida’s Boudoir”, her portrait upon a bed-like
floating rectangular object. A bust of Russian
revolutionary Leon Trotsky, murdered in exile in Mexico,
stands beside it. Images from a “Mexican Art” disk of clip

art, of several women drawn by Rivera, were positioned to
serve as the walls of Frida’s boudoir. This imagery alludes
to the fact that Frida Kahlo had a love affair with Trotsky
as well as with several women, and Diego had affairs with
many women that he painted.

VII. Further Development:
The initial version of PosadaSpace was exhibited upon an
Intergraph workstation in “The Art of Digital
Technology”, an exhibit curated by Barbara Allie and
Barbara Rainforth held at the Santa Clara County Fair in
August 1998. All visual development on PosadaSpace had
to cease in mid-July prior to Mike’s travels (6); coding, of
course, continued up until the last possible minute. It was
exhibited behind a painted facade of two skeletons kissing,
with another skeleton on each side wing panel.

The third path takes the viewer to the frontiers, where four
Posada images of crowds among buildings appear, finally
shooting the wiewer upwards to view close-up the moon, a
rotating sphere with a crazy face mapped upon it.

V. Engineering Issues:

There were significant difficulties encountered with the
browser, requiring positioning a strip of black tape on the
screen and Tim clicking at precise moment to stop its
rotation. It is also suspected the piece may have been down
(frozen or shut off) a considerable amount of time during
the exhibit.

Tim McFadden relished the opportunity of this project as a
great way to learn the languages VRML and JavaScript. In
something resembling a movie’s director-cameraperson
relationship, Mike designed the scenario’s storyboard and
look and feel of the project while Tim performed the
coding. “For a programmer, it was a big thrill to be in
control of moving bodies in color” said Tim.

Work has begun on refinement of the Tour paths, with the
addition of one or more new Tours under consideration.
The optimum goal would be to allow the user total
freedom to wander, yet worlds built in this manner
traditionally suffer the problem of the user flying out into
empty space without sufficient visual clues that allow easy
return, unless an invisible bounding box or sphere is
in place.

Most of the VRML was hand coded, but for creating the
navigation paths a table-driven curve generator was
written in C. A table would specify start and endpoints,
type of curve, rotation, and initial value for splines. The
output of the C program would be loaded into MFVec3f
arrays in a JavaScript node to be loaded sequentially into
eventout SFVec3f and SFRotation fields on clock ticks.
The spline code came directly from William Press’

Tim has begun to code PosadaSpace to swap highresolution JPEGs for conventional ones when the viewer
reaches a predetermined distance from a specific JPEG. A
later version will use LOD (level of detail). This would
give the illusion of near focus without big pixels’
blockiness interfering with reading of the image.

Numerical Recipes in C.

VI. Process Issues:
Mike Mosher handed over to Tim McFadden
specifications for PosadaSpace, including sketches of
proposed positioning of the sprites and the trajectory of the
viewer’s paths through the world. Upon viewing the results
notes on their modification would be presented in action
item lists.
For an artist and a software engineer to work together
efficiently meant a learning process towards a common
language, so visual ideas which Mike would otherwise
express evocatively yet imprecisely could be quantified for
the most precise implementation by Tim. By assigning
numerical values to the position of each sprite, Tim could
build paths that most accurately resembled Mike’s
intentions, and then together they could refine them upon
viewing of the results in thebrowser.

521

Some of the animated movement within the world could
not be implemented, due to the browser slowing down. In
three instances the swapping of alternatives to specific
sprites, so skeletons would appear to strum a guitar or stab
a piece of meat with a fork. However the standing portrait
of Posada by Rivera would momentarily momentarily
swap with a version wearing a skeleton head, and a large
moon face mapped upon a sphere above him would rotate.
The story of Indra’s Net says that the universe is made of
an infinite net at whose intersections are jewels, each jewel
reflecting all the others. This image engaging him as a
provocative paradigm of cyberspace, Tim hopes to
continue the work within it begun in his essay “Notes on
Cyberspace and the Ballistic Actors’ Model” (7) both in
writing and embodied in future collaborative art projects.
Tim did not have access to a Java-compliant VRML
browser early enough in the PosadaSpace project, but in

the future hopes such projects will be networked and
multi-user.

Bibliography:
Anders, Peter, Visualizing Cyberspace (Macmilliian &
Co., New York NY, 1999). Includes mention of
PosadaSpace plus three screenshots on p. 44.

It is hoped by both Mike and Tim that continued
development of VRML, and supportive technologies like
MPEG-4, will support continued investigation by many
more teams of artists and programmers, pursuing their
personal investigations into design and content amidst the
burgeoning potential of creative virtual worlds.

Bad Subjects Production Team, Bad Subjects (NYU Press,
New York NY, 1998). Includes Mike Mosher’s 1995 essay
“Towards Community Art Machines” <http://eserver.org/
BS/l8/>.
Benedikt, Michael, Cyberspace: First Steps (MIT Press,
Cambridge MA 1991). Includes Tim McFadden’s essay
“Notes on the Structure of Cyberspace and the Ballistic
Actors Model”.

Notes:
(1 ) First proposed by Mike Mosher in “Objects in Mirror
May Be Larger: On Designing Low-Rez Virtual Worlds” a
poster installation at the Second Conference on
Cyberspace, Santa Cruz CA, 199 1.

Berdecio, Robert & Applebaum, Stanley, Posada’s
Popular Mexican Prints (Dover Publications, New York

(2) Mike’s experience painting murals in San Francisco,
and living in the mural-rich Mission neighborhood there
1981-84, inspires this investigation.

NY, 1972).
Carey, Rick and Bell, Gavin, The Annotated VRML 2.0
Reference Manual (Addison-Welsey Publishing Co.,

(3) Berdecio, Robert & Applebaum, Stanley, Posada’s
Popular Mexican Prints (Dover Publications, New York

Reading, MA, 1997). Tim found this book especially a joy
to read and use.

NY, 1972), Preface and Acknowlegements.
Press, William et. al., Numerical Recipes in C (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK, 1988).

(4) When Tim wore a Posada calavera t-shirt to a
breakfast meeting at Hobee’s Restaurant, Mountain View,
California in February 1998 Mike realized the
appropriateness of Posada’s simple, powerful imagery for
their first virtual world.

Rothenstein, Julian, J. G. Posada: Messenger of Mortality
(Moyer Bell Limited, Mt. Kisco, NY, 1989).

(5) Two recent public sculptures in Mountain View are
larger-than-life cut-out figures in metal by Joe Sam stand
at the City Hall and at the Whisman Sports Center. Mike
acknowleges the influence of works like this on
PosadaSpace’s “sculpture garden”. Mike painted mural
panels in 1990 for Laguna Honda Hospital, San Francisco,
California, cut to the contours of the composition of
multiple figures, and since 1992 has exhibited multimedia
and hypertext software in kiosks whose screen is cut into
shaped, painted facades.

Mike Mosher <http://www.ylem.org/artists/mmosher/
Opening.html> is an artist and an Adjunct Professor in the
University of San Francisco Information Systems
Program, Cupertino, CA. He has taught in the San
Francisco State University Art Department, the SFSU
Inter-Arts Center and the SFSU Multimedia Studies
Program. His multi- media artwork has been exhibited at
the Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, PA, at the Rochester
Institute of Technology, and at Artists’ Television Access,
San Francisco.

(6) While in Memphis, Tennessee in August 1998, Mike
organized and painted a collaborative mural panel
“Transistor Healing Elvis”, described in “Elvis Healed! A
Report From His Conference” in BAD SUBJECTS #39
<http://eserver.org/BS/39/> .

Tim McFadden is a software engineer at ThinkOne,
Brisbane, California, U.S.A., where he is currently
networking MPEG-4. Please note that PosadaSpace is
unrelated to any work done by Tim for ThinkOne, and
does not in any way represent its efforts in VRML or
MPEG-4. Tim is also working privately on a sonar
cyberdeck, and will continue to upload fun art
into cyberspace.

(7) Published in Benedikt, Michael, Cyberspace: First
Steps (MIT Press, Cambridge MA 1991).

522

