Visualizing World-Wide Web Search Engine Results
Sougata Mukherjea and Yoshinori Hara,
C&C Research Laboratories,
NEC USA Inc.,
San Jose, Ca, USA
E-mail: fsougata,harag@ccrl.sj.nec.com
Abstract
Most of the popular WWW search engines show the documents that match the users’ queries as pages of scrolled
lists. If lots of information are retrieved this is not very
user-friendly. Moreover, there is no mechanism to easily
determine documents linked to the retrieved documents or
keywords related to the query terms. This paper presents
a system that allows the user to visualize various related
information for the search results. We also introduce a focus+context visualization technique for the search space of
WWW queries.
Figure 1. System Architecture
KEYWORDS: Query Result Visualization, World-Wide
Web Search, Focus+Context Visualization.

1. Introduction
Although search engines are one of the best methods to retrieve information of interest from the World-Wide Web,
most popular search engines only retrieve documents that
match the user specified query terms. Sometimes the user
may be interested in other related information. For example,
they may be interested in the pages that are linked to the retrieved pages; they may also be interested in keywords that
are related to the query terms.
Another problem with the search engines is that they show
the results as pages of scrolled lists. With the explosive
growth in the amount of information that is available on the
World-Wide Web, many queries result in a large number of
retrieved documents. It is very tedious for the users to go
through pages of scrolled lists to find the relevant information.
This paper presents a system that allows the user to navigate through the result space of a World-Wide Web search
to find the relevant information. The user can look at the
documents connected by links to the retrieved documents.

They can also look at keywords relevant to the query terms.
Visualization is used to present the results because it allows
people to use perceptual rather than cognitive reasoning in
carrying out tasks [19].
This paper also introduces a visualization technique, CardVis, that is useful to show the search space to the user. The
technique is based on the metaphor of a pack of playing
cards and uses the focus+context technique to handle a large
amount of information. For the focus or the section of the
information space that is of interest to the user, we show the
details. The 3rd dimension is used to show a large amount of
contextual information.
The next section gives an overview of our system. Section 3
introduces the visualization technique by showing how it can
be used to visualize World-Wide Web search engine results.
Section 4 presents related work. Finally section 5 is the conclusion.

2. System Overview
Our system is based on client and server mediation architecture similar to [7]. A mediation server facilitates the interaction between users and various service providers. The me-

<query_result>
<query_term>.....</query_term>
......
<document>
<url>...</url>
<title>...</title>
<linkin>...</linkin>
....
<linkout>...</linkout>
....
<keyword>....</keyword>
....
</document>
....
<semantically_similar_kwd>
<keyword>.....</keyword>
<document_url>...</document_url>
.....
</semantically_similar_kwd>
.....
<syntactically_related_kwd>
<keyword>.....</keyword>
<document_url>...</document_url>
.....
</syntactically_related__kwd>
.....
</query_result>

Figure 2. Query Result Format for Visualization

diation server forwards users’ requests to the corresponding
servers based on users’ preferences and functional requirements. An overview of the system architecture is illustrated
in Figure 1. The components of the system are presented in
this section.

2.1. Specialized Crawler
A specialized crawler is used to gather information from the
World-Wide Web. Unlike traditional crawlers used by the
search engines whose role is to gather as much information as possible, our crawler only gathers pages related to
the users’ interests. For example, we can gather all Web
pages relevant to Visualization or all pages related to Computer Science conferences.

2.2. WebDB
One essential server is the WebDB hypermedia database system [11] since it provides indexing of the gathered information and supports comprehensive database-like query functionalities. WebDB has two levels: a logical level consisting modules for logical Web document modeling and storage, the query language translator, and an XML document

generator; and a physical level consisting modules for internal class representations, object depository, query processing, and an internal query result class generator.
In WebDB, we view and model the Web as a labeled directed
graph Gweb = Vweb ; Eweb , where the vertices (V ) denote
the pages and the edges (E ) denotes the hyperlinks between
these pages. The vertices have information, including title,
keywords, and other metadata. The edges are links from
source pages to destination pages. We represent the document contents and Web structure using an object-oriented
data model and implement WebDB on top of NEC PERCIO
OODBMS.
When a document is passed to WebDB by the crawler, link
and keyword information is extracted and maintained in the
database. For each keyword in the databases, we perform
keyword co-occurrence analysis to derive syntactically related keywords (e.g. car and Toyota) and consult an online
lexical dictionary to derive semantically similar keywords
(e.g. car and automobile). These relationships are maintained using pointers.
During querying, the system can traverse from the user specified keywords to related keywords and from the retrieved
documents to linked documents easily. These information
help the user to gain a better understanding of the search
space. Instead of seeing the information in a series of HTML
pages, the user can also visualize the data.

2.3. Visualization Engine
The visualization engine supports various languages for generating the visualizations. For example Java can be used
and the resultant visualizations can be shown as an applet.
We also allow the use of Virtual Reality Markup Language
(VRML), which can be shown in a VRML browser like SGI’s
CosmoPlayer.
To support various visualization functionalities, we define a
protocol for data exchange between the visualization engine
and WebDB. XML is used as the format in our implementation. The data exchange format is given in Figure 2. This
allows the visualization engine to be integrated with other
systems as long as they follow the same format.
With the augmented query results, the visualization engine
has many options to display the query results based on users’
preferences. For example, as shown in Figure 3, the user
can visualize the neighborhood of any retrieved Web page.
One of the retrieved pages for a specialized search engine for
visualization was the homepage of the visualization group
of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The user
can visualize the link neighborhood of (nodes linked to and
from) the page as shown in Figure 3(a). The user can also
determine pages that are semantically similar to this page.

.

.
(a) Link neighborhood

(b) Semantic neighborhood

Figure 3. Showing the neighborhood of a Web page (Url http://www-vis.lbl.gov)
(Similarity is determined using the vector space model [18]).
This semantic neighborhood can be shown in a Bulls-Eye
visualization as shown in Figure 3(b). In this visualization
the document of interest is at the center; the position of the
other documents are determined by how similar they are to
the main document. The next section introduces another visualization technique to show the entire search space.

3. Card Visualization
Sometimes the user is interested in getting an overview of the
whole search space. The objective will be to show the structure of the retrieved Web pages as well as how these pages
are relevant to the main keywords of the search space.
Considering the information space as a graph, we can first
determine its connected components. Assuming that a link
exists between two nodes if they are related, these connected
components will have related nodes. A typical WWW search
will result in many connected components. We have developed a visualization technique that is suitable for such an
information space whose data organization is a group of disconnected graphs.
Figure 4 is an example of this visualization technique. It
shows the results of a query to a database consisting of Computer Science conference Web pages indexed by WebDB.
Each graph of the search space is shown in a card. One
card is at the focus and shown at the top. The nodes and
links comprising this graph are also shown. The nodes are
shown as cubes and labeled by the HTML page titles. Moving the mouse over them shows their URLs at the status area
of the VRML browser and clicking on them retrieves the cor-

responding URLs. The other graphs are shown in the context
by arranging them in different planes in the 3rd dimension.
The position in the 3rd dimension is determined by how relevant the nodes of the graph are to the original query terms.
The titles of their main nodes are also shown. (The node
with the maximum number of links is assumed to be the main
node of a component).
The query terms are shown at the top as spheres. The other
related keywords are also shown as cylinders. Their sizes
indicate how closely they are related to the query terms. Initially one of the query terms as well as all the nodes which
are relevant to the query term in the focus card are highlighted. The cards in the context are also highlighted if they
have nodes relevant to the query term. Thus, in Figure 4 the
query term “web” and nodes and graphs relevant to it are
highlighted. The focus graph shows pages related with the
WWW8 conference and the links between them.
The visualization allows two types of user interaction. (We
use Javascript to program the interactions).
The user can click on any of the related keywords. The
nodes in the focus graph are highlighted if they are relevant; the other cards are also highlighted if they have
relevant nodes.
The user can click on any of the context cards to bring
them into focus.
Thus in Figure 5 the user has clicked on the sphere for the
keyword database; all the nodes and context cards relevant to
the keyword were highlighted. The user has brought into focus a graph with pages related to the SIGMOD conference;
note that a related conference (PODS) also belongs to this
graph.

Figure 4. Visualizing the results of a query with the term “1999” and “web” to a WebDB database
containing Computer Science conference Web pages. Initially, pages for the WWW8 conference is at
the focus.

Figure 5. Visualization with database as the selected keyword. The user has also selected a database
conference as the focus.

This visualization is based on the metaphor of how a player
arranges a group of playing cards. One card is kept at the top
and the other cards are arranged in such a manner that the
main information (suit and color) of them are easily apparent. The user also has the ability of bringing any card to the
top.

4. Related Work
4.1. Focus+Context Visualization
A popular approach for visualizing abstract information is
to use focus+context techniques by which the information of
interest to the user is shown in detail, smoothly integrated
with other context information. By balancing local detail
and global context, this technique can display information
at multiple levels of abstraction simultaneously. An example of this technique is the fisheye-view concept [6]. The
focus+context technique has been used to develop visualizations of different data structures. Examples include perspective walls [13] for visualizing linear data; document lens
[17], a 3D visualization strategy for textual documents; table lens [16], a method for presenting tabular information
and hyperbolic browser [10] for visualizing trees. A focus+context visualization for World-Wide Web nodes has
also been developed [15]. In this paper we discuss a visualization technique that is suited for a collection of disconnected graphs.

4.2. Visualizing Web Sites
Several systems for visualizing WWW sites have been developed. Examples includes Navigational View Builder [14],
Harmony Internet Browser [1], Narcissus [9] and WebCutter [12]. Since Web sites are large graphs and visualizing
large graphs is difficult [3], these systems use various data
simplification techniques like filtering and abstraction. The
CardVis technique is not suited for visualizing large graphs.
It is ideal for a collection of disconnected graphs and thus is
a good technique to visualize Web search results.

4.3. Visualizing Search Results
Unique interfaces for viewing information retrieval results
have been developed. Recent examples include SenseMaker
[2] and Cat-a-Cone [8]. SenseMaker is an interface for information exploration across heterogeneous sources in a digital library. Cat-a-Cone is a 3D interface that integrates
searching and browsing of very large category hierarchies
with their associated text collections. Another interesting
approach is the WebBook [4], which potentially allows the

results of the search to be organized and manipulated in various ways in a 3D space. These systems show the usefulness of visualization for better understanding of the results
of search engines.
Visualization techniques for World-Wide Web search results are also being developed. For example, the WebQuery
system [5] visualizes the results of a search query along
with all pages that link to or are linked to by any page
in the original result set. On the other hand, Alta Vista
(http://www.altavista.com) shows the keywords related to the
original query terms. However, the World-Wide Web has two
aspects: the contents of the Web pages as well as the links
connecting different Web pages. Therefore, an effective visualization should show the user both the content and the
structural information.

5. Conclusion
We have presented a system that provides specialized search
on the World-Wide Web. It allows the user various techniques to visualize and navigate through the search results as
well as other related information. We believe that the combination of visualization and searching will make it easier for
the user to retrieve relevant information.
The paper also introduced a focus+context visualization
technique called CardVis which is very suitable to visualize
Web search results which can be organized as a collection of
disconnected graphs. The visualization presents the details
of the structure and contents of the focus graph. Moreover, it
provides the user with an idea about the other graphs in the
information space. The user can also bring any graph into
focus. Therefore, we believe that the visualization is quite
useful to gain an understanding of the search space.
Future work is planned along various direction:
We believe that the CardVis technique can be generalized for visualizing information that can be clustered
based on two criteria of similarity. Cards representing
the clusters for one criteria of similarity can be arranged
in different planes in the 3rd dimension. One of these
cards will be in the focus and at the top. The details of
the focus card will be shown to the user. To enable the
user to get an understanding of the contents of the other
clusters, their labels should be displayed. The labels of
the clusters for the second criteria of similarity will be
shown at the top. If one of these clusters is selected, all
nodes in the focus card that belong to this cluster will
be highlighted. The other cards will be also highlighted
if they have relevant nodes.
If the information space is really big, the visualizations
may be too cluttered to be useful. Therefore, we are

exploring effective abstraction and filtering techniques.
Usability studies are also essential to determine the actual usefulness of the system.

References
[1] K. Andrews. Visualizing Cyberspace: Information Visualization in the Harmony Internet Browser. In Proceedings of the 1995 Information Visualization Symposium, pages 97–104, Atlanta, GA, 1995.
[2] M.Q.W. Baldonado and T. Winograd. SenseMaker: An
Information-Exploration Interface Supporting the Contextual Evolution of a User’s Interest. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCHI ’97 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 11–18, Atlanta, Ga, March
1997.
[3] G.D. Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I.G. Tollis.
Algorithms for Drawing Graphs: an Annotated Bibliography. Technical report, Brown University, June
1993.
[4] S.K. Card, G.G. Robertson, and W. York. The WebBook and the Web Forager: An Information Workspace
for the World-Wide Web. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCHI ’96 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 112–117, Vancouver, Canada, April
1996.
[5] J. Carriere and R. Kazman. Searching and Visualizing
the Web through Connectivity. In Proceedings of the
Sixth International World-Wide Web Conference, pages
701–711, Santa Clara, CA, April 1997.
[6] G.W. Furnas. Generalized Fisheye Views. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI ’86 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 16–23, Boston,
MA, April 1986.
[7] Ashish Gupta. Junglee: Integrating Data of All Shapes
and Sizes. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Data Engineering, Orlando, Florida,
USA, February 1998.
[8] M.A. Hearst and K. Chandu. Cat-a-Cone: An Interactive Interface for Specifying Searches and Viewing
Retrieval Results using a Large Category Hierarchy.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR ’97 Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 246–255, Philadelphia, Pa, July 1997.
[9] R.J. Hendley, N.S. Drew, A.M. Wood, and R. Beale.
Narcissus: Visualizing Information. In Proceedings of
the 1995 Information Visualization Symposium, pages
90–96, Atlanta, GA, 1995.

[10] J. Lamping, R. Rao, and P. Pirolli. A Focus+Context
Technique Based on Hyperbolic Geometry for Visualizing Large Hierarchies. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCHI ’95 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 401–408, Denver, CO, May 1995.
[11] W. Li and J Shim. Facilitating Complex Web Queries
through Visual Interfaces and Query Relaxation. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems. Special Issue on
the Seventh International World-Wide Web Conference,
Brisbane, Australia, 30(1-7):149–159, April 1998.
[12] Y. Maarek and I.Z.B. Shaul. WebCutter: A System for
Dynamic and Tailorable Site Mapping. In Proceedings
of the Sixth International World-Wide Web Conference,
pages 713–722, Santa Clara, CA, April 1997.
[13] J. D. Mackinlay, S.K. Card, and G.G. Robertson. Perspective Wall: Detail and Context Smoothly Integrated.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI ’91 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 173–179,
New Orleans, LA, April 1991.
[14] S. Mukherjea and J.D. Foley. Visualizing the WorldWide Web with the Navigational View Builder. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems. Special Issue on
the Third International World-Wide Web Conference,
Darmstadt, Germany, 27(6):1075–1087, April 1995.
[15] S. Mukherjea and Y. Hara. Focus+Context Views
of World-Wide Web Nodes. In Proceedings of the
Eight ACM Conference on Hypertext, pages 187–196,
Southampton, England, April 1997.
[16] R. Rao and S.K. Card. The Table Lens: Merging
Graphical and Symbolic Representations in an Interactive Focus+Context Visualization for Tabular Information. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI ’94 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
318–322, Boston, MA, April 1994.
[17] G.G. Robertson and J.D. Mackinlay. The Document
Lens. In Proceedings of ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ’93, pages 101–108,
Atlanta, GA, 1993.
[18] G. Salton and M.J. McGill. Introduction to Modern
Information Retrieval. McGraw-Hill, 1983.
[19] K.J. Vincente and J. Rasmussen. The Ecology of Human Machine Systems: II. Mediating “Direct Perception” in Complex Domain. Ecological Psychology,
2:207–249, 1990.

