A Semantic-Centric Approach to Information Visualization

Chaomei Chen
Department of Information Systems & Computing
Brunel University
Uxbridge UB8 3PH, UK
Tel: +44 1895 203080
E-mail: chaomei.chen@brunel.ac.uk

Leslie Carr
Department of Electronics & Computer Science
Southampton University
Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK
Tel: +44 1703 594479
E-mail: L.Carr@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract

collaborators have been experimenting with techniques for
creating concept spaces using supercomputers based on
bibliographic information obtained from several databases
heavily used by computer scientists.
Approaching the accessibility issue from a different
perspective, the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI),
best known for its Science Citation Index (SCI), has been
exploring the structure of scientific literature based on
citation data embedded in scientific literature. ISI’s work
was originally motivated to break the barrier in subject
indexing  by relying on the collective and accumulated
views of researchers in a given discipline regarding what
the most influential work is and what is likely to be the
most fruitful research topic.
The pioneering work at ISI is known as the Atlas of
Science [3], which was based on document co-citation
patterns. Recently, ISI is increasingly interested in the
applicability of visualisation technologies in revealing the
structure of science [4, 5].
Author co-citation analysis (ACC) is an analytical
method that has been traditionally used to identify
interrelationships between pairs of authors. ACC uses
authors as data points in the literature. The focus of ACA is
on authors instead of articles or journals. author co-citation
is a more rigorous grouping principle than that of typical
subject indexing, because it depends on repeated statements
of connectedness by citers with subject expertise [6]. It is
believed that author co-citation can provide invaluable
information about how authors, as domain experts, perceive
the interconnectivity between published works. A sub-field
may be identified by a group of researchers contributing to
closely related themes and topics. Such sub-fields are also
known as specialties.
In this paper, we introduce our work in incorporating
visualization techniques into citation analysis so that the
structure and evolution of the field of hypertext can be

A semantic-centric approach to information visualization is
described in this paper. In contrast to the conventional
document-centric approaches, the semantic-centric
approach focuses on the intrinsic connectivity in an
information space beyond the boundary of individual
documents. The approach aims to visualize the profound
interrelationships perceived by the scientific community
through the literature. An application of this approach is
demonstrated through an author co-citation analysis of the
entire collection of the ACM Hypertext conference
proceedings over the last decade. Sub-fields, or specialties,
in the field of hypertext are visualized based on the results
of a factor analysis of author co-citation patterns. Nine
snapshots of annual author co-citation maps introduce a
new way of knowledge discovering in an information space
shaped by the contemporary literature.

Keywords: Visualisation for Knowledge Discovery,
Citation Analysis, Visualisation of Literature
1

Introduction

Vannevar Bush [1] described a visionary device called
Memex, in which all the information ever available to the
mankind would be richly inter-connected. Users would be
able to find relevant information and organize it into a
thread, or a trail, for their own use. Information can be
grouped together as trails to meet the need of users.
Maintaining the interconnectivity and accessibility of
an information space is a crucial issue in a modern
information society. According to Schatz [2], the next
generation of information technology should transcend the
boundary of documents and enable users to handle the
semantics underlying these documents. Schatz and his

revealed through the groupings of the most influential
authors. Our aim is to identify the most predominant
specialties in the field of hypertext and to use author cocitation maps as a means of trailblazing the literature of
hypertext.

2

Communications of the ACM in 1994 and the MultiCard
paper published in ECHT ’94. However, instead of citing
the WWW paper published in Communications of the
ACM in 1994, three articles in the 1997 and 1998
proceedings have cited two earlier publications on the same
topic of the WWW by Berners-Lee.

Document versus Author Co-Citation

There are two types of co-citation relationships: one is
based on documents and the other is based on authors.
Document co-citation approaches focus on a finer
granularity than author co-citation approaches  it is
possible for analysts to track down the contribution of
specific documents to a given field of research. Author cocitation approaches, on the other hand, have a major
advantage over document co-citation approaches 
forging intrinsic interconnectivity links that might be
missing by a document-centric analysis.
Figure 1 illustrates how document co-citation counts
are measured. Let us consider two articles: one is a classic
citation of the WWW and the other presents MultiCard, an
open hypermedia system.
Berners-Lee, T., Caillau, R., Nielsen, H. & Secret, A. (1994)
The World Wide Web, Communications of the ACM , 37(8),
76-82.
Rizk, A. & Sauter, L. (1992) Multicard: An open hypermedia
System, Proceedings of the European Conference on
Hypermedia Technology (ECHT’92) (pp. 4-10), Milano, Italy,
November 1992. ACM Press.

Between 1997 and 1998, the WWW paper has been
cited by seven articles published in the ACM Hypertext
conference proceedings, whereas the MultiCard paper has
been cited by six articles. As shown in Figure 1, four
articles cited the two papers together.

Figure 1. Document co-citations. The WWW paper
and the MultiCard paper have been co-cited four
times in the ACM Hypertext conference
proceedings in 1997 and 1998.
The document co-citation counts have revealed the cocitation relationship between the WWW paper published in

Berners-Lee, T. (1992) World-Wide Web: An Information
Infrastructure
for
High-Energy
Physics,
Software
Engineering, AI and Expert Systems for High Energy and
Nuclear Physics, La Londe-les-Maures, France. [98(16)]
Berners-Lee, T. (1992) World-Wide Web: The Information
Universe, Electronic Networking: Research, Applications
and Policy, 1(2), 52-58. [98(16), 98(17), 98(32)]

An examination of the context of each citing suggests
that these three articles are equivalent from citers’ point of
view, but a document co-citation analysis would treat these
articles as different items and fail to recognize the
fundamental connections among these three. The intrinsic
connections among the citations of these articles may be
lost.
One may argue that we should only take into account
those articles that have been predominant in terms of their
overall citation profile and weed out articles that turn out to
be less influential. This is a document-centric view. From a
semantic-centric view, articles that describe essentially the
same concept should be tightly coupled with one another as
they represent integral aspects of the same thought. What
we need is instrumental information that can help us to
uncover such implicit but profound connections.
Information visualization based on word frequencies
and distribution patterns has been a unique research branch,
especially
originated
from
information
retrieval
applications. The changing patterns at the lexical level have
been used to detect topical themes. Some intriguing
visualization technologies have been developed over the
past few years [7-9].
In our research, we are interested in visualization
techniques that can handle the connectivity issue at a higher
granularity so as to overcome some of the problems
identified in the above example. Note that the name of
Berners-Lee is associated with all the three WWW articles.
In this case, his name more appropriately summarizes the
nature of these citations. This suggests that, instead of
focusing on individual documents, one could gain insights
into the nature of citing behavior by shifting the focus to
authors who have contributed to the literature.
Figure 2 illustrates a author co-citation network. In this
example, Card and Robertson, who are well known for their
work in information visualisation, have been cited through
several different articles, including Cone Trees and the
WebBook. Marchionini’s work includes his book on
information seeking and a popular article published in IEEE

Computer. He is also a co-author of self-organized maps.
Robertson and Marchionini have been co-cited by three
articles in the ACM Hypertext conference proceedings in
1998. Author co-citation networks can be very complex. A
visualisation method should reduce the complexity.

Figure 2. Author co-citations. Card and
Marchionini have been co-cited three times in the
ACM Hypertext conference proceedings in 1997
and 1998.

3

Author Co-Citation Analysis

White and McCain [6] used author co-citation analysis
to map the field of information science. Their analysis
included the top 120 authors ranked by citation counts
based on 12 key journals in information science from 1972
through 1995. One of the most remarkable findings is that
the field of information science consists of two major
specialties with litter overlap between their memberships:
experimental retrieval and citation analysis.
Multidimensional scaling techniques are typically used
in author co-citation analysis as a means of depicting the
underlying patterns between authors. However, author cocitation studies have been limited by the number of authors
that one can map with multidimensional scaling facilities in
the SPSS statistical package. For example, they had to limit
the maximum number of authors within the capacity of the
multidimensional scaling routines. In 1980s, the limit was
40 authors and in 1990s, this number is raised to 100
authors.
Author co-citation analysis provides an additional
perspective to help us understand the dynamic structure of a
field. The groupings of authors and research groups all
provide clues to the value of their contribution to the
development of the field. Therefore, we expect that author
co-citation analysis, enhanced by visualization techniques,
can play a significant part in helping people to make sense
of the literature as a whole.

4

Methods

In a series of studies, we have been investigating the
role of Pathfinder network scaling techniques in a virtual
structure-generation methodology that can be used to
reduce the excessive number of links and extract the most

salient structures from a range of proximity data [10]. In
this paper, we introduce the latest results from our research
in incorporating visualization techniques based on
Pathfinder network scaling into author co-citation analysis.
Author citation and co-citation counts were obtained
from a database covering all the articles published in the
ACM Hypertext conference proceedings since 1989 up to
1998. In addition to full text articles, the data set also
included data derived from short papers, especially for 1998
data. Author co-citation counts were computed for all the
authors who were cited five times or more during the whole
period. This selection criterion resulted in a pool of 367
authors for the entire period. In order to discover significant
advances and trends in the history of the field, we applied
the same methodology to the series of nine conference
proceedings. We introduced a three-year sliding window
scheme for these single-year visualizations. For year X, cocitation counts were calculated for authors who have been
cited for five time or more in any year of the sliding
window, i.e. year X-1, X, or X+1. This scheme provides a
wider context for the author co-citation analysis in each
single year.
Following [6], the raw co-citation counts were
transformed into Pearson’s correlation coefficients using the
factor analysis on SPSS for Unix Release 6.1. These
correlation coefficients were used to measure the proximity
between authors’ co-citation profiles. Self-citation counts
were replaced with the mean co-citation counts for the same
author.
Pearson’s r was used as a measure of similarity
between author pairs, because, according to [6], it registers
the likeness in shape of their co-citation count profiles over
all other authors in the set. Pearson correlation matrices
were submitted to Pathfinder network scaling. The resultant
Pathfinder network was modeled in VRML. An author cocitation map was then generated automatically. Hypertext
reference links are provided in these VRML maps from the
name of an author in the co-citation map to the
corresponding bibliographical entry in a citation table
maintained at Southampton University’s Web server.

5

Results

Information visualization is an inter-disciplinary
domain. Finding out the characteristics of visualization in
hypertext may lead to additional insights into the spatialsemantic structure of the visualization. We summarize the
major results in the following sections, including author cocitation maps based on the proceedings of 1998, a
landscape view of the entire co-citation network, and a
series of annual snapshots showing the major developments
in the field.

5.1

Author Co-Citation Maps in 1998

Factor analysis of the author co-citation patterns has
identified 18 underlying factors. The first 10 authors with
the highest factor loading on each factor are shown in
Table 1, including the accumulated percentage of variance
explained by each factor.
Table 1. The first three factors in the 1998 data.
Factor 1
22.6%

Factor 2
33.4%

the author has been cited in this sample of the literature. In
Figure 4, we used the factor loading of the first three of the
18 factors extracted from the co-citation patterns to color
the network. The first three factors together explain 42.2%
of the variance. Color-coded nodes and links allow users to
identify and distinguish authors from different specialties,
or invisible colleges.

Factor 3

5.2

42.2%

Smith_J

0.89 Deerwester_S

0.74 Landauer_T

Nurnberg_P

0.87 Dumais_S

0.74 Golvchinsky_G 0.47

Schneider_E

0.87 Harshman_R

0.74 Richardson_J

0.45

McCracken_D

0.86 Shneiderman_B

0.73 McKnight_C

0.45

Schuler_W

0.86 Landauer_T

0.73 Dillon_A

0.45

Schutt_H

0.86 Chen_C

0.72 Hill_G

0.43

Trigg_R

0.85 Fairchild_K

0.67 Remde_J

0.42

Heath_I

0.85 Poltrock_S

0.67 Lochbaum_C

0.42

Streitz_N

0.85 Rivlin_E

0.63 Harman_D

0.42

Leggett_J

0.85 Marchionini_G

0.62 Gomez_L

0.42

A Coherent View of Literature

0.49

Figure 3 shows an author co-citation map based on
author co-citation patterns derived from the proceedings of
1998. It contains 259 authors. Citation indices over three
periods are displayed as stacked bars to provide additional
cues for understanding the implications of the overall
structure. The higher the stacked bar, the more frequently

Figure 5 is a screenshot of the visualization of the
structure of the field of hypertext in terms of its most
representative authors and the strongest co-citation paths
among them. In this landscape view, generic contributions
tend to gather towards the center, whereas unique and
specific contributions tend to be placed towards the tips.
This interpretation has been partially verified by the skyline
of the landscape  periodical citation poles. A color-coded
citation pole represents the citation counts for the
corresponding author over three periods with the latest
period on the top. As we can see from the screenshot, the
height is gradually increasing as we move from the rim
towards the center. The network structure is the union of all
the possible minimal spanning trees. In this case study, it
appears almost like a tree, with a few extra links, which
implies that there are alternative shortest paths connecting
two points in the network.

Figure 3. The author co-citation map in 1998 with citation indices displayed as stacked bars to provide
additional cues for understanding the implications of the structure.

Figure 4. The author co-citation map in 1998 colored by the first three of the 39 factors identified in
factor analysis. Predominant specialties in the field become apparent in the map.

Figure 5. A landscape view of the literature of the hypertext field. Stacked bars vertical to the author cocitation network represent periodical citation index for corresponding authors.
At the beginning of this paper, we present an example
of how the WWW paper and the MultiCard paper have
been co-cited. Figure 6 highlights the local structure in the
author co-citation map generated automatically from our
semantic-centric approach. It shows that the authors of
MultiCard, Rick and Sauter, have been placed in a
strategically important position connecting a few clustering

branches. The figure also shows that Berners-Lee and other
co-authors of the WWW paper are grouped together with
Berners-Lee in the center. By looking at who has made the
co-citation one may obtain additional insights into who has
painted this picture of the literature. In this example, all the
citing papers address open hypermedia on the WWW.

6

DISCUSSIONS

We have generated a series author co-citation maps of
the field of hypertext. These maps not only visualize the
structure and evolution of the hypertext literature, but also
provide a basis for researchers to understand the structure
of the contemporary literature. The domain visualization
essentially reflects the collective view of the community.
This literature mapping is based on the ACM
Hypertext conference proceedings alone. Of course, there
are many other forums for hypertext research and
development. We plan to extend our literature mapping
across several interrelated fields, such as the WWW
conferences, the ACM SIGIR conferences on information
retrieval, the ACM Digital Libraries conferences, and major
journals in these fields. Cross-domain literature mapping is
likely to reveal more insightful patterns than a singledomain literature mapping.

specialties in the field, and a visual aid of interpreting the
results of citation analysis.
Using factor loading to color author co-citation maps
provides additional insights into the dynamic structure of
the field. To our knowledge, this visualization technique
has not been applied to semantic-centric information
visualization.
We expect that the semantic-centric approach will be
valuable for synthesizing a field of study, optimizing the
interconnectivity and accessibility of the literature to their
learning and communication needs, and for developing
engaging digital libraries and virtual environments.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the British research
council EPSRC (Grant Number: GR/L61088).

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

Figure 6. Shortest paths between the authors of
the WWW paper and the MultiCard paper.

7

Conclusions

We have integrated visualization techniques into
author co-citation analyses. We have used Pathfinder
networks to layout our maps. These maps are different from
the multidimensional scaling-based maps typically used in
author co-citation analyses, such as [6]. Pathfinder
networks can provide more accurate information about
local structures than multidimensional scaling maps [11].
We found that the provision of explicit links in our maps
made it easier to interpret interrelationships among different
data points.
The value of this work is in its ability to thread
through the literature and extract the most salient
associations among authors who have made significant
contributions to the field. Furthermore, author co-citation
maps provide a means of identifying research fronts, i.e.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

V. Bush, “As we may think,” The Atlantic Monthly, vol.
176, pp. 101-108, 1945.
B. R. Schatz, “Information retrieval in digital libraries:
Bringing search to the net,” Science, vol. 275, pp. 327334, 1997.
ISI, ISI atlas of science: Biochemistry and molecular
biology, 1978/80. Philadelphia, PA: Institute for
Scientific Information, 1981.
E. Garfield, “Mapping the world of science,” presented at
the 150 Anniversary Meeting of the AAAS, Philadelphia,
PA, 1998.
H. Small, “Update on science mapping: Creating large
document spaces,” Scientometrics, vol. 38, pp. 275-293,
1997.
H. D. White and K. W. McCain, “Visualizing a
discipline: An author co-citation analysis of information
science, 1972---1995,” Journal of the American Society
for Information Science, vol. 49, pp. 327-356, 1998.
B. Hetzler, P. Whitney, L. Martucci, and J. Thomas,
“Multi-faceted insight through interoperable visual
information analysis paradigms,” presented at IEEE
Information Visualization '98, 1998.
J. A. Wise Jr., J. J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M.
Pottier, A. Schur, and V. Crow, “Visualizing the nonvisual: Spatial analysis and interaction with information
from text documents,” presented at IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization '95, Atlanta, Georgia, USA,
1995.
H. Chen, T. D. Ng, J. Martinez, and B. R. Schatz, “A
concept space approach to addressing the vocabulary
problem in scientific information retrieval: An
experiment on the Worm Community System,” Journal
of the American Society for Information Science, vol. 48,
pp. 17-31, 1997.
C. Chen, “Visualising semantic spaces and author cocitation networks in digital libraries,” Information
Processing and Management, vol. 35, pp. 401-419, 1999.
R. W. Schvaneveldt, F. T. Durso, and D. W. Dearholt,
“Network structures in proximity data,” in The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 24, G. Bower,
Ed.: Academic Press, 1989, pp. 249-284.

