Visualizing Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging Data with Merging Ellipsoids
Wei Chen∗

Song Zhang†

Stephen Correia‡

David F. Tate§

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, ZJU, China

Mississippi State University

Brown University

Brigham and Women’s Hospital

Abstract
Diﬀusion tensor ﬁelds reveal the underlying anatomical
structures in biological tissues such as neural ﬁbers in the
brain. Most current methods for visualizing the diﬀusion
tensor ﬁeld can be categorized into two classes: integral
curves and glyphs. Integral curves are continuous and represent the underlying ﬁber structures, but are prone to integration error and loss of local information. Glyphs are useful
for representing local tensor information, but do not convey
the connectivity in the anatomical structures well. We introduce a simple yet eﬀective visualization technique that
extends the streamball method in ﬂow visualization to tensor ellipsoids. Each tensor ellipsoid represents a local tensor,
and either blends with neighboring tensors or breaks away
from them depending on their orientations and anisotropies.
The resulting visualization shows the connectivity information in the underlying anatomy while characterizing the local
tenors in detail. By interactively changing an iso-value parameter, users can examine the diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld in the
entire spectrum between the continuous integral curves and
the discrete glyphs. Expert evaluation indicates that this
method conveys very useful visual information about local
anisotropy in white matter ﬁbers. Such information was
previously unavailable in tractography models. Our method
provides a visual tool for assessing variability in DTI ﬁber
tract integrity and its relation to function.
Index Terms: Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging; Visualization;
Volume Rendering
1

Introduction

Diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) data contains information
about water diﬀusion in biological tissues. The underlying
anatomical structures can be retrieved from the diﬀusion
information. Visualizing the diﬀusion tensor remains challenging due to the complexities of the tensor ﬁeld and the
underlying tensor ﬁeld.
A majority of the previous work on DTI visualization models the diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld with either integral
curves [2, 21] or glyphs [16, 12, 10, 11]. Integral curves explicitly show the connectivity in the anatomy by integrating over the major eigenvector ﬁeld of the diﬀusion tensor
ﬁeld (see Figure 1 (a)). Integral curve methods, however,
have certain limitations. Speciﬁcally, considerable information is lost in integral curve methods because the tensor is
reduced to a vector. Moreover, integration errors accumulates along the curves. Glyphs show the entire local diﬀusion
tensor information at each glyph location and represent the
data faithfully without introducing error. However, impor∗ e-mail:

chenwei@cad.zju.edu.cn

† e-mail:szhang@cse.msstate.edu
‡ e-mail:stephen

correia@brown.edu

§ e-mail:dftatephd@mac.com

IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium 2009
April 20 - 23, Beijing, China
978-1-4244-4404-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

tant connectivity information is either lost or hard to interpret from the glyphs. Moreover, the placement of the glyphs
can be problematic: if too many glyphs are packed into the
visualization volume, visual clutter might prevent users from
understanding the inside structures; if too few glyphs are visualized, they will not represent the underlying continuous
structures well. Figure 1 (b) shows the ellipsoid glyphs at
the sample grid in a diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld. Even without the
tensors outside the brain, the visualization becomes cluttered by the ellipsoids. Another drawback for glyphs is that
they do not represent the physical appearance of the neural
ﬁbers and thus require explicit interpretations from users.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) DTI integral curves methods show the continuous structures such as the white matter ﬁber tracts well. However, there are
integration error hidden in the integral curves and the tensor details
are partially lost. (b) Glyphs methods show individual tensors well.
However, they do not present the continuous structures and connectivity information well. And they suﬀer from cluttering if placed on
a regular sample grid.

We propose a merging ellipsoid method for DTI visualization. We use ellipsoids as the glyphs for diﬀusion tensors
and allow these glyphs to merge or disconnect based on the
relative positions of the tensors. Instead of placing the ellipsoids randomly or on a regular grid, we place these ellipsoids
on the paths of the integral curves. We choose the integral
curves as the sample paths for the ellipsoids because the continuous structures represented by these curves are important
and useful for the expert users. Also, the methods used to
cull redundant integral curves can be readily transferred to
the merging ellipsoids to avoid visual clutters. The downside of the integral curves, namely the lack of detailed tensor
information and the integration error, can be compensated
by the detailed depiction of the tensors by the merging ellipsoids.
The resulting visualization allows users to grasp the connectivity information in the underlying structures as well
as examine the local diﬀusion tensor information in detail.
We provide an iso-value parameter for users to interactively
change the sizes of the ellipsoids. When ellipsoids merge
with neighbors on the integral curves more, a stronger sense
of connectivity information is conveyed without sacriﬁcing
tensor details. The smaller ellipsoids are more isolated and

145

preserve the individual tensor information better while losing some of the connectivity information. By changing the
iso-value parameter from the very large to the very small,
users can examine both the shapes of the integral curves
and the tensor information along the curves with a single
view, therefore better understand the nature of these integral curves. For example, an uncertain connectivity in a ﬁber
might be warned by the presence of one or more tensors with
rounder shapes (low anisotropy values).
We discuss related work in section 2 and describe the
method in section 3. We then show the results in section 4.
Two neuropsychologists with extensive DTI research experience evaluated our method. Their feedback is documented
in section 5. Finally we list our conclusions and future work
in section 6.
2

Related Work

Numerous methods have been developed in the last decade
for DTI visualization [9, 7, 13, 20, 17]. Among them, two
classes of methods have relative success in elucidating the
underlying anatomical structures.
The integral curves method ﬁrst appeared in Xue et
al. [21]. This method reduces the diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld
to a vector ﬁeld and traces the streamlines in the vector
ﬁeld. The method is sometimes called ﬁber tracking [14]
or tractography [2]. A main problem of this method is
the integration error in the integral curves, especially those
running through ambiguous DTI regions (i.e., low linear
anisotropy regions). The error will accumulate along the
integral curves. Pierpaoli et al. [15] showed a tractography
method can produce anatomically incorrect ﬁber trajectories. Despite these concerns, integral curve methods were
useful for showing structures in heart muscle and the cerebral white matter. The resulting ﬁber structures were shown
to be consistent with the known anatomy as validated by
histological data [18, 8, 5]. Delmarcelle et al. [6] extend the
integral curves method to hyperstreamlines that incorporate
more information than a vector from each tensor. However,
the hyperstreamlines are sparse in the image space due to
their sizes. To place the integral curves appropriately, seeding strategies [22, 19] were designed to prevent visual clutter
and generate representative curves.
The glyphs method was ﬁrst applied to DTI data by Pierpaoli et al. [16] using ellipsoids. Laidlaw et al. [12] normalized the ellipsoids to show more in a single image. Kindlmann et al. [10] applied the superquadratics [1] to DTI
data to better distinguish between diﬀerent types of tensors.
While many types of glyphs can convey the complete information of a diﬀusion tensor, the connectivity information in
the tensor ﬁeld is often lost or hard to interpret. Another
problem with the glyph method concerns their placement in
3D. Since glyphs need to be at a certain size to be visible,
placing a glyph at every data point can block the structures inside while placing them too sparsely only exasperate
the loss of connectivity information. Kindlmann et al. [11]
densely packed the glyphs into the ﬁeld using potential energy proﬁles from the the local tensor values and avoided
using the regular grid.
Our new method places ellipsoids along the integral
curves. It also applies the ideas from streamballs by Brill et
al. [4] to the ellipsoids and allows the ellipsoids to merge or
disconnect depending on the relationship between the two
neighboring tensors. Thus, the merging ellipsoids method
preserves both the connectivity information and local tensor
details. Moreover, it allows users to judge the uncertainty
of the DTI ﬁbers in ambiguous or injured regions by inter-

146

actively examining the merging ellipsoids.
3 Methods
3.1 Diﬀusion tensor
The diﬀusion-weighted imaging data was collected from an
MRI machine and then ﬁt to a diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld . A
diﬀusion tensor is a 3 × 3 positive deﬁnite symmetric matrix:
⎤
⎡
Dxx Dxy Dxz
(1)
D = ⎣ Dxy Dyy Dyz ⎦
Dxz Dyz Dzz
The matrix D describes how water molecules propagate assuming free diﬀusion in a uniform anisotropic medium, such
as the coherent ﬁbrous structures in white matter or muscles.
D can be decomposed as: D = rΛr−1 , where e1 , e2 , and e3
are the three eigenvectors
e1 , e2 , e3 ) is a unit
⎛ of D, r = (⎞
λ1 0
0
rotational matrix, Λ = ⎝ 0 λ2 0 ⎠ is the eigenvalue
0
0 λ3
matrix, with λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 as the three descending eigenvalues. A diﬀusion tensor can be represented geometrically by
an ellipsoid with their eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors mapped to the three axes of the ellipsoid. Thus the
diﬀusion ellipsoid is a natural glyph for the diﬀusion tensor
and not surprisingly one of the ﬁrst method applied to DTI
visualization [16].
3.2 Ellipsoid placement
We place the merging ellipsoids along a set of precomputed
integral curves. There are two reasons for choosing this
method over other seeding methods such as random seeding,
regular grid seeding, and dense packing. First, by placing
these ellipsoids along the integral curves, we are able to visualize the inherently continuous structures in the anatomy.
Second, we can adjust the density of the ellipsoids by adjusting the distance between the integral curves, taking advantage of the culling process applied in integral curves methods
such as [22] or [19].
The set of integral curves were precomputed by integrating in the major eigenvector ﬁeld of the diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld:
t

e1 (p(s))ds

p(t) =

(2)

0

where p(t) is the generated curve and e1 is the major vector
ﬁeld. p(0) is set to the initial point of the integral curve.
A dense set of integral curves were initially seeded from
every grid point with jittering. These integral curves were
then culled so that no two curves have a distance lower than
a threshold. The distance between the integral curves is
deﬁned in [22] as:
Dt =

s1
max(dist(s) − Tt , 0)ds
s0
s1
t
max( | dist(s)−T
, 0)ds
dist(s)−Tt |
s0

(3)

where s parameterizes the arc length of the shorter curve,
s0 and s1 are the starting and end points of s, and dist(s) is
the shortest distance from location s on the shorter curve to
the longer curve. Tt ensures that we label two trajectories
as diﬀerent if they diﬀer signiﬁcantly over any portion of the
arc length.
The distance between the ellipsoids on the integral curves
is set to be the same as the length of the voxel edges, which
is 0.85mm for the DTI data used in section 4.

3.3 Merging ellipsoids
For the sake of simplicity, we adopt the similar notations
of [4]. The discrete streamball denotes an isosurface extracted from a scalar inﬂuence ﬁeld F (S, x), which is given
as the sum at a given point x of weighted inﬂuence functions
Ii (x) generated by a set of blobby objects:
F (S, x) = Σi ωi Ii (x)

(4)

where ωi denotes the strength of the ith inﬂuence function.
A typical spherical metaball function applies the following
polynomial approximation:
6

Ii (x) =

4

2

a fiR(x)
+ b fiR(x)
+ c fiR(x)
+ 1,
6
4
2
0,

radius R and the placement of the ellipsoids. The distances
among ellipsoids are determined by their placements in associated integral curves, and greatly inﬂuence the merging
or separation extent. The optimal truncation radius R is
computed as the minimum of two distances:
R = min(Dt , Dl ∗ 0.7)

(7)

where Dt is the threshold for the ones introduced in Equation 3, and Dl denotes the maximum distance between two
consecutive tensors in all integral curves.

fi (x) ≤ R;
(5)
fi (x) > R.

where R is the truncation radius, fi (x) = x − si , and si
is the center of the ith inﬂuence function. In our implementation, we use the parameters introduced in [3]: a =
−4.0/9.0, b = 17.0/9.0, c = −22.0/9.0.
Rather than using the spherical kernel in Equation 5, we
represent each diﬀusion tensor with an elliptical function,
yielding:
(e1 · (x − si ))2
(e2 · (x − si ))2
(e3 · (x − si ))2
+
+
(λ1 )2
(λ2 )2
(λ3 )2
(6)
Given a list of integral curves, we construct an elliptical function fi (x) for every diﬀusion tensor on each curve.
The threshold on the distance among integral curves introduced in Equation 3 ensures that the inﬂuence from one
diﬀusion tensor will be imposed only on its neighboring tensors in its associated integral curve. The sum of all weighted
inﬂuence functions Ii (x) at x, which loops over a regular
three-dimensional grid, generates a scalar ﬁeld F (S, x). By
computing an isosurface F (S, x) = C, a global surface representation for the entire diﬀusion ﬁeld is constructed. This
surface not only depicts the shape and orientation of individual diﬀusion tensors locally, but also illustrates their connectivity and transition in a smooth and visually plausible
fashion. We call this technique “merging ellipsoid ”, as the
ellipsoids can blend to others in highly anisotropic regions
or disconnect from others in isotropic or isolated regions.
Figure 2 compares the eﬀects of the ellipsoid glyph method,
the standard streamball method and the merging ellipsoids
method for eight diﬀusion tensors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

fi (x) =

Figure 3: Visualizing eight diﬀusion tensors with diﬀerent iso-values:
(a) 0.01, (b) 0.25, (c) 0.51, (d) 0.75, (e) 0.85, (f) 0.95. The truncation radius R is 1.0.

In practice, three eigenvectors of diﬀusion tensors need
to be scaled to the normalized space from the real physical
space. This global scaling St is computed as:
St = 2.0·R/r, r = max{ri = min(rc , λi1 , λi2 , λi3 ), i = 0, 1, 2, ...}
(8)
where λi1 , λi2 , λi3 are three eigenvectors of the ith diﬀusion
tensor, rc is an adjustable threshold to suppress over-sized
tensors. A list of results with diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the
truncation radius are compared in Figure 4. A typical choice
for R in our experiments ranges from 1.0 to 2.0.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4: The results with diﬀerent truncation radii: (a) 0.3, (b) 0.5,
(c) 1.0. In all cases, the iso-value is 0.5.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Visualizing eight diﬀusion tensors along an integral curve
with (a) glyphs, (b) streamballs, and (c) merging ellipsoids (R=1.0).

The degree of merging or separation depends on three factors. The ﬁrst one is the iso-value C that can be adjusted
interactively. Its continuous change can reveal the merging
process or its reverse. Figure 3 shows a sequence of results
with the change of the iso-value. The second and third factors are a pair of complimentary constants: the truncation

To summarize, the merging ellipsoids method has the following interesting properties for visualizing a diﬀusion tensor
ﬁeld:
• A diﬀusion tensor produces one elliptical surface,
• When two diﬀusion tensors are close, their ellipsoids
tend to merge smoothly,
• If they coincide, a larger ellipsoid is generated,
• In theory, the entire merging ellipsoid representation is
C ∞ -continuous,

147

• If the three eigenvectors are set as identical, our method
becomes standard streamball approach [4],
• If a sequence of ellipsoids are continuously distributed
along an integral curve, the hyperstreamline representation [6] is yielded,
• An individual elliptical function fi (x) can be extended
into other superquadratic functions, yielding the glyph
based DTI visualization techniques [10].
4

Results

We applied the merging ellipsoids method to the DTI data
collected from a normal subject. 12 gradient directions and
two b-values 0 and 1000 were used to collect the diﬀusionweighted images (DWIs) with a 1.5T MRI machine. Diﬀusion tensor ﬁeld was then calculated from the DWIs with the
in-house software. All experimental results were collected at
a laptop equipped with P4 2.2G HZ CPU and 2G host memory.
With a given conﬁguration, the scalar ﬁeld F (S, x) can be
precomputed, stored and reloaded for visualization. Its running time depends on the grid resolution and the number of
diﬀusion tensors. In the experiments presented in this paper,
the constructions cost range from 15 minutes to 150 minutes
with the volume dimension of 2563 . The visualization of the
merging ellipsoids, however, can be performed in real-time.
Even when users change the iso-value, the reconstruction of
the isosurface can be done in about 0.5 second by means of
an unoptimized software implementation.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 5: The merging ellipsoids method was applied to the DTI data
of a normal subject. (a) The red box indicates the horizontal view of
the region-of-interest on the fractional anisotropy map of the brain.
(b) The merging ellipsoids capture the connectivity information as
well as the tensor details. (c) Sagittal view of the merging ellipsoids.
(d) Coronal view of the merging ellipsoids.

148

Figure 5 shows the merging ellipsoids visualization in a
box region of 34mm × 34mm × 34mm in the corpus callosum area. The ﬁber paths are generated with the distance
between the paths larger than 1.7mm. From the pictures,
the anatomical structures such as the corpus callosum and
the cingulum bundles are clearly visible. In addition, the
individual tensor details and the relationship between the
tensors along a path are also revealed by the merging ellipsoids.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 6: Comparison of the integral curves method, the simple ellipsoids glyph method, and the merging ellipsoids method in a corpus
callosum region of the brain. (a) The red box indicates the horizontal view of the region-of-interest in the brain. The dimension of the
region is 17mm × 17mm × 17mm. (b) The integral curves show the
connectivity information but lack the tensor details. These curves
also accumulate integration error. (c) Ellipsoid glyphs placed on the
integral curves reveal more details in the individual tensors but reduce
the connectivity information. (d) The merging ellipsoids capture the
connectivity information as well as the tensor details.

To illustrate the advantage of the method, Figure 6 shows
a smaller box region of 17mm × 17mm × 17mm and sparser
ﬁber paths visualized by the integral curves, the ellipsoids,
and the merging ellipsoids. The distance between the ﬁber
paths is set to be more than 3.4mm in this ﬁgure. The integral curves show the connectivity well. But the local tensor
details important for users to discern the integrity of a ﬁber
are lost. On the contrary, the ellipsoids method shows the
tensor details but does not convey the connectivity information well. The merging ellipsoids combine the advantage of
both. This becomes even clearer in Figure 7.
Figure 7 illustrates the merging ellipsoids in the same region as Figure 6 with various iso-values. Figure 7 (a), (b),
(c), and (d) contain merging ellipsoids with decreasing isovalues. The diﬀerent models visualize the same diﬀusion
tensor ﬁeld with diﬀerent emphases on local diﬀusion tensor
information and the global connectivity information.

(a)

(c)

(b)
(b)

(c)

(d)

(d)

Figure 7: The iso-value parameter was adjusted interactively by users
to produce a continuous set of merging ellipsoids models that provide
information with diﬀerent emphases on the connectivity information
and the tensor details. (a), (b), (c), and (d) were produced by the
iso-values set to 0.90, 0.80, 0.60, and 0.40. The region-of-interest is
the same as in Figure 6.

Figure 8 applies the method for Figure 6 to another
region-of-interest closer to the forceps major. Note that the
ﬁbers appear to have more isotropic tensors. This may be
because the corpus callosum region contains more coherent
neural ﬁbers than the forceps major region. The change from
high anisotropy region to low anisotropy region on a single
ﬁber can be visualized with the merging ellipsoids better
than the other two methods, especially when users change
the iso-value interactively.
Figure 9 shows that the diﬀerence between tensors on a
single integral curve can be easily identiﬁed with the merging
ellipsoids.The diﬀerence in the anisotropies is revealed by
the shapes of and the blending among the ellipsoids. This
helps users to identify the problematic integral curves and
the problematic segments on an integral curve.
5

(a)

Expert evaluation

Two neuropsychologists with extensive experience evaluating white matter DTI tractography metrics examined the
results seperately. After examining the merging ellipsoids
and working with the visualization tool, they provided the
following feedback:
This method of visualization is novel yet elegantly simple. The merging ellipsoids provide considerable additional
visual information. They permit the user to identify small
regions within a single tract that might have areas of low
anisotropy. Areas along an integral curve or group of integral curves with low anisotropy could reﬂect normal anatomy
(i.e., crossing ﬁbers) or white matter ﬁbers that have been
injured or are at risk of injury. Such visual variability was
previously unavailable when selecting tracts of interest in
tractography models.

Figure 8: The comparison of the three visualization methods in another region-of-interest close to the forceps major. (a) The regionof-interest. (b) The integral curves method. (c) The simple ellipsoid
glyph method. (d) The merging ellipsoids method.

This merged presentation of integral curves with diﬀusion
ellipsoids might be most useful as an adjunct to more conventional DTI tract selection. For example, initial tract selection might be performed using the streamtube model [22]
and traditional voxel-of-interest or or other selection methods. Once a tract-of-interest is selected, turning on the merging ellipsoid visualization would permit users to reﬁne the
selection to target areas of low or high anisotropy. The merging ellipsoids method advances the clinical utility of DTI by
improving researcher’s ability to discern disease and injury
speciﬁc tract variability. It has potential to reveal associations that might have otherwise be masked in conventional
tract selection methods because of the inclusion of both normal and abnormal ﬁbers.
In traditional tractography models, a minimal threshold
for linear or fractional anisotropy is set for generating ﬁbers.
Fibers will be generated as long as this threshold is met.
This approach, however, potentially masks variability in the
integrity of the ﬁbers that are rendered, such that in two
individuals, a ﬁber bundle (e.g., cingulum) might appear
similar in terms of length and number of ﬁbers even though
its underlying structural integrity might actually be poorer
in one compared to the other individual. The merging ellipsoids method also allows researchers to identify a small
number of ﬁbers at risk (assuming low anisotropy is not due
to ﬁber crossing) within what appears to be an otherwise coherent bundle and test whether or not these ”at risk” ﬁbers
have a disproportionate impact on cognition or behavior—
an association that would otherwise be visually masked by
inclusion of the larger set of normal ﬁbers in the tract.

149

References

Figure 9: This picture shows the diﬀerence in tensors along an integral curve. The blue arrow points to the region where the tensors
are more anisotropic and well aligned while the red arrow points to
the region with more isotropy and uncertainty.

6

Conclusions and future work

We propose a new method for visualizing DTI data that
merges tensor ellipsoids with integral curves. We use ellipsoids as the glyphs for diﬀusion tensors and allow these
glyphs to merge or disconnect based on the underlying data
and a user-controlled visualization parameter. Instead of
placing the ellipsoids on a regular grid or randomly, we place
these ellipsoids on the paths of the integral curves.
User evaluation showed that this method has the advantage over the integral curves methods in that it shows the
local tensor details as well as the connectivity information.
Our method is especially helpful for representing the ambiguity in the regions where linear anisotropy is lower. By
controlling the iso-value parameter, users can see the entire
spectrum of visual models from the discrete glyphs to continuous curves. The added interactivity allows the user to
gather a more complete understanding of the information in
the DTI data.
This method has the potential to bridge the two main
categories of the DTI visualization methods into a single
visualization framework and help elucidate the complicated
structures and uncertainty in the DTI data.
In future work, we will employ adaptive volume grid to accelerate the computation of the scalar ﬁeld. Recent progress
in programmable graphics hardware has enabled the fast implementation of dynamic branching in GPU. Another interesting goal is to extend the proposed scheme to streamsurface representation for DTI data. We plan to apply this
technique to a white matter disease such as the vascular
cognitive impairment and further evaluate the eﬀectiveness
of this method in discerning the details in the ﬁber integrity.
7

Acknowledgement

This work is partially supported by NSF of China (No.
60873123), the Research Initiation Program at Mississippi
State University.

150

[1] A. Barr. Superquadrics and angle-preserving transformations. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 1(1):11–
23, 1981.
[2] P. J. Basser, S. Pajevic, C. Pierpaoli, J. Duda, and A. Aldroubi. In vivo ﬁber tractography using DT-MRI data. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 44:625–632, 2000.
[3] J. Blinn. A generalization of algebraic surface drawing. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 1(3):235–256, 1982.
[4] M. Brill, H. Hagen, H.-C. Rodrian, W. Djatschin, and S. V.
Klimenko. Streamball techniques for ﬂow visualization. In
VIS ’94: Proceedings of the conference on Visualization ’94,
pages 225–231, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1994. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[5] J. Dauguet, S. Peled, V. Berezovskii, T. Delzescaux, S. K.
Warﬁeld, R. Born, and C.-F. Westin. Comparison of ﬁber
tracts derived from in-vivo DTI tractography with 3d histological neural tract tracer reconstruction on a macaque brain.
NeuroImage, 37:530–538, 2007.
[6] T. Delmarcelle and L. Hesselink. Visualizing second-order
tensor ﬁelds with hyperstream lines. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 13(4):25–33, jul 1993.
[7] F. Enders, N. Sauber, D. Merhof, P. Hastreiter, C. Nimsky,
and M. Stamminger. Visualization of white matter tracts
with wrapped streamlines. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2005, pages 51–58, 2005.
[8] E. Hsu, A. Muzikant, S. Matulevicius, R. Penland, and
C. Henriquez.
Magnetic resonance myocardial ﬁberorientation mapping with direct histological correlation.
American Journal of Physiology, 274:1627–1634, 1998.
[9] C. R. Johnson and C. D. Hansen. Visualization Handbook.
Academic Press, June 2004.
[10] G. Kindlmann. Superquadric tensor glyphs. In Proceeding
of The Joint Eurographics - IEEE TCVG Symposium on
Visualization, pages 147–154, May 2004.
[11] G. Kindlmann and C.-F. Westin. Diﬀusion tensor visualization with glyph packing. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5):1329–1336, 2006.
[12] D. H. Laidlaw, E. T. Ahrens, davidkremers, M. J. Avalos,
C. Readhead, and R. E. Jacobs. Visualizing diﬀusion tensor
images of the mouse spinal cord. In Proceedings of IEEE
Visualization 1998, pages 127–134. IEEE Computer Society
Press, October 1998.
[13] B. Moberts, A. Vilanova, and J. J. van Wijk. Evaluation
of ﬁber clustering methods for diﬀusion tensor imaging. In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization, pages 65–72, 2005.
[14] S. Mori and P. van Zijl. Fiber tracking: principles and strategies a technical review. NMR in Biomedicine, 15(7-8):468–
480, 2002.
[15] C. Pierpaoli, A. Barnett, S. Pajevic, A. Virta, and P. Basser.
Validation of DT-MRI tractography in the descending motor pathways of human subjects. In International Society
for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM), page 501,
Glasgow, 2001.
[16] C. Pierpaoli and P. Basser. Toward a quantitative assessment
of diﬀusion anisotropy. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine,
36(6):893–906, December 1996.
[17] B. Preim and D. Bartz. Visualization in Medicine. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2007.
[18] D. Scollan, A. Holmes, R. Winslow, and J. Forder. Histological validation of myocardial microstructure obtained
from diﬀusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging. American Journal of Physiology, 275:2308–2318, 1998.
[19] A. Vilanova, G. Berenschot, and C. van Pul. DTI visualization with streamsurfaces and evenly-spaced volume seeding. In VisSym ’04 Joint Eurographics - I.E.E.E. T.C.V.G.
Symposium on Visualization, Conference Proceedings, pages
173–182, 2004.
[20] J. Weickert and H. Hagen. Visualization and Processing of

Tensor Fields. Springer, 2006.
[21] R. Xue, P. C. van Zijl, B. J. Crain, M. Solaiyappan, and
S. Mori. In vivo three-dimensional reconstruction of rat brain
axonal projections by diﬀusion tensor imaging. Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine, 42:1123–1127, 1999.
[22] S. Zhang, C. Demiralp, and D. H. Laidlaw. Visualizing diffusion tensor MR images using streamtubes and streamsurfaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 9(4):454–462, 2003.

151

