An Organization Topographic Map for Visualizing
Business Hierarchical Relationships
Rieko Otsuka

Kazuo Yano*

Nobuo Sato

Hitachi, Ltd., Advanced Research Laboratory and *Central Research Laboratory

ABSTRACT
Visualization of the actual conditions of an organization is a very
challenging issue. We propose a new system called a Business
Microscope that senses the activities of people in an organization
and provides visual feedback to users. We use name-tag shaped
sensor nodes to measure face-to-face interaction between
employees. The massive amount of data collected by the sensornetwork terminal are signal-processed by the server and displayed
as an organization’s topographic map that displays the frequencies
of organizational activities. To depict the organization’s
topographic map, our system creates a novel relation tree using
the interaction data from all pairs of members. In this kind of map,
some groups in the organization hierarchically form islands.
Members in those islands who have relationships with many
others form mountains that are plotted with contours. We can
comprehend the actual conditions of organizations from our
topographic map.
We tested our technique in several experiments to evaluate this
system.
KEYWORDS: Face-to-face interaction, hierarchy Visualization,
clustering, sensor network, sensor node.
INDEX TERMS: I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and
Techniques —Graphics data structures and data types
1

INTRODUCTION

The quantification of the productivity of knowledge workers is a
subject of great interest. Manufacturing productivity improved
rapidly due to the establishment of scientific management
techniques in the 20th century. However, the productivity of
knowledge workers in the 21st century cannot be improved just by
implementing the same techniques used in manufacturing because
the work that knowledge workers do is more abstract.
The need for communication is deeply related to the
productivity of knowledge workers[1][19]. We all desire to
understand the effectiveness and of communication and how it
changes.
We believe it is important to measure communication engaged
in by knowledge workers. Additionally, we think that sensornetwork technology makes this possible because the data detected
by sensor modules are objective. Therefore, the data captured by
sensor modules should generate self-reflection. Some attempts
have been made to measure the activity of knowledge workers in
1-280, Higashi-koigakubo, Kokubunji-shi, Tokyo 185-8601, Japan
{rieko.otsuka.gd, kazuo.yano.bb, nobuo.sato.jn}@hitachi.com
IEEELEAVE
Pacific Visualization
2009BOTTOM OF LEFT
0.5 INCH Symposium
SPACE AT
April
20 - 23, Beijing,
China
COLUMN
ON FIRST
PAGE FOR COPYRIGHT BLOCK
978-1-4244-4404-5/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

their work environments, e.g., by sensing using an accelerometer
[2] and sensing by using temperature [3]. A new generation of
sensor-network technologies is now making it possible to observe
organizations at a more detailed level than ever before.
In this paper, we introduce a novel system called Business
Microscope that captures the activity of people in their workplace
and gives visual feedback to users. In particular, we describe a
new technique of visualization that is a topographic map of an
organization. First, we create a hierarchical tree from data on faceto-face interactions. Second, we use that tree to draw a map in
diverse ways according to two mapping conditions. Our proposed
visualization method can depict the complicated multi-task
working style of knowledge workers because our method permits
any members to appear any number of times in trees.
Our purpose was to create a mechanism that could
automatically measure the activity of people in their organization
and give them opportunities for self-reflection and motivation to
improve themselves and other organization members.
2

RELATED WORK

2.1 Sensor Net Device for Capturing Human Activity
Previous attempts have been made to measure personal
interactions. For example, UbER-Badge, created at the MIT
Media Laboratory, operates for 15 hours and can detect face-toface interactions, but it measures 11 x 12 cm, and weighs about
170 grams [4]. It is thus too heavy to wear throughout the day.
The MIT Media Laboratory also developed the Wearable
Communicator Badge. Its printed circuit board is only 4.2 x 6.5
cm, but it only operates for 8 hours[5] [6].
Another example is nTAG, which measures 4 x 3 in [7]. These
sensor nodes for detecting face-to-face interactions are useful but
are too limited in their size, weight, or operation time for our
purpose. The sensors must be made lighter so that they are not
inconvenient and they must be small enough so that they are not
obtrusive in interactions. Moreover, they must be able to detect
interactions reliably in a variety of real-use scenarios, i.e., those
that occur within 2 meters, and to detect face-to-face encounters
to within about 30 degrees, which is difficult to achieve with
simple conventional schemes of detecting infrared light.
2.2 Hierarchy and Social Network Visualization
Methods of hierarchy visualization have involved structural
representation of the information or the subject.
The strongest influences on this area have been ConeTrees[14],
MoireGraphs[8] and Multi-tree hierarchies[9]. Radial hierarchy
visualizations plot the levels of a hierarchy as concentric circles.
InterRing[10] places the root of the hierarchy at the center with
each sector of the circles divided among the branches in the tree. a
branch with more children would have a larger area than those
with fewer children. Meanwhile, Zoomology[11] uses a three-

25

level enclosure to depict the hierarchy—the outermost circle
represents the parent of the current node in the hierarchy while the
inner circle contains its children. This use of enclosure is the
circular analogy of Treemaps[12], which utilizes rectangular
regions to densely pack the display space. MoireTree uses an
approach similar to Zoomology’s, but displays the entire path to
the root of the current tree (instead of just the immediate parent)
via a concentric display. In addition, the location of children and
sibling nodes is constrained to assist the user’s mental map of the
multi-hierarchy. Combined with a focus+context layout, this
allows for a dense information display for browsing.
Meanwhile, social networks are mostly trees or graphs. a
number of systems[15][16] for generating social network
visualizations and performing statistical analyses are known.
MarixExplorer[17] is a network visualization system that
combines matrix-based representation with node-link diagrams.
Furthermore, a node duplicated representation [18] is proposed for
exploring communities in social networks.
Our method enables users to see the actual condition of an
organization that cannot be found in a formal chart of the
organization.
3

BUSINESS MICROSCOPE

This section describes an overview of the Business Microscope.
We will first discuss the concept of the Business Microscope and
then describe a beam-scan sensor node and back-end systems.
3.1 Concept of Business Microscope
Figure 1 shows the concept of the Business Microscope system.
This system can be used to clarify problems within an
organization and thus, reduce risks in organizational operation, in
addition to improving productivity, by quantitatively showing the
strength of the relationships among the members of the
organization.

The key device in the Business Microscope system is a nametag-shaped sensor network terminal, as shown in the photographs
in Fig. 2. A name-tag-shaped sensor node measures the time used
for face-to-face communication among the members of the
organization as well as the time used for their activities. It
functions as an inflated radiation sensor, triaxial acceleration
sensor, sound sensor, illuminance sensor, temperature sensor, and
radio-communication device. The members of the organization
receive feedback from the Business-microscope system and can
use it to improve their work efficiency.
3.2 Beam-scan Sensor Node
The beam-scan node has four infrared (IR) modules. These
modules are in the upper part of the beam-scan node and are set at
+/-30 degrees horizontally perpendicular to the board. The inner
two IR modules are inclined downward at 30 degrees, and the
outer two modules are inclined downward at 15 degrees (Fig. 2).
The facing detection angle can be increased by using this
arrangement. As a result, the beam-scan node can capture face-toface interactions within 2 meters within an angle of 60 degrees.
We have also developed a "beam scan technology," which enables
the four infrared modules to operate sequentially. With the
intermittent operation, the power consumption was reduced to 7.2
mA, and 20.8 hours continuous operation was achieved. The
sensor node weights 62 grams and works for more than 20 hours
with a small 5-gram Li-ion battery.
The beam-scan node has an LCD with 128 x 64 pixels that
presents the sensing information in real time. The LCD displays
the names of persons that the wearer is interacting with.
3.3 Framework of Business Microscope
Figure 3 illustrates the system configuration of Business
Microscope. It has base stations, data management middleware, a
database, and an image server.
The base stations are capable of handling numerous sensornode data. Data storage as well as data processing in the database
should be sufficiently fast to feed back activity information
obtained from the sensing data to the user in real time. To achieve
this, the base station is given management tasks to lighten the load
on the middleware and the database.
The middleware software manages the sensing data sent from
the beam-scan sensor nodes as an event. It can adapt to a new
format of sensing data and data other than that of the sensor. The
middleware can easily adapt to different kinds of sensing data
through mediation.

Figure 1. Concept of Business Microscope

Figure 2. Name-tag shaped beam-scan sensor module
(73 x 98 x 9 mm)
Figure 3. System configuration

26

The database stores daily tables that hold data on up to 100
members. The image server can quickly visualize the data in the
database through this fast retrieval; there is little delay with
calculation or the display itself.
The image server visualizes the sensing data and gives visual
feedback to users. The server must deal with the data of each user
that has been accumulated over a period of several months. The
user should be able to get an overview of his/her or the
organization’s tendencies in terms of long-term activities during
specific time periods. Therefore, the database’s data and resulting
images can be downloaded at any time a user requests them.
Basically, the server images were created to match the activity
cycle of the business, the month, and the weekday. We propose
one method of the visualization in the next section.
4

INFRARED (FACE-TO-FACE) DATA CLUSTERING

We can obtain face-to-face communication data from the
members of the organization with the previously discussed nametag sensor nodes. Figure 4 shows the traditional method of
visualization and our proposed approach for such communication
data. To create the images in Fig. 4, we used the actual IR data
from 30 people for a month detected with our name-tag sensor
node.
Figure 4 (a) outlines the most commonly used means of
visualizing social networks. We can easily create a network graph
in Fig. 4 (a) from the IR data. The graph is a collection of nodes
(users) and a collection of edges that connect pairs of nodes
(according to the quantum of face-to-face interaction). Such a
network graph is effective in various ways because it is easy to
recognize influential people and pairs that have strong links.
However, with increasing numbers of people, the more complex
the graph becomes. Incidentally, a person in an organization
(especially a knowledge worker) tends to deal with multi-tasks
instead of focusing entirely on a single task. It is difficult to find
such a multi-tasking working style in typical network graphs
because such concurrent activities are hidden on the thousand of
network-graph loops.

Cone Trees and Multi-tree, on the other hand, are known as
accessible tools for visualizing hierarchical information in 3D.
However, those tools cannot effectively give us a quick overview
of the current state of organizations because of the limitations of
the 3D system. It does not make much sense to use interactive
system.
To solve these issues, we propose a novel method of clustering
relational data such as IR data (Fig. 4 (b)) and an organization
topographic map (Fig. 4 (c)). Figure 4 (b) is a hierarchical tree
that permits any members to appear any number of times in trees.
That is to say, our proposed tree can depict the complicated multitask working style of knowledge workers. Meanwhile, Figure 4
(c) is a new way of visually representing the hierarchical structure.
We will describe this method of visualization in the next section.
Our proposed hierarchical tree and organization topographic
map are created automatically in the image server as described in
previous section. First, the image server automatically calculates
the total time for face-to-face communication during a given time
interval. Next, the system creates a hierarchical tree from the
compiled data as shown in Fig. 4 (b). Finally, we get a
topographic map drawn by the tree graph. Users can see the
resulting images on their PC at anytime as visual feedback from
the experiment done on name-tag sensor nodes.
4.1 Construction of Dendrogram
This subsection describes our proposed clustering algorithm. That
is, we discuss how a dendrogram is generated. Clustering is an
important area of data-mining research as a method of dividing
data into groups of similar objects. Our new algorithm is based on
extended agglomerative hierarchical clustering (AHC).
Dendrograms are automatically generated by repeating the
following process of grouping. There are three cases of grouping,
as outlined in Fig. 5. The A-D in figure are data structure
members.
-

Case 1: Create a new group from two members.

-

Case 2: Add a member to an existing group.

-

Case 3: Make a new group by merging two groups.

Figure 5. Three cases of grouping

Figure 4. (a) Traditional social network visualization.
(b) and (c): our proposals.

Figure 6. Example of data matrix IR (i,j).
(face-to-face interaction data from four people)

27

Figure 7. Algorithm for generating dendrogram

The threshold value (th) in our proposed clustering algorithm is
the most important parameter. The th is used to determine which
of the three cases should be selected. The following example
details the steps of generation. As indicated by the table shown in
Fig. 6, IR (i,j) is a matrix of the face-to-face interaction data from
four members(A, B, C, and D). The matrix data are aggregated
and normalized.
Here, we fixed th = 0.2. In a pre-treatment process, we
compared the data of IR (i,j) with the diagonal data of IR (j,i) and
selected the largest data. Additionally, we removed IR (i,i). The
resulting matrix is at the bottom of Fig. 6.
To create a dendrogram from the example data in Fig. 6, four
steps are required, as detailed in Fig. 7. The common rules are as
follows.
Choose the maximum value, IR (i,j), in remaining data on
the matrix in every step.
If there are any existing groups, check whether a pair (i,j)
selected now could be integrated into an existing group. If
coupling conditions are satisfied, add a pair, (i,j), to the
group. Otherwise, create a new group.
Repeat above processes until no data remain.
In the first step (1) in Fig. 7, IR (A,B) has the largest value, and
there are no groups. We then create a new group G1, and the

28

height of G1 is 0.83. In the next step (2), we focus on IR (A,C). If
we can add C to the existing group G1, we must check whether
relationships between members of G1 (i.e., A, B) and C are nearly
equal. If the requirement of adding C to G1 is not satisfied, a new
group is created from A and C. The logic of the third step is
almost the same as that in the second. In the last step (4), there are
already two groups (G2, G3). Also, we select IR (C,D), and C is a
member of G2, and D is a member of G3. As the relationships
between members of G2 and members of G3 are nearly equal, we
can merge G2 and G3. In this example, we merge G2 and G3 as
shown in Figure 7. Finally, dendrogram T as seen in Step 4 is
generated. The primary characteristic of our dendrograms is that
the same person appears many times. Dendrogram T has five
nodes, and A appears twice, as is clear from the figure. Also,
another characteristic is that our dendrograms contain indirect
relationships of an organization unlike ordinary network graphs.
As indicated, the grouping steps will change according to the
value of threshold th. If we set th so that it is larger, groupings
will be approximately executed. As a result, we can have a broad
view of the conditions in an organization.

4.2 Pruning Process for Dendrogram
As we can seen from Fig. 7, our proposed tree algorithm does not
impose constraints that all members should be only classified into
one main group unlike ordinary agglomerative hierarchical
clustering. That is to say, one of the distinctive points of our
dendrograms is that the any member can appear many times. Such
multiple appearances are considered to have two meanings. The
first is where a member appears more than once in different trees.
This is very meaningful information because the member is
regarded to work on multiple-tasks concurrently and meets with
all the project’s members who attend meetings. The second case is
where a member appears many times in a same tree. This
indicates that the member has a hub role in that tree. That is to say,
the other members are connected by the hub role of that associate.
For example, in a dendrogram T in Fig. 7, member A precisely
plays such a hub role.
Both cases indicate respective activities that are significant.
However, in the latter case, if the number of data members
increase, it would be difficult to understand because multipleappearance in same tree would be increase proportionately and
inhibit visibility.
To solve the above problem, we adopted a pruning process that
can preferably decrease redundant existence of members in the
same island. Figure 8 outlines the concrete process for simplifying
the dendrogram. In the illustration at left before pruning, A
appears twice in groups (G1) and (G3). Then, by comparing the
value of G1 and G3, A is deleted in smaller group (G3).
Consequently, the image after pruning at the right, the second A
has been deleted.
Another algorithm for compaction is where we do not draw
small groups that only have two members. This is because groups
with two members are narrow relationships that in most cases do
not contribute to the organization.

Ng

E=∑
i =0

4.3 Sorting Process for Optimized Placement of Tree
Dendrogram
The resulting dendrogram, as seen in Fig. 4 (b), is generated after
the above pruning process. In the representation in the figure,
there are five trees and 62 members. Here, we have a serious
problem with the placements of trees and their inner structure. In
the present state, no tree’s position or distances between trees in
the resulting tree s have significant meaning.
Therefore, we need some optimized process to place trees to
present Business-microscope users with really intuitive visualized
images of organization status. Our idea was a simple Monte Carlo
Metropolis simulation. Here, let us present an example of
simulation on optimizing placement among trees.
-

∑
j =0

F (Gi , G j ) * D (Gi , G j )
Na

F (Ga , Gb ) = ∑
i =0

Nb

∑

C (i, j )

j =0

G : 　tree
Ng :

the number of trees

N a : 　the number of members of Ga
N b : 　the number of members of Gb
C : 　IR data
D : 　
| position of Ga − pisition of Gb |
-

Randomly change the position of two arbitrary trees and
evaluate value of E. That is, if E after the position of two
trees has changed is larger than that before this process, the
position of two trees can be changed. The larger the value of
E, the more certain it is that closer pairs of trees will have
members included in each tree who have quantitatively
interacted.

-

Continue the simulation until conditionally converging.

Optimization processing about the inner structure of a tree is
similar to these rules. There are various ways of defining the
energy function. We can define the energy function by using an
official organization chart to view relationships between
departments. Alternatively, it would be interesting to define the
function according to member’s ages or positions.
5

Figure 8. Algorithm to prune dendrogram

Ng

TOPOGRAPHIC MAP

This section describes our hierarchy-based method of
visualization called an “Organization Topographic Map". An
organization topographic map is created from a dendrogram as
was described in the previous section. First, we introduce two
axes for mapping process. The first is an “Activity level” axis and
the second is an “Order” axis. According to how we arrange the
two axes in 2D field, we can create a variety of organization
topographic maps.
Figure 9 outlines examples of the placement of the two axes.
The left diagram in Fig. 9 indicates the positional relationship of
the two axes for a dendrogram. Here, for example, we have
arranged the two axes with polar coordinates as seen in the right
diagram in Fig. 9. After we define the placement of the two axes,
we draw circles around members that they belong at the same
hierarchical level without drawing links. Furthermofore, it is
possible to create an intuitive map by drawing contours that are on
a truly significant hierarchical level. Concequently, a circular
topographic map as shown in Fig. 9 (right diagram) is generated.
In a circular topographic map, the closer a pair is to the center of
the map, the closer their relationship is.

We define the energy function E. For example, this is
determined by using function F (the summation of IR data)
and the distance function, D.

29

Figure 9. Mapping concept of an organization topographic map

In addition, we can create many organization topographic maps
according to arrangement of these two axes. Figure10 shows
examples of arrangements. “Type 1” represents the most basic
manner of mapping similar to a dendrogram. By aligning the
islands in one row sideways, we can identify the shape
distribution of the islands at a glance.
“Type 2” is regarded as an extension of “Type 1” because we
positioned the two activity-level axes in separate place. The
concept underlying “Type 2” mapping is a “Mercator chart”. The
closer relationship between a pair is, the closer they are to the
center of the map, they come closer to equator line.
“Type 3” is circular mapping the same as in the left diagram in
Fig. 9 and “Type 4” is a more complicated spiral version.
“Types2” and “4” are adopted comparatively more for large-scale
data because the space they occupy is greater than “Types1” and
“3”.
Which type of arrangement the Business-microscope user will
select is dependent on what s/he wants to focus on. Furthermore,
by combining the variety of energy functions previously described
for optimizing the placement of trees and mapping patterns, it is
possible to analyze relationships from various perspectives.

us to focus on the relationships between one island and another
while combining an appropriate sorting algorithm.
In an organization topographic map, we could assign a colored
icon to each member for various purposes. For example, icons
could be designed according to the job level or in order of age.
By drawing contours, we could intuitively identify the
hierarchy of an organization’s activities. Furthermore, the color of
the contours indicates the variance in a group in a dendrogram. In
other words, these colors suggest what quantity or proportion of
common sense a pair of members had in a group. We adjusted the
hue to change from turqoise to brown according the variance in
the coherence of a group. These color-coded contours indicate
how well that group integrated. Cummings notes that more
integrative structures are related to higher performance [13].

Figure 11. Examples of organization topographic maps with data
from Fig. 4.

6
Figure 10. Examples of arranging “Activity level” and “Order” axis.

After the arrangement for two axes is determined, we can
automatically create an organization topographic map by selecting
important hierarchical levels and drawing circles around members
who belong to the same level. Figure 11 shows examples of
organization topographic maps with the IR data from 30 people
used in Fig. 4.
The top diagram in Fig. 11 uses orthogonal mapping and the
bottom ones uses circular mapping. Both enable us to recognize
the hierarchical structure of this organization and actual activities
compared to the network graph shown in Fig. 4 (a).
Rectangular mapping like that in the top diagram in Fig. 11
helps us to quickly glance at distributions in the shape of islands.
However, the circular mapping at the bottom of the figure enables

30

EXPERIMENTATION

Over the past two years, we have conducted a dozen of
demonstration experiments, and recorded approximately 700 mandays of IR data. The scale of most of these experiments was less
than 30 people who were working in small departments. We
presented the results to the subjects with our hierarchy-based
method of visualization and obtained their impressions. One
subject said that an island represents members who use smoking
rooms. In fact, it is thought that informal communication groups
are visualized in an organization’s topographic map. Furthermore,
the transition of members attending a new project was examined.
In the next challenge, we carried out experiments on
organizations that had more than 100 members. This section
presents the results with data obtained from 172 people, i.e., a
mid-size company. The target organization’s formal organization
chart and assigned icons are below. The organization members
(User 00 – User 172) could be classified into a management
group and six working groups.

■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Management level employees (User00, User86, User87)
Group1 (User01 – User23)
Group2 (User24 – User78)
Group3 (User79 – User85)
Group4 (User88 – User117)
Group5 (User118 – User139, User145 – User 162)
Group6 (User140 – User144, User163 – User171)

Figure 12 (a) shows a traditional network graph using the data
from 172 people. It is difficult to find who is the key person.
Figures 12 (b), (c), and (d) show our proposal topographic maps.
Each image has different ways of mapping the activity-level and
order axes. Furthermore, Figure 12 (d) shows that the positions
where User 00 appeared are marked with red frames. From these
results, we drew the following conclusions:
-

-

7

The biggest island revealed that members of Groups 2–6
collaborated closely with one another. That is, this island
indicated a kind of cross-sectional project. Additionally,
group members with the orange icons played the main roles.
The group with the orange and pink icons seemed to have
strong connections with its internal members.
User 00 seemed to play three roles. In one island, he was a
hub-role member and in the other two islands, he seemed to
have interacted actively with members belonging to other
groups.
CONCLUSION

We developed a novel technique of visualization for clarifying the
actual conditions of an organization by using a beam-scan node
that can capture face-to-face communication. Furthermore, we
introduced the concept of a Business-microscope system, which
senses the activity of employees and gives them visual feedback.
We used the Business-microscope system to test the data on
organization activity from several departments for a total of over
two years and we ascertained our system was valid.
Moreover, this experiment clearly revealed periods when faceto face communications decreased and increased, information that
should be useful in designing strategies for the scientific
management of knowledge workers. In fact, since our tests were
conducted on workers in our own organization, we noticed how
our own behaviors could be reformed by analyzing the sensing
results with the Business-microscope system.
In the next stage of our research, we plan to create a new
method of visualization to present the time-series variations in an
organization. Furthermore, we are going to consider a layout for a
large scale data and add interactive functions to the tool for
mapping the topography of organizations. In particular, annotation
layout must be improved. We are also planning to do more
experiments to verify the system in business environments such as
banks and retail stores.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

ACNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Norihiko Moriwaki, Norio Ohkubo,
Yoshihiro Wakisaka, Satomi Tsuji, Koji Ara, Minoru Ogushi,
Takeshi Hoshino, Shinichi Fukuma and Youichi Horry for their
help in developing the name-tag-shaped sensor node and for their
useful advice on our topographic map.

[18]

[19]

B Kirkman, B Rosen, P Tesluk and C Gibson. “The impact of
team empowerment on virtual team performance: The
moderating role of face-to-face-interaction”, Academy of
Management Journal, Apr. 2004.
B Waber B, and et al., “Organizational Engineering using
Sociometric Badges”, Intl. Workshop and Conference on
Network Science, May 2007.
K Yano, N Sato, and et al. “Life Thermoscope: Integrated
Microelectronics for Visualizing Hidden Life Rhythm”, In Proc.
of the 2008 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference,
pp.136-137.
M Laibowitz, J Gips, R Aylward, A Pentland, and J.A. Paradiso,
“A sensor network for social dynamics”, In Proceedings of The
6th International Symposium on Information Processing in
Sensor Networks (IPSN/SPOTS), Apr. 2006.
D Olguin, J.A. Paradiso, and A Pentland, “Wearable
Communicator Badge: Designing a New Platform for Revealing
Organizational Dynamics”, IEEE 10th International Symposium
on Wearable Computing, Oct. 2006.
B Waber, D Olguin, T Kim, A Mohan, K Ara and A Pentland,
“Organizational Engineering using Sociometric Badges”, NetSci
2007, New York City, USA, May, 2007.
“Ntag interactive,” http://www.ntag.com/.
T.J Jankun-Kelly, MA K.-L., “MoireGraphs: Radial
focus+context visualization andinteraction for graphs with
visual nodes”, In Proc. of the 2003 IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (2003), IEEE Computer Society Press,
pp. 49–66.
G.W Furnas and J Zacks, “Multitrees: enriching and reusing
hierarchical structure”, In Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems (1994), ACM Press, pp.
330–336.
J Yang, M.O Ward, E.A. Rundensteiner, A Patro, “Interring: a
visual interface for navigating and manipulating hierarchies”,
Information Visualization 2, 1 (2003), 16–30.
J.Y Hong, J D’Andries, M Richman and M Westfall.
“Zoomology: Comparing two large hierarchical trees”, In 2003
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization Poster
Compendium (unpublished), 2003.
B Johnson and B Shneiderman, “Tree-maps: a space-filling
approach to the visualization of hierarchical information
structures”, In Proc. of the 2nd conference on Visualization ’91
(1991), IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 284–291.
J.N Cummings and R Cross, “Structural properties of work
groups and their consequences for performance”, Social
Networks 24 (2003) pp. 197-210.
G Robertson, D.J Mackinlay, K.S Card, “Cone Trees: Animated
3D Visualizations of Hierarchical Information”, In Proc. of the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
189-194, 1991
E Adar, “GUESS: A Language and Interface for Graph
Exploration", CHI 2006, April 24-27, 2006, Montreal, Canada,
J Heer and D Boyd, “Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
Networks”, Information Visualization, (2005).
N Henry, J.D Fekete, “MatrixExplorer: a Dual-Representation
System to Explore Social Networks”, IEEE Trans. Visualization
and Computer Graphics. 12(5): 677-684 (2006)
N Henry, A Bezerianos, J.D Fekete,
“Improving the
Readability of Clustered Social Networks using Node
Duplication”. Information Visualization, (2008)
L Wu, B.N Waber, S Aral, E Brynjolfsson and A Pentland,
“Mining Face-to-Face Interaction Networks Using Sociometric
Badges”, Twenty Ninth International Conference on Information
Systems, Paris, 2008.

31

Figure 12. Organization topographic maps with data from 172 people

32

