Remote Sensing, LIDAR, automated data capture and the VEPS project
Andrew Richman, Andy Hamilton, Yusuf Arayici, John Counsell, Besik Tkhelidze
The Environment Agency for England and Wales, University of Salford, Greater Manchester,
University of the West of England, Bristol
{andrew.richman@environment-agency.gov.uk, a.hamilton@salford.ac.uk,
y.arayici@salford.ac.uk, john.counsell@uwe.ac.uk, Besik2.Tkhelidze@uwe.ac.uk}
Abstract
There has been research into the 3D modelling of
urban settings and landscapes since the early 1980’s,
initially primarily for visual impact assessment, and
more recently for wider simulation and analysis. This
paper discusses recent project work that has been
examining how to minimise operator based digital 3D
modelling of urban and rural environments, where
remotely sensed data is available. The increasing
availability of highly accurate LIDAR data offers these
opportunities, but currently is not captured so often nor
is yet a sufficiently extensive coverage that it can be
relied on to keep VR analogues of real places up to date.
This places increasing importance on developing an
‘urban data fusion’ of different types including: LIDAR;
Digital Elevation Models derived from radar altimetry
and similar data (SAR interferometry); real-time video
photogrammetry; and thus on standards. 3D models of
proposed changes then need to comply with these
standards as they emerge.
KeywordsLIDAR;
SAR;
DEM;
Environmental Impact Assessment; GIS; VR.

Visual

1. Introduction
This paper discusses recent and forthcoming project
work that has been examining how to minimise 3D
modelling where remotely sensed data is available. The
increasing availability of highly accurate light detection
and ranging LIDAR data (the basis for the forthcoming
VEPS project described later) offers other opportunities.
However it is currently not captured sufficiently often,
nor is yet a sufficiently extensive coverage, that it can
yet be relied on to keep Virtual reality (VR) analogues of
real places fully up to date. This places increasing
importance on developing an ‘urban data fusion’ of
different data and media types that can then
interchangeably support a common 3D urban
information space. Such data types include:
Conventional mapping: Satellite and aerial imagery;
LIght Detection And Ranging (LIDAR); Digital
Elevation Models derived from radar altimetry and
similar data (SAR interferometry); and Real-time video
photogrammetry. The very range and diversity and

increasing detail and accuracy of such datasets, together
with increasing frequency of capture, creates problems
for managing and extracting requisite data on demand.
Automated capture can swiftly create massive datasets
and thus creates significant problems for data
management, storage and retrieval. For VR views there
are additional challenges in culling and selecting
appropriate data in real-time.
As these datasets become broadly available and
provide overlapping descriptions and views of the same
places, there is an increasing urgency for the definition
of common standards and metadata. "Users need to be
educated more and, to aid the greater use of the data,
standards need to be defined for products and for data
exchange.”[1] 3D models of proposed changes then need
to comply with these standards as they emerge. The main
issue being that while exceptional efforts in resources
can produce very good 3D urban models, this effort is
difficult to sustain, and needs to become commonplace
and substantially automated before it can be generally
useful. The INSPIRE[2] draft directive defines a need for
‘a coherent combination of spatial data sets or services
that represents added value, without requiring specific
efforts on the part of a human operator or a machine’,
and this combination needs to be both broadly available
and commonplace, for 3D Built Environment (BE) to
become the norm.

2. 3D Modelling of the Built Environment
There has been research into the digital 3D
modelling of urban settings and landscapes for visual
impact assessment since the early 1980’s. This started by
using commercial CAD systems, but has since developed
with the use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
The GIS have been used both to generate 3D VR models
of urban areas, and to integrate them with information
from various sources into an overall navigable
interactive whole, in a manner still difficult to achieve
with the latest commercial CAD software [3][4].
In the recent Interreg IIIB project proposal for a
virtual environmental planning system (VEPS) it was
argued that there is growing pressure to use 3D
modelling and VR at the planning proposal stage to
create virtual models that enable all the stakeholders to
understand the proposals [5]. Bulmer and others have

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

argued that “Urban simulations; that is computer
generated simulations of the built environment, are an
effective means of improving the public ’s participation
in the planning process ”. [6] The 3D digital terrain data
(DEM) available from mapping organisations is still
considered to be too inaccurate to make critical
judgments about the extent to which a new structure
masks or intrudes on an existing view. Harris and
Longley point out that for effective and fully useful BE
models other forms of non-visual and indeed perhaps
data whose capture cannot be fully automated are also
required. They state “it is well known that classified
urban land cover does not bear a spectrally identifiable
correspondence with urban land use... The inadequacies
of self-organisation in cities necessitates some kind of
intervention, and, in order to intervene, some knowledge
of city dynamics is required... New, relevant, and timely
lifestyles data may be 'tied' to other framework data such
as those provide by remote sensing or Ordnance Survey's
Addresspoint. We believe that such approaches offer the
prospect of creating vastly enhanced models of the form
and functioning of systems which can be implemented
into the management of 'sustainable cities'”[7].

interpolation methods, and also tools for adding
breaklines and additional ground points.
The automated vegetation and building classification
identifies DEM cells based on particular height
differences and places a buffer around the identified
objects. These objects may then be stripped out of a
scene, and the bare earth terrain gap is filled by simple
interpolation. The work requires some manual
intervention for the finished product, which has a 1 metre
grid spacing and a height accuracy of +/- 15cm. The
current new and improved methods of vegetation and
building classification identify unique and separate
objects for all of the surface features (i.e. for each
building). These individual surface objects identified can
now have a height assigned to them.

3. Available 3D Data for Contextual Models
3D building proposal information is often now
available from design practices and is held to be
inherently more inclusively understandable by all
stakeholders than conventional drawings. However the
contexts in which such proposals are demonstrated are
often unreliable and even misleadingly inaccurate. 3D
contextual information is now increasingly available (at
an accuracy that far surpasses commercially available
mapping data) from LIDAR and it is claimed is now
accurate enough to support local analysis of the visual
and environmental outcomes of detailed proposals.

3.1. Aerial LIDAR and Environmental Data
The Environment Agency for England and Wales
began R&D Surveys using airborne LIDAR in late 1996,
leading to operational surveys from March 1998,
concentrating on surveys of river and coastal floodplains.
To date they have surveyed in excess of 60,000 sq km
using an Optech ALTM laser scanner. The continued
R&D programme has led to the development of
operational filtering routines for the separate extraction
of “bare earth” (terrain models), vegetation and building
(surface models) objects. These filtering routines are
implemented using ESRI ArcView Spatial and 3D
analyst and include: Elevation Variance analysis;
Maximum vs. Minimum difference within varying
spatial windows; Aspect Variance analysis; Inverse
hydro-fill and edge detection; Minimum filters (varying
spatial windows); Edge detection (varying thresholds)
and area segmentation.
Combinations of different filtering techniques are
applied to specific landscape types (e.g., urban, steep
slopes, forested, rural, etc) along with a choice of

Figure 1: Example classified LIDAR objects;
buildings, vegetation, bare earth. Copyright
Environment Agency 2005
The 3d raster products may then be used with a
variety of environmental point and vector datasets e.g.
river quality samples overlain onto the OS 1:10,000 scale
digital maps. The data is also used for input into
modelling
Flood
risk
Zone
maps.
(http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/yourenv/)

3.2. 3D Terrestrial Laser Scan Data
In the field of surveying, ground based 3D scanning
technologies are able to acquire accurate 3D data about
portions of land and objects of various shapes and sizes.
These instruments are commonly known as terrestrial
laser scanners. While laser scanner instruments based on
the triangulation principle and high degrees of precision
have been widely used since the 1980’s, TOF (Time of
Flight) instruments have been developed for 3D survey
applications only in the last 5 years [8].
The University of Salford purchased a Riegl LMS
Z210 scanner in May 2002. The 3D-RiSCAN software is
used during data acquisition. It allows the operator to
perform a large number of tasks including sensor
configuration, data acquisition, data visualization, data
manipulation, and data archiving. Numerous export
functions allow the scanned data to passed to postprocessing data packages for, e.g., feature extraction or

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

volume estimation. PolyWorks software (produced by
Innovmetric Software Inc.) provides comprehensive set
of tools for quickly processing 3D scanned data. This
software has traditionally been used in manufacturing
industries with very short-range scanners, but with the
advent of longer-range laser scanners, it has seen
widespread use in surveying and architecture, especially
within North America. The software can handle many
millions of data points while still retaining the ability to
model very fine details very accurately. Figures 1,2 and
3 below show Jactin House, a case study building in East
Manchester. This work is funded by the EU: the
Intelcities FP6 IP 2004-2005.
The processing of laser scanning data can be
complex and since the Salford scanner was purchased,
research has been conducted to investigate this complex
environment for the use in the built environment.
Terrestrial laser scanning offers fast 3D terrain data
acquisition. It has advantages over current survey
techniques including EDM (Electronic Distance
Measurement), GPS and photogrammetric applications
in providing high-density point data without the need for
a reflector system. Merged data clouds have sufficient
points to negate the need for DEM (Digital Elevation
Model) interpolation techniques and potentially provide
the optimum representation of any scanned surface. The
advantages of speed and high data point density must be
viewed against the data point accuracy, which may
reduce instrument performance below that achievable
using EDM techniques (such techniques are, however,
much more time consuming). There remains scope for
improvement in measurement range, resolution, field of
view and error/accuracy. Either would significantly
advance current research into effective techniques for the
spatial and temporal measurement of change in the built
and natural environment, and may resolve the accuracy
issue with regard to EDM techniques. These point clouds
can also be merged with those from airborne LIDAR to
enhance it with highly detailed elevations for more
effective street level viewing.

Figure 4: Plastic model produced from the CAD
model

3.3 GMES Urban Services
The European Space Agency (ESA) funds GMES
Urban Services (GUS). This project aims to consolidate
a product portfolio, based on the combination of satellite
images and in-situ data, to facilitate cities and regional
authorities in their implementation of European
environmental policies. GUS aims to provide them with
cost effective, up-to-date and homogeneous, “GIS ready”
spatial environmental information mainly based on highresolution satellite image data. GUS has developed a
number of products clustered into three thematic areas:
Urban Land Use Mapping – with urban land use; urban
change detection; urban development modeling tool and
plan monitoring products; Urban Development Control with change detection hot spots; Urban Environmental
Quality – with mapping of sealed areas; Urban
thermography; Road noise observatory; risk and security
mapping and Brownfield mapping products.
These products, except for the urban thermography
product, which is airborne, are based on IKONOS,
Quickbird and SPOT-5 satellite images with scales
1:5000 to 1:25000. During 2004 GUS also developed an
Urban 3D Mapping product based on airborne data,
which was delivered to the Belgium City of Turnhout.
This is a 3D model of the historic castle, with horizontal
resolution < 15cm and vertical resolution < 30sm and the
product is integrated into the Turnhout City Hall
geoportal to be viewed by tourists. Unfortunately, 3D
modeling is not going to be developed further within
GUS project during the 2005-2008 period, as the main
focus is on developing generic satellite based products
with highest demand and potential to cover all Europe.

Figure 2: Virtual Reality (VR) model produced
from raw scan data

Figure 5: 3D Map of the Castle Hertogen van
Brabant in Turnhout, Belgium

Figure 3: CAD model produced from the VR
model in figure 1

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3.4 Comparing Lidar with SAR and other data
The International Society for Photogrammetry and
Remote Sensing (ISPRS) Technical Commission reports
that SARs (synthetic aperture radar) have difficulties in
urban settings when buildings are high or if the streets
are narrow. "Urban areas can also be troublesome to
SARs because of shadowing and layover effect.”[9]
Similar problems arise with imaging steep slopes and
high depressions angles.[10] Whereas LIDAR capture
can for example be limited by atmospheric moisture or
particularly reflective surfaces.
LIDAR
IfSAR
Height
10cm (Z)
0.5m in Z
Accuracy
Approx Cost
$500 per km2
$5 per km2
larger areas
Best Suited for: limited areas
with high
with lower
accuracy
accuracy
requirements
requirements
Figure 6: Table from Dowman [1] comparison
Dowman states that the ESA ERS 1/2tandem
missions have acquired very wide coverage of
interferometric SAR pairs, which have been successfully
used for the generation of regional DEMs. (Spaceborne
IfSAR [interferometric synthetic aperture radar] is more
established as a source of DEMs that its airborne counter
part.) However he forecasts “new airborne technologies
such as 3 line optical sensors could also compete with
LIDAR when they become more mature and can acquire
data with higher resolution than at present. Three line
data avoids occlusions and adds redundancy to the data
set. Multi sensor data could also do this." Dowman
however concludes that IfSAR data analysis is still very
much reliant upon the system operator (and thus lacks
any current standards) and for bare earth filtering there
will inevitably be a need for manual editing after the
automatic processing. Filtering of LIDAR is probably
more effective than that of IfSAR. He points out that on
the other hand LIDAR LAS standards have been
developed in the USA and further specification standards
are being developed. (http://www.lasformat.org).[1]
“Another particularly useful side benefit with InSAR
maps is that they can detect change exquisitely, at the
level of inches of vertical deflection.”[10] Thus SAR
data has an important emerging role in identifying and
mapping authorised and unauthorised development in
urban areas. "It is likely that high-quality urban mapping
will depend on combining data from all three techniques
in the future.”[10]

3.5. Continuing Need for Data Fusion
A UNESCO 2003 report concluded that 'a
fundamental challenge for spatial analysis tools is the
need to resolve the "knowledge gap" in the process of
deriving information from images and digital maps. This
knowledge gap has arisen because our capacity to build
sophisticated data collection instruments (such as

satellite sensors, LIDAR, and GPS) is not matched by
our means of producing information from these data
sources.'[11] Dowman argues that the ISPRS Journal
(vol 58[1-2]2003) theme issue on multi-source data
fusion for urban areas clearly demonstrates both the
range and importance of data fusion. "Data fusion can be
used for many applications. Some of the established ones
are: Assisting phase unwrapping; Eliminating errors and
blunders; Atmospheric correction; Providing orientation
in areas where there is no control; Terrestrial images to
LIDAR; Feature extraction, such as buildings and roads;
Other aspects of feature extraction and environmental
analysis”[1].
The IPSRS technical report states “Semi-automatic
extraction of GIS and CAD (computer aided design) data
is still mostly restricted to research and development.
Implemented algorithms combine computer vision
approaches with rigorous photogrammetric modelling.
Some results indicate that future systems will be
equipped with more powerful tools... Systems and data
fusion becomes increasingly important and must be
addressed on different levels. The trend of using several
sensors on the same platform requires establishing a
common reference system for the sensors (fusion on the
physical (sensor) level). Similarly, data obtained by
different sensors, perhaps not on the same platform, must
be merged (fusion on the data level). Not all multiple
sensor data can be merged on that, however; it may be
necessary to extract features independently and merge
them on the feature level”.[9]

4. European Standards for Spatial Datasets
"Efforts have been devoted to the development of
systems and tools for the integrated management of
large-volume heterogeneous spatial data and for enabling
users to access various Earth Observation (EO) and other
spatial data at regional, national and global scales." [9]
There are moves to establish European standards relating
to spatial datasets, which will eventually have an impact
on common standards for urban modelling. Their goal is
described as 'an open, cooperative infrastructure for
accessing and distributing information products and
services online’ (Inspire AST)[12]. The Inspire project
aims to establish ‘an infrastructure for spatial
information in the Community’ and has published a
proposed directive in this respect that was adopted by the
European Commission (EC) on the 23rd July 2004 [2]. It
is stated that the proposal ‘focuses specifically on
information needed in order to monitor and improve the
state of the environment’, and that ‘much of this
information needs to be underpinned by "multi-purpose"
spatial data’. It is explicit that ‘in an infrastructure for
spatial information, not all spatial data themes need to be
subject to the same degree of harmonisation, nor can
they be brought within the infrastructure at the same
pace’, and therefore gives different deadlines for
harmonisation of different categories of spatial
information. Other directives and actions also indicate a
move to harmonisation and inter-operability, e.g. the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

GMES action plan from 2004 to 2008 is aimed at
achieving integration and consistency of such data [13].
While these initiatives do not specifically exclude
3D data one can find nevertheless an implicit assumption
that at the scales at which data is to be collated height
data is less significant. Height data standardisation was
addressed in a 2004 workshop on establishing ‘Vertical
Reference Systems for Europe’. In the conclusions from
this workshop it was stated that significant work was still
needed to achieve harmonised decimetre accuracy by
2006, although accuracy at the metre level was available
now. The current problem was defined as 'Worldwide
there are some hundred physical height systems, in
Europe about 20, realized - by different reference tide
gauges (inconsistencies within 2 m range) - by spirit
leveling reduced by different theories (10-6) - at different
epochs - and as static systems' (EVRS) [14]. The Inspire
AST position paper [12] made it clear that ‘from the
European point of view Coordinate Reference Systems
(using ETRS89 and additional projections) will be used
both in GIS and in geodesy. Both applications
correspond to different accuracy classes (one or more
meters in GIS; several decimetres or less in geodesy). At
regional level also GIS information moves to smaller
accuracy (like cadastre) with (adequate) regional

geodetic reference systems becoming more important.’
Figure 8: Diagram showing proposed ‘scales’ or
granularity of data -Inspire RDM position paper
2002
The OpenGIS specification for locational geometry
[15] refers to the need for many spatial reference systems
with explicit mappings between them. In this light the
common European Coordinate Reference System
database contains the descriptions of national Coordinate
Reference Systems of European countries and the
descriptions of Transformations to the European
Terrestrial Reference System together with descriptions
of European Coordinate Reference Systems. (Inspire
RDM) [16].
From this it may be argued that European
standardisation that identifies local accuracy as
potentially adequate for the range under 2.5m in X, Y,
and possibly Z, needs clarification and further
development to become of use in urban modelling for
accurate visualisation. In practice these further standards
may become defined in a de-facto manner by readily
available LIDAR data of significantly higher accuracy.
De-facto standards that emerge from practice often
precede and establish international standards. Yet at this
moment there is still be a need for those engaged in
visualisable (and thus 3D) urban models as facsimiles of
reality to define the most appropriate spatial reference
system (that will serve all or most local requirements)
while standardising their creation and maintenance, but

also to provide mappings from the localised reference
system to national and international reference systems. It
is suggested that further research is needed in this area,
and this is likely to be one focus of the VEPS project.

5. The VEPS Project
VEPS is a newly commenced Interreg IIIB funded
European project focused on the North West Europe
region. The project brings together partners from the UK,
Germany and France, with skills in geographic
visualisation and spatial planning, led by the
Environment Agency for England and Wales. VEPS has
received additional support from the UK government as
a potential contribution to its e-Planning programme.
VEPS aims to develop a common and transferable web
based three-dimensional visualisation system that
enables citizens to view, analyse, interact with and
respond to proposed changes, to collaborate and
comment together and pose and test their own alternative
solutions. To increase participation it is considered
essential that it be free at the point of use, so it will make
use of the web and open source tools. It is intended to
test this system in different demonstration case studies.
The project is thus expected to improve future public
participation procedures on planning strategies and
development proposals by making planning information
more accessible and easier to understand for the general
public, while at the same time facilitating the decisionmaking structures of planning authorities.
A key action of VEPS will be the analysis of large
data sets, including high-resolution 3 dimensional height
data from LIDAR, for use within Virtual Reality (VR)
visualisation software and the subsequent delivery of the
VR environment via the Internet and World Wide Web.
The virtual environment used in VEPS can look
extremely realistic as the LIDAR image demonstrates.
These images are compiled by overlaying different data
sets, LIDAR data, and for example, Compact Airborne
Spectrographic Imager (CASI) data, which records the
colour of the underlying ground.

5.1. Alternative User Generated Proposals
The VEPS product will be based on interactive 3D
visualisation. As such it represents a technology leap in
the modernisation of the planning process. The
visualisation would also allow the user to explore
alternatives such as before and after scenarios. Other
types of data can also be overlaid according to the user
requirements. All the data would be underpinned by
mapping data. The user will be able to explore this
virtual world and click on features to see the
environmental model. In some cases the environmental
model might be dynamic e.g. for properties in a flood
plain the model might show the water gradually
inundating the planned development. In addition, the
VEPS product challenges existing practice in that it
would allow a two-way consultation process. It would
allow citizens to upload their own alternative planning

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

scenarios and view the results in terms of visual and
environmental impact as well as download and view the
details of the planned development. The user could also
manipulate the planned development and see the impact
of their own suggestions [5]. This poses the question (as
yet unanswered) of which media will acceptably and
credibly present user's own suggestions in this context. It
might be argued that 2D images billboarded into the 3D
context might adequately convey a proposal from a
specific set viewpoint. There is certainly a truism that
systems that exclude methods or approaches that are
found useful and relevant become bypassed and
consequently risk obsolescence. An effective versatile
and lasting system should accommodate approaches and
methods not envisaged by its designers. In this respect
the VEPS project will examine, define and integrate
standards for incorporating other media into the same
spatial referencing system.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Conclusions
[9]

There is still a pressing need to develop better means
of integrating and fusing data from different datasets to
automate digital urban and landscape models that are at
present highly resource intensive. There is also a need to
re-examine and define in such standards the data to be
recorded with media such as images and video. It should
then eventually become possible to limit the resource
intensive 'manual' modelling tasks to proposals for
change that have yet to exist, or to interpreting historic
events and contexts that no longer exist. While currently
emerging European Standards for 2D data and 'vertical
data' provide a context, there is still within this context
an apparently as yet un-addressed need to define digital
urban model standards that define data and urban
modelling outcomes, at scales / resolutions that enable
critical tasks such as visualisation and construction to be
adequately supported. The VEPS project will need to
address these issues in attempting to define a usable paneuropean standard approach to uploading proposals for
change and alternative scenarios into the context of such
increasingly available highly accurate datasets as those
derived from LIDAR.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Acknowledgements
[15]

The VEPS project work presented in this paper is
co-financed through the INTERREG IIIB North West
Europe programme.

[16]

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

Dowman, I. (2004) Integration Of Lidar And Ifsar For
Mapping, Invited paper In proceedings of XXth ISPRS
Congress, 12-23 July 2004 Istanbul, Turkey Commission
2, (www.isprs.org/istanbul2004/comm2/papers/104.pdf )
INSPIRE Project (2004) (www.ec-gis.org/inspire )
Counsell, J. Brkljac, N. & Smith, S (2002). GIS based
Urban Information Systems as a basis for the Generation
of Complex 3D VRML Models, in Proceedings of
DMUCE, London, November 2002.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Hamilton, A. et al. Learning through visual systems to
enhance the urban planning process in Journal of
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 2001,
vol 28, pp 833-845
VEPS (2004) Proposal document submitted in support of
VEPS project bid to Interreg IIIB North-West Europe,
2004.
Bulmer, D. (2001), How can computer simulated
visualizations of the built environment facilitate better
public participation in the planning process? Online
Planning
Journal,
(http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/planning/articles61/complann
ing.pdf)
Harris, R. Longley, P. (2000) “Data-Rich Models Of The
Urban Environment: RS, GIS and 'Lifestyles'” GISRUK
2000
Conference,
York,
England
(www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/urgent/DataRich.doc)
Bornaz, L. Rinaudo, F. (2004) Terrestrial Laser Scanner
Data Processing. In proceedings of XXth ISPRS
Congress, 12-23 July 2004 Istanbul, Turkey,
http://www.isprs.org/istanbul2004/comm5/papers/608.pd
f)
ISPRS Annual Report 2000 Technical Reports
(www.isprs.org/publications/highlights/
highlights0601/16_HL_03_01_Annual_Report.pdf)
Vick, A. et al: (2000) Enabling Technologies For Urban
Aerospace Operations chapter 6 of ‘Aerospace
Operations in Urban Environments: Exploring New
Concepts’ MR1187 ISBN: 0-8330-2851-0 published by
Rand
Corp,
Santa
Monica,
CA,
USA.
(http://www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR1187/ )
UNESCO Report on the International Workshop on
Open Access and the Public Domain in Digital Data and
Information for Science 10/11 March 2003, ICSU/
UNESCO
(http://www.codata.org/wsis/FinalReportUNESCO31Jul
y.pdf)
Inspire AST (2002) INSPIRE Architecture and Standards
Position Paper, European Commission, Joint Research
Centre,
2002
(
http://snig.igeo.pt/inspire/DOCUMENTOS/Position%20
Papers/inspire_ast_pp_v4_3_en.pdf )
GMES (2004) ( Establishing a GMES capacity by 2008
(Action
Plan
(2004-2008)
(http://www.ecgis.org:8080/wecgis/ecgis.dyn_document.show?nome='4
87' )
EVRS (2004) Workshop on Vertical Reference Systems
for Europe, Frankfurt Main 5-7 April 2004 (http://gigis.jrc.it/ws/evrs )
OpenGIS (1999) Open GIS Consortium Abstract
Specification
Topic
3:
Locational
Geometry
(http://www.opengis.org/docs/99-103.pdf )
Inspire RDM (2002) Position Paper of the Reference
Data and Metadata working group, European
Commission,
Joint
Research
Centre,
2002
(inspire.jrc.it/reports/position_papers/
inspire_rdm_pp_v4_3_en.pdf)

