Visualising Sentiments in Financial Texts?
Khurshid Ahmad and Yousif Almas
Department of Computing, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK
{k.ahmad, y.almas}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
An information extraction system that extracts
‘sentiment’ words in unrestricted Arabic texts is
described. Earlier work on the automatic sentiment
analysis in English and Chinese texts has been adapted
and extended to the morphologically richer Arabic
texts. A method for automatically and unambiguously
extracting sentiment-bearing patterns from texts in
Arabic is described. A list of sentiment words is
provided and sentiment bearing excerpts are extracted
from time-stamped news wire: The frequency of
sentiment words per unit time is then plotted for
‘visualising’ changes in sentiments.

1. Introduction
The noun sentiment is defined as ‘what one feels
with regard to something; mental attitude (of approval
or disapproval, etc.); an opinion or view as to what is
right or agreeable’ or ‘a thought or reflection coloured
by or proceeding from emotion’. Natural language text
can be used to convey fairly powerful sentiments.
Speeches of politicians and advertisement texts are two
examples. And, reviews of and discussions about
books, restaurants, holidays, and financial advice
comprise a substantial sentimental component [1].
Sentiment analysis is an important part of the analysis
of financial markets: sentiment here refers to the
perception of the actors in the market, including
investors, traders and regulators, in-line with or
contrary to the actual performance of stocks, currencies
and other financial instruments. Some authors have
argued that the sentimental decisions of the actors
precipitate bubbles and crashes in financial markets
[2], [3].
Experts can easily detect sentiment even when it is
not expressed very clearly in speech or text. In this
respect, particularly in the context of financial markets,
experts read news and financial reports, and listen to
speeches and pick nuances of meaning in the news.

The nuances are combined together to form a number
of confidence indices: For instance, questionnaires and
focus groups are used to find out whether the traders
and/or investors expect the markets to crash. Two US
university departments of finance and economics, Yale
and Michigan, put up a series of monthly indices that
shows investor and/or trader confidence on a range of
otherwise un-quantifiable measures [4], [5], [6].
The volume of news, reports and speeches is
expanding the whole time as financial markets become
ever more important. Globalization of finance and
trade has meant that the news, reports and speeches
emanate from different parts of the world, usually in
English but increasingly in other languages. There is a
need for automatically identifying text excerpts that
may comprise sentiment-based information so as to
alert the investors and traders in the first instance. If
the automatic procedure can distinguish between
optimism and pessimism, or between positive and
negative sentiments, then this analysis can form a basis
of monitoring changes in the financial instruments.
The visualisation of sentiment related information is,
for us, a major challenge for information visualisation
in terms of creating a financial information system that
comprises the quantifiable information, time series of
numbers related to the value of financial instruments,
and qualitative information – primarily information
related to the optimistic and pessimistic expectations
about the instruments.
We report on aspects of an ambitious project for
identifying the underlying sentiment in free naturallanguage texts in English, Chinese and Arabic. We are
currently focusing on financial markets and expect that
the method for automatically extracting sentiments
from financial texts can be adapted to other specialist
areas. We begin by describing our motivation (Section
2) and then describe a case study where from a preproposed set of sentiment words in Arabic we were
able to visualize sentiment changes over a period of
time (Section 3). We then describe a procedure, which
may enable us to automatically extract sentiment-laden
phrases and to correspondingly reduce the bias in our
analysis (Section 4). Section 5 concludes this paper.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2. Motivation
Computer programs have been used in the
‘computation’ of sentiment especially related to
financial markets. However, this analysis is usually at
the meta-level of detail: Some authors simply count the
frequency of news wire stories in a unit of time and
higher frequency is construed as upwards or
downwards movement in a market or a stock [7]. The
analysis of headlines for keywords and proper nouns
has persuaded others that sentiments can cause
‘volatility’ in the market [8]; (‘volatility’ here refers to
changes in the ratio of the logarithmic values of a stock
for two consecutive days). There are studies where
attempts were made to train a system that correlates
negative and positive ‘news stories’ with the value of
stocks [9].
More recently, there have been reports of content
analysis of full news texts for extracting not only
sentiment words but patterns of words used to encode
such sentiments as unambiguously as possible: the
authors have correlated the movement of stocks and
currencies with that of the hourly computed frequency
of sentiment words for a number of weeks [10], [11],
[12]. The work reported in this paper is an extension,
and by implication an evaluation, of Ahmad et al’s
work where a list of movement words (e.g. fall/rise
and the associated morphological variants of the verbs)
and spatial location words (up/down) were selected by
hand. The frequency of the movement and the location
words was computed in a collection of news stories
ordered temporally. The words were then divided
manually into sets of positive (e.g. rise and up) and
negative sentiment words (fall and down) For each
instance in time, typically on a daily basis, the
frequency of positive and negative sentiment words
was plotted against the value of a financial instrument,
for instance, a currency, or stocks of a company or
aggregates of stocks.
In one case study the authors showed that when
they collected financial news related mainly to the
United Kingdom and then correlated the negative and
positive movement with that of a key UK index, the
Financial Times Stock Exchange 100 top companies
share Index (FTSE-100) [10]. Subsequently, a detailed
study of the distribution of words suggested that there
is a possibility that sentiment words are strongly
collocated with financial instruments and, in particular,
with words and symbols used in the expression of
change in the value of an instrument – the percentage
sign (%), amongst the frequent words used in a
financial news corpus, strongly collocates with the
movement and the spatial location words. Work under

the direction of one of the authors (KA) suggested that
there appears to be a local grammar that is used in an
attempt to unambiguously express change in the actual
or potential value of an instrument. The local grammar
hypothesis on English and Chinese financial news texts
was partially confirmed [13]. Some of the local
grammar patterns used in English financial news are
shown in Figure 1.

­%
½
­share (s)
½
°
°
°­rose ( rise, rising) ½ªbyº­(numeral ½°
¾®percent ¾
¾« »®
®currency(ies) ¾®
)
(
fall
,
fallen
)
fell
to
cardinal
¿¬ ¼¯
¿°
°
°index ( e.g.FTSE) °¯
¯percentage¿
¯
¿
Figure 1. The various frequent patterns used
in financial news texts for reporting changes
in the value of an object (share), movement
(rise/fall), hedge (by, nearly), quantity
(number) and measure (%, percent,
percentage). Similar patterns were found for
Chinese [12].
Our current project is to discover such patterns
without hand-crafting the sentiment words: in
particular the endeavour is to start from the most
frequently used lexical words in a text corpus and
analyze the collocation patterns of the lexical words.
These patterns may lead on to a local grammar – an
algorithm to this end has been proposed [12].

3. An Arabic language sentiment analyser
3.1 Some challenges in processing Arabic text
Arabic language belongs to the group of Semitic
languages and it is a widely used language (over 250
million native speakers in 22 odd countries).
Arabic differs from Indo-European (English,
German, Hindi) or Chinese languages not just in
orthography - Arabic text is written from right to left
and the shape of letters change depending on their
location in words (beginning, middle, end) - but
markedly in syntax and morphology.
In Arabic, very productive use is made of roots set
in vowel patterns for generating stems [14]. The stems
can be further pre-fixed and post-fixed for expressing
grammatical usages such as articles, prepositions,
pronouns, and adverbs [15]. Arabic words are sensitive
to gender and number and so the affixes can change
accordingly. In an analysis of word distribution in
Arabic and English newspapers text it was found that
Arabic text contains more distinct words and words
occurring only once compared to English text [16].
Capitalization is not employed in Arabic and special

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

rules are required if a system is required to detect and
extract proper nouns, acronyms and abbreviations [17].
There are different varieties of Arabic, including
Egyptian Arabic, Gulf Arabic, and Hijazi Arabic. The
Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is the language of
written and spoken media across the Arab countries.
The spelling of the MSA is not as standardized as may
be the case for French or German or English. For a
text collection that has a Pan-Arab origination, it may
be essential to have a thesaurus that may help in
relating differently spelled words of the same concept.
Research on the Arabic language, particularly from an
information extraction perspective, is very much in its
infancy although there are some rich insights to be had
here.

same architecture as one of our prototypes for
processing English language texts, SATISFI ([10],
[12],[18]) and offers similar services for browsing
through a corpus of texts and for viewing the frequency
of all the unique tokens identified by the system
including the sentiment words. Furthermore, and in a
vein similar to SATISFI, Ara-SATISFI correlates the
extracted sentiments with a financial instrument
movement through a numeric and visual output.

3.2 Sentiment words in Arabic
The sentiment words were selected by ‘hand’ by
one of us who is a native speaker of Arabic (YA) and
comprised
movement
words,
rise/fall,
and
metaphorical words like growth/decline:
Table 1. Examples of sentiment words
Positive
Sentiment

ϮϤϧ
ϊϔΗέ΍

Translit, Gloss
nomow, growth
ertifa, rise

Negative
Sentiment

Translit, Gloss

ϊΟ΍ήΗ

taraja, decline

ξϔΨϧ΍

enkafada, fall

We have created a rule base, which can be used to
identify the ‘sentiment’ stem (word) when used in
combination with the various affixes for producing
inflected forms of the stem.
The spelling variants were noted and kept in a flat
file and the variants removed by a pre-selected
spelling.
An analysis of 275 news reports published between
1st –31st May 2004 in Al-Wafd (http://www.alwafd.org),
an Egyptian newspaper that carries financial news and
reports about the Egyptian economy, suggested that the
patterns observed in English that template objectmovement-hedge-quantity- measure (Figure 1) are also
found in Arabic.

3.3 The Ara-SATISFI prototype
Ara-SATISFI “Arabic Sentiment and Time Series:
Financial Analysis System” attempts to extract
sentiments from financial news in Arabic by extracting
a pre-stored set of sentiment words, and when
necessary, by reconciling the spelling variants. AraSATISFI has a rule-base for dealing with affixes on the
sentiment words. The system which is based on the

Figure 2. Ara-SATISFI interface displaying the
results of an analysis of the Al-Wafd corpus.
The negative and positive sentiments are
correlated with the movement of the Egyptian
Pound. The correlation with the positive
sentiment and the Pound is better (30%) than
that of the negative sentiment (24%). AraSATISFI was written using VB by Almas [19].

4. Automatic extraction of local grammar?
The above analysis remains an ad-hoc way of
identifying sentiment-bearing words unambiguously.
The literature on corpus-based terminology suggests
that meaning bearing words are used frequently and
have greater probability of occurring in the
neighbourhood of other meaning bearing words: the
collocates of frequent words form the key component
of the lexicon of a specialism [20], [21].
Following the method proposed in [12], we collated
financial news available on Middle East and North
Africa Financial Network (MENA-FN) website [22].
Our analysis is based on 9494 news items comprising
3.398 million tokens published during June 2004 –
March 2005.
The first 50 most frequent tokens in the MENAFN
corpus comprise 21.80% of all tokens used. Eight out
of 10 most frequent tokens are closed class or
grammatical words except for the ϥϮϴϠϣ (million) token

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

and the percent symbol (%) token (f=16423), which, in
turn, comprises 1 in every 200 tokens used in the 3.398
million tokens (Table 2 contains the details).
Table 2. Cumulative distribution of tokens in
the MENAFN corpus (N=3.398M). English
gloss of the tokens is in parentheses.
Rank

Tokens

Cumulative
Relative
Frequency

1-10

ϲϓ (in) - Ϧϣ (from) - ϰϠϋ (over) - ϥ΍
(that) - ϭ (and) - ϲΘϟ΍ (those) - ϰϟ΍
(to) - ϥϮϴϠϣ (million) - % - Ϧϋ
(about)

12.39%

11-20

ϝϼΧ (through) - ϊϣ (with) - ϩάϫ
(this/feminine) - ΍άϫ (this/masculine)
- ϡΎόϟ΍ (the-year) - ϱάϟ΍ (whose) - Δϛήη
(company) - Ύϣ (which or what) - ϡΎϋ
(year) - Δϛήθϟ΍ (the-company)

3.71%

21-30

ΚϴΣ (at-which) - ϦϴΑ (between) έϻϭΩ (dollar) - ΔϴΑήόϟ΍ (the-Arabian) ΎϤϛ (as) - ΔϴϟΎϤϟ΍ (the-financial) - ΖϳϮϜϟ΍
(Kuwait) - βϠΠϣ (council) - ϦϳήΤΒϟ΍
(Bahrain) - έΎϨϳΩ (Dinar)

Table 3. Downwards collocates of percent in
the MENAFN Corpus ordered according to
total collocation frequency (Col. 6).
Collocate

ΓΩΎϳΰΑ
nomow, growth
1683 216
ϮϤϧ
ΖόϔΗέ΍ ertafaat, rise (feminine) 1156 112
taraja, decline
684 169
ϊΟ΍ήΗ
enkafadat,
fall
(feminine)
297
63
ΖπϔΨϧ΍

31-40

410

626

297

409

46

215

58

121

A manual analysis of the concordances containing
both percent symbol and its downward collocates leads
to an automaton which is used to encode the movement
of a financial instrument. Consider the example of the
frequent collocation patterns of ΓΩΎϳΰΑ (be-zeyada, withan-increase) in Figure 3:

22.9%

ΎϬΘΒδϧ
by-aproportion

15.9%

2.43%

ΎϫέΪϗ
amounted

%

ΕΎϛήθϟ΍ (the-companies) - ΔϳΩϮόδϟ΍
(Saudi) - έΎϴϠϣ (billion) - ϝΎϳέ (Ryal) ϕϮδϟ΍ (the-market) - ϲϠϋ (over) - ϝΎϗϭ
(and-said)- ϚϨΒϟ΍ (the-bank) - ϚϟΫ
(that) - ωΎτϘϟ΍ (the-sector)

Left Right
Total
(-1:-5) (1:5)
be-zeyada, with-an-increase 1271 85
588 673
f

Translit, Gloss

numerical
cardinal

ΓΩΎϳΰΑ

22.4%
4.4%

with-anincrease

ΔΒδϨΑ
with-aproportion

1.78%
3%

ϮΤϨΑ
with-toward

41-50

ϢϬγ (stock) - ΔΒδϨΑ (with-aproportion) - ϝϭΪϟ΍ (the-countries) Ϟϛ (every) - ςϔϨϟ΍ (the-oil) - ΪόΑ (after)
- Ϊϗϭ (and-may) - έΎϤΜΘγϻ΍ (theinvestment) - ϮΤϧ (toward) - ΩΪϋ
(number)

1.49%

The collocation patterns of the token percent
symbol (%) were computed from the MENA-FN
corpus: we looked at five tokens either side of the
token. Only downward collocations of percent were
considered - that is only those collocates that have a
frequency of occurrence less than that of percent. A
selection of the collocates shows the high frequency of
collocation between movement words and percent.
The positive sentiments expressed through tokens like
increase, rise and growth show greater numerical
presence than the negative sentiment tokens including
decline and fall (see Table 3):

Figure 3. An automaton derived from
collocation patterns of percent symbol and
increase. The important collocations include
one where percent occurs on the left of ΓΩΎϳΰΑ
(be-zeyada, with-an-increase) followed by ΎϬΘΒδϧ
(nesbatoha, by-a-proportion), and a cardinal
number (22.9% of all collocates of increase
including %). Other collocates are also
marked.
The strong collocational patterns for percent symbol
(%) and related words follow rules of grammar that
predicate the relative positions of movement words
ΓΩΎϳΰΑ (be-zeyada, with-an-increase) together with (an
optional) hedge ΎϬΘΒδϧ (nesbatoha, by-a-proportion),
and a cardinal numeral together with the percent
symbol. Such collocational patterns are not usually
used in Arabic language of day-to-day usage. The rules
of grammar are ‘local’ to a specialist usage of Arabic

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

(financial news reporting); perhaps a local grammar of
Arabic financial news is used for writing such news.
There are strong parallels to the local grammars found
in English and Chinese financial news.
The pattern in Figure 3 which has been derived
from the MENAFN corpus can be construed as an
automata. This and similar patterns can then be used to
extract phrases that have sentiment bearing information
in Arabic natural language texts. Tests have been
conducted for measuring the effectiveness of the
automata for other collocation patterns of percent;
initial results appear promising. These automata can
then be automatically extracted from a corpus of texts
and fed directly from a training corpus into AraSATISFI.
The automata can then used to
unambiguously extract sentiments and a sentiment time
series from a streaming news wire for instance.

5. Afterward
The visualisation of information encoded in text is a
major theoretical and practical challenge for
information visualisation. We have shown that whilst
different natural languages have idiosyncratic features,
what unites these different languages is the existence
of a language of a given specialism complete with its
own lexicon and (local) grammar. The local grammar
can be used in automatically selecting phrases with
least ambiguity – a major challenge in information
extraction. The use of local grammar can perhaps then
be used in the visualisation of sentiments.

Acknowledgements
Yousif Almas wishes to thank the Department of
Computing, University of Surrey for a PhD
scholarship. Khurshid Ahmad wishes to acknowledge
the support of the UK Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council Grant (REVEAL Project,
GR/M/89041) and that of the UK Economic and Social
Sciences Research Council (FINGRID Project ESRC
RES-149-25-0028).

References
[1] Turney, P., “Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? Semantic
Orientation Applied to Unsupervised Classification of
Reviews”, Proc. of the 40th Ann. Meeting of the Ass. for
Comp. Linguistics (ACL). Philadelphia, 2002, pp. 417-424.
(Available at http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu/P/P02/P02-1053.pdf).
[2] Lakonishk, J., Lee, I., and Poteshman, A., “Investor
Behavior in the Option Market”, NBER Working Papers
10264, Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic

Research,
2004
http://ssrn.com/abstract=495769).

(Available

at

[3] Kindleberger, C., Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A
History of Financial Crises (Wiley Investment Classic), New
York, John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[4] Shiller, R., The New Financial Order: Risk in the 21st
Century, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2003.
[5] Shiller, R., “Measuring Asset Values for Cash
Settlement in Derivative Markets: Hedonic Repeated
Measures Indices and Perpetual Futures”, Journal of
Finance, 1993,Vol 48(No. 3), pp 911–931.
[6] Michigan., Survey of Consumers - May 2004 (published
June
2004),
2004
(Available
at
http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/).
[7] Baestaens, D., and van den Bergh, W.M., “The marginal
contribution of news to the DEM/USD swap rate”. Neural
Network World, 1995, Vol. 5(No. 4), pp. 371-378.
[8] DeGennaro, R., and R. Shrieves., “Public information
releases, private information arrival and volatility in the
foreign exchange market”, Journal of Empirical Finance,
1997, Vol 4, pp 295–315.
[9] Koppel, M., and Shtrimberg, I., “Good News or Bad
News? Let the Market Decide”, AAAI Spring Symposium on
Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text, Palo Alto: AAAI Press,
2004, pp. 86-88.
[10] Ahmad, K., Taskaya-Temizel, T., Cheng, D., Ahmad,
S., Gillam, L., Manomaisupat, P., Traboulsi, H., and Casey,
M., “Fundamental Data to SATISFI the Chartist”, The
Technical Analyst Magazine, 2004, Vol 1 (No. 3), pp. 36-38.
[11] Ahmad, K., Gillam, L., and Cheng, D., (Forthcoming).
“Textual and Quantitative Analysis: Towards a new, emediated Social Science”, First International Conference on
e-Social Science, 2005.
[12] Ahmad, K., “FINGRID Final Report”, ESRC Project
No. ESRC RES-149-25-0028, 2005
(Available at
www.computing.surrey.ac.uk/FINGRID).
[13] Cheng, D., “Corpus Analysis and Market Sentiment”,
MPhil-to-PhD Transfer Report (Unpublished). Guildford:
Department of Computing, Univ. of Surrey, 2003 (Available
from the author: d.cheng@surrey.ac.uk).
[14] Badawi, E., Carter, M., and Gully, A., Modern Written
Arabic - A Comprehensive Grammar, London, Routledge,
2004.
[15] Larkey, L., Ballesteros., L. and Connel, M., “Improving
Stemming for Arabic Information Retrieval: Light Stemming
and Co-occurrence Analysis”, Proc. of the 25th Annual Int.
Conf. on Research & Development in Information Retrieval.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Tampere,
Finland,
2002
(Available
http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/pubfiles/ir-249.pdf).

at:

[16] Abuleil, S., and Evens, M., “Discovering Lexical
Information by Tagging Arabic Newspaper Text”, Proc. of
Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages Workshop,
University of Montreal, Canada, 1998 (Available at:
http://www.cs.um.edu.mt/~mros/casl/proc/abulsal.zip).
[17] Hammo, B., Abu-Salem, H., Lyitnen, S., and Evans, M.,
“QARAB: A Question Answering System to Support the
Arabic Language”, Proc. of Computational Approaches to
Semitic Languages Workshop. University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia,
USA,
2002
(Available
at
http://
www.cs.um.edu.mt/~mros/WSL/papers/hammo:etal.pdf).
[18] Taskaya, T., and Ahmad, K., “Bimodal Visualisation:
A Financial Trading Case Study”, in (Eds.) E. Banissi et al,
Proc. of 7th International Conference on Information
Visualisation, Los Alamitos: IEEE Computer Press, London,
England, 2003, pp. 320-326.

[19] Almas, Y., Information Extraction from Economic
News: A Study of the Middle East Financial Markets,
Masters thesis (Unpublished), Guildford, UK: University of
Surrey,
2004
(Available
from
the
author:
y.almas@surrey.ac.uk).
[20] Ahmad, K., “Pragmatics of Specialist Terms and
Terminology Management”,
in (Ed.) Petra Steffens.
Machine Translation and the Lexicon, Proc. 3rd Int. EAMT
Workshop, Heidelberg, Germany (April 26-28,1993)
Heidelberg: Springer, 1995, pp.51-76.(LNAI, Vol. 898).
[21] Ahmad, K., and Rogers, M., “Corpus Linguistics and
Terminology Extraction”, In (Eds.) Sue-Ellen Wright and
Gerhard Budin, Handbook of Terminology Management,
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing
Company, 2001, Vol 2, pp 725-760.
[22] http://www.menafn.com, sources include news from
Ad-Dustour Newspaper (Jordan), Akhbar Al-Khaleej
Newspaper (Bahrain), Al-Jazira Net (Qatar), Al-Qabas
Newspaper (Kuwait), Emirates News Agency (WAM),
Kuwait News Agency (KUNA).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

