The Exchangeability of Speech by Cognitive Metaphors
Dirk Burmeister
Institut für Allgemeine Pädagogik und Berufspädagogik
Fachgebiet Allgemeine Pädagogik
TU Darmstadt
Pankratiusstr. 2
64289 Darmstadt
DuS.Burmeister@t-online.de
Abstract
This article proceeds the reports regarding the
development of learning techniques for deaf people
based on information visualization. It connects Piagets
research about the use of symbol systems with
contributions taken from cognitive linguistics concerning
cognitive metaphors.
On the one hand it is shown, that audible speech is
only one of many ways to access abstract content. It is
possible to exchange it by visualizations of cognitive
metaphors which are a proper visual aid used in special
languages.
On the other hand a demonstrator program for a
knowledge editor based on cognitive metaphors is
introduced. This editor may be a useful tool even for
analyzing metaphors.

1. Introduction
Deaf people use sign language to express their ideas
whereas hearing people use audible speech. In [1] this
fact inspires the thoughts about a productive
interconnection between information visualization and
linguistic research about the use of a visual means of
speech. In particular the iconic character of many
gestures in sign language may be valuable for the search
for metaphors in information visualization. The other
way around the use of metaphors in information
visualization may be useful to express ideas which are
hard to explain in the narrative nature of sign language.
The technical realization of information retrieval
software, which satisfies the different ways of access to
information according to the view of different user
groups, is explained in [2]. The necessity of this
approach is based on the different mindsets evolving

from the use of the different symbol systems sign
language and audible speech.
But the technology described in [2] does not reach
far enough to implement a bridge over the different
mindsets. It is concept-based and does not reflect on the
circumstance that the use of different symbol sets implies
a shift in semantics. The non-observance of minorities
using speech leads to an incorrect generalization in the
theories concerning access to and expression of
knowledge. Higher knowledge in particular has appeared
to be out of reach to deaf persons for many decades, the
decisive factor being that deaf persons are not able to
gain sufficient levels of knowledge to progress beyond
manufacturing professions.
In [3] Hans G. Furth contradicts these assumptions
and points out that many results concerning mental
abilities of deaf persons are self-fulfilling. The ability of
deaf persons to learn and to read an audible speech is
delimited by their use of another symbol system.
Therefore all knowledge expressed by so-called abstract
concepts seems to be out of the range of deaf persons
because they simply do not use them to utter statements.
Nevertheless they do have the ability to learn the abstract
content behind the abstract concepts. This can be proven
by many experiments based on non-verbal expressions
for abstract ideas behind exercises, which can only be
solved using background knowledge implying the same.
Hans G. Furth based his research on the theory of
knowledge developed by Piaget.

2. Piaget’s Theory of Knowledge
Because mental processes cannot be observed
directly they are often mapped to the metaphors of
medial objects like a board of wax or a picture gallery or
modern information technology. All these metaphors
diminish the real mental activity. By contrast, the starting
point of Piaget’s theory of knowledge is the biological

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

dimension of human being. He uses human activity as an
indication for mental processes and maps them to a
model of inner states which essentially require
equalization. As with all biological activity even mental
activity tends towards a condition of equilibrium.
To become equalized the mental processes have to
be reversible. This means that acts do not lead to a
varying inner standpoint but to constants of observations.
One constant of observation, for example, is the
constancy of objects. In his research Piaget finds out that
a child younger than one year does not search for a teddy
bear hidden from its sight for a brief moment. This child
exhibits “out of sight, out of mind” behavior. Older
children who have reached the development stage where
they rely on the constancy of objects and who are put
into the same situation would react by actively searching
for the teddy bear.

Figure 1. Constancy of Objects

Piaget distinguishes several levels of operations
which lead increasingly to reversible states in mental
activity. Basically, these include the following:
• The senso-motoric level: the child has some
practical intelligence including the schema of
constancy of objects, the schema of special
movements, senso-motoric causality etc.
• The semiotic level: prepares and reaches mental
representations of the environment in which the
child is acting
• The level of formal operations: implication,
inversion, negation or reciprocity
At the level of formal operations all internalized activity
is reversible.
This hypothesis of mental development has several
advantages compared to concept-based theories of
knowledge. First of all, it explains the incorrect use of
concepts by children who have reached the semiotic
level but have not reached the level of formal operations.
Several examples for these observations are discussed in
[4].
Essentially, however, it denies the pejorative
presumption that deaf people are excluded from higher
knowledge because they do not know abstract concepts.
Mapping knowledge to internalized acts instead of
communication technology in its newest state of the art
makes it independent from its contingencies.

3. Cognitive Metaphors
Cognitive metaphors are a special subject in the
domain of cognitive linguistics. Many ideas concerning
this subject are based on the work of George Lakoff and
Mark Johnson [5]. The theory of cognitive metaphors
states that, to a large extent, conceptual systems and
everyday actions and speech derive their content from
metaphors. Thus for deaf people it would be reasonable
to visualize the metaphoric content of concepts
concerning higher and abstract knowledge.
To deepen this approach it is necessary to discuss
below some statements and results derived from the
research into the theory of cognitive metaphors. It states
that cognitive metaphoric projection is preliminary and
superior to conceptual projection. In the process of
understanding speech the cognitive dimension of
information transfer precedes the linguistic level. The
ability to recognize and think in metaphors is
fundamental and appears even before language
development begins in the early childhood. [6]
This result coincides with Piaget’s statement, that
cognitive processes are independent of the use of symbol
sets. A symbol is a hint to cognitive processes but does
not enable any knowledge building process nor is it a
condition for the same.
Metaphors transfer content of the original to the
target. This process is successful if afterwards the
understanding of the target increases and leads to a
higher competence concerning the handling of the target.
The word “theory” can provide an example. “Theory”
can be viewed like a building. It is a construction which
is not material but immaterial. Therefore the metaphor
“Theory – Building” is useful to abstract from the virtual
aspect of theories. By suppressing this aspect a theory
becomes handy for the mind.
If otherwise the immaterial aspect of “Theory” gets
the focus of the attention then “Cloud” is a good
metaphor. These two metaphors do not define “Theory”
in an exact way but generate true expressions of this
subject.
In [2] we report the three ways to define semantic:
• The intensional approach traces the sense of a
word back to other words. A definition works
this way.
• The extensional approach tries to refer to real
objects as content for a word. This will not
work in this case.
• The third approach relies on the use of concepts
and the role of the speaker. If the concept
“Theory” is described by the metaphor
“Building” then the use of this abstract word is
mapped to the use of the word “Building”.
Therefore a metaphor is an invitation to use the
semantics of a symbol like another symbol
which is better known.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 2: Level of Knowledge
A metaphor is a “use like” invitation. This makes it
fundamental for cognitive processes, because – regarding
to Piaget – cognition is mental acting.

reading is difficult for someone who is not familiar with
the syntax of speech.

4.2. The Answer

4. Visualization
4.1. The Origin of the Research
Two years ago my reports about my research start
with a question mark symbolized in Figure 2. The
illustration depicts three levels of knowledge:
• Everyday knowledge which is gossiped
• Common-sense knowledge which can be read in
newspapers or which is taught in public schools
but not necessarily in a scientific context
• Problem solving knowledge which is developed
to expand our skills to handle human
conditioned environment
Between these three levels of knowledge there exists
a circular flow combining each level with the others.
This circular flow can be participated in and affected by
speech.
Deaf persons are excluded from this circular flow.
They cannot hear it and they cannot read about it because

A “use like” invitation is valuable for deaf persons,
because the origin of the metaphoric transfer can be
visualized.
In Figure 3 a second circular flow is inserted
regarding deaf people.
• The everyday knowledge is signed. It is not a
problem for deaf people to get it
• Within the community of deaf people there are
many opportunities to talk about common-sense
knowledge. But deaf people are somewhat
excluded from newspaper and other cultural
media, because these media use a lot of
metaphors in their language to express facts in a
short but apposite way. Science journalism, in
particular, and related resources use many
metaphors to explain higher theoretical themes.
In the domain of astronomy a black hole could
be referred to as “Moloch”. What is a
“Moloch”? It is an all ravening graven image.
This is a metaphor which could be unfamiliar to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3: Level of Metaphors

deaf people but which can be visualized (Figure
4).
• The problem solving knowledge is very
important especially for deaf people in their
profession. The discussion of the term “Theory”
above shows that even special languages
contain many cognitive metaphors. Special
languages are created for the main purpose of
precise intensional definitions or models. This
precision is a precondition for domain specific
communication, but not for understanding.
The circular flow concerning deaf people is not as
productive as the corresponding normal circular flow.
This means that terms of special languages become
public in a relatively short time, i.e. the term “relativity”.
Most terms in special languages are taken from Latin or
Greek. They only designate theoretical content which is
in its origin a cognitive metaphor. In the normal circular
flow the cognitive metaphor corresponding to the special
term is absorbed in a short time. For deaf people this
process takes another form. They are able to create new
signs instead of designating a cognitive metaphor by
former languages. These new signs are in most cases

directly derived from cognitive metaphors which
afterwards become specialized sign languages. But these
specialized sign languages are not common to all deaf
people – and so there is a lack of intermediation in a
culture of knowledge even affecting deaf people.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 4: Moloch

5. Mapping a “Use Like Invitation”
The “use like invitation” of metaphors is not a
precise but a fuzzy modeling of content. That is why the
metaphor is not used consciously in scientific domains.
Nevertheless many concepts have metaphoric allusions
as we saw above in the case of “theory” or “black hole”.
There are several aspects under which the
intensional content of concepts can be mapped to a
metaphor. Firstly, there is the circumstance that models
and metaphors are based on different philosophical
directions. The model is used to get clear distinctions
between true and false statements whereas the metaphor
is to do with opening up the mind [7], (Figure5). It is
beyond the scope of this study to discuss these
philosophical directions in detail but it should be born in
mind, that modern theories of cognition distrust the
facility of the empirical proceeding. A model is well
suited to discuss some aspects of reality but it works well
only because it suppresses the intrinsic ambiguousness of
reality.

learning as a whole, several metaphors are excogitated
based on the most evaluated information technology of
the age, i.e. a wax board or a chart room or a computer.
Even corresponding to the development of the computer
there is a development of metaphors of learning. First
learning is a bitwise saving of input. After the coming up
of neuronal networks learning is a calibration of triggers.
These three aspects of mapping intensional concepts
to metaphors are summarized in Figure 6.

Figure 6: Three Dimensions of Metaphors

Figure 5: Interrelations for Metaphors and
Models
The first aspect to be mentioned in the process of
mapping intensional content to metaphors is therefore the
lost of unambiguousness.
The second aspect is the choice of perspective under
which the concept is mapped. This is already denoted
above. If we want to underline the constructive aspect of
the theory we would take a building as metaphor. If we
want to center the immateriality of theories we use a
cloud.
The third aspect is the choice of the dominant media.
An example for this aspect can be obtained among the
theories of learning. Since no one knows the way of

The first thing to be done in this constellation is to
extend the media to the human skills establishing them in
the background. Corresponding to the example given
above we should use informal activities instead of
artifacts. To become concrete the concept theory
describes a piece of knowledge which should be mapped
to the human activity of construction instead of the
newest technological artifact. At this point the
connection to Piaget can be drawn. As it is explicated in
[3] this step yields independency from the temporary
given dominant medium. Moreover deaf people are not
familiar with some media and this step yields
independency from them. As such, the cognitive
processes are no longer diminished.
The perspective of a metaphor is its cognitive
conception. Cognition is part of meaning and therefore
part of semantics which can be assigned by a notation of
their use.
Ambiguousness arises from the possibility of
switching between several aspects of the metaphor. As a
cognitive phenomenon, ambiguousness can be found in
all cognitive processes because reality itself is
ambiguous. It is the human mental activity which
clarifies the impressions given by the environment
(Figure 7).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 7: Embedding Metaphors

Regarding these three dimensions of metaphors a
knowledge editor has been built which can be used to
create and maintain metaphorical transmissions of
knowledge in its own foundations (figure 8).
The editor has three parts as usual:
• The area of functionality which allows editing
of several aspects of a metaphor
• An area for symbol libraries which can load
according to the needs of the user. If the user
needs signs instead of words the corresponding
library should be loaded. Other user might use
Aladin or Minspeak as symbol libraries. Aladin
or Minspeak are symbol sets developed for non
speaking humans. It is important to be
independent from generalizations concerning
the use of symbol sets. One should always keep
in mind that specialized symbol sets like speech
do not represent the needs of everybody.
• The area of visualization: This area is the origin
for many more ideas and functionality. All
elements of the area of visualization can be
interactive to allow an expedition through all
aspects of the metaphor.
Two elements of this editor can be used to insert much
more information behind it: the area for symbol libraries
and the area of visualization.

Figure 8: Knowledge Editor

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 9: Search Engine

Editing knowledge with this tool means embedding
symbols in their metaphorical context. For clarification
the example “theory” mentioned above can be taken.
According to the Formal Concept Analysis the concept
“theory” has an intrinsic kernel. The black point in the
middle of the visualization area is the interactive
entrance for editing this kernel. To do this another tool
like editors for the Formal Concept Analysis [8] or
CMAP [9] pops up and enables the corresponding
entries. The Knowledge Editor maintains a link to this
entry. The metaphoric dimensions for a concept like
“theory” i.e. “building” or “cloud” can be edit in further
dialog windows which pop up clicking in the
corresponding areas of the editor.
So this knowledge editor can be used as metaphoric
completion to given concept-based editors of ontologies
or thesauries. In a close sense it is a metaphor editor. But
because of the interrelations and figural aspects of
metaphors it is a knowledge editor with the same rights
as concept based ontology editors claim it. According to
the theories of cognitive linguistics it is yet more
fundamental than concept based editors.
The area for symbol libraries can hide complex
interrelations between separate symbols which may
express a great deal of semantic and syntactic
information about the source of the metaphoric
expression. Usually one would take labeled icons as a

source for a metaphor. If we have a look on our desktop
we can recognize many such elements. But in real
metaphorical environments this is unsatisfying.
A deaf person would prefer a subset of the sign
language as a source for metaphoric material. Sign
language is a language in its own right with complete
semantic and syntactic functionality. This ought to give
an expression of the complexity behind the source of
metaphoric expressions. It cannot be solved by labeled
icons.
On the other side the target of the metaphoric
expression can contain several distinct levels. Moreover
all of the three dimensions of metaphors hide links to
material which influences the expressivity of a metaphor.
These can be visual impressions, mappings of semantic,
formal expressions for cognitive acts based on Piaget’s
theory of cognition, and many more.
Each of the three dimensions of the metaphor can be
used to explore and search for impulses of creativity to
get the meaning of cognitive aspects of abstract concepts.
As an example of such an application one might think
about a search engine based on this technique. An initial
sketch of such a search engine is shown in Figure 9.
The upper bar of the search engine shows a subset of
Minspeak symbols. With drag and drop these symbols
can be deposited on the grey bar. To determine the aspect
of the metaphor being searched for, the deposited

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

symbols should be arranged in the three dimension
metaphor. Pressing the cogwheels yields a search result.

Conclusions
Putting together cognitive linguistics, genetic
epistemology and information visualization a new view
on metaphors is obtained. Metaphors are no longer visual
substitutions for data cluster enabling a quick view on
their interconnections. Instead they are the background
for the semantic of symbol systems. It makes no sense to
change the known symbol system auditable speech to
sign language on a pure semiotic level as many
translations do it. The semantic of symbols change by
such a transformation. So even the underlying semantic
has to be transformed and this is done by including
metaphoric views.
Piaget’s theory maps the semantic of symbol
systems to mental models. This is different to the usual
way of getting semantic as mapping from reality to
concepts. Based on his theory we get another
understanding of the relation of speech to reality. Speech
is no longer equivalent to thinking. Metaphors are no
longer equivalent to confusing conceptions. With Piaget
we can state that metaphors represent a type of prelingual
thinking.
On the one hand the knowledge given by prelingual
thinking is important for understanding the relation
between data and their visualization. On the other hand
the evaluation of metaphors outreaches technologies of
information visualization for other domains like
humanities. So this article is not only valuable

concerning deaf people. Deaf people are a special case of
the exchangeability of symbol sets. But at long sight the
ideas developed in this article and their
conceptualizations as graphical user interfaces are the
entrance of information visualization in humanities.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Dirk Burmeister. Requirements of Deaf User of
Information Visualization - An Interdisciplinary
Approach. In Proceedings Seventh International
Conference on Information Visualization IV 2003. IEEE,
433-438. July 2003
Dirk Burmeister, Stephan Grimm, Jörg Haist. A
Semantic Approach for User Depending Information
Visualization. In Proceedings Eighth International
Conference on Information Visualization IV 2004. IEEE,
302-307. July 2004
Hans G. Furth. Thinking without language. London, New
York. 1966.
Hans G. Furth. Deafness and learning. A psychological
approach. Belmont. 1973.
Mark Johnson, George Lakoff: Metaphor and
Communication. Trier. 1982 (L.A.U.T. - Paper)
David S. Palermo. The Transfer Dilemma: From CrossModal Perception to Metaphor. In: Topping, Ed.:
Donald, Crowell, Kobayashi. 349-356. 1989
Anil K. Jain. Medien der Anschauung: Theorie und
Praxis der Metapher. München. 2002
B. Ganter, R. Wille. Formal Concept Analysis:
Mathematical Foundations Berlin - Heidelberg - New
York, 1999.
http://cmap.ihmc.us

