Framework for Spatial Visual Design of Abstract Information.
Malgorzata Bugajska
University of Zurich, Department of Informatics, Switzerland
bugajska@ifi.unizh.ch
Abstract
Spatially-organized information can be accessed
and operated on rapidly and effortlessly, especially
when a spatial arrangement reveals the conceptual
organization of information. Therefore, spatial
perception plays an important role for cognitive
processing when interacting with abstract information.
The process of spatial information visualization is
shaped by various factors including interactive,
perceptual, navigational as well as organizational and
metaphorical aspects and as such requires an
interdisciplinary approach. Consequently, bringing the
knowledge from different disciplines requires the
development of a framework which can host and
classify the interdisciplinary features important in
designing effective spatial visualizations. In this paper
we present a framework which manifests a holistic
approach in designing spatial visualization of abstract
information.
Keywords: spatial
information visualization

visualization,

framework,

1. Introduction
Spatial perception plays an important role for cognitive
processing when interacting with abstract information,
since spatially organized information can be accessed
and operated on rapidly and effortlessly, especially
when a spatial arrangement reveals the conceptual
organization of information. Therefore, an important
benefit that improves quality of processing abstract
data is the incorporation and use of spatial schemas
while designing visual representation. It becomes even
more crucial today when, due to the popularity of
handheld devices, the size of the display is constantly
decreasing whilst the amount of information which is
expected to be displayed on the digital device is
increasing.
In this paper we describe a framework which
embraces features important for spatial interactive
design of abstract information. This framework has
already been successfully used to organize spatial
design guidelines for information visualization [see 6].

2. Importance of spatial
information visualization

design

for

Space is a crucial dimension of our everyday life. In
space, we perceive and recognize objects and relations
between them. In space, we manipulate these objects
and we can move around to observe them. Depicting
space has been used for a long time to convey concrete
ideas. However, only recently it is being used to
convey abstract ideas [38]. Tversky [38] notices that
spatial schemas, by linking together elements, provide
an organization which improves memory and can
sometimes be a more powerful organizer of memory
than time. Additionally, spatial manipulation is a
largely subconscious activity that imposes very little
cognitive load, hence offering very powerful
functionality [21].
Abstract data is lacking inherent spatial mappings,
and additionally, the relationship between the data
value and the data view is multi-faceted [9, 10] As a
result, it is challenging to create a spatial set up for this
type of data since it requires applying interactively
different views of the same data set or applying an
operation of data spatial-filtering to compare different
data sets. Consequently, effective spatial representation
of data requires understanding the phenomena
governing the perception of space.

3

Holistic approach to spatial visual
information design

Spatial visualization depends on many aspects
relating to data attributes and organization, design
method, and available display technology. There is a
need for organizing components required for guidance
in spatial, interactive visualization and for investigating
relations between them. The nature of such relations
depends on a visualization goal envisioned by the
designer and the cognitive tasks to be fulfilled by the
user. Additionally, it is important to be aware of
various levels that are involved in shaping the quality
of spatial information visualization output. Some of
these levels include perceptual, interaction and

1
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

navigation levels as well as organizational or
metaphoric levels. Until now, these aspects were
investigated separately by various researches [7, 19,
26, 28, 29, 35, 36, 37]. Many frameworks focusing on
different portions of design space have been proposed
[3, 8, 9, 11, 22, 25, 27, 33, 39]. Many classifications
have been created to help designers develop their
works [10, 20, 23, 29, 36, 43]. Additionally, principles
and rules for different aspects of information
visualization design have been developed [2, 3, 4, 8,
17, 35]. Understanding the spatial visualization process
in the digital domain requires an awareness of the
holistic nature of the act of space perception.
Furthermore, the process of reusing and sharing design
expertise should be structured and open to facilitate
sharing competencies among different design domains.
Therefore, we propose a framework which manifests a
holistic approach to designing spatial visualizations of
abstract information. Additionally, an important part of
the framework that classifies spatial visual cues is
based on analysis of spatial visual properties for digital
domain (see [6] for more details and examples).

4

Framework for spatial visualization
design and its elements

The framework presented here integrates various
aspects of spatial visualization. It encompasses
elements of visualization pipeline as described in [12]
by incorporating aspects of mapping data to geometry,
assigning visual properties to geometry and integrating
the user’s visualization tasks together with the goals of
the visualization designer. In the graphical
representation of the framework (Appendix 1) we mark
the contributions of various researchers with “patches”.
Properties and tree-structures of properties without a
patch represent our contribution to the framework. We
take a top-down approach to describe the main
elements of the framework.
During the process of assigning properties to
visualization objects we distinguish five elements,
which define our “Digital Visualization Space”. Three
elements create the core of our classification:
• Object – a graphic element or geometry which
is used to represent concepts in our world
• Context – a graphic space which is used to
represent relations between elements [38]
• Order – definition of a choice of spatial
arrangement of objects in the graphic space

Figure 1. Five main groups of spatial visualization
factors build framework for the spatial visualization
of abstract information: User Task Group, Designer
Goals Group, Context Group, Order Group, and
Object Group. Additionally, relationships between
Context, Order, and Object groups are visualized as
lines connecting spatial design factors on different
levels.

Designer Goals and User Tasks are two further
classification elements which have an important
influence on spatial visualization effectiveness. The
influence of these components is represented as a circle
embracing the Context, Order and Object elements in
the graphical representation of this classification. For
defining The User Tasks element, we adopted the
cluster of tasks method formulated by Shneiderman
[37] who defined seven items of “Information-Seeking
Mantra” while working with the visualization
environment. Please note that the visual examples of
spatial framework elements can be found in [6].

4.1 Elements of classification model Object Group
Within Object Group, we embrace three levels
describing information visualization objects. We
describe a visualization object in terms of its role
within a visualization scene using taxonomy of
graphical Simple Marks, Compound Marks, and
Negative Space. Furthermore, we acknowledge the
classification of the visualization object as a data
object, process object and referential object. Finally,
we classify visual properties of a visualization artefact
which enriches the spatial visualization of abstract
information.

2
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Visualization object: graphical marks and negative
space
Marks first introduced by Bertin [3] refer to graphical
elements visible on a display medium; they describe
the most primitive blocks which encode information:
points, lines and areas (volume mark was added later
by [8]). Senay [35] further extended the ordering of
graphical elements by adding another group of marks
called compound marks. They define Compound
Marks as “collections of simple marks that form a
single perceptual unit”. On this level of classification
we additionally introduce Negative Space which, in our
opinion, is an important element of information
visualization artefacts. Marcus [28] observes that
“empty” or negative space is needed to provide
emphasis for visual elements within the display space.
Also, Arnheim [1] points out that the relationship
between figures can only be understood if the spaces
between them are designed as carefully as the figures
themselves.
Data, Process, and Referential Objects
In this framework, we classify objects in terms of roles
they play within a visualization artefact. We
distinguish between three types of objects: Data
Object, Process Object and Referential Object. By
Data Object, we refer to any object that visually
represents different types of data. Process Object refers
to the type of object that supports interaction processes
between a human and a machine on the visual level.
We refer to Referential Object, which is based on the
concept of Referential Component [35], as any type of
visual object facilitating the proper interpretation of
spatial qualities in a graphical scene but not encoding
data items directly. The characteristics of a Data Object
are determined by the type of data being visualized.
We use the seven data types introduced by
Shneiderman [37].
The Process Object group clusters Icon, Label,
Filter, and Menu elements. We understand Icon as an
object that graphically represents an item recognizable
or learnable by the user. Icons can be used for
communicating certain functions or processes within
visualization artefacts. We refer to Label as an object
attached to another object (data or process-related)
describing this object, often using textual
representation. Filter represents types of object used
during the process of exploring visualized content for
modifying the spatial and graphical parameters of
objects (e.g. changing spatial configuration of objects
according to the new rule established by the user).
Finally, Menu refers to a wide range of processes
collected in one set of functions available for use when
working with visualization artefact. Within Object

group we classify visual properties that influence
spatial design in visualization of abstract information.
For more detailed description of these properties (with
examples) please refer to [6].
Spatial Properties
We have grouped selected properties for spatial
information visualization in nine thematically
organized groups. A group clusters properties of
visualization artefact that share the same aim in
supporting spatial visualization on a flat display or a
group collects properties bearing similar perceptual
characteristics to evoke a spatial illusion in a
visualization artefact.
1. Position Group clusters properties that assemble
techniques which visually define the position of the
objects within a spatial environment. Orientation
property points at the position of an object with respect
to the observer’s viewpoint for reading the spatial
qualities of this object. Dropped Line property
describes the use of supporting elements to clarify the
geometrical position of visualization elements within a
spatial scene. Visual Frame communicates the
influence display borders have on reading spatial
relationships within the visualization artefact. Gravity
is an example of a force that can visually influence
characteristics of the behaviour of visualization objects
within the spatial scene. Elevation describes elements
acting as reference for objects which are subjected to
gravitational force within a visualization artefact.
Finally, Distance Association illustrates the technique
of defining the distance between objects based on the
observer’s knowledge of the size of these objects.
2. The Sequence group clusters properties
supporting qualities of sequential occurrences in space
and time. Rhythm describes a time-bounding property
helpful in prolonging the user’s attention to the visual
presentation. Disintegration illustrates an art of
composing elements on different planes in a spatial
organization. Finally, Level of Detail conveys a
technique that governs the detail’s order of appearance
within a visualization artefact. Detailed descriptions of
these properties follow.
3. The Layering Group clusters properties
describing the effects of relationships between objects
positioned on the same visual surface. Occlusion
describes spatial quality derived from the superposition
of objects. Figure/Background underlines the
importance of the relationship between objects and the
background for spatial visualization. Finally, Shape
Contour illustrates spatial effects that can be achieved
by manipulating shapes of contours on the surface.
4. The Symbolic Form Group describes techniques
that control spatial organization. Pyramidal Space

3
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

represents a technique for depicting spatial
environment using rules of linear perspective. Negative
Space illustrates issues related to the impact of an
empty space on the spatial environment. Finally,
Distortion presents an approach for manipulating the
shape of objects with the goal to create a spatial scene.
5. Properties clustered in Kinetics Group explain
techniques for conveying time-based events within
computer-generated environments. Temporal Sequence
describes the process of integrating time into the
presentation of a phenomenon. Point of View describes
a technique that involves the user in a time-based
exploration of the visualization environment.
6. The Gradient Group depicts techniques that
evoke the perception of space by differentiating the
size or density of objects positioned near the observer
from those positioned far away. Relative Size Gradient
uses properties of familiar size for spatially positioning
elements. Textual Gradient illustrates the use of
elements building the texture in a spatial environment.
Finally, Relative Density describes the use of density of
objects as an aid for supporting the spatial quality of a
visualization scene.
7. Properties in Brightness Group stress the role of
light in modelling the spatial environment. Value
describes the relationship between lightness and
darkness of a colour. Shadow property explains the
importance of shadow in defining spatial environment.
Lighting and Colour properties illustrate the role of
brightness in a spatial composition. The property of
Transparency describes the effect of seeing through the
objects involved in a spatial scene.
8. The Focus Group explores the effects of
controlling the cognitive and vision-related focus of the
user when viewing a visualization artefact. Depth of
Focus describes how the illusion of depth can be
modelled using blurred and sharp objects. The Law of
Visibility presents rules that have an impact on a spatial
visualization. Atmospheric Perspective illustrates the
modelling of the spatial environment using different
types of visual gradation.
9. The User Group collects properties of User
Control and Continuity of Illusion which define the
importance of the user’s engagement in the spatial
visualization environment. User Control focuses on the
possibilities of the user for exploring the spatial
organization of the visualization artefact. Continuity of
Illusion refers to the spatial quality of a visualization
artefact.
These nine groups are further classified into clusters
which organize groups of properties according to the
role they play within a spatial visualization artefact.
Based on [3] vocabulary, we classify spatial properties
into Positional Cluster, Temporal Cluster, and Retinal
Cluster. Positional Cluster groups spatial properties,

which describe character of the visualization scene
depending on the spatial position of the object and
relationships between objects with respect to the user’s
viewpoint. Temporal Cluster describes techniques for
depicting space and time-based events within
visualization environments. Finally, Retinal Cluster
assembles properties which visually define spatial
character of the object - its shape, the effect of light on
it, or density of its texture.
Connection and Closure group are located on the level
of Positional, Temporal, and Retinal Clusters in our
classification and are described in more detail in [6].
During the design process of a computer-generated
spatial visualization of abstract information, it is
important to consider the impact of user action and
technology on the visualization artefact. Therefore, we
include in our classification additional clusters of
properties: User Defined Cluster, Input Device Cluster,
and Display Cluster.
Input Device Cluster differentiates between two types
of devices: a natural and a synthetic one. We refer to
the natural device as a device which facilitates the
transfer of instructions or information into the
computer for processing or storage, using natural
human capabilities for communicating through voice,
touch, gesture, body movement, eye contact, etc.
Synthetic devices require from the user a special type
knowledge of how to operate them (e.g. to enter
instruction into the computer with help of mouse,
keyboard, joystick, etc.)
Display Cluster includes items influencing the use of
other visual spatial properties by the choice of display
parameters such as size, resolution, and the use of
colour. The higher the resolution, the more complex
visual information can be presented on the display.
Compare, the spatial character of Linear Perspective
which can be diminished if the resolution of the display
is low, since the diagonal lines may appear jagged and
do not to convey the effect of objects disappearing in
the space behind the display.
There are three strong categories emerging from the
organization of spatial properties proposed until now.
Connection, Closure and Position clusters group
properties underlining the value of spatial relationships
between objects. Temporal and Retinal clusters
concentrate on describing the relationship between the
spatial scene and its meaning. Finally, User Defined,
Input Device, and Display clusters include properties
illustrating the impact a presentation device and user
involvement have in a spatial presentation. To
complete our classification of visual spatial properties,
we use visual semiotics. Using the approach of [16]
and [28] we distinguish three categories: Visual
Syntax, Visual Semantics and Visual Pragmatics.

4
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Visual Syntax refers to the quality of arrangements of
signs used for spatial communication. It therefore
includes Connection and Closure as well as Position
Clusters.
Visual Semantics deals with relationships between
signs and what they refer to [5]. In our classification,
spatial properties that stress relationships between the
type of technique chosen for creating a spatial scene
and the communication purpose of this visualization
scene belong to this category. We include Retinal and
Temporal clusters into this category. Finally, Visual
Pragmatics deals with the relation between the signs
and their users [5]. Similarly to [28], we extend this
definition to include technical conditions influencing
the process of communicating the signs. For the
purpose of our classification we include User Defined,
Input Device, and Display clusters into this category.
These clusters group properties that define the
limitations of visual spatial communication (e.g. size
and resolution of the display) as well as direct the
influence the user has on the spatial visualization scene
(see Appendix 1).

4.2 Elements of the framework - Context
Group
Perception is not an entirely stimulus-driven process.
Our perception is influenced to some extent by
“cognitive constrains: higher level goals, plans, and
expectations” [32]. Here we propose to include factors
that influence context of spatial visualization. We refer
to them as contextual factors. Until now, we have only
explored their visual features in spatial information
visualization environments.
Contextual factors describe components affecting
user’s spatial exploration of information on the
following levels: user, community, and environment
levels. “User level” represents the attributes a cognitive
model user is using when interacting with a particular
visualization. Cognitive attributes describe the task and
role of the user in the visualization environment.
“Community Level” - defines characteristics of a
digitally-based social space formed in a multi-user
visualization
setting.
“Environment
level”
encompasses visualization components or methods that
define and characterize an environment dedicated for
user exploration in a perceptible way. The following
elements belong to this group: ‘spatial container’,
‘orientation’, ‘interaction’, and ‘expression’. Spatial
container embraces a structure that visually identifies
the user’s exploration space. Orientation represents a
set of characteristics defining the act of navigating
through the information space. Interaction describes
the group of techniques, which allow the user to

influence visualization. Finally, expression specifies
the metaphorical concept used for spatial visualization.
User level - Mental Model
Mental Model is an important component of user
interface. After [42] we refer to Mental Model as a
basis for “understanding the system, for controlling its
action and predicting its future behaviour”. Mental
Model represents the organization of data, functions,
activities, and roles that users inhabit within computerbased environments of work or play. We distinguish
two factors of the Mental Model group which have
been already introduced by [13]: Pattern of Presence
and Pattern of Association. Pattern of Presence is a
mental map (or model) of the user’s presence within a
visualization environment. Pattern of Association is
understood as a conceptual map created by the user
representing the community formed within the user’s
spatial system which would otherwise have no visible
manifestation in the physical world.
Community level - Social Space
Social Space is a group of factors defining social
aspects of a spatial multi-user environment. This group
includes: Digital Portrait, Digital Conversation, Digital
Crowd, and Social Networks. After [13] we refer to
Digital Portrait as a representation of the user within a
spatial multi-user environment. Digital Portrait has a
visual form which demonstrates the user’s presence as
a member of social space (through the actions he
provokes and takes) within the environment. As
already noted by [14], Digital Portrait depicts “a
culture as well as an individual which tells far more
about its subject than just what he or she looked like”.
Digital Conversation in newsgroups, chatrooms, wikis
and mailing list forms is referred to by [14] as the
foundation of Social Space in online environments.
Digital Conversation describes space and timedependent conversation taking place between users of
an online environment (synchronous and asynchronous
conversations). Digital Crowd, an expression coined
by [30] describes visualization of users simultaneously
visiting spatially-defined environments of online
documents or websites. Minar [30] lists three important
requirements for visualizing a digital crowd: a map of
the digital environment (e.g. documents visited by
users) for providing a spatial structure for a digital
crowd, a representation of individual users to show
visitors of the site, and an animated demonstration of
crowd dynamics. Crowd dynamics describe methods
for distinguishing between popular and less popular
groups of websites by mapping users accessing or
leaving these websites. Finally, Social Networks
(netvis.org) are patterns of relations or connections

5
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

among individuals. A spatial visualization of such
networks allows for conducting analysis of network
behaviour.
Environment level
Spatial Container encloses factors which describe
qualities of constructs defining visualization scene.
Background refers to the visual character of the
background against which all elements of the
visualization are placed. Using a polychrome or
monochrome background for the visualization artefact
influences the way in which the user perceives the rest
of the visualization scene. Additionally, since
Background is an element which only rarely changes
its visual character, it can be classified as the type of
visual experience that responds to the phenomenon of
visual adaptation [32]. The Spatial Setting group
describes the setup of the Spatial Container used in
visualization artefacts. By using the Inner Space of the
container, the background image is not influencing the
visual character of the spatial composition. By using
the Outer Space of the Spatial Container as a
component-creating scene for the visualization, the
Background starts to play an important role as an
element of the spatial composition.
Orientation relates to the set of factors influencing a
user’s ability to explore spatial visualization. We
defined two groups of factors: View Point and
Navigation. View Point clusters in.world and out.world
which describe the manner in which the spatial
information of the visualization environment is
presented. An, element called in.world describes types
of spaces resulting from the user’s activity directly
within a particular multi-user environment. Out.world
refers to the type of space inhabited by the
representation of the users’ group activity within the
environment as a community [40]. Navigation factors
describe user movements between pieces of
information. We distinguish three aspects of navigation
after [15]: Spatial, Semantic and Social Navigation.
Spatial Navigation refers to the user movement from
one item to another within a computer-generated
structure based on spatial relationships (e.g. right, left,
above, outside). In Semantic Navigation the user
movement through the environment is performed
according to semantic relationships between items (e.g.
bigger, faster, similar, and alike). Social Navigation
plays an important role in systems supporting multiuser collaborative activity. It refers to the user
movement from one item to another which is provoked
by the activity of other users. Examples of Social
Navigation include moving “towards” other users or
starting an activity because other users are performing
it.

For the Interaction cluster, we adopt the taxonomy of
interaction styles developed by [36]. Shneiderman
distinguishes Menu Selection, Form Fill-in, Command
Language, Natural Language, and Direct Manipulation
as interaction styles.
Finally, Metaphor in the computer environment helps
to achieve a mapping between the digital environment
and a reference system known to the user from the
physical world [31]. It is one of many communication
techniques, which Marcus [29] is often referred to as a
“rhetoric”. However, since Metaphor balances between
“expectation and surprise” it can often provoke
confusion in the user. Within the Metaphor group,
“Association of Organization” refers to the similarity
of structure, objects or attributes (e.g. metaphor of a
tree with roots, branches, leaves). “Association of
Operation” refers to the similarity of processes or
actions (e.g. selecting objects by touching them,
grabbing items, or sliding items).

4.3 Elements of the framework - Order
Group
The Order Group classifies design principles we found
important in creating spatial environments for
visualizing abstract information. To organize this
group of properties, we adopt the classification set of
‘visible language’ principles introduced by Marcus
[29]. He distinguished three clusters (Organize,
Economize, and Communicate) to group principles
which provide guidance for designing user interfaces.
We use this type of grouping to propose clusters of
principles helping to achieve effective spatial
visualizations. In our framework we use the term
Organization to describe groups of principles which
provide users with consistent and clear spatial
structures. Economy groups concepts maximizing the
effectiveness of spatial, visual expression using
minimum input. Finally, Communication represents
principles which help to match a spatial presentation
with the perceptive capabilities of the user.
Organization
For the spatial visualization of abstract information, we
find it important to include gestalt principles of
perceptual grouping within the Organization group.
These principles form a basis for techniques used for
arranging objects in spatial configurations. We
distinguish seven items within this group: Continuity,
Proximity, Closure, Similarity, Common Region,
Synchrony, Connectedness and Mathematical Structure
of design. For more detailed discussion of gestalt
principles see [32, 41]. The Mathematical Structure of
Design based on a nested hierarchy of symmetries (e.g.

6
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

a square is described as the following nested hierarchy
of symmetries: Point.Translation.90°Rotations) [24].
Economy
We break down the group of Economy into four major
subtopics:
Attention
Management,
Praegnanz,
Common
Fate,
and
Consistency.
Attention
Management [2] supports the use of multiple views in
information visualization. Attention Management
refers to techniques such as animation, movement,
sound etc. used in information visualization to guide
user attention and ensure that “user attention is in the
right place at the right time”. This principle saves time
used for exploring a spatial visualization. Praegnanz is
one of the gestalt principles of organization which
refers to subjective feelings of simplicity, order, and
regularity that arise when a certain object is observed.
The work of [18] demonstrated that ‘good’ figures can
be encoded and stored more efficiently than ‘bad’ ones
(the shape of a figure can be coded in fewer bits of
information). The Principle of Common Fate also
belongs to the gestalt principles of organization and
describes the tendency of grouping together units
(objects) that move with the same velocity (direction
and speed). This principle is particularly effective in
conveying the spatial organization of a large amount of
particles within a visualization artefact. In proposed
framework we assign the principle of Consistency to
promote the same visual convention and rules to all
objects belonging to the Economy cluster. Following
conventions and rules as well as avoiding causal
differences (without a strong motivating reason) allows
the user to work faster and more effectively with
information within a spatial environment [42].
Additionally Distinctiveness, [42] promotes the use of
visual techniques to direct the focus of the user to
important objects or parts of the scene.
Communication
The Communication group comprises the following
factors: Symbolism, Emphasis, Graceful Transition,
and Legibility. Symbolism refers to the specific
principles of design objects where graphical symbols
are used for communicating the message. Designing
graphical symbols (or symbolic spaces) requires
adopting the essence of the message and translating it
into the visual object or the spatial configuration.
Emphasis refers to the visual process of accentuating
important messages to the user. This factor is related to
the property of Attention Management in the Economy
group, since emphasis helps to direct user attention to
an important event or scene within a visualization
artefact. Graceful Transition [42] refers to the quality
of representing changes over time. Changes within the

visual environment, if presented to the user in an
abrupt manner and with lack of continuity, may be
disorienting and fail in communicating the message.
The Legibility factor refers to the visual quality of
textual elements. To be able to communicate
effectively, legibility of the textual elements has to be
secured. This can be achieved by using typographic
design chosen with regard to the visual scene in which
these objects are placed, the technical possibilities of
the display (size, resolution, colour), and the software
used for generating the text on the display (especially
in 3D environment).

4.4 Elements of the framework - Designer
Goals Group
We have chosen the Vitruvian Triad of Firmitas,
Utilitas, and Venustas as a classification instrument for
defining the goals of a designer of spatial information
visualization artefacts. As already discussed by Schmitt
[34], we believe that creating environments for abstract
information presented and shared through online
networks can fulfil the criteria of designing physical
architecture.
Firmitas - Firmness and Structural stability
In this classification we define the firmness or the
structural stability of a visualization artefact as an
essential constituent of a spatial scene or formation of
objects. We distinguish three types of structure
representation: Exterior, Interior, and Compound.
Exterior structure refers to the type of representation
when the focus is put on an external part of the scene
or arrangements of objects. By using this type of
representation, not all characteristics of the structure
are revealed to the user. Interior structure refers to the
representation of the structure when the focus is on its
interior characteristics. In this case, the user does not
obtain an immediate overview of the structure as a
whole. Compound structure compromises the interior
and exterior representation of the visual structure of the
scene by combining them in one arrangement
demonstrating both the structural characteristics of the
whole scene and its spatial details.
Utilitas – Utility
We define Utility as a logical arrangement of spaces
planned for the convenience and comfort of users. The
logic of Utility can be expressed using various modes
of spatial visual appearance. We distinguish three types
of arranging objects or spatial scenes: elementary,
symbolic, and relational. An elementary type of
arrangement is characterized by objects or scenes
embraced into a simple spatial arrangement with an

7
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

easily recognizable pattern of interrelationships. The
symbolic type of arrangement focuses on objects or
spatial scenes by assigning to them additional meaning
(e.g. associative or conventional in nature) conveying
the character of the arrangement. Finally, relational
arrangement focuses on the character and arrangement
of connectors between objects or spatial scenes to
demonstrate the nature of the spatial relationships
between objects or scenes.
Venustas – Appearance and Beauty
We refer to Appearance as to the group of aesthetic
features defining the visual character of the object or
scene. Appearance groups three types of properties
important for spatial visualization: Entertainment,
Engagement, and Ambience. The importance for
entertaining the user while he is visually exploring
information has been already pointed out by [37], who
stresses the importance of information exploration as a
joyful experience. We refer to Entertainment as a
spatial definition of a scene or group of objects, which
users watch with pleasure, and which helps to engage
users into the discovery process. Engagement refers to
methods supporting the user in focusing on the spatial
exploration of information while working within
visualization artefacts. Design aspects of visual, spatial
engagement enable the user to work faster and more
effectively with the visualization objects. Finally, by
Ambience we understand a particular visual ‘climate’
created for the purpose of visually influencing the
user’s exploration of visualization artefacts. Ambience
can operate on the “periphery of human perception”
and requires minimal attention and cognitive load.

4.5 Elements of the framework - User
Tasks Group
During the spatial exploration of information, users
perform a sequence of tasks allowing for the optimal
discovery of patterns, clusters, and relationships
between visualized items. The kind of tasks which
allow for effective information searching or browsing
is strongly interrelated with the spatial character of
visualization proposed by the designer. Therefore, we
find it important to include User Tasks as an element
of the framework. The importance of involving user
control in the visualization artefact design process was
already pointed out by Shneiderman. For the User Task
Group we adopt his seven tasks of “InformationSeeking Mantra” that information visualization
applications should support. Shneiderman’s cluster of
tasks includes the following: overview, zoom, filter,
detail-on-demand, relate, history, and extract. These
well-known principles have been described in [37].

4.6 Relationships between elements of the
framework
As already mentioned before, it is important for us to
demonstrate the significance of a holistic approach to
the spatial design of abstract information. Therefore,
the proposed framework stresses interrelations between
all five groups: Context, Object, Order, Designer Goals
and User Tasks. As demonstrated in Figure 1, User
Tasks embrace all groups of factors we created for
spatial visualization, meaning we believe the tasks
performed by users while exploring a visualization
influence the kind of spatial design and vice versa. The
next layer positioned closely to User Tasks in our
graphical representation of the framework is the
Designer Goals Group. We believe that the spatial
factors involved in creating spatial information
visualizations will effectively interact with each other
when the spatial visualization scene is designed
according to the principle described by the triad of
Vitruvius or the coexistence of three factors: firmitas,
utilitas, and venustas. Relationships within the ‘circle’
composed by Design Goals and User Tasks are created
between three elements: Context, Object, and Order.
We draw relationships between Object and Context
groups on two levels.
The first relationships created within the framework
on the level of primitive objects used in visualization
artefacts are Simple Marks, Compound Marks and
Negative Space (see Appendix 1). We see Negative
Space as a classification item in which visual presence
is influenced by factors present in both Object and
Context groups. Although Negative Space is defined
by the objects surrounding it, we believe that this
classification item requires that it be operated on as any
other visualization object represented by graphical
marks. The second relationship is created on the level
of the function of the object, namely Data Object,
Process Object and Referential Object. Referential
Object serves as a visual reference within a
visualization artefact. It is an important element in
creating the context for the whole visualization artefact
and its presence is determined by properties applicable
to any other visualization object.
We draw relationships between Object and Order
groups on the level of primitive objects (Negative
Space, Simple and Compound Marks) as well as on the
level of the process of Data Mapping. The design
principles influence graphical marks to secure optimal
visual communication between the designer and the
user of visualization artefacts. Consequently, mapping
data to geometry should reflect the design principles
foreseen for any particular visualization artefact.
Additionally, we draw relationships between the

8
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Context, Object, and Order groups on the level of
Spatial Visual Properties, Design Principles and
Contextual Factors of Design Space. At the same time,
we see Spatial Visual Properties as influencing the
visual quality of contextual factors. On the other hand,
contextual factors can strengthen or weaken the
influence of visual properties on the effectiveness of a
visualization artefact. The design principles used in
spatial visualization influence the choice of spatial
properties to secure the most effective visual
communication. For the same reason, design principles
should also control the use of contextual factors in
visualization artefacts.

5

Qualities and
framework

limitation

of

the

For a designer who is literate in visual spatial creation,
a holistic approach to the spatial design embedded in
the framework is attractive. This approach, already
used in architecture and product design, allows for
bringing together important properties which are
shaping the quality of spatial information visualization.
By using a spatial design framework designed this
way, the designer is aware that the overall spatial
quality of the visualization artefact can be reviewed
along dimensions of structure, function and visual
appearance and also by the designer’s goal and the
definition of the user’s task. Furthermore, a designer
can simultaneously consider his visualization product
in terms of factors shaping the quality of the
visualization object (in Object Group), contextual
factors shaping design space (in Context Group) and
the fulfilment of visualization design principles (in
Order Group). For designers not familiar with aspects
of spatial design, an important quality of the proposed
framework is the possibility to investigate properties
and factors important for spatial design, taking the
bottom-up as well as top-down approach. Another
significant characteristic of the framework is its
topological openness, which allows for adding new
design taxonomies or extending the existing ones at the
top as well as at the bottom level of the proposed
classification. In addition, this framework already
serves as a map for the spatial design guidelines
presented already elsewhere [6] and guidelines which
may be developed by others. Finally, it reveals design
areas where no guidelines have been formulated up to
now.
Apart from the qualities described above, it has to
be said that the framework we propose possesses
certain limitations. This framework is created only for
the visual part of spatial design. We do not focus on
audio or tactile interaction with visualization. With this

proposed framework, we captured the process of
spatial visualization design on a high level, therefore
the granulation of the detail may not necessary satisfy
all designers using this framework to shape their
visualizations. However, we believe that the structural
openness of this framework allows for its further
development on an interdisciplinary, collaborative
basis or even to adaptation, which can be triggered by
further improvements of display technology or
extending the exploration of spatial information
visualization.
A major challenge is to follow the path of
classifying spatial properties by moving towards the
development of an automated approach in spatial
visualization of abstract information. We hope that our
contribution can serve as an initial map in the
development of a such system.

Conclusion
We have addressed the importance of spatial design for
visualization of abstract information. Spatial design is
a challenging issue in information visualization. It
requires the sharing of expertise among visual design
oriented disciplines, computer science as well as social
fields of study. We have stressed the significance of
the framework which incorporates properties from
diverse present lines of research which influence
spatial visualization. We have proposed a holistic
approach in designing a framework which builds an
extendable base for an infrastructure which is a step
towards augmenting the quality of spatial information
design.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

Arnheim, R: 1984, Art and Visual Perception. A
Psychology of the Creative Eye. Berkeley, University
of California Press.
Baldonado, M. O., Woodruff, A., Kuchinsky, A: 2000,
Guidelines for Using Multiple views in Information
Visualization. Advance Visual Interfaces, Palermo,
Italy.
Bertin, J: 1974, Graphische Semiologie. Diagrame,
Netze, Karten. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter.
Bowman, WJ: 1968, Graphic Communication. New
York, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Britannica 2002. The Encyclopaedia Britannica. 2002.
Bugajska, M: 2003, Spatial Visualization of abstract
Information, PhD Thesis, ETH Zurich
Card, SK, Mackinlay, JD: 1997. The structure of the
Information Visualization Design Space. IEEE,
Symposium on Information Visualization, Phoenix.
Card, SK, Mackinlay, JD, Shneiderman, B, Ed: 1999,
Readings in Information Visualization. Using Vision to
Think. San Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann.

9
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

Chi, E H: 1999, A Framework for Information
Visualization Spreadsheets, University of Minnesota.
Chi, E. H: 2002, A Framework for Visualizing
Information. Human-Computer Interaction Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Netherlands: 176
Chuah, MC, Roth, SF: 1996, On the Semantics of
Interactive Visualizations. IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, Los Alamitos, California,
IEEE Computer Society Press.
Domik, G: 2000, Concepts and Models of the
Visualization Process, 2002.
Donath, J: 1995, Visual Who: Animating the affinities
and activities of an electronic community. ACM
Multimedia 95, San Francisco, ACM.
Donath, J: 1999, Social Visualization, Donath, Judith.
2002.
Dourish, P, Chalmers, M.: 1994, Running Out of
Space: Models of Information Navigation. BCS HCI,
Glasgow, UK.
Eco, U: 1976, A Theory of Semiotics. London, Indiana
University Press.
Heeter, C: 2000, Journal of Interactive Advertising,
Hochberg, J., McAlister E. 1953. "A quantitative
approach to figural "goodness"”. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 46: 361-364.
Kamada, T, Kawai, S: 1991, "A general Framework
for Visualizing Abstract Objects and Relations." ACM
Transactions on Graphics 101: 1-39.
Keller, P, Keller M: 1993, Visual Cues. Practical Data
Visualization. Los Alamitos, IEEE Computer Society
Press.
Kuhn, W, Blumenthal, B: 1996, Spatialization: Spatial
Metaphors for User Interfaces. CHI.
Kwok-Chu Ng, G: 2000, Interactive Visualization
techniques for Ontology Development. Department of
Computer Science. Manchester, University of
Manchester
Leung, Y. K., Apperley MD: 1994, ACM Transactions
on CHI, 126-160.
Leyton, M: 2001, "Group Theory and Architecture 2:
Why Symmetry/Asymmetry?" Nexus Network Journal
34.
Lindley, CA: 2000, Workshop on Computational
Semiotics for New Media University of Surrey UK.
Lohse, G, Biolsi, K, Walker, N, Luerer, H: 1994, "A
Classification
of
Visual
Representation."
Communication of ACM 3712: 36-49.
Mackinlay, JD: 1986, Automating the Design of
Graphical Presentations of Relational Information,
ACM Transactions on Graphics.
Marcus, A: 1980, Computer-assisted Chart Making
from the Graphic Designer's Perspective. SIGGRAPH,
San Francisco, ACM.
Marcus, A: 1995, Principles of Effective Visual
Communication for Graphical user Interface Design.
Readings in Human-Computer Interaction. R. M.
Baecker et al, San Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers: 425-435.

[30] Minar, N, Donath, J: 1999, Visualizing the Crowds at a
Web Site. CHI, Pittsburgh, USA, ACM.
[31] Nielsen, J: 1994, Usability Engineering. Boston,
Academic Press, Inc., Harcourt Brace
[32] Palmer, SE: 1992, "Common region: A new Principle
of perceptual grouping." Cognitive Psychology 243:
436-447.
[33] Robertson, PK: 1990, "A Methodology for Scientific
Data Visualization: Choosing Representation Based on
a Natural Scene Paradigm." IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications 113: 56-68.
[34] Schmitt, G: 1999, Information Architecture. Basel,
Birkhäuser - Publishers for Architecture.
[35] Senay, H, Ignatius, E: 1994, "A Knowledge Based
System for Visualization Design." IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications November: 36-47.
[36] Shneiderman, B: 1995, A Taxonomy and Rule base for
the Selection of Interaction Styles. Readings in
Human- Computer Interaction. Towards the Year
2000. Baecker RM, et al, San Francisco, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers: 57-69.
[37] Shneiderman, B: 1996, The eyes have it: A task by
data-type taxonomy for information visualization.
Visual Languages. Boulder, CO, Sept. 3-6, IEEE
Computer Science Press.
[38] Tversky, B: 2001, Spatial Schemas in Depictions.
Spatial Schemas and Abstract Thought. M. Gattis.
Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.
[39] Tweedie, L. A. (1997). Characterizing Interactive
Externalizations. CHI, ACM.
[40] Wenz, F, Gramazio, F: 1996, Archaeology of the
Future City: TRACE. Architektur mit dem Computer.
G. Schmitt. Wiesbaden, Vieweg Verlag.
[41] Wertheimer, M. (1923). "Laws of Organization in
Perceptual Forms." Psychologische Forschung 4: 301350.
[42] Wickens, CD: 1992, Engineering Psychology and
Human Performance. New York, Harper Collins.
[43] Zhang, J: 1996, "A Representational Analysis of
Relational Information Displays." International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies 451: 59-74.

10
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

overview

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE
[42]

e

relate

elevation

i
or

t
ta
en

c

negative space

pyramidal space
distortion

ti
ul
m ane
pl

negative space

sp

za
tio
n

data mapping

point of view

relative size

temporal
sequencing

[4]

color

transparency

lighting

shadow

value

brightness

retinal

appearance

ambience

relative density

Appendix 1. Framework for spatial visualization of abstract information.
Grey patches mark the contributions of various researches (see list of references).
Elements without patches mark the contribution of the author.
extract

venustas

accretion/deletion
of texture

texture gradient

gradient

kinetics

temporal

semantics

visual semiotics

focus

engagement

atmospheric
perspective

law of visibility

depth of focus

user continuity
control of illusion

user defined

la
tio
n
al

or

nt
in
o

[42]

co

natural

synthetic

display

as

iz
ed

history

color

ph

em

size position

us

tio
n

filter
ut
ili
ni ta
za s

ga

input device

gr
le
gi
ac
bi
ef
lit
u
y
em l tra
ns
ph
sy
iti
as
on
m
i
s
bo
s
lis
m

at
io
n

co
m
m
un
ic

pragmatics

pr
in
ci
pl
es

m
y

co

[41]

re

[4]

lic

di
st
co inc
ns tiv
e
is
te ne
nc ss
y

[42]

bo

sy
m

m
pr m
ae on
gn
f
m att
an ate
an en
z
t
ag io
ec
em n
on
en
o
t

[2]

[35]

of
de
si
gn

icon label filter menu

process object

[37]

[24]

[29]

contour line glyphs flow ribbons
particles

1D 2D 3D multi-D
tree network temporal

data object

ni

fu
lfi
llm
en
t

ga

SPATIAL VISUAL PROPERTIES

[35]

or

[32]

en
ta
ry

el
em

st m
ru a
ct the
co
ur m
e a
nn
of tic
e
s
de al
yn cte
co
si
ch dn
m
gn
m
ro
e
on
ny ss
sy
r
eg
m
cl ila
io
pr os r
n
ity
o
u
co
x
r
nt imi e
t
in
ui y
ty

[41]

[37]

compound marks

OBJECT
simple marks

referential object

m

DIGITAL
VISUALIZATION
SPACE

point line area volume

motion parallax

[3]

te

in

[28,1] [3,8]

[4]

l

d
an e
m g
n
m ua
io
co ang
l
ct
ra
in

n
ct io
re at
di pul
i
an
m

n
io n
at io
ci at
so er
n
io on
as f op
at ti
o
ci iza or
so an
h
as rg
o
ap
of
et

[29]

e
ac us
sp uo
gn ntin ace
i
es co sp
fd

fil

o

rm

rs

fo

to

c
fa

l
ra e
tu ag
na gu
n
la

[4]

l
ua
xt e
te lan e
n
p ac
o

entertainmen

shape contour

figure/
background

distance
association

io

a

linear
perspective

occlusion

level of detail

ig

symbolic form

rhythm

gravity

av

n
tio

n
tio
ga
vi
na
n

ln

ga

layering

disintegration

visual frame

n

i
av

tia

tic

g

n
tio

e
ur

n
io
at

a
sp

an

i
av

t
in
po

ld

ew
vi

.w

or

ld

ct

[15]
n
al

m
se

ci

orientation

sequence

[28,16]

r
ne

in

or

so

dropped line

relative position

position

syntax

a
ci
so

connection closure

[8]

m

rn ce
tte en
pa res rn ion
t
p
el
t t e ia
of
od
pa soc
m
as
of
al

nt

[14]

l
ia
at
sp

ai
nt
co

r
ne e
in ac
sp ter e
g
ou ac
tin
et
sp
ls
tia
a
sp

ou

t.w

m

[40]

co

nd

ru

USER TASKS

ER

[13]

[4]

e
ur
ct
ru
st
r
rio
te
in

e
om
hr
e
oc
om d
on
hr
n
c
m
ou
ly
gr
po
ck
s
a
k
b
or
d
tw
n
io
ne row
at
c
al
rs
it
ci
al
ve tra
so o c i
on or
s
c
ce
p
l
al
ta
pa
gi igit
di
d
ls

re
tu
uc
tr
s
r
rio
te
ex

s
itature

mc
firstru

zoom

u
po

st
s

DESIGNER GOALS

O

D

C

X
TE

N

O
R

details-on
-demand

