Tying Beauty to Truth:
Visual Mnemonics Add Meaning to Perceived Patterns
W. Bradford Paley
Digital Image Design Incorporated and
Columbia University Department of Computer Science, USA

T

he information visualization community has made great strides in understanding and
engaging human sensory and perceptual mechanisms over the last decade, essentially backfitting them by designing displays that take advantage of human vision. I will present an
abstraction of the human visual system that follows a “Knowledge Acquisition Pipeline” from
photons to contextualized ideas at just the granularity needed by designers and engineers. My
students and I have found it valuable in the analysis of visualizations and the design of
visualization-like user interfaces: interfaces with non-standard widgets or spatial organization.
This pipeline does more than help us sort out and connect data to the appropriate perceptual
mechanisms; it helps us explore the final stages in knowledge acquisition: the stages where
patterns exposed by good visualization tools get integrated into the individual ideas and shared
metaphors of a knowledge domain. By letting questions from domain experts define the goals of
a view, and letting their shared metaphors inform the structure of the view space and shapes of
the glyphs, we can streamline the task of interpretation and memory embellishment that anchors
ideas.
Though many of the techniques I will share are well known, I hope this pipeline abstraction will
help designers sort out which data to present to what perceptual/cognitive process, and evaluate
designs to see whether they are missing expressive opportunities by ignoring one or more human
“input channels.” These techniques are more effective in some domains than others, but the
approach can also help to identify where visual metaphors should not be used, helping prevent
unintentionally misleading displays.
The approach also seems extremely well suited to alternate displays such as large-format prints
and the pixel-dense meter-wide displays we will see in the near future. Perhaps most important:
tying the tool more firmly to the representations experts have in their minds makes each tool
more of a toy, work more like intellectual play, and might even add the depth of human meaning
to our pretty patterns.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

