Knowledge Visualization in Practice:
Challenges for Future Corporate Communication
Steffen Klein
DaimlerChrysler AG, Research Interaction and Communication Design
steffen.klein@daimlerchrysler.com
Abstract
In this paper I will illustrate some of the key
challenges for knowledge visualization in corporate
communication. Based on a case study from Edward
Tufte and an evolutionary account of Mihai Nadin, I
will argue that interactivity is an essential issue with
regard to organizational communication or knowledge
media design in general. Finally I am going to present
an example that comes from a recent DaimlerChrysler
research project. This project was using an interactive
visualization to support the communication between
several different management levels and professional
backgrounds.
Keywords: Knowledge Visualization, Interaction
Design, Information Visualization

1. Introduction: From information
visualization to knowledge visualization
Over the last decades the graphical performance of
computers increased by large amounts. Visualization
techniques such as high-quality 3D rendering, which
required highly specialized workstations not long ago,
nowadays are available on any ordinary desktop PC.
Closely connected to the technological progress, new
visualization concepts in domains such as data mining
or mechanical engineering have been developed and
successfully evaluated.
Despite the whole technical progress on one hand
and the availability of sophisticated graphics on the
other, Burkhard [3] made clear that there is a gap
between the availability of highly sophisticated
visualization techniques and technologies developed by
the information visualization community and their
utilization within processes of communication – most
importantly within organisational communication.
Since information visualization is predominantly
used in order to analyse large sets of data, the focus is

on creating new knowledge rather than disseminating
existing knowledge throughout an organization. While
engineers might use advanced visualization techniques
for technical analysis, their results are likely to be
communicated by means of PowerPoint slides.
Knowledge visualization [3, 4, 7] is a field of
research that aims to close this gap, and to make
advances in information visualization, as well as other,
i.e. non-computational, visual techniques available to
solve problems pertaining mediated communication, or
knowledge management respectively: “Knowledge
Visualization examines the use of visual representation
to improve the transfer and creation of knowledge
between at least two people.” [3]
This direction of Research is well aligned with a
general trend in the field of human computer
interaction to see the computer not only as a tool to
support individual competences but also as a medium
to support human communication and coordination [6,
9]. Intensive research is necessary because traditional
means of mediated communication increasingly fail to
cope with the problems arising from intra-functional
communication of highly complicated contents.
In this paper I will illustrate some of the challenges
for knowledge visualization based on a case study from
Edward Tufte [14] and an evolutionary account of
Mihai Nadin [13]. I will argue that interactivity is a key
issue with regard to organizational communication or
knowledge media design in general. This might also
suggest some adjustments to recently proposed
frameworks of knowledge visualization. Finally I will
present an example that comes from a recent
DaimlerChrysler research project. This project was
using an interactive visualization to support the
communication between several different management
levels and professional backgrounds.

2. The need for interactive visualization
In his essay “The cognitive style of PowerPoint“
Edward R. Tufte [14] analyses the circumstances that

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

eventually led to the 2003 space shuttle Columbia
disaster – a case that is often hold up as an example for
the limitations of technical control, but in the end
turned out to be an example of the tragic consequences
of failed communication.
The catastrophe began during liftoff, when several
chunks of debris had accidentally hit the left wing of
the shuttle. The incident caused serious damage to the
insulation of the left wing that ultimately made the
Columbia burned up upon reentry. Although the
incident has been noticed immediately and a group of
Boeing Corporation engineers where in charge to
assess the possible danger to the mission, the analysis
did not feed into the right decisions.
One remarkable result of the following
investigation was that not primarily the engineering
analysis had failed to assess the level of danger but
rather a significant drop of information had happened
during the communication process:
“For the Boeing PowerPoint reports and for many
PP presentations by NASA to the Board, the
hierarchical bullet-outline failed to bring clarity, focus,
or credibility to the presentations. On the contrary, the
argument and evidence appeared broken up into small,
arbitrary and misleading fragments.” [14]
And in their final report the Columbia Accident
Investigation Board states:
“As information gets passed up an organization
hierarchy, from people who do analysis to mid-level
managers to high-level leadership, key explanations
and supporting information is filtered out. In this
context, it is easy to understand how a senior manager
might read this PowerPoint slide and not realize that it
addresses a life-threatening situation.” [14]
Tufte might be right to blame PowerPoint for its
limited capabilities to support a good information
design. But this assessment diverts from the underlying
problem. Obviously PowerPoint was not the right
medium to successfully communicate these complex
issues over several hierarchical levels. Then again, to
achieve a successful communication process in the
long run a good information design that is solely based
on traditional media might no longer be sufficient. The
complexity of both, the content and the communication
network, will require new types of media and new
forms of knowledge visualization.
This need for new forms of mediation has to be
seen in a wider perspective of human evolution as
described by Mihai Nadin [13]. Technical capabilities
as well as the organization of living have vastly
changed during history. This change is primarily based
on the development of tools, which are inserted
between the human and its environment – including
other humans. Tools are proven to help to enhance
human capabilities in order to increase efficiency:

physical tools to extend the physical capabilities and
cognitive tools, such as language, which are based on
signs.
“Signs combined with tools improve the mediating
function of each artefact used. Consequently, complex
mediations arise, and this complexity is an essential
characteristic of human species. Human beings
consistently seek mediations in order to increase
productivity even further.” [8]
Throughout the different stages of human evolution
different means to this end have been developed; each
of them appropriate to the pragmatic requirements of
that time. Various types of language – oral and written
language as well as visual forms – have helped to raise
the efficiency of communication.
With changing conditions also the pragmatic
requirements change; rendering previous means of
communication insufficient. Given the level of
complexity that current communication is already
confronted with, previous media will no longer be
appropriate. Gradually we might enter a stage of
human development beyond traditional literacy, where
new forms of mediation evolve to deal with the
conditions of our life.
Nadin’s account on the evolution of media with
regard to the conditions of life and the concerning
efficiency requirements points to upcoming challenges
of knowledge visualization. Tufte on one hand relies
on the power of traditional media and a good
information design to reach a proper understanding. He
particularly proposes the use of printed material
because of its high resolution, which allows text with
full meaningful sentences accompanied by detailed
charts and tables.
Nadin’s argumentation on the other hand makes
clear that this approach might no longer be successful,
given the changing conditions of communication. To
meet the pragmatic requirements of today and
tomorrow, new concepts of mediation have to be
developed. Foremost that have to be concepts which
utilize the characteristic capabilities of computational
media – most importantly interactivity.
This also sheds another light on recent attempts to
define a framework for knowledge visualization.
Burkhard [3, 4, 7] describes interactive visualization as
one format of knowledge visualization among others.
But when it comes to communication – and knowledge
visualization above all applies to communication
processes – interactivity is involved per se.
Flipping back and forth through the slides of a
presentation, pointing to particular place of a chart or
map, sketching arrows in a drawing, to explain
relations in the course of a discussion is fundamentally
interactive. Communication essentially is interaction
among people – from a more sophisticated point of

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

view it can aim at a mutual agreement regarding
justified expectations based on shared experiences.
These experiences are made in the course of
communication or they are referred to within
communication.
Understanding is possible if and only if all parties
can refer to a set of comparable experiences. Since
media increasingly have to connect people from
various backgrounds and cultures (corporate,
professional, regional, etc.) the stock of common
experiences declines. Therefore joint interaction with
visual representations of data is an important first step
towards a new media paradigm that supports shared
experiences “just in time”; i.e. within the
communication process.
Media differ in whether or not they facilitate joint
interaction “within” the medium rather than relying on
interaction with the medium. Facilitating interaction
“within” the medium is a quality that evolved with
digital computers and their ability to produce an
immediate response to an action. A model which
conceals much of the domain complexity and still
enables complex interactions with it helps to make
communication even more efficient. For this reason
information visualization, which is per definition
interactive [5], particularly contributes to the field of
media based communication.
Moreover interactivity itself is not a formal
expression. It needs to be built on formats such as
charts, images, or maps. It is a quality that can be
added to a visualization format to facilitate its efficient
use within the communication process. In many cases
knowledge visualization might have to draw on known
formats such as charts, in order to enable an initial
understanding of a representation, and then use
interactivity in order to deepen or widen this
understanding within a process of communication. This
combination of known formants and advanced
interactivity within the medium might be a major
challenge for future research on knowledge
visualization.
Next I will present an example of an interactive
visualization that combines known chart techniques,
which have been used within the respective domain
and interactivity within the medium in order to support
the communication process between persons of various
hierarchical levels and professional backgrounds.

3. Case study: Interactive visualization in
corporate communication
The case study describes an interactive
visualization that was developed to support the internal
communication considering warranty and goodwill

budgets. The application design was part of a project
carried out recently by the department for
Communication
and
Interaction
Design
at
DaimlerChrysler Research.
Unlike the Columbia accident, this example
certainly does not describe a life threatening situation
in a narrow sense. But obviously it is essential for a car
manufacturer to keep its warranty and goodwill costs
under control to survive in the market place. However,
since technical flaws of a vehicle can possibly also
result in life threatening situations, one can easily
imagine other examples within the context of
automotive business that are more comparable to the
Columbia incident. However, there are certain parallels
to the circumstances of the space shuttle accident.
Firstly, the issue itself is complex in many
dimensions, caused by the technical complexity of the
product itself. On top of that it is produced in a highly
depending manufacturing process based on very
sophisticated logistics and production technologies.
Each of these dimensions – and many more – are
having several potential effects on the technical quality
of the vehicle over its lifecycle.
On top of this technical complexity there is a
certain level of economic complexity, since technical
problems with a car will produce costs months or even
years after its production. That might have effects on
business results in the same or the next fiscal year of
the company.
This content related complexity also includes
several parallel timelines referring to either production
dates, product usage, or budget effects. They might be
based on known quantity (e.g. past production
quantities), operational planning (e.g. future production
quantities), or forecasts founded on knowledge from
past productions and formalized in algorithms.
Secondly, quality issues are communicated across
many levels of hierarchy within the organization –
from engineers, who are responsible for the
development, production, or quality control of
individual parts or technical groups, up to top-level
executives which have to make far-reaching decisions
based on results reported from those engineers. The
communication also involves people with many
different professional backgrounds, such as technical
engineers, mathematicians, general managers, and so
on. The circumstances described above lead to a high
level of complexity in the resulting communication
network.
Just like the Columbia Investigation Board reported
on NASA and similar to the situation in most
corporations, the communication about technical
quality was primarily based on presentations made up
from PowerPoint slides. The slides contained several
business charts, showing the development of certain

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

key figures over the time of production (or operation
respectively) and the resulting forecasts.
Especially the design of these charts showed
several weaknesses, resembling those reported by
Tufte with regard to the Columbia examples: Due to
the relatively low resolution of the screen or beamer
reproduction only a very limited number of figures can
be presented and curves are not easy to interpret. More
importantly, since the charts show static images that
refer to different timelines (defects reported after a
certain time of operation caused by vehicles produced
at a certain point of time resulting in costs at another
point of time) the different timelines have to be
mentally mapped onto another by the audience.

available and controllable by adding an interactive
timeline to the charts.
The position of a time slider indicates a definite
point of time where a certain number of cars has been
produced and several past defects have been reported
(from cars build in previous production months). While
the user moves the slider forward, the number of
reported defects grows (since more and more cars are
produced and used for a longer period of time) and
consequently the warranty and goodwill budget
increases.
The advantage of sliders for intuitive data analysis
is well described in the literature [1, 2]. In this case
using the interactive time slider helps to understand the
interrelationship between the different key figures and
their development in time. Cause and effect relations
can easily be demonstrated by showing the
corresponding changes of the curves. Furthermore the
slider can be moved through the time to show temporal
effects, and it can be moved back and forth to
concentrate on a particular period of time.

Figure 1. Schematical representation of the
original PowerPoint slides
Given these difficulties in the representation of a
demanding content with sometimes contradicting
interests (considering the different roles of the people
involved in the discussion), the right interpretation of
the figures could easily become subject for discussion.
One solution proposed by a team of researchers and
domain experts in the course of the research project
was an interactive visualization of the warranty and
goodwill costs. The application can be used by a
presenter during the discussion to demonstrate the
effects and interrelationship of several key figures.
The visual representation of the data is based on the
charts that previously have been used to support the
initial understanding of the graphics. However, the
charts have been redesigned in order to raise the visual
quality and clarity of the information that shall be
conveyed.
One of the more important improvements compared
to the static PowerPoint charts is an additional time
dimension. The time dimension has been made

Figure 2. Screenshot of the proposed
interactive visualization
The interactive timeline helps to overcome one of
the biggest problems in understanding: the mapping of
different time perspectives. The (present or future)
result of any action can immediately be located on the
global timeline. Simultaneous change indicates a cause
and effect relation between different values while their
spatial distribution represents their relation in time.
By animating the timeline known patterns of key
figures can be effectively presented to an audience
with different professional background. What is more,
using the slider interactively new patterns can be
explored and ad hoc hypotheses can be tested within
the discussion.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Manipulating time with an interactive slider is an
example of how the characteristic quality of digital
media, i.e. interactivity, provides a platform for direct
experience with the model of a highly abstract domain.
Interacting with the timeline shows immediate results
for all affected graphs. Cause and effect relations
thereby can be experienced directly by the user and
mapped to his or her individual background. These
coherent experiences regarding the behaviour over the
time or under particular circumstances help to establish
a shared understanding of the domain within the
discussion process.
The possible range of experience is further
extended by adding additional means of simulation to
the visualization. Production numbers can be altered as
well as the average number of defects per vehicle or
the average costs of a defect. The application becomes
a complete model of the domain, of which properties
can be altered as one likes, to study the possible effects
to be expected.
Still the interactive visualization is fundamentally a
medium in every respect: It mediates between the user
or a group of users and the physical world. Although
changing figures in the simulation does not change
anything in the production line, real world figures find
their way into the simulation and real world
interrelations can be experienced within the
application. Finally findings based on interaction with
the model lead to actions in the real world – that is
changing reality.
Moreover the simulation mediates between the
people which are communicating. It provides a ground
of coherent experiences which people can refer to and
which people relate to their individual background and
expertise. It provides perceivable distinctions,
figurations that can be distributed and a clear bias
towards a preferred outcome. Hence, like every
medium it serves as a means to reduce the unlikelihood
of successful communication [12].
First reactions from different users of the
interactive visualization suggest that the proposed
visualization proved to be successful in supporting the
communication process. Although one high-level
manager was initially disappointed that we did not
come up with a radically new form of visualization, he
quickly realized that the known format made the initial
understanding much easier for all the different
stakeholders. The format provided a reference point to
a known context.
Moreover by interacting with the timeline he was
now able to show how the typical form of a certain
curve or bar evolves over the time, suggesting possible
cause and effect relations between different values.
The possibility to move back and forth in time and

change quantities to simulate different scenarios
proved to be the key factor for understanding.
One other user reported how the interactive
visualization helped to understand the work of another
department, which is responsible for budget
predictions. To understand how certain assumptions
with reference to a prediction affect other figures
turned out to be more interesting for him than the
actual prediction itself. Since the discussion process is
no longer solely based on facts and figures, but rather
on a shared understanding of interrelationships, the
communication gets more efficient.
Although these are just first impressions and
additional user testing has to be part of further
research, the comments already suggest that the
combination of the known chart format and an
interactive simulation helps to improve the discussion
between the different stakeholders. This assessment is
also supported by previous experiences made with
interactive visualizations in the domain of online
consultation [10].

4. Conclusions: The power of interactivity
In this paper I described some of the challenges for
knowledge visualization and argued that interactivity is
one of the key features to meet the requirements of
corporate communication. I presented an example of
interactive visualization that supports a group of people
to share their experiences using the model of a
complex domain – that is warranty and goodwill
management.
Starting from Tufte’s example describing the
Columbia disaster, I pointed to two major challenges
for today’s communication. Firstly, the level of
difficulty in respect to the content that can be
experienced in all areas of our civilization, from rocket
engineering to purchasing a car. Secondly, the
complexity of a communication network that includes
participants with different professional backgrounds,
personal experiences, hierarchical levels, social
standing, etc. As the level of difficulty and the
complexity of communication further escalate to meet
the rising efficiency goals of our civilisation the level
of technical mediation have to increase continuously.
This paper is basically a review of the fact that new
approaches in knowledge visualisation are needed to
enable communication to be successful under these
conditions. To meet the pragmatic requirements and to
come to appropriate solutions, it is important to dismiss
the notion of media as a tool to convey messages from
one person to another. Common understanding has to
be based on a set of common experiences. Therefore

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

media have to provide an interactive platform where
coherent experiences can jointly be made [11].
Knowledge media have to provide a ground to gain
mutual understanding – in a process of interaction
“within” the medium – and provide visual references to
make this shared knowledge accessible within
communication. Interactivity therefore seems to be a
core element of knowledge visualization rather than
one among many available formats.
Companies will have to use the power of interactive
visualization to meet the requirements of their internal
and external communication. In an increasingly
complex environment and with ever growing
efficiency constraints, the quality of media is setting
the limits of the corporate knowledge. The ability to
share experiences in a virtual environment across
different domains, cultures, professional backgrounds,
or hierarchical levels, will be a basic prerequisite for a
successful company.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

Acknowledgements
[9]

I would like to thank Remo Burkhard and two
anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on
previous versions of this paper.

[10]

References
[11]
[1]

[2]

Ch. Ahlberg, B. Shneiderman, “Visual information
seeking: tight coupling of dynamic query filters with
starfield displays”, Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
Boston, MA, 1994.
Ch. Ahlberg, Ch. Williamson, B. Shneiderman,
“Dynamic queries for information exploration: an
implementation and evaluation”, Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, Monterey, CA, 1992.

[12]

[13]
[14]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

R. Burkhard, “Learning from Architects: The
Difference between Knowledge Visualization and
Information Visualization”, Proceedings of the Eigth
International Conference on Information Visualization
(IV04), London, July 2004.
R. Burkhard, “Towards a Framework and a Model for
Knowledge
Visualization:
Synergies
between
Information
and
Knowledge
Visualization”,
Knowledge and information visualization: searching
for synergies, Tergan and Keller, Eds., Heidelberg /
New York, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, [to appear].
S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, B. Shneiderman,
Readings in Information Visualization, Using Vision to
think, Los Altos, CA, Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
W. Coy, „Automat - Werkzeug – Medium“, Informatik
Spektrum, 18, 1995, pp. 31-38.
M. Eppler, R. Burkhard. “Knowledge Visualization”,
Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, Idea Group,
[to appear].
F. Chordá. “A Civilisation of Many Literacies”, A
Mind at Work, Mercedes Vilanova and Frederic
Chordá, Eds., Heidelberg, Synchron, 2003.
J. Grudin, “The Computer Reaches Out: The Historical
Continuity of Interface Design”, Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems: Empowering people, Seattle, WA, 1990.
S. Klein, “Designing for Customer Interaction on the
Web”, IEEE Internet Computing. 3 (1), 1999, pp. 3235.
S. Klein, Differenz und Kohärenz: Gestaltung und
Wahrnehmung elektronischer Medien, Heidelberg,
Synchron (Digital Horizons; Bd. 1), 2001
N. Luhmann, Soziale Systeme: Grundriss einer
allgemeinen Theorie, Frankfurt am Main, Suhrkamp,
1984.
M. Nadin, The Civilisation of Illiteracy, Dresden,
Dresden University Press, 1997.
E. R. Tufte, The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint,
Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press, 2003.

