DIGITAL ART: A brief history of the Graphical User Interface in contemporary
art practice, 1994 - 2004.
Ian Gwilt
Creativity and Cognition Studios / School of Design, University of Technology Sydney
(Ian.gwilt@uts.edu.au)
Abstract
This paper will explore the use of the Graphical
User Interface (GUI) in contemporary art practice and
examine how the cultural ubiquity of digital computing
has allowed the GUI to become an interesting source of
creative content. It will trace examples where the visual
aesthetic of the computer interface has been referenced
within 2d media: paintings, digital prints, web art and
the gaming interface.

1. Introduction
The notion of the Graphical User Interface as art
content refers to artworks which have enlisted the visual
qualities of the GUI to investigate ideas around a
computer interface aesthetic as source material, and to
works that challenge the media specificity of the screen
based interface. How these artworks foreground the
Graphical User Interface aesthetic to comment on the
formal, social and speculative aspects of a computerised
culture is central to this debate.
A tangible or at least visual device, the GUI
facilitates our interaction between the abstract computer
world of zeros and ones and a human centered, symbolic
interpretation of this information, which can be
(generally) understood and adapted. The GUI is literally
an interface between the disparate languages of computer
code, and a usable, visible language. The key to this
screen based language is a use of visual metaphors and
idioms, which harness the potential of the computer. [1]
The simplicity and mutability of this screen based visual
architecture also predicates the use of the GUI interface
as an effective foil for commentary and critical
reflection. A critical viewpoint can be established
through a reference to the visual aesthetic of the
computer interface framed within a contemporary art
practice.

2. The Graphical User Interface in painting
and print
In 2004 there was a minor stir caused in the new
media art world when a painting of the Google home
page was purchased by non-other than the Google
company itself. The work entitled A web page was

conceived by Exonemo and painted by Masayuki
Inagaki. A new media art consortium based in Japan,
Exonemo have a history of creating net based and mixed
media art works. [2] The painting, A web page is a faithful
reproduction of a screen shot of a Google homepage in
2004. It is 3.33 meters x 2.58 meters in size, painted in
acrylic and oil on canvas and was part of more complex
installation piece entitled Natural Process. As well as
the painting of the Google home page the Natural
Process installation involved a web-cam transmission
that captured the image of the painting in the gallery
environment. The web-cam transmission was displayed
as a webpage on the Internet, and was also viewable as a
video projection in the gallery space.

Figure 1. EXONEMO Natural Process / A web
page, gallery installation courtesy of the artists
This configuration creates a convoluted feedback loop
where the physical manifestation of the work is captured
digitally, and synchronously replayed through the
mediating technology of a web-cam and the Internet,
from where it is projected back into the same physical
space. When the gallery was open the web-cam also
captured audience movement in front of the actual
painting which could be observed not only on the gallery
data projection but also remotely through the distributed,
multiple capabilities of the webpage upload.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

mainstay of our own enterprise is firmly grounded in the
digital realm.

Figure 2. EXONEMO Natural Process / A web
page, Online participation 2004
The configuration of the Natural Process installation
is interesting in that it raises issues of authenticity,
originality and veracity - in terms of the functionality of
the interface and the referencing of computer based
imagery in contemporary art practice. The viewer is
forced into questioning what it is they are looking at, the
levels of iteration, mediation and varying contextual
frameworks; gallery wall, remote computer Internet feed,
video projections, all create representational and
perceptual settings that challenge the way we read and
respond to the work. The qualities engendered by the
firsthand experience of the physical painting are
juxtaposed with the technologically mediated viewing of
the same image, questioning the cultural value systems
we assign to physical artifacts as opposed to digital
iterations. A further dialectic is created when the
audience is invited to choose between viewing the work
in the gallery, or through the online website version. In
promoting their work the artists pose the question to an
intended audience, will you visit the real webpage
painting in the gallery, or visit the virtual version on the
Internet? Although perhaps the pertinent question here is
which of the Google homepage manifestations is most
real? Is it the painting in the museum, the image on the
Internet of the painting, the video projection of the
webpage in the gallery, or in fact the source code and
graphics of the 'original' Google home page referenced in
the work and realised on millions of individual computer
web browsers? As the new media theorist Lev Manovich
states "In semiotic terms, the computer interface acts as a
code which carries cultural messages in a variety of
media". [3] That these codes are not neutral in the
transmission of their message is a given in the post
McLuhan world of media and message. An interesting
observation made at the time by an online list observer
raised the question as to why Google did not purchase
the complete artwork rather than just the painting?
Perhaps this says much about the store that we still invest
in material objects, even (or especially) when the

The Google purchase became a high profile event
from the perspective of artists dealing with digital image
based content as source material for art their practice.
However, in the preceding 10 years or so, there have
been a number of artists visually referencing the Web
Interface and the Graphical User Interface in their work.
An earlier exponent of web painting, and self confessed
leader in the field is Valery Grancher whose less formal,
free-hand paintings of web pages employ a stronger
hand-generated aesthetic which is in stark contrast to the
usual digital visualisation style we normally encounter
on screen. Through an exploration of content such as
web logos, home pages and even command line
interfaces Grancher challenges the way in which we
perceive the Graphical User Interface as technologically
driven image and re-interprets this visual information in
a more human, primitive style – reintroducing the hand
of the artist. [4]
As well as re-working digitally found imagery, the
artist Miltos Manetas also takes as his source material the
very hardware of technology. Creating paintings of
cables, monitors, input devices such as game consoles
and joysticks as well as including images of users
actually interacting with technology. These paintings
again point towards the ubiquity of technological devices
in our daily lives as we increasingly spend time and
energies interfacing with computers. Manetas's images
comment on the easy acceptance of these technologies
not only as screen based visual symbols but also as
material artifacts accepted into a computerised culture.
And like the painterly computer icons of Valery,
Manetas work consciously draw upon the cultural capital
that we assign to paintings as part of the fine art canon
and makes a critical link between the disparate value
systems of art and technology. [5]
New York / Milan based artist Carlo Zanni is
another example of an artist who has appropriated the
computer icon in their work. Zanni paints oil on canvas
versions of well-known desktop application and system
icons, such as the PhotoShop jpeg icon and the Napster
logo; increasing the rendered size of the image by a
hundred times and exporting the icons from computer
screen to gallery wall. Zanni is interested in painting the
icons in the way we see them in the analogue world,
carefully blending continuous tone shadows and colour
shifts in a realistic painting style. In this way, filling in
the (non-existent) details which are approximated in the
sampling process of digitisation. Painting the default
desktops of well-know operating systems, Zanni calls his
paintings 'landscapes', which he suggest, are as familiar
to us as the traditional landscapes of our 'real world'
experiences. [6]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Other examples of the remediation of the graphical
user interface into a physically painted from are found in
the works of Russian artist George Pusenkoff. Pusenkoff
exploits the visual iconography of existing paintings by
Warhol, Polock, Mondrian and Leonardo da Vinci. Reimagining visual icons such as the Mona Lisa as products
of a digital environment, Pusenkoff redefines the images
within the window architecture of a web browser or other
image handling software. He includes the interface
architecture in the painting as a frame to the original
image. [7] These transformed icons are then painted as
physical paintings on canvas - returning to their original
media. However, the effect of this transformation
through a digital rhetoric and the visual referencing to
the evidence of this process encourages the viewer to reasses the value of the original icon. As with the work of
Zanni we can read Pusenkoff's images as an extension of
the commodification of the image as achieved through
the Pop Art works of Warhol. The difference being that
this time, the source material and references come from
(or in the form of, in the case of Pusenkoff works) the
domain of the computer Graphical User Interface. The
mutability and capacity for hybrid and multiple
manifestations of these technologically referenced icons
is such that, as Manovich suggests, we can no longer
separate interface from content. [8]

3. Reflexivity in net art
A number of New Media theorists have suggested
that the Internet and indeed digital technologies as a
whole are not a media but a database, a dynamic
information system that is capable of simulating existing
(art) mediums. [9] Not just simulating but also combining
and reconfiguring existing content to create new models
of reading and interpretation. Lack of media specificity,
multiplicity and transitive content opened the door for a
new Net based creative paradigm. But like anything new,
the initial wave of Net based artworks understandably
included a number of pieces that investigated through
their content a certain amount of self-realisation,
definition and navel gazing. One might surmise that in
historic terms, the very newness of the Internet was the
key to the self-reflection we often saw manifest in the
work of early net based artists such as Alexei Shulgin
and Mark Napier amongst others.
The popularity of the Internet in the public domain
did not take hold until the release of the user-friendly
Netscape browser in the early-nineties with the first Net
based artworks commonly documented from around this
period - 1994/95. As mentioned previously, analysis and
introspection often formed the basis of this early content,
in a struggle to define what this phenomenon was, and
how from the position of a Net art practice one might
comment on, or utilise the potentials of this dynamic
system.

It is tempting to draw parallels, and indeed a number
of theorists do refer to similarities between these early
web works and the themes of the Conceptual artists of
the 1960's. Conceptual art was often highly politicised
and concerned with revisiting the definition of art.
Utilitarian in nature, ‘Conceptual art’, much like Net art
represented a dematerialisation of the art object and a
questioning of art media specificity. Furthermore,
redefining the spaces in which we might encounter art.
In his book Conceptual art, Tony Godfrey loosely
defines the works, concepts and actions of Conceptual art
in four main categories: readymades as in the notion of
Duchamp's work, interventions the placing of an element
in a different or unexpected context, documentations and
words, which are self explanatory. [10] Early Net based
artworks often employed these same systems, creating
self-reflexive works that borrowed from, or entirely
replicate existing material both on and offline. This
replication of content is often housed in a different
context or conceptual positions as in the Conceptual art
notion of interventions (see Shulgin's Form Art and
Biggs’s Recombinant Icons later in this paper). Net based
art works are also often comprised of in part, if not in
whole, of documentary activities, documentations (for an
example of this trope we will shortly examine Shulgin's
Net artwork Desktop Is). To complete the suite of
comparisons between Net art and Conceptual art, the use
of words is obviously fundamental in the makeup of the
Internet. From the underlying word based programming
language of HTML to the extensive use of hypertext text based links that take you to another part of a web
page or section of the Internet. Many web-based artists
exploit the potential in HTML code to create unusual or
unexpected events in the conventional web browser. An
example of a subversive use of HTML can be seen in the
Net art work entitled The Shredder by Mark Napier
(1998). The Shredder tampers with the HTML code of a
website before it reaches the viewer's browser,
'shredding' the content and effecting the way that this
content is displayed. [11] This idea is also explored at
www.Jodi.org, where shorts circuits in hypertext links
are used to frustrate users and reveal unexpected or unrequested responses.
In the light of an ongoing commercial appropriation,
continuing technological advancement and the as-yet
lack of general acceptance for Net based art by the
mainstream art world, it is no surprise that this shifting
territory leads to a self reflective vain in a number of web
based artworks. In her book ‘Internet Art’, Rachel
Greene comments on the fact that by 1997 web-art had
moved away from the simple use of HTML based web
pages towards, amongst other things "…parody,
appropriation and formal explorations…" [12] An obvious
vehicle for this type of self-reflection, and one which I
am concentrating on in this section is the use of the
actual 'look and feel' of the Net - the components and
structures that create the visual aesthetic of the Internet.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

A leading exponent of these types of work is one of
the recognised founding Net artists Alexei Shulgin.
Shulgin's 1997 works, Form Art and Desktop Is are two
pieces of Net based art that foreground the visual fabric
of the graphical user interface as creative content worthy
of further consideration, a visual carrier capable of being
more than a pragmatic technological tool. Form Art
consciously parallels notions of formal practice in the
analogue world of fine arts painting and sculpture. In an
introspective mode, the work utilises and adapts the form
creating facility of HTML and the way that these forms
are typically visualised in web browser software. Form
Art arranges the elements of the form making facility (a
subset of the graphic user interface), scroll bars,
command windows, navigation buttons, tick boxes etc. to
create visual layouts, patterns and formal arrangements.
[13]
Divorced from any specific message or content these
arrangements can be considered through the lens of
gestalt theory, and critiqued in terms of layout, structure,
repetition and other compositional practices. The form
buttons and navigation devices still function in the
conventional sense allowing the user, by clicking on the
buttons and utilising scroll bars to open new windows
and explore additional compositional arrangements.
However, the interaction is facile, with no purpose
beyond the bringing of the interface to the attention to
the user as a part of a tacit visual language, embedded,
but often overlooked in the human computer dialectic.
Desktop Is, also comments on the recursive nature of
our digital engagement and the framework within which
the majority of computers users automatically operate.
Again re-contextualising the Graphical User Interface,
Shulgin created a participatory artwork by requesting
computer users to send a digital copy of their computer
desktop. The computer desktop being the visual space
that commonly appears when we start up our computer
and where all our personal work files, folders, notes,
links to software and system choices etc are visually
presented. Shulgin collected these examples and
presented them within dedicated web site that allowed
visitors to click on hypertext links to view the eclectic
selection of desktops. Shulgin's only explanation of the
collection is framed by the following statements that ask
us to reflect on the desktop in a variety of subjective
lights beyond its normal role;
"Desktop Is the main element of a human - machine
interface
Desktop Is your window to the digital world
Desktop Is your first step into virtual reality
Desktop Is a reflection of your individuality
Desktop Is your everyday visual environment
Desktop Is an extension of your organs
Desktop Is the face of your computer
Desktop Is your everyday torture and joy
Desktop Is your own little masterpiece
Desktop Is your castle
Desktop Is a seducer
Desktop Is a reliever

Desktop Is your enemy
Desktop Is your friend
Desktop Is a psychoanalyst
Desktop Is your little helper
Desktop Is your link to other people
Desktop Is a device for meditation
Desktop Is the membrane that mediates transactions
between client and server
Desktop Is a substitute for so many other things
Desktop Is a question
Desktop Is the answer" [14]
The collected desktops still function today as a
historic snapshot of the GUI in late the 1990’s (it was
collected between October 20th 1997 - April 20th 1998).
As we have noted previously, it is possible to draw
parallels between some of the early Net based artworks
and the concepts foreground in Conceptual Art. In the
case of Desktop Is, we might associate the work with
three Conceptual art techniques: readymades, through
the use of pre-authored images of desktops.
Interventions, through the re-contextualisation and
positioning of these desktops as an artwork on the
internet, and documentation, the gathering and
presentation of a collection of desktop examples in a
specific location and framework. Like many of the
Conceptual art works in their time, Desktop Is was not
without it's critics. Included in a curated show of
contemporary net art works entitled 'Beyond the
Interface' (1998), by Steve Dietz the then Director of
New Media Initiatives at the Walker Art Center. Desktop
Is was a hot topic of debate for the show’s steering
committee, eliciting negative comments as to it's nondiscriminatory, simplistic survey based content. Other
more positive comments suggested that the work played
a role in documenting “…a crucial aspect of
contemporary computer culture…” of its day. [15]
Fast forwarding five years to 2003, a virtual lifetime
in terms of the internet, it is possible to compare the
Dietz curated show with the online art exhibition entitled
'Iconography'.
Iconography was supported by
Turbulence.org, the US based Net art initiative, and
curated by Patrick Lichty a conceptual intermedia artist,
curator and writer. To give it it's full title, ‘Iconography:
critiquing the icon’, looked more specifically (as the
name of the show suggests) at the use of the icon as a
device within the graphical user interface, used in the
context of art practice. In his curatorial statement Lichty
made reference to the semantic and ontological nature of
the icon, situating the technological use of the term in a
wider socio-cultural perspective. The icon, re-inscribed
in terms of it's use within the graphical user interface is a
given, Lichty suggests, as "…any symbolic system
signifies the gestalt of the given culture that creates it".
[16]
It is no surprise therefore that the makeup of the
Graphical User Interface reflects the environment in
which it was conceived.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

A number of factors specifically relate the two Net
art shows together. Lichty sites Shulgin's work Desktop
Is as an inspirational reference in the curation of his later
show. And although Shulgin's work did not make into
the later show as well, a piece by Artist John F. Simon,
Jr. entitled Every Icon did. Simon's work Every Icon is
interesting in that it is an ongoing, generative piece that
utilises the computational potentials of digital
technology. Started in 1997 Every Icon consists of a
visual presentation of a 32 x 32 grid of white squares.
Adding a black square to the equation the computer
works out every possible combination of the black and
white elements, which on the computing power available
in 2003 would still take well over six billion years to
complete. The concept being that during this process the
computer will draw every single possible 32 x 32 pixel
icon.
The inter-disciplinary artist Simon Biggs showed a
piece of work in each show. In a similar ‘content’ area to
Every Icon, Biggs's contribution to the Iconography
show was entitled Recombinant Icon. Recombinant Icon
plays with the notion of a self-aware icon, which is able
to morph into a new visual configuration based upon its
own state as dictated by the interactive gestures of the
computer user. Biggs’s work acutely comments on the
essential nature of the icon in the Graphical User
Interface. [17]

4. The gaming interface repositioned
The computer game interface is another potent and
familiar form of computer based, popular culture
imagery to which we are increasingly exposed; if not as a
first hand player then certainly through the remediation
of the computer game in movies, advertising campaigns
and television graphics. In his book (Digital Art) tracing
the history of Digital art, Christiane Paul places a high
value on the role of the computer game in the ‘digital
revolution’ and comments on how a variety of artist have
utilised computer games and the games aesthetic in
number of different ways. [18]
Like the sorting and storing icons of the computer
desktop and the visual navigation devices of the web
browser the typical gaming interface has a number of
buttons and devices that allow the player to monitor the
progress of the game. The players can for example,
check on their location, health, weapons status and often
more importantly the proximity and strength of other
players. On a perfunctory level these interface devices
act as a visual shorthand that allows the player to read
information in the context of the gaming environment
and adjust their responses accordingly. The new media
critic and author Sherry Turkle see the computer game
(or ‘video game’ aesthetic as she refers to it) as the
perceptual vanguard to our acceptance of computing
technologies. Though perhaps more cynically one might
also regard this as representing the more addictive and

ephemeral qualities of human computer interaction.
Turkle goes on to say that “video games are a window
onto a new kind of intimacy with machines that is
characteristic of the nascent computer culture”. [19]
In this final section I will briefly examine two artists
who have re-appropriated the visual aesthetic of the
computer game in a politicised or critical context. These
works again echo the tactics of the Conceptual art
techniques of interventions placing images and ideas in
unexpected environments.
As well as producing a number of paintings that
dealt with the material paraphernalia of computer games
cables and joysticks etc. Manetas, like a number of artists
working in the nineties was quick to see the potential in
the controversial imagery from the computer game
domain. Manetas produced digital prints of snapshots
from the actual computer game onscreen action. Taken
in real-time during the games progress, these images
were then enlarged (typically 40x60 inches) and printed
as colour prints on super glossy paper. Repositioning this
decidedly low brow content (digitally conceived) and
presenting it in a conventional art gallery context,
Manetas was challenging what might be considered as
acceptable art content of the day.
The Chinese artist Feng Mengbo also bases much of
his artwork on the aesthetic and activities of the so called
‘first person shooter’ computer gaming environment.
Much of Mengbo’s better know pieces involved the artist
placing himself in the gaming environment as a
participating figure, or in a reportage role. Mengbo
modifies the computer environment in a number of ways
sometimes engaging in the traditional combat actives
inherent in the first person shooter environments, as in
his work Q4U. Or taking a more conciliatory stance as in
his earlier work Q3 where Mengbo, armed with a video
camera attempted to engage other virtual players in a
philosophical debate about the underlying meaning of
their activities. [20] Trained as a fine artist Mengbo also
produces paintings based on classic computer combat
environments. These environments are combined with
contemporary Chinese iconography to create a visual
dialectic, which comments on notions of conformity,
repetition and authority in both spaces - cultural and
digital.

Conclusions
The artists mentioned in this paper are among a
group of artists who have in common the repositioning of
the computer Graphical User Interface within their art
practice. Commonly taking a critical or self-reflective
stance and producing works that problematise our
engagement with the many facets of digital technology,
questioning the validity of the experience in terms of the
personal and broader social cultural influences. The
creation of snapshots from the Graphical User Interface

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

allows for the GUI to be incorporated as part of the
image content and picture plane. Disenfranchised from
the usual participatory actives inherent in the functional
computer interface, the viewer is asked to reassess the
meaning of the emancipated icons as they might any
other metonymic or literal visual content. As computer
operating systems become more efficient and able to
display photo-realistic icons, perhaps we are seeing the
end of the GUI image as discernable artistic and cultural
phenomenon.

References
[1]

S. Johnson. Interface culture: how new technology
transforms the way we create and communicate. San
Francisco. HarperEdge, 1997
[2] Exonemo 2005 url:
http://www.exonemo.com/NP/indexE.html
[3] L. Manovich. The language of new media. Cambridge,
Mass., London. MIT Press, 2001 pp64
[4] V. Grancher 2005 url;
http://www.nomemory.org/webpaint/
[5] M. Manetas 2005 url:
http://www.manetas.com/splash/index.htm
[6] C Zanni 2005 url: http://www.zanni.org/index/
[7] G. Pusenkoff 2005 url:
http://www.pusenkoff.de/galerie.html
[8] L. Manovich. Ibid. 2001
[9] O. Grau. Virtual art : from illusion to immersion.
Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 2003.
[10] T. Godfrey. Conceptual art. London. Phaidon, 1998
[11] M. Napier. 2005 url:
http://www.potatoland.org/shredder/shredder.html).
[12] R. Greene. Internet Art. London. Thames and Hudson,
2004 pp73
[13] J. Stallabrass. Internet Art: the Online Class of Culture
and Commerce. London. Tate Publications, 2003
[14] A. Shulgin 2004 url:
http://www.easylife.org/desktop/desktop_is.html 2005
[15] S. Dietz 2005 paragraph 5, url:
http://www.walkerart.org/archive/5/B6739D3FD8344455615F.h
tm.
[16] P. Lichty. curatorial statement 2005, paragraph 4, url:
http://turbulence.org/curators/icon/lichty.htm
[17] S. Biggs 2005 url:
http://hosted.simonbiggs.easynet.co.uk/icon/index.htm
[18] C. Paul. Digital Art. London. Thames & Hudson, 2003
[19] S. Turkle. Video Games and Computer Holding Power, in
N. Wardrip-Fruin and N Montfort (ed.) The New Media Reader,
MIT Press. Massachusetts, 2003 pp 501
[20] C. Paul. Ibid. 2003

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

