Persistence through Visualization in Knowledge-intensive Conversations
Jeanne Mengis, Martin J. Eppler
School of Communication Sciences, University of Lugano
{jeanne.mengis@lu.unisi.ch, martin.eppler@lu.unisi.ch}

Abstract
This article confronts the discourse on persistence in
mediated interactions to the one in face-to-face
conversations and outlines various areas of development.
We argue for distinguishing different kinds of persistence
depending on the type of conversation and focus on
graphic persistence of knowledge intensive conversations.
In a second part, we describe specific requirements for
conversational tools aiming to make the processes and the
outcomes of knowledge intensive conversations traceable
and correctible (i.e. persistent). In order to do so, two
conversational tools are presented. Based on this
presentation and referring to dialogue theory, we discuss
requirements for applications that support two types of
knowledge intensive conversations.
Keywords:
Knowledge
visualization,
persistence,
conversations, conversational tools, social visualization

1. Introduction and rationale
Persistence has recently been of great interest for
researchers and practitioners dealing with computer
mediated communication (CMC). Bregman and
Hythornthwait define persistent conversation as a humanto-human interaction that leaves a permanent trace of its
content and allows for correctibility of the exchanged
messages [4]. Even if this definition is applicable beyond
the CMC context, the scientific discourse on persistent
conversations is mostly limited to remote conversations
and is often viewed as the opposite of face-to-face
conversations (F2F) [10]. Yet, F2F conversations are by
their nature ephemeral and because of this trait, they are
sometimes considered to be ineffective means for the
dissemination of knowledge. Holtham and Courtney state
that “informal mechanisms, such as unscheduled meetings,
informal seminars, or coffee break conversations, may be
effective in promoting socialization but may preclude wide
dissemination” [1 p.120]. Other authors state that F2F
conversations are very effective means to create new
knowledge [14] and to share and integrate insights on a
group level [15]. In order to take advantage of the positive
qualities of conversations and reduce the problem of their

lacking permanence, persistence is an important issue in
F2F conversations (such as team meetings, negotiations, or
workshops). By exploring the differing needs regarding
persistence in F2F versus CMC contexts, we can learn
more about the general nature and benefits of persistence
in conversations. We can further differentiate the construct
of persistence (i.e., regarding types of persistence) and
highlight its potential drawbacks (e.g., such as blocking
spontaneity and creativity).
A key distinction between F2F conversations and
CMS in their means of achieving persistence is the use of
visual support. Visuals are quite commonly used in CMC,
which is not the case for F2F communication (with some
exception in the group decision support field). In CMC,
visualization is generally used to reveal social activities as
for example the amount of contributions of each converser
[6, 12, 16, 19]. Conversers lack the social cues of F2F
communication (gestures, eye contact, etc.) and they need
the social visualization so that they can make sense of the
provided information [19]. Next to social visualization,
semantic visualizations like the visualization of semantic
networks [16] or the color coding of emotional content [6]
is employed in CMC, even if to a much lesser extent. Both,
social and semantic visuals are not used in a static way but
are developed during the process of a conversation. In this
way, the visual support does not only help to reconstruct a
conversation once it has finished, but it actually fosters the
quality of the conversation process and enhances the
mutual understanding of the conversers [20]. Up until now,
visualization is often limited to the computer generated
social visualizations of conversational actions within long
time frames. It would, however, be valuable to use more
“micro” visualizations of the actual content of a
conversation. These visualizations do not have to be
automatically generated by the computer, but their value
actually is that they are built by interacting conversers and
the computer only supports these activities by providing
mental and social frameworks.
Before presenting two specific applications for
achieving persistent conversations, we will first specify for
which type of conversations they are useful. Such a
specification is important since not all conversations
require the same form and degree of persistence. This view

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

is reflected in the current discourse on CMC. Whereas
older contributions on persistent conversations proposed
solutions for the issue of persistence in mediated
conversations in general, more recent contributions are
limited to a specific type or setting of conversations.
Siegel, Ellis, and Lewis for example analyze ‘deep
conversations’ [18], Farnham, Uberoi Kelly, Portnoy, and
Schwartz propose a communication tool for socializing
and organizing social events [11], and Bregman and
Haythornthwaite discuss persistence in the distance
learning environment [4]. This specialization is an
important evolution in the discourse on persistent
conversations, because it shows that different types of talk
and the different contexts in which these talks take place
have differing needs in terms of persistence. We will
outline such diverse requirements on persistence
discussing two types of knowledge-intensive conversations in the organizational context, namely knowledge dialogues that intend to create new ideas (we call
these crealogues) and discussions that intend to jointly
evaluate an issue (we call these assessalogues). We will do
so by presenting two conversational tools for knowledgeintensive conversations. The first con-versational tool is
the ‘idea-aquarium’ that supports conversations that intend
to create new ideas (i.e., crea-logues). The second is the
‘ruler’ and facilitates conversations through which the
participants can develop options for action and assess them
(i.e., assessalogues). The tools show how our previous
points on persistence issues could be actually realized. In
particular, the tools also illustrate that more persistence (in
terms of completeness) is not always better. In the
following, we will outline how the attributes of persistence
depend on the type of conversation (e.g., crealogue,
assessalogue) and on the use of the tool (either as a visual
conversation support or subsequently for visual minutes).

2. Persistence through conversational tools
We will now present two examples of conversational
tools that try to integrate the means and objectives of
persistence from both the F2F and the computer mediated
context. The applications are specific to knowledgeintensive conversations in the organizational context. One
tool is the “ideaquarium”, an application that helps to
generate new ideas and develop knowledge collectively.
The other is the “ruler”, a tool that helps to assess a
situation and outline various options when people have to
make a decision in a complex and knowledge-intensive
environment. Both conversational tools have originally
been developed for F2F conversations but can also be used
in the computer mediated context. Both applications can be
used with or without a formal facilitator, since the handling
of the tool is very easy and intuitive. In a F2F situation,
one to three people can input content into the tool (in the

CMC situation, the rights to add information can be passed
from one converser to the other or they can be
simultaneously held by many people). We believe that it is
better to use the software with a dedicated facilitator. Such
a facilitator, as various experiences with the tool in the
corporate context and in a class experiments have shown,
performs much better if he/she receives an introduction to
the functionalities of the tools, to the role of a facilitator,
and to the basic principles of visualization.

2.1. Persistence through the visualization of
knowledge creating conversations - the ideaquarium
The “ideaquarium” is an application that supports
conversations aiming to create new ideas and knowledge,
or in other words crealogues. It provides more structure
than a simple brainstorming technique. Figure 1 shows a
screenshot of the tool in action. It illustrates the persistent
trace of a meeting that aimed to gather ideas for an
advertising campaign for the fixed network service of a
national telecommunication provider.
At the beginning of the meeting, the group has to
define the main elements of the starting position and
visualizes them through seashells lying on the sand on the
lowest layer of the aquarium. These markers of the starting
point might result from an analysis of the current situation.
Still in the lowest layer of the ideaquarium, the group can
define two or three thinking directions for the collective
idea generation, i.e. general approaches of how to think
about the issue. These stones represent the general thinking
vectors, along which the group decides to develop its
ideas. As with all other features of the ideaquarium, the
conversers are free to decide whether they want to work
with the thinking directions and label the stones or directly
move to the second phase. In the second phase (middle
layer of the aquarium), the group members develop ideas
by selecting a fish and positioning it over one of the
various thinking directions/stones and labeling it with their
idea (every fish also has a comment box for annotation).
The facilitator colors the fish depending upon the ‘owner’
of the idea (representing group member participation). In
this moment, the single ideas pop up as fish one after the
other. Following this first brainstorming phase, the single
ideas are discussed further, the comment field can be used
for additional remarks, and the ‘owner’ can characterize
his/her idea by choosing a specific fish type. Additionally,
the group can decide upon the size of the fish according to
the consensus or support regarding the idea. After these
first two phases of idea development and discussion, the
group tries to cluster the various ideas (creating fish
swarms of related ideas). The group can visualize the
further development of an idea by positioning an alga grass
between two idea-fish. After this clustering activity, the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

group conducts a first evaluation of the produced ideas by
deciding on two or three criteria fish (criteria that the ideas
have to meet). Turning the evaluation criteria explicit
augments the probability that conversers question
evaluation criteria that are usually taken for granted [2].
This shows how turning something persistent actually
fosters correctibility [4]. The ideas that pass the criteria
fish reach the surface in the aquarium, constituting a
shortlist of the convincing ideas. From this short
presentation of the ideaquarium application, we can deduce
three suggestions for tools that aim to support crealogues,
that is to say discussions that lead to new insights and
ideas:
1. Allow an ample level of freedom and ambiguity
through the facultative and multifunctional use of the
single features of the application: In knowledge and idea
generating conversations, Erickson’s emphasis on the
importance of ambiguity in social representations [9] can
be extended to representations of conversations in general.
In this type of conversation, it is particularly vital that the
conversational tool does not constrain the conversers in
their creativity by providing too tight a structure to which
they have to adhere. Thus, using the ideaquarium, the
facilitator is not forced to exploit the complete spectrum of
the available features. Given a certain situation, it might be
better to work with just one fish type rather than using all
of them. Thus, a conversational tool for crealogues should
allow the conversers to use a specific software function in
a variety of ways. In the ideaquarium, we suggest that fish
should be colored according to the originator of the idea,
but the software does not restrict the users to this specific
use. The facilitator can also decide to use color to express
the closeness to another idea (or the nature of an idea from
crazy to realistic). At the same time, this means that the
closeness or relation of an idea can be expressed in various
ways: The facilitator can decide to use the physical
proximity, the color, the fish type, or even the sea grass to
express the relation of two ideas. This type of versatile
persistence is essential to make conversational tools
seamless and guarantee their acceptance. In this way,
unlike other software packages (such as mind mapping or
concept mapping software) our approach lets the user
choose among different organizing schemes or logics. The
software lets him/ her position elements freely (and not
just hierarchically as in mind mapping software). Versatile
persistence entails a stretch between providing a cognitive
and social structure, and giving users a certain freedom for
their interaction. The inherent risk in that approach is that
facilitators might not always be assisted enough (for
example regarding color choice, symbol consistency, or
positioning).
2. Enhance creativity and trust through the use or
collaborative and playful creation of metaphoric visuals:
When people have to create new ideas and externalize

implicit knowledge, a very collaborative mode of
conversation is necessary [7]. People have to find
themselves in an atmosphere of trust and perceive a certain
level of intimacy in order to put forward still fragile ideas
and find words and structures for yet implicit knowledge
[14]. To create together a beautiful picture, as a colorful
aquarium, fosters this collaborative spirit. The various
ideas are not reciprocal competitors, but all contribute to a
more colorful image. The application further supports a
systemic vision of an issue by inviting the conversers to
reflect which ideas are connected to each other.

Figure 1. The ideaquarium tool to visualize crealogues
In fact, the conversers can position an alga grass to do
so. Furthermore, trust is also fostered through the metaphor
of the aquarium, since it implicitly gives the feeling that
every idea is a precious, beautiful fish. Finally, the
ideaquarium also fosters a very playful interaction with the
generated ideas. A playful mode is important to enable
creativity in the brainstorming phase. But even afterwards,
when conversers have to order and select the produced
ideas, the playful mode can be important not to destruct the
collaborative and trustful atmosphere between the
conversers. Conversers can cluster ideas in an associative
way through the positioning of alga and select the
“winning” ideas through piranhas that do not let certain
fish pass to the topmost layer of the aquarium.
3. Make those contributions persistent that contribute
to the understanding of the process, the content, or the
context of a conversation. More persistence does not
necessarily mean better conversation, or better
conversation documentation. For creative, spontaneous
conversations, it can be confusing or limiting for the
conversation process to create too many traces. In terms of
documenting conversations, recording all details may
result in overloading the later readers of a persistent
conversation and discouraging them from reading such

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

documents all together. Providing a concise meeting
summary on a one page diagram or metaphor reduces
information overload and augments the possibility that
minutes actually get read. On the other hand, using the
collaboratively created visual schema for internal
documentation is only useful if more context information
is added to it [17] through the built-in annotation
functionality. Otherwise, someone who has not attended
the meeting will not be able to understand the visual
minutes.

2.2. Persistence through the visualization of
assessment conversations - the ruler
The ruler is an application that facilitates collective
evaluations and assessment meetings or assessalogues and
helps to explore alternatives jointly by structuring
conversations and, at the same time, making them
persistent. In discussions, groups often have to assess a
current situation or evaluate the various options for a
decision they have to take. The ruler is particularly useful
in a judgment situation “where the procedures are less than
obvious and the rules are ‘shades of gray’, context-based,
and where there is no single solution but rather tradeoffs
among a sometimes unknown set of options.” [18 p.1]. The
ruler has two fundamental ways of application. On the one
hand, the ruler facilitates the assessment of a current
situation as for example the assessment of one/various
client/s. On the other hand, the ruler can also be used to
assess options for action or investment. Such an
application could be the various options in a new market
strategy, e.g., which product features to stress or which
pricing schema to apply, The major advantage of the ruler
is that it turns judgments and judgment criteria explicit and
persistent and thereby encourages conversers to think of
alternative judgments and options. We will briefly present
the main features of the ruler and outline the general
process of its use. We do so by referring to an example in
which students assessed university courses of their first
semester in communication studies in order to define,
which ones should have more weight in the future
curriculum, which ones should be eliminated, added or
moved to other semesters. First, the group filled in the title
of the assessment (e.g. course evaluation) and started to
define the parameters by which it wants to evaluate the
courses. For each parameter (the box on the far left) they
also defined the scale with three to five values that show
the various rating levels of the parameter. The values of
the scale can either be qualitative (e.g. from very poor to
very good) or quantitative (e.g. from 1 vote to 5 votes). It
is important that the facilitator chooses the scales in a way
so that moving the scale to the right always has the same
meaning for the decision (e.g. moving the slider to the
right is a positive argument for a certain decision, moving

it to the left is a negative rating). For quantitative scales,
he/she also has to ascertain that “high” is not once a
positive argument for the option and the other time a
“negative” one. If the scales generally tend to the right,
then the option is as a whole rather positive, when the
scales tend mostly to the left, it is likely to be rejected by
the group. In this first phase, the conversers have the
possibility to work with up to seven parameters or criteria
(they can hide the ones they do not use), and they can copy
the scale of one parameter to another parameter. They also
have the possibility to highlight or block certain
parameters to indicate which ones they have already
discussed and agreed upon. Additionally, whenever the
facilitator works in one scale or parameter, the texts of
these are shown in bold so that all conversers exactly know
which topic is currently discussed. After having defined
the parameters and the respective scales of the evaluation,
the group still has to decide upon the importance of each
evaluation criteria (parameter). The group can move the
most important criteria to the top level of the ruler and the
least important one to its very bottom thanks to the little
arrows next to the parameter field. After this rating of the
evaluation criteria, the group starts to actually assess the
issue (here: the single university courses) and moves the
scales of the parameters to the position the group agrees
upon. The group members have the possibility to make a
comment outlining the reasons why the scale has been
‘calibrated’ at a specific value in a separate pop-up box. In
that comment field, they can also add a specific link for
further information or facts. On the basis of this
evaluation, the group takes the decision.

Figure 2. The ruler tool to visualize assessalogues
In the here reported example, the students decided,
on the basis of their evaluations, which course should be
eliminated, which ones should be given more importance
and which course should be added to their curriculum (in
theory). The students were given 40 minutes for this task
and described the ruler as “useful, simple, fun to use,
ergonomic, and fit for the task”. Again general guidelines
for versatile persistence can be deduced from this

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

application example. Below we focus on three possible
design suggestions for conversation tools that support
assessalogues:
1. Make evaluation criteria explicit: In judgments,
people highly rely on their “gut feeling”. Although this
intuitive feeling is very important, it is also necessary that
people inquire into their implicit criteria that are behind
their judgments. Only in this way they can make their
judgment comprehensible to others and they can question
themselves on how important a criterion actually. Various
authors stress the importance of making assumptions and
values explicit. In this way we can question and critically
examine our reasoning, our attitude and our group
consensus [2, 3] and consequently reach more informed
agreements.
2. Move away from a dichotomic thinking towards a
playful mode of developing alternatives: The ruler
encourages people to think of various alternatives and to
get away from either-or solutions and dichotomic
reasoning (a common bias in conversations). The
metaphor of the ruler suggests that there are always
degrees that one can choose from. A certain situation or
option always has positive and negative aspects and the
group has to decide which drawbacks or advantages are
particularly important for the issue at hand. Visualizing
various options legitimizes different viewpoints and
actions, which is a first important measure to avoid
groupthink [13] and to foster alternative and innovative
thinking. The fact that the bars are easily moveable
encourages the conversers to see a value of a parameter as
potentially changeable and look at its possible
consequences. Often, we are quite stuck to a certain
opinion and have difficulties to suspend our judgment [2,
8] which makes it difficult to find a real consensus.
Having a simple, visual access to alternative ratings and
combinations encourages such mental changes and group
flexibility.
3. Make the conversation and assessment process
persistent through un-, redo, and replay functions and
through printouts of intermediary results: A tool that aims
to support conversations in which collective assessments
take place should also make it possible to reconstruct how
a certain judgment came about. In the ruler, the
conversation process is captured in three ways. First, it
offers the feature to conduct an unlimited number of
“undoes” and “redoes” which permit to reconstruct the
various steps through which the group has gone through.
The second function, labeled as replay, takes this step
further by showing all steps in one animation sequence.
Third, the tool can be used to print out every rating that
has been made. This change in output media is important
because a printout is a more stable (and less changeable)
medium than a picture on the computer screen or beamer.
This gives the participants a sense of security and

progress. The group then – on the basis of these printouts
– compares the various options and assessments. In this
sense, the printing has the function of ‘freezing’ the
intermediary results of the rating and decision process. It
is also a protection against (later) manipulations or
changes.

3. Conclusion and outlook
In this paper, we have argued for the benefits of
comparing face to face and mediated conversations with
regard to persistence issues. We have highlighted several
important factors for conversational tools, that we have
summarized as versatile visual persistence. We have
argued that what is considered to be relevant depends on
the use of the visualization as either a direct support for
knowledge intensive conversations or as visual minutes.
Further empirical research has to examine these different
types of persistence and has to compare its different
contexts (F2F versus CMC).
The two presented tools for making knowledge
intensive conversations persistent will be further
developed by integrating them into a macro application.
The reasons for such an endeavor are twofold. First,
people engaged in knowledge-intensive conversations
usually have to solve problems or make and implement
decisions. Thus, different types of knowledge-intensive
conversations (create, share, assess, and implement
knowledge through conversations) are important in
different phases of these decision processes. In this sense,
the ruler could be the natural follower to the ideaquarium
within a decision making process. A macro application
would make it possible to coordinate the different types of
conversations along a decision process. In addition to
crealogues and assessalogues, other important types of
knowledge intensive conversations are sharealogues
(aiming at the transfer of knowledge and at gaining a
shared understanding) and doalogues (e.g., conversations
that lead to a commitment for action and close the gap
between saying and doing). Such a macro application
would also be necessary in order to allow micro and
macro readings as postulated by Erickson [9] i.e. to
identify patterns of participation of argumentation not
only within the single conversation but among various
conversations.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

References
[1] M. Alavi and D.E. Leidner. Review: Knowledge
Management and Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual
Foundations and Research Issues. In MIS Quarterly, 25(1), 107136. 2001.
[2] C. Argyris. Knowledge for Action. A Guide to Overcoming
Barriers to Organizational Change, San Francisco, Jossy-Bass
Publishers. 1996.
[3] D. Bohm, On Dialogue. New York, Routledge. 1996.
[4] A. Bregman and C. Haythornthwaite. Radicals of
Presentation in Persistent Conversations, In Proceedings of the
34th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Los
Alamitos CA, IEEE Computer Society Press. January 2001.
[5] J.M. Di Micco, A. Pandolfo, and W. Bender. Influencing
Group Participation with a Shared Display. In ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2004).
Chicago, IL. November 2004.
[6] J. Donath, K. Karahalios, and F. Viegas. Visualizing
Conversation, In Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences. Los Alamitos CA, IEEE
Computer Society Press. January 1999.
[7] K.M. Eisenhardt, J.L. Kahwajy, and L.J. Bourgeois III, How
Management Teams Can Have a Good Fight. The Absence of
Conflict is Not Harmony, it's Apathy, In Harvard Business
Review, 75, 77-85. 2000.

[15] G.A. Okhuysen and K.M. Eisenhardt. Integrating
Knowledge in Groups: How Formal Interventions Enable
Flexibility, In Organization Science, 13(4), 370-387. 2002.
[16] W. Sack. Discourse Diagrams: Interface Design for Very
Large-Scale Conversations. In Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Los Alamitos CA,
IEEE Computer Society Press. January 2000.
[17] D.B. Schoeneborn. Consistency Encounters Contingency.
The Application of PowerPoint for Knowledge Management
Purposes and Its Differentiation as a Genre of Organizational
Communication. In Proceedings of the Sixth European
Conference on Organizational Knowledge, Learning and
Capabilities (OKLC). Bentley, Boston. March 2005.
[18] M.A. Siegel, S.E. Ellis, and M.B. Lewis. Designing for
Deep Conversation in Scenarios-based Learning Environment.
In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Los Alamitos CA, IEEE Computer Society
Press. January 2004.
[19] M.A. Smith, A.T. Fiore. Visualization Components for
Persistent Conversations, Chi 3(1), 136-143. 2001.
[20] B.M. Stafford. Artful Science. Enlightenment
Entertainment and the Eclipse of Visual Education, Cambridge
MA, MIT Press. 1994.

[8] L. Ellinor and G. Gerard. Dialogue: Rediscover the
Transforming Power of Conversation. New York, John Wiley &
Sons. 1998.
[9] T. Erickson. Designing Visualizations of Social Activity: Six
Claims, In Proceedings of CHI 2003: Extended Abstracts. New
York, ACM Press, 846-847. April 2003.
[10] T. Erickson and S. Herring. Persistent Conversation: A
Dialog between Research and Design. In Proceedings of the 37th
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. Los
Alamitos CA, IEEE Computer Society Press. January 2004.
[11] S. Farnham, S. Uberoi Kelly, W. Portnoy, and J.L.K.
Schwartz. Wallop: Designing Social Software for Co-located
Social Networks. In Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Los Alamitos CA,
IEEE Computer Society Press. January 2004.
[12] S.C. Herring. International Coherence in CMC. In
Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences. Los Alamitos CA, IEEE Computer Society
Press. January 1999.
[13] I. Janis and L. Mann. Decision Making: A Psychological
Analysis of Conflict, Choice and Commitment. New York, Free
Press. 1977.
[14] I. Nonaka, R. Toyama, and N. Konno. SECI, Ba and
Leadership. A Unified Model of Dynamic Knowledge Creation.
In Long Range Planning, 33, 5-34. 2000.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

