Polyscopy – a New Paradigm in Design for the Web
Almira Karabeg and Dino Karabeg
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
almira@ifi.uio.no, dino@ifi.uio.no
Abstract
Abstract—Polyscopy is offered as a new paradigm
in the design for the Web. One of the characteristics of
polyscopy is that it is based upon a methodology,
called Polyscopic Modeling, which offers explicitly
formulated principles, criteria and methods for
designing information. We show how certain tools and
techniques from polyscopy may be applied to devise a
methodology for designing for the Web. Our approach
allows us to highlight a central role of visual
information (creation and presentation of high-level
information) and to specify and discuss visual
information design criteria.
Index Terms—Information design, design criteria,
visual intelligence, information visualization.

1. Introduction
Information design, rather than being a defined
point of origin, is a field to which researchers and
practitioners converge from a variety of disciplines
such as graphic design, linguistics, computer science,
library science, education, cognitive science etc.
Research within the field thus has a diversity of angles
of looking at the field, methods and techniques. For
us, information design is about designing a new way of
informing, in which information is created according to
certain set of principles, criteria and methods (a
methodology) [1-3].
The possibility to design an informing as a whole is
a novelty. The motivation is a series of informationrelated anomalies, such as information overload,
relativism and various forms of information misuse. A
designed methodology, called Polyscopic Modeling,
shows that our ‘informing puzzle’ can indeed be
solved: the methodology serves as a prototype design
plan for a coherent and well functioning informing
[2,3]. Polyscopy is a brand name for practical applications of Polyscopic Modeling methodology [1-10].
The application of Polyscopic Modeling may lead
to different understanding and handling of key issues

such as economic and political power [4], free choice
[4], values [5], well-being [6] and sustainability [7].
In this article we show how the methodological
approach to information can serve as foundation for
reconstructing the way we design for the Web. The
word ‘paradigm’ in this context may have two
meanings: it can signify a meta-model, image or
pattern (the etymological meaning); alternatively, it
may signify a set of concerns, values, worldviews etc.
in an intellectual discipline (the newer and now more
common meaning). As we show below, polyscopy is a
‘new paradigm’ in both senses.
In section two of the article we give a short review
of polyscopy. In section three we show how polyscopy
can be used in information structuring and navigation.
In section four we discuss polyscopic meta-information
design with such technologies as Topic Maps or
Semantic Web, where a semantic layer is created on
top of the Internet resources for efficient access and
findability. In section five we look at how polyscopy
can help us devise criteria for design and evaluation of
visual representations aimed at publication on the Web.

2. Polyscopy
2.1. Polyscopy as an attitude
Polyscopy begins with a certain insight from which
characteristic attitude and course of action naturally
follow.
The insight is that our mind has a tendency to
consider a certain conceptualization of reality (be it
religious, scientific or otherwise) as the reality itself.
Cognitive science allows us to understand the origins
of this tendency [11].
The attitude associated with polyscopy is to
consciously counteract this deceptive tendency of the
mind. The action associated with polyscopy is to
consciously seek new ways of looking at things, and to
be receptive to the ways of looking at things of others.
In polyscopy the way of looking is called scope. The
basic credo of polyscopy is that multiple scopes are
possible and often necessary.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Polyscopy supports holistic thinking and conscious
choice [4, 7]. It is not sufficient that something looks
good and whole from one point of view; that which
truly is whole must look whole from every angle.
Polyscopy stands for the fact that proper handling
of any issue presupposes that the issue is perceived,
understood and dealt with within an appropriate scope.
A car cannot be understood at the level of detail of
screws and nuts. Polyscopy allows us to see ‘the whole
thing’ in clear and simple terms. Polyscopy requires
that we consciously choose our scopes, in order to have
better or more functional views of issues and
phenomena.

scopes, the circle represents high-level information and
the square represents low-level information.
Ideograms [8] serve for visual representation of
ideas. As they often involve visual metaphors, a short
textual message usually accompanies the visual
presentation. The message of the Polyscopic
Information ideogram is that polyscopic information
(represented by the ‘i’) consists of concise and holistic
high-level information (the circle or the point) which is
founded upon detailed, analytical and multiple-sided
low-level information (the square).

2.2. Polyscopy as a meta-model

Obviously, the creation of polyscopic information
involves more than just reorganizing the existing
information. The lacking high-level information needs
to be created. The missing low-level information needs
to be created and the existing one needs to be
reconfigured. The Polyscopic Modeling methodology
provides the principles, criteria and methods that are
required for this task.
The main design criteria in polyscopy are
perspective, nourishment, relevance and foundation
[1].
The perspective criterion postulates that
information needs to allow us to ‘see through’ the
whole, to see the whole in correct proportions, with
nothing essential left obscure or hidden. The
perspective roughly corresponds to the intuitive notion
of the ‘whole truth’. The perspective criterion gives
role and prominence to ideograms and other intuitive,
artistic or visual techniques in informing.
The nourishment criterion reminds us that
information has subtle long-term effects, influencing
our values, emotions, preferences, habits etc. This
criterion emphasizes the subtle but often decisive
impact of visual and other non-explicit forms of
communication.
The relevance criterion imposes a priority structure
on information. We are reminded that information has
a purpose, and that we must create and choose
information according to that purpose.
The
foundation
criterion
postulates
that
‘information needs to have a broad and solid
foundation’. This roughly means that information must
be reliable, proven or verifiable. Conscious founding of
information, in particular of high-level information,
can bring substantial benefits to culture.

To facilitate meaningful use of multiple scopes and
views, the Polyscopic Modeling methodology
introduces levels and aspects. Those may easily be
understood by using the metaphor of a mountain,
where every standpoint is a viewpoint or scope.
The high-level views are like the views from the top
of the mountain; they allow us to see the large picture,
choose directions, distinguish between what is large
and what is small and perceive the role and the relative
importance of a detail within a whole. The low-level
views are more technical and detailed. A key point is
that the high-level views and the low-level views serve
for different purposes and that both are needed.

Figure 1: Polyscopic Information ideogram.
In addition to vertical abstraction whose goal is to
create high-level information, the methodology also
supports
horizontal
abstraction.
Polyscopic
information is presented in terms of different aspects
which intuitively correspond to sides or angles of
looking. The aspects may reflect different reader
categories, ways of looking at the subject etc.
A high-level view of polyscopic information is
given in terms of the Polyscopic Information Ideogram
(Figure 1), where the triangle represents a hierarchy of

2.3. Polyscopy as a method

Perhaps the most interesting novelty in polyscopy is
that specific methods are provided for creating reliable
high-level information by integrating low-level
information pieces [2, 3, 6]. Those methods allow us to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

create verifiable, scientific-like high-level facts and
insights. Ideograms and other artistic techniques serve
for efficient, intuitively suggestive communication of
high-level information.

more scientific or real. The historical cultures did not
need polyscopy because the slow rate of change and the
absence of potentially destructive technologies made
them sustainable.

2.4. Polyscopy as a cultural initiative

3. Polyscopic structuring and navigation

In the culture where we can no longer rely on
traditional choices, polyscopy provides support for
choosing purposefully and consciously. By using the
high-level information to look at an issue ‘from above’,
we can understand the issue in simple and clear terms
and take appropriate action. Polyscopy also stands for
‘contextualizing’ information and action. Polyscopy
allows us to see the large issues and contextualize the
smaller ones, by understanding them within the context
of the larger ones. This highlights purpose and
relevance.
Polyscopy supports holistic or multiple-perspective
thinking. This way of thinking is especially relevant in
the post-industrial era, where it has become
increasingly important that technical, socio-cultural,
political and other aspects of an issue be taken into
account in design and decision making [12].

3.1. Modular presentation
Polyscopic structuring of information is one of the
key elements of the Polyscopic Modeling
methodology. In keeping with the basic principle of
computer programming [14], polyscopic information is
structured in terms of small, manageable modules, each
representing a simple coherent view. The view is
coherent if it corresponds to a coherent scope (if it
results by looking from a single ‘viewpoint’ on the
metaphorical ‘mountain’).
Polyscopic structuring of information is natural. In
nature we always see a coherent view. Views that are
not coherent (where what is large is mixed up with the
small) tend to be confusing and deceptive.
Small, coherent modules are easy to understand and
verify. High-level modules provide a compact
overview and efficient access to details (details are
accessed only when needed). High-level modules also
serve as pointers for finding the relevant low-level
information. Polyscopic structuring of information may
therefore be considered as the natural antidote to
information overload.
Distinguishing high-level information from lowlevel one by separating them in distinct modules fosters
the sense of perspective and supports holistic thinking.
Large issues are distinguished from small ones. Details
are understood in the context of the large picture.
Aspects are presented separately.

3.2. Orientation

Figure 2: Book cover for “Theorizing Modernity”
The modern (post-industrial or post-traditional)
culture requires such way of thinking in order to be
functional or sustainable. The cover of the book
“Theorising Modernity” (Figure 2) [13], where the
modern ‘globalized’ world is depicted as a globe tied
to a truck running towards a precipice, is a succinct
ideographic illustration of this point.
The reasons why we are lacking the sort of
information we most need are historical. Reductionism
tended to destroy the high-level information by
reducing it to low-level one, which was considered as

In polyscopic structuring of information, modular
presentation is combined with a clear visual indication
of the polyscopic hierarchy (the metaphorical
‘mountain’) and the reader’s current position on it.
This too is natural – in nature we are intuitively
aware of our position and our way of looking, based on
which we know whether we are looking at the big
picture or the detail. That secures the awareness of
relevance and perspective.

3.3. Navigation
A basic principle of polyscopy is that the scope
determines the view. Applied to navigation, this
principle signifies that the user must be allowed to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

choose the view by selecting among available scopes.
Intuitively, the scope is the control knob given to the
reader to switch between views.
To see the naturalness of polyscopic navigation,
think of inspecting a hand-held object. One turns the
object at different angles and takes it closer or further
from the eye to explore the object. In a similar way, the
polyscopic information structuring facilitates active
exploration of the presented subject.

4. Polyscopic meta-information
The creation of meta-information is often
considered as the next phase in Web development and
as remedy for information overload. Specific tools and
standards, such as Semantic Web and Topic Maps, are
being developed for this purpose. Similar observations
and principles as the ones mentioned in the preceding
section motivate and orient the polyscopic structuring
of meta-information.
In what follows the polyscopic structuring of metainformation is explained by using Topic Maps [15] as
example.

programming languages which provide suitable
program structuring constructs. The IF-THEN-ELSE
and the WHILE instruction replaced the generic GOTO
statement, which allowed for arbitrary jumps from one
program line to another.
The conditions around information are now similar.
We are overproducing poorly structured information
[16]. Furthermore, we presently have no underlying
metaphor or methodology which would help us
organize information in a meaningful and
comprehensive way. From the point of view of our
parallel, the hyperlinks are the GOTOs (in the sense
that they allow for arbitrary jumps from one context to
another), and so are the Topic Map associations! The
consequence is that the Internet information is
currently structured in a spaghetti-like manner, similar
to early computer programs.
What is needed is a collection of structuring
principles and techniques, analogous to the ones
introduced by early programming methodologies. An
initial, prototype solution is provided by the Polyscopic
Modeling methodology.

4.3. Making the topic maps polyscopic
4.1. Topic Maps
Topic Maps is a method for organizing, retrieving
and navigating information. The main concepts in
Topic Maps are topics, associations and occurrences
[15]. The associations specify in what way the topics
are related with one another. By following an
association, the search can move from a topic to the
one which bears with it a desired semantic relationship.
An example of the kind of access which is facilitated
by Topic Maps might involve shifting from the topic
‘Giacomo Puccini’ to the topic ‘Lucca’ (the city where
Puccini was born) and then to ‘Alfredo Catalani’
(another composer born in Lucca).

4.2. Insights from history of computing
A parallel between information overload and early
history of computer programming suggests that the
Topic Maps method alone is not sufficient to remedy
the information overload and helps us motivate
Polyscopic Topic Maps.
In the early 1950s the budding software industry
found itself in a crisis. Ambitious software projects
were undertaken which resulted in thousands of lines
of ‘spaghetti code’ (called so because of their messy,
spaghetti-like control structure) which nobody could
understand or debug. The solution was found by
developing programming methodologies which instruct
how to structure programs, and high-level

The Topic Maps provide a natural platform for
polyscopic
structuring
of
information.
The
instance/type and the subclass/superclass constructs
allow for vertical abstraction and for implementing the
levels. The scoping constructs allow for horizontal
abstraction and for implementing the aspects.
The Polyscopic Modeling methodology provides
principles for structuring the Topic Maps in a
polyscopic way. To use again our parallel, the Topic
Maps are in the role of a low-level programming
language. The goal of Polyscopic Topic Maps research
is to create standard structuring constructs analogous to
the IF-THEN-ELSE and the WHILE statement.
The question “Why should the Topic Maps be
polyscopic?” may also be answered by following the
analogy with geographical maps, which naturally
served as inspiration or meta-model for topic maps.
The geographical maps are polyscopic. They have
levels (of detail or granularity), each serving a different
purpose. They also have aspects: physical, political,
climatologically and others.

5. Polyscopic visual design
5.1. Visual language and visual intelligence
Robert Horn begins his “Visual Language” [17]
book as follows:
A larger synthesis of how people communicate is

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

occurring. A wide variety of visual and verbal
representation systems are coming together. … Visual
language is emerging as any other language does – by
people creating it and speaking it. Already, visual
language is growing and spreading in ways that
artificial international languages like Esperanto,
which was invented by a single person, have never
done. It is being borne of people’s need, worldwide, to
deal with complex ideas that are difficult to express in
words alone. … The primary goal of this book is to
investigate the properties of visual language that make
it a language as opposed to another in the multitude of
communication methodologies.
Rapid increase in the use of visual language is
clearly associated with the growth of the Web, both in
terms of the number of users as well as the complexity
and diversity of tasks that can be managed by and
through the Web. As we have pointed out in our earlier
work [18-20], our culture is becoming increasingly
visual and there is a need to develop our skills in
communicating in visual language. Web is one huge
area of application that has given a burst of creativity,
but, of course, the use of visual language is not limited
to the Web. Visual language is the main tool of the
media and multimedia, film, advertising and graphic
design, engineering and architecture, art etc. While the
visual language in these more traditionally visual
disciplines may be more advanced than what we are
seeing on the Web, it certainly finds its presence on it
(we can watch movies, co-design buildings, visit art
galleries and much more on the Net). However, surfing
the Web is still often far from a relaxed, pleasant
experience that results in successful retrieval and
presentation of information that we need. Also, it
seems to be quite difficult when we, without previous
training in visual arts or graphic design, want to
publish something on the Web. Whether we are
creating a business site, educational site, entertainment
or simply a private site, visual language is hard to
speak. This is true in spite of clip art, fantastic tools
such as Flash and Dreamweaver or guidance on the
Web on just how to do this job. Part of the problem
might be that in our early education, we did not learn
much about visual and spatial reasoning, visual
problem solving, visual perception, influence of
images on our mind and emotions etc. And now, when
we have impetus to use the visual language, we find it
difficult. Sometimes, even when we are satisfied with
our visual language skills, we may find out that we
have not communicated clearly, perhaps because our
fancy design has blurred our message.
The plausible solution for better design for the Web

that we offer here is to combine polyscopy (for
structuring and designing information that we want to
conway) and visual intelligence (presenting it in a good
way). The term visual intelligence is employed here, as
defined by Barry [21], as “the quality of mind
developed to the point of critical perceptual awareness
in visual communication. It implies not only the skilled
use of visual reasoning to read and to communicate,
but also a holistic integration of skilled verbal and
visual reasoning, from understanding of how the
elements that compose meaning in images can be
manipulated to distort reality, to the utilization of the
visual in abstract thought”.
In [18-20], we were concerned with problems of
addressing and advancing visual intelligence, in
particular visual and spatial reasoning. The three
central concepts proposed in those articles were visual
immediacy, visual impetus and visual impedance.
Visual immediacy is defined as the characteristic
that facilitates production of the kind of visual
presentations that enables the interpreting party to
perceive/recognize and cognitively process information
embedded in the presentation (or parts of it) ‘at a
glance’. Visual immediacy is a cognitive quality that is
often implied in references to a presentation’s
intuitiveness and directness. The term is chosen to
reflect not only the visual nature of this presentation
characteristic, but also to emphasize its comparatively
faster (and sometimes apparently immediate) cognitive
processing, which also is an indicator of visual
reasoning facilitation.
Visual impetus is defined as a visual impulse, an
incentive or stimulus whose aim is to increase activity
and curiosity related to the contextual aspect of the
design. One can evaluate visual impetus by asking
questions related to how the first impression of the
page “feels”, and whether it hinders or stimulates
further interest. Visual impetus is thus related to the
aesthetic aspects of a visual presentation, and is a
perceptive quality as well as a cognitive one.
Visual impedance is the hindrance or (often
unintended) negative implicature in a visual design that
causes the receiver to be less receptive to the visual
representation itself, or causes deviance or
deterioration in the message communicated trough the
visual representation. In relation to reasoning,
impedance can be manifested as slower cognition. An
interesting experiment has been conducted and
described in the works of Knauff et al. [22, 23].
Further, we need some standard visual language
vocabulary:
•
Visual metaphor - representation of a new system
by means of visual attributes corresponding to a

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

•
•

•

different system, familiar to the user, which
behaves in a similar way.
Visual analogy - representation of a new system
by means of visual attributes corresponding to a
similar system, familiar to the user.
Visual association - representation of a familiar
system by means of visual attributes
corresponding to a different system, in order to
make the user associate the two systems.
Visual abduction - occurs when hypotheses are
instantly derived from a stored series of previous
similar experiences. It covers a mental procedure
that tapers into a non-inferential one, and falls
into the category of perception [24]. This is
similar to what Turner [25] calls “parables” and
proposes as explanatory of reasoning.

5.2. Polyscopy and visual language design
characteristics
The polyscopic modeling ideogram from Figure 1
may be used here to connect the discussion on the
structuring of information with its visual properties.
The circle now represents the high level
information, but what about its presentation? There is,
of course, no single answer to this question, but the
idea is to present the high level information simply,
clearly, as holistically as possible, using images,
ideograms, visual metaphors, associations, abductions
etc. Visual immediacy and/or visual impetus should be
designed into presentation in a conscious manner.
Visual metaphors frequently posses visual impetus, but
no visual immediacy when viewing the image for the
first time. However, recall of the metaphor is
immediate upon consequent viewing. For example,
visual metaphor in Figure 3 might cause curiosity, but
without reading the text, it would not have any
meaning at the first glance. In terms of characteristics,
the representation has some level of visual impetus and
law level of visual immediacy. Depending on the
predicted usage of the site, one can design in such a
way that desired characteristic is present to a smaller or
a larger degree.

Information Design Challenge Ideogram

Modern culture with
traditional informing is like a
bus with candle headlights.

Information design means
creating and using
information according to its
purpose.

Figure 3: Information design challenge
Basic guidelines for design are thus: the text and
images work together to communicate the message
according to the polyscopic principles. High level
information should to be designed with large level of
visual immediacy and/or impetus. The low level
information should be designed in such a way that
there is as little visual impedance as possible. In
learning environments, polyscopic topic maps are en
excellent choice for structuring information, and with
some creativity and consciously designing into their
presentation visual immediacy and impetus, they may
be truly a fantastic learning device, combining quality
of information with artistic visual expression.

6. Concluding remarks
While polyscopy is a tool for design of information
in general, combined with polyscopic topic maps it
becomes a very useful tool for Web design and Web
based learning. Polyscopic Topic Maps support good
thinking and learning habits. The levels allow us to
distinguish what is fundamental from what is
ephemeral, the large picture from the detail. The
aspects allow us to control the complexity by
distinguishing between different angles of looking
(technical, humanistic, philosophical etc.) while still
keeping them together. They are also particularly
suitable for multi-disciplinarity, inter-disciplinarity and
trans-disciplinarity learning and research. They allow
for overcoming the separation between the humanistic
and the technical aspects of an issue, which needs to be
encouraged.
Polyscopic approach, combined with visual
intelligence promise to deliver really sound approach
to large portion of Web design needs (see [26] for an
example of application of polyscopy to e-business).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

References
[1] D. Karabeg, Polyscopic Modeling Definition. In
Griffin at al (Ed.): The Turning of the Tide.
Selected Readings of the IVLA, 2004.
[2] D. Karabeg, Information Design – An informing
for the 21st century. Keynote speech. Proc. IPSI
conference Stockholm, September 2004.
[3] D. Karabeg, Designing Information Design.
Information Design Journal, vol. 11(1), Fall 2003.
[4] D. Karabeg, Information for Conscious Choice.
Information Design Journal 1(2/3), Spring 2004.
[5] D. Karabeg, Polyscopic Study of a Basic Cultural
Pattern. In World Views and the Problem of
Synthesis,, Aaerts et al. Ed. Kluwer, 1999.
[6] D. Karabeg, Addiction Pattern. In Exploring the
Visual Future: Art Design, Science & Technology,
R. Griffin et al. Ed. `International Visual Literacy
Association, 2001.
[7] D. Karabeg, Information Design Is The Key.
Poster and lecture on Visions Of Sustainable
World conference, Milano, Italy, December 2003.
The text of the lecture is available at
www.holiscope.org.
[8] D. Karabeg, Ideograms in Polyscopic Modeling.
Proceedings of the IEEE Infovision2000
conference, London, England, July 19-21, 2000.
[9] D. Karabeg, R. Guescini and T. Nordeng, Flexible
and Exploratory Learning by Polyscopic Topic
Maps. Proc. IEEE ICALT 2005 (to appear).
[10] D. Karabeg, Design is the alternative to tradition.
Proc. EAD06, April 2005.
[11] M. S. Gazzaniga, The Mind’s Past. University of
California Press, 1998.
[12] H. A. Linstone, Decision Making for Technology
Executives. Artech, 1999.
[13] C. Hey (Ed.), Theorising Modernity: Reflexivity,
Environment and Identity in Giddens’ Social
Theory. Longman, 1999.
[14] O. Dahl, E. Dijkstra, C. Hoare, Structured
Programming. Academic Press, 1972.
[15] S. Pepper, The TAO of Topic Maps.
http://www.ontopia.net/topicmaps/materials/tao.ht
ml
[16] R. S. Wurman, Information Anxiety 2. QUE,
2001.
[17] R. E. Horn, 1999, Visual Language: Global
Communication for the 21st Century. MacroVU
Press.
[18] A. Karabeg, M. N. Akkøk, K. Kristensen, 2004,
Towards a Language for Talking About
Information Visualization Aimed at Presentations
on the Web, in Proceedings of the Eight

International Conf. on Information Visualization
(IV04), London UK: IEEE Computer Society.
[19] A. Karabeg, M. N. Akkøk, (IVLA 2003). Visual
Representation and the Web. In Griffin at al (Ed.):
The African Experience. Selected Papers from
IVLA Conference 2004.
[20] A. Karabeg, M. N. Akkøk, Towards a Language
For Talking About Visual And Spatial Reasoning
In Griffin at al (Ed.): The African Experience.
Selected Readings of the IVLA, 2004.
[21] A. M. Barry,
1997, Visual Intelligence:
Perception, Image and Manipulation in Visual
Communication. SUNY Press.
[22] M. Knauff, P. N. Johnson-Laird, Visual imagery
can impede reasoning. Memory & Cognition,
2002, p. 363-371.
[23] M. Knauff, E. May, Visual Imagery in Deductive
Reasoning: Results from experiments with sighted,
blindfolded, and congenitally totally blind
persons. CogSci2004, August 5-7 2004.
[24] L. Magnani, S. Civita, G. P. Massara, Visual
Cognition and Cognitive Modeling, in Human and
Machine Vision: Analogies and Divergences, V.
Cantoni, Editor. Plenum Press: New York, 1994.
p. 229-243.
[25] M. Turner, 1998. The Literary Mind: The Origins
of Thought and Language. Oxford University
Press.
[26] A. Karabeg. Values, Brand and Aesthetics in ebusiness, From Information Design Point of View
IPSI 2004, Stocholm, September 24-26, 2004

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

