Real 3D Digital Method for Large-Scale Cultural Heritage Sites
1st Shao-xing HU, 2nd Hong-bin ZHA, 3rd Ai-wu ZHANG
1 School of Mechanical Engineering & Automation, Beijing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Beijing 100083, 2nd National Laboratory on Machine Perception, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, 3rd Ministry of Education Key Lab on 3D Information Acquisition & Application,
Capital Normal University, Beijing 100037
{husx@buaa.edu.cn, zhangaw163@163.com}
P

P

P

P

P

P

st
P

P

P

P

P

P

Abstract
Digital preservation of cultural heritage sites has
become a global problem. The paper proposes a real 3D
digital method for culture heritage sites using 3D laser
scanners and CCD cameras. Firstly, we preprocess the
laser scans for noise removal and hole filling. Next step is
using an improved ICP algorithm we present step-by-step
registration to align all range scans into a common
coordinate system. And then, we proposed a filtering of 3D
data compression and use a volumetric-based algorithm
for the construction of a coherent 3D mesh that encloses
all range scans. Finally, through texture mapping, we
obtain real 3D and real texture models. The example of the
construction of the 3D model of buildings and grottos are
presented.
Keywords---Cultural Heritage Sites; Digitization;
Laser scan; 3D model; Camera calibration; Texture
mapping.

1. Introduction
Cultural heritage sites show the development process
of a nationality on economy and culture. However, with
the lapse of time and the effects of human activities,
cultural heritage sites are subjecting to erosion and
vandalism. How use new techniques to protect cultural
heritage sites has become a global problem.
Over the past decade years people finished many
works for protecting cultural heritage sites. For example,
Dunhuang Academy China developed a computer
restoration and exhibition system of cultural relics
information[1]. It used image processing and digital
photogrammetry to recode the information of murals and
cultural relics. Zhejing University of China researched the
project: Fuse of multimedia and intelligent technology and
artistic restoration[2]. The two projects main employed
image processing and virtual reality.
In fact, the textured 3D models are more important for
preservation of cultural heritage because they can provide

geometric and textured information for conversation and
restoration of culture heritage sites. So fast capturing
geometric data and textured data and modeling become
new research focuses. Some notable projects have
appeared in succession, including the modeling of
Michelangeo’s Daivd and other statues[3], the Pieta
project[4], the Great Buddha project[5], and the virtualization of Byzantine Crypt[6].
Our goal is using real 3D data and real texture data to
creating 3D models of large-scale cultural heritage sites.
Our method overlaps the work of the above researches, but
differ in several ways. First, our target objects are largescale objects. Second, we can’t use a laser range finder and
a structured-light range finder to measure our targets
because our targets are larger than the usual targets for
these sensors.
Our main work include: 1) Use a time-of-flight laser
scanner (Cyrax 2500) to capture geometry data and use
high-resolution digital camera to obtain texture data. 2)
Preprocess the laser scans for noise removal and hole
filling. 3) Present step-by-step registration of multi range
scans. 4) Create geometric models. 5) Realize texture
mapping.

2. 3D data preprocessing
Generally, when measuring cultural heritage sites,
each range scan includes some objects such as cars, traffic
lights, people, trees, etc. that occlude the actual measured
object. Objects of this type have the following two
properties:
1. They lie on the front the large structures we
measure, and they constitute unorganized point sets if we
compare them with the regular structures we measure.
2. They lie on the back the large structures we
measure, and they are small in size if they are compared
with the measured large structures.
Our goal is to only retain the data that confidently
substitute the actual measured object. We make some
assumptions that are similar to the one proposed in [17]: 1)
the measured large structures are usually vertical, 2)
extend a small range in horizontal direction for measured

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

the large structures, 3) z-axis of laser scanner keeps
perpendicular to the ground plane, x-axis and y-axis keep
parallel with the ground plane. In cylinder coordinate
system, the vertical structures keep vertical. For each scan
line, these points on the same vertical structure have a
same distance to the scanner, we define the main range as
the range value that occurs most frequently, the measured
large structures and other vertical objects such as a street
light or a tree trunk are extracted. With the second
assumption and the location of the measured large
structures, we filter out the latter class of vertical objects.
Figure 1 shows the process of scanline segmentation.
split

measured object

range value

Figure 1 The Process of Scanline Segmentation
After extracting the measured structures, we will find
some holes on them sometimes. Holes are created due to
the following reasons:
1. Occlusion from other scene objects (i.e. trees, cars,
etc.). The removal of these objects generates holes.
2. Glass windows. The laser beams pass through the
glass and measure points in the interior of the buildings
(ceilings, bookcases, etc.)
We employ two approaches to fill holes:
1. If the hole is on a planar region, we employ linear
interpolation, for example, windows.
2. If the hole is on a no-planar region, we employ
quadratic surface interpolation, i.e. sculpture.
_

3. Registration of range scans
To acquire data describing an entire structure requires
capturing multiple range scans from different locations and
registering them together correctly. The strategies of
registration have main two types: one is point-based
registration [7]; the other is feature-based registration
[8,9,10]. Because extracting features from cultural heritage
sites is very difficult, we select point-based registration
strategy.
Point-based registration demands to search corresponding points between two overlapping scans. Zhang et al.
proposed fast global registration of multiple 3D data sets
from outdoor large scenes [11]. She employed two
attributes of laser sample point: position and reflectance to
search corresponding points between two overlapping

scans by mahalanobis distance, and use reverse projection
to speed up searching corresponding points.
We employ the method of Zhang et al. to register
range scans by step-by-step way. First, we divide the two
range images into N and M child images, and suppose the
child images from different range images include equal
pixels. We compute the similar degree of the two child
images from different range images by mahalanobis
distance. We select three pairs of child images that they
have maximal similar degree and compute their centers.
We use the three pairs of centers to create an initial
estimate.
When using laser scanner to measure objects, we can
obtain a range image and a reflectance image, and
reflectance image and range image are fully registered
because they both originate with the same echoed laser
pulse. Next to extract 3D feature points using reflectance
image and align the 3D feature points in two range scans
into a coordinate system by the initial estimate. And then,
we execute the method of Zhang et al. for the feature
points of the two range scans. In this time, we can obtain
an improving transformation matrix.
We align all points of the two range scans into a
coordinate system using the improving transformation
matrix, and we execute the method of Zhang et al. for all
points of the two range scans. Finally, the two range scans
are accurately aligned into a common coordinate system.

4. Geometry modeling
Each range scan contains a huge amount of points, if
ten or hundred of range scans are aligned together, a very
huge 3D data set will be produced. 3D modeling from the
data set needs a better computer hardware environment.
We must filter 3D data before modeling.

4.1 Filtering
The structure features are the main elements
describing the shapes of culture heritage sites, we must try
our best to retain the structure features when compress 3D
data. We propose a filtering 3D data compression.
The laser points are organized on the 2D grid and a
2D point on the grid is corresponding a 3D point. We
divide the grid into four rectangles with the same size. The
two conditions are tested for each rectangle: (1) Whether
the 3D points covered by the rectangle are on the same
plane. (2) Whether the vertices of the rectangle are four
effective points, or whether the vertices of the rectangle
have three effective points. Effective point means that it is
an actual point of the measured objects.
If both conditions are met, we retain these vertices of
the rectangle corresponding the effective points, otherwise
the rectangle is subdivided into four rectangles and the
same tests are performed for each of them. The algorithm
proceeds iteratively until the two conditions are fulfilled.
The filtering method retains structure features while
reducing 3D points. Figure 2(a) is original data before
filtering, and figure 2(b) is the result after filtering. The
amount of points is reduced 88%.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

After 3D data filtering, we perform the Curless and
Levoy’s method to obtain 3D models of culture heritage
sites. Figure 3 is a mesh model from the filtered data using
the Curless and Levoy’s method.

5. Texture mapping

(a)

(b)

Figure 2 3D Data Compression
(a) Original Data (148400 points); (b) The Result
After Filtering (17919 points)

4.2 Modeling
V.Sequeira [12] and G.Turk [13] first built the mesh
from a range scan, and then they zippered the meshes of all
range scans into a single mesh model. Their methods
cannot smoothen the errors from the registration of multi
range scans and the errors of samples.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3 Mesh Model
(a) Data After Compression; (b) 3D mesh
A volumetric method for building complex models
from range images proposed by Curless and Levoy [14]
can select the best mesh patch to fit 3D points. Due to the
method is executed for all 3D points that are obtained
through registration, it can remove some registration errors.
Furthermore, the method can recognize holes and
distinguish different objects.

Cultural heritage sites contain not only rich geometric
details but also color textures. When reconstructing
realistic 3D digital models, all of information on the
cultural heritage objects should be considered.
Cyrax2500 laser scanner that we use can only output
range and laser reflectance data. To obtain color texture
data of cultural heritage objects, we use a high- resolution
digital camera. Thus, the problem of texture mapping
appears, which is also a key technique of photometric
modeling.
Generally speaking, a reflectance image is also an
image and can be matched to any other image. We decided
to employ the reflectance image as a vehicle for the
alignment of range images with texture images.
Reflectance images are similar to texture images.
Edges in reflectance images are generated due to several
reasons: (1) Different colors or materials, (2) Range jumps,
(3) Occluding boundaries. These edges can also be
observed in texture images. So by aligning the
discontinuities in reflectance images with those in texture
images, we can determine the relative relationship between
the range and texture views. We select Sobel to extract
edge points: 3D reflectance edge points and 2D texture
edge points. Our texture mapping steps are similar to the
method of P. Debevec, et al [15]:
1. Extract edge points including 3D reflectance edge
points and 2D texture edge points.
2. Project 3D edge points on 2D texture image and
search corresponding points between two type edges.
3. Compute the camera model using Tsai’s method
[16].
4. Return 2, using the camera model, renew to project
3D edge points on 2D texture image and update
corresponding points.
We perform the above process continuously until the
mean error of correspondence less than a given value.
Finally, we obtain an optimal camera model, and the
texture images are mapped onto the 3D geometric model
correctly.

6. Applications and results
We selected two projects as case studies and test beds
for the new methods. In the first examples we generate a
high-resolution, reality-based 3D model of Yungang grotto.
In the second example we reconstruct real 3D digital
models for some historic objects. Both projects
demonstrate the benefits of digital preservation of cultural
heritage.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 4 The Part Results of Yungang Grotto
(a) And (b) Are The Photos; (c) And (d) Are The Results of Registration; (e) 3D
Geometric Model with Reflectance; (f) Real textured 3D Model.

6.1. Yungang grotto visualization
Yungang grotto was built 1500 years ago. With the
environment changes, the grotto has been destroyed. We
collected geometric data and texture data of the first cave
of Yungang grotto using Cyrax2500 laser scanner and a
high-resolution digital camera in 2003.
Firstly, we aligned all range scans into a common
coordinate system. Secondly, we created geometric 3D

models of Yungang grotto. Finally, we mapped the texture
images onto the 3D geometric models. Figure 4 shows the
part results we finished.
Figure 4(a) and (b) are the photos; figure 4(c) and (d)
are the results of registration of three range scans; figure
4(e) is 3D geometric model with reflectance; figure 4(f) is
real textured 3D model.
The digital preservation of Yungang grotto is a longterm task, and we only did a little work.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 5 The Results of Registration

Figure 6 3D Geometric Model with Reflectance

6.2 Modeling of culture heritage objects

Conclusions

We also selected some cultural heritage objects to test
the new methods proposed by us. The example is creating
3D model of Qinlin. Qinlin has a very irregular complex
geometry.
Figure 5 is the registration result of eleven range scans
of Qinlin. It shows our registration method is robustness.
Figure 6 is the 3D model of Qinlin, the model contains
the geometric details. Figure 6 shows the results from two
viewpoints.

Cultural heritage digitalization is complex system
engineering, and it refers to the knowledge of many
subjects. We only research some key problems. Our main
contributes are written as follow:
x Proposed an algorithm of automatic registration
of laser range data sets.
x Presented a multi-resolution compression method of 3D data.
x Address an iterative approach to camera
calibration, realize texture mapping.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

Y.Pan, D.Lu. Digital Protection and Restoration of
Dunhuang Mural (in Chinese). Journal of system
simulation. 15(3): 310-314, 2003.
X.Ma, W.Dui, et al. Walkthrough in Image-Based Virtual
Indoor Environment (in Chinese). Journal of Image and
Graphics. 6(1): 86-90,2001.
M. Levoy, K. Pulli, et al. The digital Michelangelo project.
In Proceeding Siggraph’ 2000. 131–144, 2000.
F. Bernardini, H. Rushmeier, et al. Building a digital model
of Michelangelo’s Florentine Piet`a. IEEE Comp. Graph.
and Applic. 22(1):59–67, 2002.
K. Ikeuchi, A. Nakazawa, et al. Creating virtual buddha
statues through observation. In IEEE Workshop on Applics.
of Comp. Vision in Architecture, 2003.
J.A. Berladin, M. Picard, et al. Virtualizing a Byzantine
crypt by combining high-resolution textures with laser
scanner 3D data. In Proceeding VMMS 2002. 3–14,
September 2002.
P.J.Besl, N.D.Mckay. A method for registration of 3-D
shapes. IEEE Trans. PAMI-14 (2):239-256,1992.
K.Nishini and K.Ikeuchi. Robust simultaneous registration
of multiple range images. In Proceeding 5th Asian Conf.
Computer Vision. 454-461, 2002.
I.Stamos and M.Leordeanu. Automated Feature-Based
Range Registration of Urban Scenes of Large Scale. IEEE
International Conference of Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 555-561, Vol. II, June 16–22, 2003.
P

[9]

P

[10] A. Johnson. Spin-Images: A Representation for 3-D
Surface Matching. PhD thesis, Robotics Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, Aug 1997.
[11] A. Zhang Aiwu, W. Sun Weidong et al. Fast Global
Registration of Multiple 3D Data Sets from Outdoor Large
Scenes (in Chinese). High Technology Letters.14(6): 610,2004.
[12] V. SequeiraˈK.Ng, et al. Automated reconstruction of 3D
models from real environments. ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing. 54(1): 1–22, 1999.
[13] G. Turk and M. Levoy. Zippered polygon meshes from
range images. In SIGGRAPH 94. 311–318, Jul 1994
[14] B.Curless and M.Levoy. A volumetric method for building
complex models from range images. In SIGGRAPH’96.
303–312, 1996.
[15] P.E.Debevec, Y.Yu and G.D. Borshukov. View-Dependent
Image-Based Rendering with Projective Texture
Mapping. Eurographics Rendering Workshop 1998. 105116.
[16] R. Lenz and R. Tsai. Techniques for calibration of the scale
factor and image center for high accuracy 3-d machine
vision metrology. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, PAMI-10(5): 713--720, Sept.
1988.
[17] C. Frueh and A. Zakhor. Data processing algorithms for
generating textured 3D building facade meshes from laser
scans and camera images. In proceeding 3D Data
Processing. Visualization, and Transmission, Padua, Italy,
June 2002.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

T

T

