Capturing Team Dynamics Through Temporal Social Surfaces
Peter A. Gloor
Center for Digital Strategies, Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth, Hanover NH
Center for Coordination Science, MIT, Cambridge MA
pgloor@mit.edu
Abstract
This paper introduces Temporal Social Surfaces.
Temporal Social Surfaces show the dynamic evolution
of social relationships in groups. Changes in
measures of social network analysis such as
betweenness centrality are plotted as a curve for each
actor. The curves for all actors are combined in a
single picture. Smoothing the resulting surface leads
to a single-picture overview of social dynamics of a
group. Temporal Social Surfaces are computed using
two variants of a “sliding time window” algorithm
with TeCFlow (Temporal Communication Flow
Visualizer). TeCFlow is a system for creating movies
of temporal information such as e-mail archives, Web
logs, and Web search results. TeCFlow takes as input
time series of records, and generates an interactive
movie of the changes in the resulting directed graph.

1. Introduction
In a weather-forecasting system, weather patterns
consisting of time series of recently collected data are
fed into a computer model to predict the weather
patterns of the next five to fifteen days. In our project
we are aiming to do the same for the evolution of
interaction patterns in networks. As with weather
patterns used to predict sunshine and thunderstorms,
communication flows allow for predicting positive and
negative developments in groups of people. Temporal
visualizations of social interactions can be extremely
valuable as an early warning system, showing highpressure systems, impending storms, and other
relationships in groups that are difficult to anticipate
through other means. By analyzing and aligning
business processes and knowledge flow, organizations
get a unique opportunity to increase the productivity of
knowledge workers through greater creativity,
efficiency, and quality.
We have been developing the TeCFLow environment
for the visual identification and analysis of the
dynamics of communication in virtual spaces for the
last three years [11,12]. Similarly to a weather map,
our tool plays back an interactive movie depicting the
interaction between actors in a network based on

“communication acts” stored in their communication
archive. We have applied our tool to the dynamic
analysis of social networks based on e-mail archives
and the analysis of changes over time in the link
structure of Weblogs and other Web sites [12]. By
comparing dynamic interaction flows with the output
produced by virtual teams, we aim to identify
characteristic dynamic communication patterns of highperforming groups of knowledge workers based on the
work done, among others, by [6,7].

2. Related Work
There has been substantial research dedicated to
computing and visualizing social networks as directed
graphs or adjacency matrices. AGNI [23], ucinet [3],
pajek [2], KrackPlot [13], VisOne [5], Agora [15] and
NetMiner [19] are some of many tools for social
network analysis (SNA). Zoomgraph [1] is a recent
system for social network analysis that combines graph
visualization with a built-in programming language for
graph manipulation and analysis. Sonia [17] is one of
the few tools that temporally visualizes social
networks by creating movies of animated graph
structures. McGrath and Blythe [16] have shown that
motion has a positive effect on the accuracy of viewers'
perceptions of change in status in a social network. In
earlier studies Gloor [10] and Lawrence, Badre, and
Stasko [14] investigated the use of animation for the
understanding of algorithms. PieSpy visualizes the
evolution of social networks of chat users over time
[18].

3. Design and Architecture of TeCFlow
TeCFlow takes as input communication archives and
automatically
generates
static
and
dynamic
visualizations of the communication networks. The
dynamic visualization consists of an interactive movie
showing the evolution over time of the communication
network within the group. Active relationships are
displayed in a sliding time window, with inactive
relationships decaying over time. TeCFlow also
calculates and plots the evolution of group
betweenness centrality and density [24] over time to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

discover interesting events in the lifetime of a virtual
team.
Actor betweenness centrality is the number of
geodesic paths (shortest paths) that pass through this
node. We count the number of “times” that any node
needs to access this given node to reach any other node
in the network by the shortest path. More precisely, if
gjk is the number of geodesic paths between j and k
and gjik is the number of paths between j and k that
pass through i, then gjik / gjk is the proportion of
geodesic paths between j and k that pass through i.
The sum BCi = gjik / gjk for all j,k pairs is the
betweenness centrality for node i. Normalized
betweenness centrality is obtained by dividing simple
betweenness by its maximum value. We use Freeman’s
index [24] for quantifying the overall level of
betweenness in the set of actors BCgroup, which
summarizes the actor normalized betweenness indices:
g

BC group =

[ BC*

'

i =1

'

4. The “Sliding Time Frame”
Algorithm for Temporal Visualization
To display the evolution of communication patterns
over time, we developed a dynamic visualization
algorithm where the layout of the graph is
automatically recalculated every day, resulting in an
interactive movie. The simplistic approach would
have been, for any given day, to base the graph
structure on the communications that occurred during
this day. However, this approach does not take into
account interactions that happened before this particular
day, and would result in a jerky animation of low
quality. For our dynamic visualization, we therefore
propose a new algorithm: the sliding time frame
algorithm, where we are always looking at a time
interval consisting of a flexibly chosen number of
days.

BCi ]

1
time

( N 1)

where BC*’ is the largest realized normalized actor
betweenness index of the set of actors and N is the
number of nodes in the network. DCgroup is the
normalized group degree centrality, where DC* is the
largest simple actor degree and N is the number of
nodes in the network:
N

DC group =

i =1

[ DC*

[( N 1)( N

3

4

5

n
n+1
n+2
n+3
n+4

DCi ]
2)]

Group density of a network is defined as the
proportion of ties present in relation to all ties
possible:

D=

2

l

N ( N 1) / 2

l is the number of present edges; N is the number of
nodes in the network.
The interactive TeCFlow movie can be stopped
anytime to drill-down into the messages that are
currently exchanged between actors. Multiple e-mail
addresses can be combined into an online personality,
reflecting the fact that people frequently use different email addresses.
We have implemented an open architecture.
Communication messages are processed locally in
three steps. In the first step, the messages are parsed
and stored in decomposed format in a MySQL
database. In the second step the database can be queried
to select messages sent or received by a group in a
given time period. In the third step the selected
communication flows are represented in a visual
browser using static and dynamic views [11,12] and
netgraphs [23]. TeCFlow has been developed in Java
and is available for free download from
http://www.ickn.org/ickndemo.

Figure 1. Sliding time frame algorithm in
“with history” mode
The basic idea of the sliding time frame algorithm is
to display active ties between actors in a sliding time
frame covering a flexibly selected interval of n days
starting from the current day d the visualization is
showing (figure 1). The window frame moves forward
day by day, and new ties (i.e. e-mail messages
exchanged) are subsequently added to the graph each
day until the desired width of n days of the sliding
time frame is reached. The time window displays all
messages exchanged within the current time frame. In
“with history” mode, messages sent before the current
time frame are included in the layout of the graph.
Once an e-mail message has been sent, it will influence
positioning of the actors in the graph for the rest of the
animation. After the message moves out of the n-days
wide time frame, it is displayed in the visualization as
a dimmed out arc. This reflects persistent ties that stay
active once they have been established for the
remainder of the lifetime of the team.
In “no history” mode, only the edges in the current
time frame are included (figure 2), i.e. only the e-mail
messages exchanged within the time frame are used to
calculate the graph. Day d is the current day that the
visualization is showing and the current time frame is
[d, d+n]. Only communications inside the current time
frame are calculated and displayed. This means that the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

lifetime of ties (i.e., e-mail messages) is limited to the
width of n days of the time frame, afterwards links
decay and disappear. In this version of our system the
tie decay function is binary, ties have a fixed lifespan
of n days and then cease to exist.

Figure 2. Sliding time frame algorithm in
“no history” mode

Figure 3. Temporal view with history (top)
and without history (bottom)

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3
gives
an
example, comparing “with
history” and “no history”
views of the same data set.
It displays a snapshot of the
communication flow of a
subset of the online
community described in
section 5. In this example,
messages
exchanged
between Nov 30, 2001 and
May 28, 2002 are shown.
Figure 3 shows the “with
history” and “no history”
screen shots of May 28,
2002. The top view of
figure
3
displays
accumulated links since
Nov 30, 2001 “with
history”. The time frame is
set to 30 days, which means
that all the links between
April 28, 2002, and May
28, 2002, are shown in full
color, while the links older
than 30 days are dimmed
out. The bottom view of
figure 3 shows the same data
sets, but “without history.”
This means that only the
links within the 30-day time
window April 28, 2002, and
May 28, 2002 are calculated
and shown. Note the
differences
in
group
betweenness
centrality,
group degree centrality, and
density in
the
small
window. In “with history”
mode,
centralities
get
smoothened out, as the
social network structure
changes less and less over
time. In “no history” mode,
centralities oscillate wildly,

displaying the centrality of the graph made up of the
messages exchanged in the last 30 days.

5. Temporal Social Surface - Innovation

Betweenness centrality

Looking at the evolution of group betweenness
centrality over time allows the observer to get a quick
overview of the temporal dynamics of a group.
Observers need to look for peaks and troughs in the
temporal evolution of group betweenness centrality
and density to find changes in the collaboration
patterns of groups.
The sample data set in this paper consists of an email archive of a virtual consulting practice with 200
members of a global consulting firm, covering the
time period from mid-2000 to early 2002. It is
composed of the ego-networks of the practice leader
and the practice coordinator (i.e. their e-mailboxes).
Those e-mailboxes are taken as an approximation of
the organizational memory of the consulting practice,
as the practice leader and the coordinator were informed
of all major events in the practice. The major
advantage of this data set is that the author was
intimately involved in the analyzed work processes.
The disadvantage is that the mailboxes of the practice
coordinator and the practice leader do not include direct
one-to-one communication among the practice
members bypassing the practice coordinator or the
practice leader.
Figure 4 illustrates evolution of group betweenness
centrality (GBC) of the consulting practice. The first
peak in GBC in figure 4 appears when a new
innovative concept is developed by the core group. The
second peak appears when the brochure with the new
service offering is published, the final peak denotes the
official marketing launch of the new service offering.

Figure 5. Temporal Social Surface:
Innovation
Figure 5 shows the changes in betweenness centrality
of 40 actors over a period of 300 days. Figure 5
illustrates team dynamics of the core team developing
the innovative consulting service offering. This picture
has been computed in “no history” mode, with a time
window of 50 days. In figure 5, the majority of group
members is inactive at any given time, but observers
are easily able to identify peaks in activity of
individuals and of large parts of the group as “elevated
planes” and “peaks” in the surface. There are five
phases in the lifecycle of this group. After initial kickoff by a few central actors, a larger group of about ten
people communicates with low centrality. Afterwards
there is a first period where collaboration of about 5
central members with about 20 peripheral people
peaks. In the next phase, total participation goes down,
as does centrality. In the final phase, there are two or
three highly central members, communicating with
about 20 peripheral participants.

6. Temporal Social Surface - Learning
Development of Innovation

Launch of Innovation
Creation of Innovation

time

Figure 4. GBC plot
Compared to the condensed plot of the evolution of
betweenness centrality, adding a curve for each
individual actor and extending the curve into a surface
conveys much richer information. In order to get a
straightened out surface, the betweenness values for
each time vector are sorted by increasing value. The
price to pay for this better readable surface is the loss
of traceability for individual actors.

The dataset for this example consists of a subset of
the e-mail messages of the previous section.
Communications on the subject of organizing a global
Web-based seminar (“Webinar”) have been collected;
allocation of messages to the dataset was done
manually. The archive includes 607 messages
exchanged among 80 actors, covering a time period of
about 190 days. The Webinar was prepared by a small
team of self-selected members of the consulting
practice over a multi-month period. One main speaker
then delivered the Webinar during one hour, assisted
by his team members. The audience of the Webinar
was spread out globally, and had the opportunity to
ask questions to the speakers via e-mail during the
talk. Questions that could not be covered during the
talk were answered in the next few days. Because of
overwhelming demand, the team decided to revise and
rerun the Webinar a few weeks later. The team worked

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

together on some minor changes until the seminar was
delivered again.

phase four is done by two to three actors with high
centrality, communicating with around ten people.

7. Temporal Social Surface – Interest
degree
centrality
betweenness
centrality

The last example illustrates the temporal social
pattern of the diffusion of the innovation. A small core
group of initially 2 people is joined in a steady growth
pattern by another 80 people over a period of 300 days.

density

Figure 6. Group Betweenness Centrality of
Webinar
Figure 6 illustrates changes in group betweenness
centrality. The three phases in the organization of the
Webinar can be recognized, with a decline in group
betweenness centrality (dark line) for the organization
of the first and second run of the Webinar, and a spike
in group betweenness centrality (when the speaker
delivers the event). In the preparation phase group
betweenness centrality is relatively high because of the
core/periphery structure [4] of the core group involved
in a dialogue with potential speakers for the event.

Figure 8. Temporal Social Surface: Interest
We can recognize 4 levels of membership, illustrated
by the three “plateaus” in figure 8. The large majority
are passive lurkers with a betweenness centrality of 0.
This means that those people switch from being not
involved at all to being passive recipients of message.
They are on the first plateau. There is a slowly
growing group of increasingly central people on three
levels of active membership. On the second plateau
there is a group of 3 to 5 people of modest
betweenness centrality. Then there is another small
group of constant size on centrality plateau three.
Finally there is a growing group of 3 to 10
significantly more central actors with relatively high
betweenness centrality.

8. Future Work and Conclusions
Figure 7. Temporal Social Surface:
Learning
Compared with the temporal evolution of group
betweenness centrality displayed in figure 6, the
temporal social surface shown in figure 7 conveys
much richer information. The four phases of initial
preparation, first run, second preparation, and wrap-up
can again be distinguished, but now we can also see
that the second peak in attendance (the actors on the
first plateau) is smaller than the number of attendants
of the first run of the Webinar. We also see that during
the first run there was a considerable number of active
actors involved (the dark slope at the foot of the high
peaks) besides the main speaker. The final wrap-up in

The temporal visualization of communication
networks through Temporal Social Surfaces offers a
novel visual way to discover different phases in the life
cycle of virtual communities. It conveys insights that
might be difficult to obtain by other means. The visual
approach permits to find periods of low and high
group betweenness centrality, and to identify potential
periods of high productivity and information
dissemination. It needs to be complemented by other
contextual cues to obtain a full understanding of the
activities, such as interviews with community
members and a content analysis of the messages
exchanged.
Users have found our pictures intuitively useful to
gain a quick overview of group dynamics. We are
currently working on a more systematic study

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

comparing analysis of longitudinal social networks by
conventional means with our dynamic approach to get
a more in-depth understanding of strength and
weaknesses of our method.
Our continuing goals are to gain deeper insights into
the evolution of online group dynamics and
developing a theory of member roles in virtual
communities using more detailed communication
pattern analysis.

9. Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Yan Zhao, the main developer of
TeCFlow, and Thomas J. Allen, Hans Brechbuhl,
Scott Dynes, M. Eric Johnson, Rob Laubacher, Fillia
Makedon, and Thomas W. Malone for their help and
encouragement. This project has been supported by the
MIT Center for Coordination Science, the Center for
Digital Strategies at Tuck at Dartmouth, and the
Devlab at Dartmouth.

10. References
[1] Adar, E. Tyler, J. Zoomgraph, HP Laboratories, Palo
Alto, 2003.
www.hpl.hp.com/research/idl/projects/graphs/zg2003.pdf

[11] Gloor, P. Laubacher, R. Dynes, S. & Zhao, Y.
Visualization of Communication Patterns in
Collaborative Innovation Networks: Analysis of some
W3C working groups. Proc. ACM CIKM 2003, New
Orleans, Nov. 5-6. 2003.
[12] Gloor, P. Zhao, Y. TeCFlow - A Temporal
Communication Flow Visualizer for Social Networks
Analysis, ACM CSCW Workshop on Social Networks.
ACM CSCW Conference, Chicago, Nov. 6. 2004.
[13] Krackhardt, D. Blythe, J. & McGrath, C. KrackPlot 3.0
User's Manual. Pittsburgh: Carnegie-Mellon University.
1995.
[14] Lawrence, A. Badre, A. Stasko, J. Empirically
Evaluating the Use of Animations to Teach Algorithms,
Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE Symposium on Visual
Languages, St. Louis, MO, October 1994, pp. 48-5
[15] Mazzocchi, S. Virtual Community Dynamics, 2003.
http://www.betaversion.org/~stefano/papers/AC2003agora.pdf
[16] McGrath, C. Blythe, J. Do You See What I Want You
to See? The Effects of Motion and Spatial Layout on
Viewers' Perceptions of Graph Structure Authors. Journal
of Social Structure JoSS, Vol. 5, No. 2. 2004.

[3] Borgatti, S., Everett, M. & Freeman, L.C. UCINET IV,
Version 1.0, Columbia: Analytic Technologies, 1992.

[17] Moody, J. McFarland, D. Bender-deMoll, S. Dynamic
Network Visualization: Methods for Meaning with
Longitudinal Network Movies. 2004.
http://www.sociology.ohiostate.edu/jwm/NetMovies/Sub_CD/dynamic_nets_public.
html

[4] Borgatti, S.P. & Everett, M.G. Models of
Core/Periphery Structures. Social Networks 21: 375-395.
1999.

[18] Mutton, P. PieSpy Social Network Bot.
http://www.jibble.org/piespy/ (Accessed 14 October
2003)

[5] Brandes, U. & Wagner, D. visone - Analysis and
Visualization of Social Networks. In Michael Jünger and
Petra Mutzel (Eds.): Graph Drawing Software, pp. 321340. Springer-Verlag. 2003.

[19] NetMiner, Cyram Co. Ltd., 2003,
http://www.netminer.com

[6] Bulkley, N. & Van Alstyne, M. Why Information
Should Influence Productivity. (forthcoming) In The
Network Society: A Cross-Cultural Perspective. Manuel
Castells, ed. Edward Elgar Publishing. 2004.

[21] Stark, D. Vedres, B. The Social Times of Network
Spaces: Sequence Analysis of Network Formation and
Foreign Investment in Hungary, 1987-2001, Columbia
University. 2004.

[7] Cross, R. & Cummings, J. Relational and Structural
Network Correlates of Performance in Knowledge
Intensive Work. Academy of Management, Seattle, WA.
Paper published in Proceedings. 2003.

[22] Van Alstyne, M. Zhang, J. EmailNet: A System for
Mining Social Influence & Network Topology in
Communication. University of Michigan working paper.
2003.

[8] Danah, B. Potter, J. Viegas, F. Fragmentation of
identity through structural holes in email contacts. Proc.
Sunbelt XII. 2003.

[23] Varghese, G. Allen, T. Relational Data in
Organizational Settings: An Introductory Note for Using
AGNI and Netgraphs to Analyze Nodes, Relationships,
Partitions and Boundaries. Connections, Volume XVI,
Number 1 & 2, Spring. 1993.

[2] Batagelj , V. & Mrvar, A. Pajek - Program for Large
Network Analysis. Connections Vol. 21, No. 2, 47-57.
1998.

[9] Fruchterman, T.M.J. Reingold, E.M. Graph drawing by
force directed placement. Software: Practice and
Experience, 21(11), 1991.
[10] Gloor, P. AACE–Algorithm Animation for Computer
Science Education. Proceedings of the 1992 IEEE
Workshop on Visual Languages, 1992.

[20] Smith, M. Fiore, A. Visualization components for
persistent conversations, Proc ACM CHI. 2001.

[24] Wasserman, S. Faust, K. Social Network Analysis.
Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

