Generation of Graphical Representations of Student Tracking Data in Course
Management Systems
Riccardo Mazza
Faculty of Communication Sciences
University of Lugano, Via Bufﬁ 13
6900 Lugano - CH
riccardo.mazza@lu.unisi.ch

Abstract
An approach of employing Information Visualisation to
develop systems that facilitate instructors in web-based distance learning is presented here. The paper describes a
tool, called CourseVis, that uses multidimensional student
tracking data collected by CMS and generates graphical
representations that can be used by instructors to gain
an understanding of what is happening in distance learning classes. The work followed a systematic approach
that started from collecting the instructors’ needs, produced some appropriate graphical representations of student tracking data, and evaluated the effectiveness, efﬁciency and usefulness of the proposed representations. The
evaluation has shown that with CourseVis the instructors
can identify tendencies in their classes, quickly discover individuals that need special attention, and are able to provide better support to their students.

1 Introduction
Web-based learning environments, often called Course
Management Systems (CMS), are widely used nowadays
in universities and companies around the world. These
tools take advantage of computer mediated communication
to create virtual classrooms where learners and instructors
share a common learning space. With CMS, the instructors
can produce and distribute content material, prepare assignments, engage in discussions with the students, and manage
distance classes. The students have unlimited access to the
learning material from any location and can submit assignments and carry out quizzes at a convenient for them time.
The students often need help from the instructors to understand unclear concepts, and beneﬁt from feedback on their
progress. CMS have now become so popular that many universities around the world have adopted them as the main

Vania Dimitrova
School of Computing
University of Leeds, LS2 9NA, Leeds - UK
vania@comp.leeds.ac.uk

platform for on-line learning. Some well-known commercial tools are WebCT and BlackBoard. Free, open source
solutions, such as Moodle, are being often employed as alternatives to the more expensive commercial CMS.
Despite the fact that CMS have reached a good level of
maturity and reliability, they still fail to provide effective
support to the instructors to perform basic student monitoring activities. Indeed, educational research reports a number of problems with using CMS in distance learning, such
as high student drop-out rates, students’ feeling of isolation, lack of motivation, and difﬁculties with ﬁnding support
from tutors and peers [16, 3, 15, 17, 4]. Some authors suggest that the regular monitoring of the students’ activities
can reduce on-line distance learning problems [2, 14, 3].
This includes monitoring of a learner’s progress with the
material and testing of the acquired knowledge and skills
on a regular basis. Furthermore, the instructors should be
provided with appropriate means to monitor the students’
activities and to diagnose particular situations that might
require the instructor’s intervention to prevent or overcome
potential problems.
CMS store in their internal databases large log ﬁles with
the students’ activities in the course, and have a built-in student monitoring feature that enables the instructors to view
some statistical data, such as the number of accesses made
by the students to each resource, the history of pages visited, and the number of hits for every day of the course.
However, this information is usually provided in a tabular
format, often incomprehensible, with a poor logical organization, and is difﬁcult to interpret. As a result, web log data
is very rarely used by distance learning instructors.
In this work, we propose an approach to graphically represent student tracking data generated by CMS. We have
implemented a tool, called CourseVis, that uses multidimensional student tracking data collected by CMS and generates appropriate graphical representations that can be used
by distance learning instructors to gain an understanding of

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

their on-line students.
The paper is organized as follows. Firstly, we will justify our research and discuss related approaches. Section
3, which is the core of the paper, will describe the CouseVis system and some of the graphical representations generated. Findings from the CourseVis evaluation with instructors will be outlined in Section 4. Finally, in the conclusions, we will summarise and sketch out some ideas for future work.

2 Visualizing student tracking data
This work is an attempt to apply some Information Visualisation concepts and ideas to deal with a vast amount of
student tracking data collected by CMS. Visualisation techniques have already been used to illustrate student data, but
although a great number of successful visualisation techniques and systems have been developed, the application of
this research into distance learning has not been explored
in a systematic way. There is a small number of recent
projects in computer-based learning that use visualisation
techniques to present data to users. For example, visualization techniques have been used to present social aspects
in computer-supported collaborative learning [15], community relationships in peer-to-peer systems [1], and conversations in online groups [6]. These projects commonly explore only one graphical representation to solely present
data in a pictorial way and provide no operations to manipulate the graphics. The application of Information Visualisation is very limited: graphical representations are merely
used as tools for communicating information to others. The
advantages of Information Visualisation for exploring data,
discovering tendencies, conﬁrming or rebutting hypotheses have not be exploited systematically in computer-based
learning, in general, and in distance learning, speciﬁcally.
Some effort has been dedicated to explore forms of visualising cognitive aspects of students with open student models [18, 7, 5]. These works use pictorial representations to
externalise a student model, which is a data structure built
by the system based on some Artiﬁcial Intelligence inference. In general, maintaining dynamic student models is a
technically challenging task. Once such models are built,
the visualisation techniques used to show the models to the
students are fairly basic. Moreover, open student models
explore graphical representations to show only one aspect
of the students’ data, namely the students’ cognitive state.
With CourseVis, we want to go further to provide multiple representations of the data in order to show different
perspectives that allow the instructors to examine cognitive,
social, and behavioural aspects of distance students. By
the means of visualisation techniques, CourseVis will transform the multidimensional student tracking data into graphical representations to help instructors build mental models

of what is happening in their classes.
Our research followed a systematic approach that included requirements gathering, design, implementation,
and evaluation. To ﬁnd out what information about distance
students the instructors need when they run courses with
CMS, as well as to identify possible ways to help instructors to acquire this information, we conducted a survey with
instructors involved in distance learning. The results of the
survey, which are presented elsewhere (see [12]), drew the
requirements for the design of CourseVis. Based on these
requirements, we designed the graphical tools and implemented the system, as described in the next session. The
educational rationale for the system was discussed in [11]).
Finally, an empirical evaluation was conducted with potential users of the system taking into account the tasks that
instructors would perform in their practice. The evaluation
focused on the effectiveness, efﬁciency, and usefulness of
CourseVis and is brieﬂy outlined in this paper, detailed description is given elsewhere, see [10].

3 The CourseVis architecture

CMS

Views

webct

Instructor

Domain
Designer

Student Data
Exporter

<xml>

<xml>

Domain
Model
Repository

Raw Data
Repository

Data Selection and
Transfomations

OpenDX

F IGURE 1: The CourseVis system architecture
CourseVis has been designed as a tool that extends an
existing CMS (we used WebCT in our current implementation) by adding new functionality in terms of graphical
representations produced with OpenDX [13] - a powerful,
open source, generic visualisation tool. The architecture of
CourseVis is presented in Figure 1.
CourseVis includes a Student Data Exporter that collects and transforms the student tracking data provided from
CMS in a well-deﬁned XML format. This XML data is then
stored in the Raw Data Repository. A speciﬁc implementation of the Student Data Exporter for the WebCT course
management system was built.
Some visualisations require that students are related to

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

entities of the course domain (called concepts). For instance, the results of quizzes could be used to judge the students’ level of mastering of domain concepts. In order to
represent the level of knowledge achieved by each student
on a speciﬁc concept, CourseVis uses a pre-deﬁned domain
model. Such a model enables the linking of content material and evaluation proofs (i.e. quizzes) with concepts of the
course. A Domain Designer module facilitates the instructors to create the domain model of the course. The domain
model deﬁnes a list of domain concepts and speciﬁes a set of
associated concepts for each page of the course and for every question in quizzes. A Domain Model Repository stores
the XML data produced by the Domain Designer.
To represent the data in a visual format, CourseVis performs some computations and transforms the data into visual structures and representations. The Data Selection and
Transformations module is in charge of:

Figure 2 1 .

• extracting from the repositories only data relevant to a
particular representation to be generated;
• manipulating the data extracted from the repository
and transforming it in a format to be processed by the
OpenDX visualisation tool.
CourseVis generates several graphical representations,
described in detail in [10], some of which are illustrated
below. The data used is from an on-line course in Java Programming ran by the ﬁrst author at the Department of Informatics and Electronics of the University of Applied Sciences of Southern Switzerland.
The preliminary study that informed the design of CourseVis [12] identiﬁed what information the instructors would
need in their on-line teaching activities. This was classiﬁed
in social, cognitive and behavioural aspects, the visualisations for which are described next.

3.1 Visualising social aspects of learners: Discussion Plot
The instructors indicated that information about social
activities of students based on interactions using the discussion boards in CMS was important for managing online classes. The discussion board is a tool which allows
students to read and post messages. Each message has a
sender, date, and topic. A set of posts on the discussions,
composed of an initial post about a topic and all responses
to it is called a thread. We call the person who started the
initial posting in a thread originator. The length of a thread
(i.e. the number of messages written on a speciﬁc subject)
is called follow-up and is sometimes useful for monitoring
discussions. These variables (originator, date, topic, and
follow-up) are mapped onto a 3-D scatterplot illustrated in

F IGURE 2: Discussion Plot example: The top scatterplot
presents a graphical representation of discussion treads
showing the students who have initiated the treads; at the
bottom, the same scatterplot is rotated to show discussions
related to the course topics.
In the image, the size of the sphere represents the number of follow-ups in a discussion. The instructor may use
operations, such as zooming and panning, to analyse the
students’ engagement in discussions. For instance, Figure
2 shows two rotations that enable the analysis of different
relations by examining the same data set. The ﬁgure allows
the instructor to identify certain social characteristics: students who dominated in opening new threads (Francesco
and Massimo in the examples), students who have not initiated any discussions, and the size of discussions on different
topics of the course.

3.2 Visualising cognitive aspects of learners: Cognitive Matrix
CMS provide the instructors with tools, such as quizzes
and assignments, to measure the level of comprehension
achieved by the students on the domain concepts. The survey with instructors indicated that they needed information
about the overall student performance, as well as the students’ performance on speciﬁc domain concepts.
One of the visualizations that CourseVis provides is the
Cognitive Matrix (see Figure 3). It uses the students’ performance on quizzes to assess the students’ understanding of
1 In this and the following images the student names are not real due to
data protection considerations

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

the subject. The student names are mapped onto the x-axis
and the concepts of the course are mapped onto the y-axis.
The performance values are mapped onto the colour of the
square corresponding to a student and a concept. If a student has not attempted the questions related to a concept,
the corresponding cell is blank.

to create visual representations that summarise the overall
students’ attendance to the course. The instructors may be
interested also to know how many times the course has been
accessed by all students on a particular day D of the course.

F IGURE 4: The Student Accesses plot, represents the
students’ attendance to the on-line course.

F IGURE 3: The Cognitive Matrix visualises the students’
performance on quizzes related to domain concepts.
The matrix allows micro and macro analysis of the students’ performance. The instructor may use it to detect
problematic topics or struggling students by comparing
columns and rows, or can analyse the performance of a
particular student on a speciﬁc topic. In CourseVis, several graphical representations can be combined for a more
comprehensive analysis. For instance, the Discussion Plot
shows that the student Massimo has opened long discussion
threads, while the Cognitive Matrix shows that his performance on quizzes was not that good.

3.3 Visualising the learners’ access to the course:
Student Accesses Plot
The survey with instructors indicated that the monitoring
of the students’ attendance was important for the effective
managing of distance courses. The Student Accesses Plot is
generated in CourseVis to enable the monitoring of the students’ access to the course. Every time a student accesses
the course, the CMS registers in its internal data structures
the date and the duration of the access. This data is used

The student access plot in CourseVis is a composition of
a scatterplot and a histogram, see Figure 4. The scatterplot
represents bivariate data of students and dates of the course,
where a corresponding bullet represents at least one access
to the course made by the student on the corresponding date.
The histogram represents the number of pages of the course
accessed by all students on a particular date.
The instructor has an overview of the global student access to the course with a clear identiﬁcation of patterns and
trends. For instance, there is a high concentration of access
between the 4th and 23rd of March, while little access is
made at the end of the course. It is also possible to have attendance information about a speciﬁc student, e.g. Michele
made little visits to the course material, while Francesco
was quite active throughout the course.

3.4 Visualising behavioural aspects of learners:
Behaviour Graph
The survey indicated that representations of the students’
behaviour, including whether the students read the materials, perform evaluation proofs, and participate in discussions, as well as the students’ progress with the schedule of
the course, will be helpful for the instructors.
This aspects are covered in the Student Behaviour
Graph, illustrated in Figure 5. It represents information
regarding a particular student, and takes advantage of the
single-axis composition method [8] for presenting a large
number of variables in a 2D metric space. With a common
x-axis mapping the dates of the course, a number of variables are represented:

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

• Accesses to content pages by topics. A square is used
to mark that a student has accessed a content page with
material linked to a particular concept. The instructor
can see the concepts studied by the student and can
ﬁnd out whether he/she has missed any concepts.

F IGURE 5: The Behaviour Graph, represents the student’s behaviour.

• Global accesses to the course. The number of accesses
(including any part of the course, not only content materials) on a single day is shown on the histogram.
• Progress with the course schedule. We assume that the
course has a linear structure, i.e. it has a syllabus with
a list of content pages having a schedule organised in
a linear sequence (the table of contents). We put in the
y-axis the page ordering according to this sequence, a
mark then represents a page accessed by the student on
a day, where the y-location of the mark is proportional
to the sequence of the pages in the schedule (ﬁrst page
on bottom, last page on top). The instructor may have
an overview of the progress made by the student with
the schedule during the time.
• Messages. Some information about the participation
in discussions has been already considered in the discussion plot. However, some further information on
discussion attendance could be given. In particular, information about the posting of a new message, the reply to a message, or simply the reading of a message, is
denoted in the representation with a diamond coloured
in a different colour (e.g. red, green and blue).
• Quiz and assignment submission. The submission of a
quiz or an assignment is reported in the graphic on the
date it was submitted with a Q or A.

4 Evaluation with instructors
An empirical evaluation of CourseVis was conducted
[10] focusing on its effectiveness (can it help instructors
gain an understanding of what is happening in distance
classes), efﬁciency (can instructors infer required information quickly), and usefulness (to what extend the information provided is useful to the instructors). The evaluation involved instructors with experience in using CMS in distance
learning, and took place in three stages. 1) A focus group
was conducted with ﬁve instructors who were provided with
CourseVis. The aim was to identify problems with the representations generated in CourseVis and assess their usefulness. 2) An experimental study was conducted with six instructors with experience in distance learning. The instructors were asked to imagine that they were running the course
and had to ﬁnd some information about the students in order
to answer a set of pre-designed questions. Instructors where
split in two groups: 3 used a standard CMS platform, and
the other 3 used the same platform and tools, but integrated
with CourseVis. 3) Finally, semi-structured interviews were
conducted with the three participants who used CourseVis
in the experimental study to discuss the usefulness of the
graphical representations.
The evaluation of CourseVis showed that the representations helped the instructors to quickly and more accurately
grasp information about social, cognitive, and behavioural
aspects of the students. The provided information was regarded by the teacher as very useful for managing success-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

ful distance courses. It was noted that the graphical representations provided in CourseVis may help instructors identify early, and even prevent, some of the problems with
distance learning, e.g. students who do not communicate
might feel isolated, a student not visiting the course material
might be confused or be a potential drop-out, long discussion treads on a topic may highlight problems experienced
by learners (e.g. technical aspects).

5 Conclusions
This paper presented a novel approach of using web log
data generated by Course Management Systems to help instructors become aware of what is happening in distance
learning classes. Speciﬁcally, techniques from information
visualization have been used to graphically render complex,
multidimensional student tracking data collected by CMS.
A system, called CourseVis, illustrates the proposed approach. CourseVis has been developed as a generic tool
for visualising student tracking data. It is required that the
data from CMS are converted into an xml format, which is
then imported into the CourseVis graphical render to produce various representations of the data. Some representations from CourseVis instantiation have been presented in
the paper to illustrate the use of information visualization
for rendering student tracking data. The validity of our approach was conﬁrmed with the evaluative studies of CourseVis. The system was regarded as useful for helping the
instructors form a mental model of their classes and offer
an appropriate help to the students.
Our immediate research plans are to address some of the
problems revealed in the CourseVis evaluation. These include providing ﬂexible links between the graphical representations, ensuring a connection between graphics and
corresponding data from CMS (e.g. a link from a discussion graph to postings in the discussion forum), enabling
instructors to specify what data should be included in or excluded from graphics. Some of these issues are addressed
in the successor of CourseVis - GISMO [9] a visualisation
tool for student monitoring being developed within the EU
funded EdukaLibre project. GISMO is integrated in the
Moodle open source learning environment and is currently
being evaluated in several studies with real users.

References
[1] H. Bretzke and J. Vassileva. Motivating cooperation on
peer to peer networks. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on User Modeling, number 2702 in LNAI.
Springer,, 2003.
[2] K. Cotton. Monitoring student learning in the classroom.
School Improvement Research Series (SIRS). Northwest
Regional Educational Laboratory, U.S. Department of Education. http://www.nwrel.org/scpd/sirs/2/cu4.html, 1988.

[3] J. M. Galusha. Barriers to learning in distance education.
http://www.infrastruction.com/barriers.htm, 1997.
[4] N. Hara and R. Kling. Student distress in web-based distance
education course. Information, Communication & Society,
4(3):557–579, 2000.
[5] D. Hartley and A. Mitrovic. Supporting learning by opening the student model. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems, 6th
International Conference, ITS 2002, Biarritz, France and
San Sebastian, Spain, June 2-7, 2002, Proceedings, volume
2363 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 453–462.
Springer, 2002.
[6] D. Judith. A semantic approach to visualizing online conversations. Communications of the ACM, 45(4):45–49, April
2002.
[7] J. Kay. The um toolkit for cooperative user modelling. User
modeling and user adapted interaction, 4:149–196, 1995.
[8] J. D. Mackinlay. Automating the design of graphical presentations of relational information. ACM Transaction on
graphics, 5(2):110–141, 1986.
[9] R. Mazza. Gismo: a graphical interactive student monitoring
tool for course management systems. In T.E.L. Technology
Enhanced Learning Conference, Milan, 2004.
[10] R. Mazza. Using Information Visualisation to Facilitate Instructors in Web-based Distance Learning. PhD thesis, University of Lugano, 2004.
[11] R. Mazza and V. Dimitrova. Coursevis: Externalising student information to facilitate instructors in distance learning.
In U. Hoppe, F. Verdejo, and J. Kay, editors, Proceedings of
the International conference in Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Education. Sydney July 20-24, 2003. (AIED 2003), pages 279–
286. IOS press, 2003.
[12] R. Mazza and V. Dimitrova. Informing the design of a course
data visualisator: an empirical study. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on New Educational Environments. Lucerne 26-28 May. (ICNEE 2003), pages 215 – 220,
2003.
[13] Opendx - open visualization data explorer, 2004.
http://www.opendx.org.
[14] L. C. Ragan.
Good teaching is good teaching: an
emerging set of guiding principles and practices for the
design and development of distance education.
DEOSNEWS, The American Center for the Study of Distance
Education, Pennsylvania State University, 8(12), 1998.
http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/html/cem9915.html.
[15] J. C. Rivera and M. L. Rice. A comparison of student
outcomes & satisfaction between traditional & web based
course offerings. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration. The State University of West Georgia., 5(3),
2002.
[16] K. Smith-Gratto.
Best practices and problems north
carolina a & t state university.
Report to the Distance Education Evaluation Task Force Distance Education.
http://qed.ncat.edu/ir&p/report.htm, 1999.
[17] D. Valentine. Distance learning: Promises, problems, and
possibilities. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 5(3), 2002. State University of West Georgia, Distance Education Center.
[18] J. D. Zapata-Rivera and J. E. Greer. Visualizing and inspecting bayesian belief models. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence IJCAI, pages 47–49, 2001.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

