Interactive Visualization of High Dimensional Marketing Data in the Financial
Industry
Ruud Smeulders, Anton Heijs
Rabobank Group, Treparel
r.j.a.m.smeulders@rn.rabobank.nl , aheijs@treparel.nl
Abstract
We describe the visualization of high dimensional
marketing data for a financial asset management
company. The data typically consists of 30 to a 100
variables of 25000 to half a million clients. We use the
visualization of the correlation matrix as a variable
selection tool which makes it easier to find patterns in
the data. The user can then select data ranges of the
selected variables and start a cluster analysis using 5
variables.
The clustered data are then visualized as a set of
spheres. In an additional visualization we first sort data
values of a client variable and then visualize the sorted
cubic data in a cube using volume rendering and
isosurfaces.
The interactive correlation visualization allows
marketing researchers to quickly explore all kinds of
combinations of variables, which enables them to find
valuable client behavior patterns much faster. The
cluster visualization allowed researchers to identify
detailed groups of customer with similar behavior.
Additionally, the visualization of the sorted cubic data
gives in dept information of one variable over the total
sample of customers. With these visualizations, a better
understanding is given on customer behavior.
Keywords--- Data mining, visualization.

1. Introduction
The business decisions of today and more so of
tomorrow depend on a better interpretation of data. To be
in control companies collect large amounts of data and
store these in databases and data warehouses.
Information systems are used to compute even more data
to gain a deeper insight in the original data. Obviously,
the real value of the data is to obtain knowledge about
the business.
One of the data intensive areas where knowledge
and insight has to be absolutely up-to-date is marketing
research. With a short time to market and a fast changing
customer demand access to all the data in an intuitive
way is vital. In database marketing studies large amounts

of high dimensional data must be analyzed. Marketing
databases often contain a large number of variables. It is
very difficult to find combinations of variables which
identify customer behavior patterns using only statistical
methods. Without any a priori knowledge about the data
records, several techniques are used to investigate the
data. Traditional data-mining techniques are normally
mostly related to statistical techniques, neural networks
or genetic algorithms. All these techniques lack the
possibility to provide some mechanism to explain their
results.
Visualization methods are becoming increasingly
important to analyze and explore these large
multidimensional data sets [1-7]. This is sometimes also
called visual data mining. MineSet [8-10] and Iris
Explorer [11] are good examples of software tools for
this approach. An important advantage of visualization
methods over other data mining techniques is the direct
interaction and immediate feedback for the user as well
as visual steering directly on the original data [6, 8, and
13]. Here we present a case where visualization
techniques are used to reveal the important variables in
marketing datasets from an accounting system of a Dutch
financial asset management company. We investigate
and propose a 3D visualization approach to obtain
insight by human pattern recognition in marketing data.
In section 2 we describe the case and in section 3 our
visualization approach, where after in section 4 we
discuss the obtained results.

2. Case study
The database we used consisted of marketing data of
25000 customers (without name or address). The client
data-set consists of 100 variables for each of the 25000
clients. There are 2 types of variables: data from the
large customer database and additional data derived from
a questionnaire. In the questionnaire 8 questions were
send out to the 25000 clients of a total of 500000 clients.
The data was analyzed and a logit model was used to
predict entrepreneurship of the clients based on their
answers. The logit model could also handle incomplete
data for those situations where clients did not respond to
all 8 questions. Using the logit model we acquired a new

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

variable, entrepreneurship, which was to be analyzed in
relation with the variables already available in a database
called Rogiro. The type of variables in the customer
database can be segmented into several groups;
questions, countries, miscellaneous and fund variables.
In our visualization experiments we included the
new variable entrepreneurship from the logit model. We
only visualized variables with strong relationship to each
other and to the entrepreneurship to improve the logit
model.

The main goal of the correlation landscape is to
provide insight in which variables have strong
correlation to give marketing analysts the opportunity to
select those variables in an interactive manner. By
pointing on a 3D bar the user can visually select the two
variables. The data distribution of these variables is then
visualized in an adjacent window. Figure 2 shows an
example of a three dimensional visualization of the client
variables “age” and “relationship time”.

3.1 Interactive 3d correlation matrix for sorting
and selecting
Selecting the right set of variables from a dataset
containing N variables is a difficult task. When N is
large, the number of combinations for 2 variables is at
least ½ N(N-1) and for combinations of 3 variables this
is ½(N-1)N2. The linear correlation coefficient represents
a relevant measure of relationship between two metric
datasets [12]. The linear correlation coefficient has a
value between -1 and 1, whereby 0 represents no
correlation. We propose to visualize the correlation of N
variables in the dataset by calculating all N2correlations
of this set and plot them as bars on a NxN grid (see also
[12]). The datasets is not restricted to contain only scalar
data. One can visualize in a similar matter vector or
tensor datasets. We used IRIS-explorer to selectively
read in the data, which are then converted into an Irisexplorer lattice [11].
By calculating the correlations between all variables
and visualizing the correlation matrix as a 3D bar
landscape the user immediately has an overview of the
most relevant variable combinations.

Figure 1 Correlations landscape of 100 variables for
25000 customers of marketing database.
Figure 1 shows the correlation landscape of the
marketing dataset we used. In the landscape each bar
represents the correlation of two variables for the total
population of 25000 customers. Providing more textual
information when a user points with the mouse over a
correlation bar is essential, and some textual information
and drill down facility are for this reason available.

Figure 2 Visualization of data distribution of 2 variables
which were selected using picking from the correlation
matrix in figure 1.

3.2 Visualization of custom properties in spheres
and colors
After the user has determined the data interval
ranges from the data distribution visualization of the two
variables, the next step is a cluster analysis. Apart from
the two selected variables one can add three other
variables for the clustering and analyze them in relation
with the earlier selected variables. Similar customers will
be clustered to form a sphere. The spheres are located in
3D space where the first two variables (from the
correlation landscape) are on the x- and y-axes. The third
variable will be the z-axis, while a fourth variable
determines the size of the spheres and the fifth variable
determines the color coding of the spheres. We used the
number of clients belonging to a cluster to determine the
size of the spheres.
Figure 3 gives an example of this visualization of
the amount of customers with strong correlation for 3
variables (now x, y and z-axis). The spheres are
‘colored’ with the average value of the entrepreneurship
of the clients in the clusters. The coupling between the
multiple views, as described by Roberts et al [14], makes
the exploration of patterns in the data more
comprehensible.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3 Similar customers are clustered into spheres;
the radius of each sphere is determined by the number of
customers with almost similar value of the 3 variables.
The colors of the spheres represent the average value of
the entrepreneurship. The variables “relationship time”,
“number of investment products” and “age” are on the x
y and z axis.

3.3 Cube with sorted custom properties
The sorting is also essential in the way we visualize
correlations between clustered data. If we have to deal
with the variables "age" and "country", for instance,
whereby we divided age in 10 groups and country in 44
different countries, sorting by country and the visualizing
the correlation of classes of age for each country is
totally different from sorting by age and then visualizing
for each age group the variable country.
This was the start of a new way of visualizing in the
2nd data visualization. Now we started with sorting one
of the variables found in the correlation visualization.
After the sorting we visualized the customers in a
cube, starting at customer 1 with the lowest value of this
variable in x, y, z equal to 0,0,0 down in the left bottom
of the cube. Than, with the rising of the value for the
particular variable, the second customer was put into
1,0,0. The 3rd into 2,0,0 and so on. The customer with
the highest value can be found in the upper right corner
of the cube. If the value of a second variable is almost
similar for several customers, these customers are
clustered into a sphere. A big sphere means that a lot of
customers have about the same value for this (other)
variable. The result can be found in Figure 4.

4 Discussion
One of the goals of the research was to explore
client behavior in relation to entrepreneurship using the
marketing database data and the logit model. After
visualizing the 100 variables of the marketing database
of 25000 customers in the correlation landscape, the

Figure 4 Clustering after sorting 25000 customers. Now,
customers are sorted with 1 variable (age) starting at x, y,
z = 0,0,0 and than ‘growing’ along x, y, z-axis. The
clustering originates around amounts of customers with
(almost) similar values for a second variable (asset).
marketing researchers easily picked out several
combinations of variables to obtain the second
visualizations. The correlation matrix was interactive in
two different ways. By pointing on a bar the 2 variables
were given with textual information. Here also some
background information and drill down facilities were
available. The marketing researchers appreciated this
interaction and used the additional information to
improve the choice of variable pairs. By picking a
specific bar the marketing researchers selected the two
variables for the second visualization. In figure 2 a
simple visualization of the data distribution for the
variables age and relationship time is shown as bars
along the z-axis. Although this is a very simple form of
visualization, marketers used this to improve there earlier
decision to select interesting data ranges. Furthermore,
they could improve there models for calculating
“entrepreneurship”.
In figure 3, clusters at positions in space according
to related variables are visible. The variables in this
visualization are: "relationship time" as x-axis; "number
of investment products" as y-axis; "age" as z-axis. The
two variables “age” and “relationship time” were
selected because they showed a strong correlation in
figure 1.
In the visualization of figure 3 we now see the
clusters of customers in certain regions of the variables,
where this correlation is very strong. Because now the
real value of importance of each variable in combination
with other variables is visible, marketers could further
optimize their model for entrepreneurship. The colors of
the spheres represent a certain value of one of the
variables that was connected with the answers on the
questionnaire. With this color visualization it was easier

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

to combine variables from the questionnaire to the model
for entrepreneurship.
In figure 4 the customers were sorted by age.
Thereafter clustering showed the amounts of customers
with almost similar assets. Here, clusters of customers
occur at certain levels of the variable age, where
customers have certain range of assets. One should
realize that in this visualization one can see every
individual customer in the total dataset of 25000
customers. Every customer has an unique position in the
cube of figure 4. This position is only depending on the
value of the variable age. The spheres now indicate that
several customers have almost the similar value for the
variable asset.
Although interpretation of the visualizations is a
hard job, the system with coupled visualizations is giving
much additional information to marketers for the mutual
relation of different variables. It generates new
information that is not available without these
visualizations. In this way a model is optimized to
predict customer behavior and especially to predict
entrepreneurship of customers from other variables of
the customer database. The resulting model of the new
variable entrepreneurship is not available for publication,
due to its confidential character.

[2]

Conclusions

[11]
[12]

Visualization techniques are a good additional
analysis tool for exploring high dimensional marketing
data by marketing researchers. Other then often used
techniques they give a better insight into the original
data. By using the image pattern recognition possibilities
of the human brains, visualization gives a powerful extra
analyzing tool for data mining and abstract model
making in marketing research.
Using the correlation landscape the marketing
researchers could identify important correlation patterns
in their data. By selecting variables with interesting
correlations in an additional second visualization
unknown relationships between clusters of variables are
discovered. This resulted in new models to predict
customer behavior.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[13]
[14]

Acknowledgements
This work was performed for the Marketing
Research department of the Robeco Group in the
Netherlands. The Robeco Group is part of the Rabobank
Group. For more information please contact the
corresponding
author
Anton
Heijs
(e-mail
aheijs@treparel.nl at Treparel). The authors wish to
acknowledge Gerard Wolfs and Erika Slagter from the
Robeco Group.

References
[1]

Ben Schneiderman, Tree visualization with treemaps: A
2 dimensional space filling approach, ACM,
Transactions on Graphics, 11, pp 92-99, 1992.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

D.A. Keim, Visual Techniques for exploring databases.
Invited tutorial Int. Conf. on Knowledge discovery in
databases, Newport Beach, CA, 1997.
Antony Unwin, Requirements for interactive graphics
software for exploratory data analysis, Computational
Statistics, 14, pp 7-22, 1999.
Buja, A., Swayne, D. F., Littman, M., and Dean, N.,
XGvis:
Interactive
data
visualization
with
multidimensional scaling. Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics. 2001.
D. Keim, Information Visualization and Visual Data
Mining, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 7(1), pp 1-8, 2002.
Benjamin B. Bederson, Ben Shneiderman, Craft of
Information Visualization, The: Readings and
Reflections, Morgan Kaufman, Paperback, 2003.
Antony Unwin and Graham Wills, Exploring Time
Series Graphically, Artifical Computing and Graphics
Newsletter, 2 pp 13-15, 2003.
SGI Inc., MineSet (tm): a system for high-end data
mining and visualization., Int. Conf. on very large data
bases (VLDB'96) , Bombay, India, pp 595, 1996.
B.G. Becker, Visualizing decision table classifiers, in
proceedings IEEE Information Visualization 98, pp. 102105, 1998.
B.G. Becker, Volume rendering for relational data, in
proceedings IEEE Information Visualization 97, pp. 8791, 1997.
Iris Explorer, http://www.nag.co.uk/Welcome_IEC.html
Michael Friendly, Corrgrams: exploratory displays for
correlation matrices, The American Statistician, vol 56,
pp 316-324, 2002.
Heijs and Smeulders, Visualization experiments of
financial data using MineSet, to be published.
Jonathan Roberts, Nadia Boukhelifa and Peter Rodgers.
Multiform Glyph Based Search Result Visualization. In
Proceeding Information Visualization 2002. IVS, IEEE,
549-554. July 2002.

