Information Visualisation Theory and Practice
D. Graham
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences
University of Greenwich
30 Park Row
London, SE10 9LS, UK.
D.Graham@gre.ac.uk

Abstract
Participation in European Union research projects now
requires the setting-up of a project website. This paper
discusses the creation of the “Matrix” to facilitate the
information visualisation of a project; experiments, data,
and results, etc, i.e. information far beyond the
promotional details of the website. The paper describes the
theory of such an endeavour before proceeding to discuss
the practical realities for this case study project. Finally,
we consider any lessons that can be learnt from this realworld application.

1. Introduction
“Information visualization can be defined as the use of
interactive visual representations of abstract data to
amplify cognition” [1], [4], [10], [11]. The characteristic of
the data that distinguishes information visualisation from
scientific visualisation is that the data are abstract.
Visualisation data types and the tasks that need to be
supported range from 1D Linear for tasks such as TextArc,
to 3D World (Desktops for example), and
Multidimensional, e.g. matrices [9]. The elements of the
task taxonomy, described by Shneiderman [9], are:
overview, zoom, filter, details-on-demand, relate, history,
and extract. Several challenges identified for information
visualisation and tool development for information
visualisation are with respect to: import data; combining
visual representations with textual labels; seeing related
information; viewing large volumes of data; integrating
data mining; collaboration with others, and; achieving
universal usability [9].
It has recently become the norm that any substantially
large European Union (EU) projects with several partners
should provide a website publicising their project. This was
a requirement for a project for which the University of

Greenwich (UoG) was a partner. Although the UoG was
not the coordinating partner and therefore was not directly
responsible, as their expertise was in Information Systems
and Computer Science they were obliged to assist in the
process. The UoG was however responsible for the
inception of the original “Matrix” concept. As this paper is
in many ways a critique, we will decline from directly
naming the project or the other partners.

2. Method
Relevant to the information visualisation of this project
is the topic of Computer-Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW). It is about groups of users and designing systems
to support their group work, understanding the effect of
technology (products often called groupware) on group
work patterns [3], [5], [6], [8]. The groupware required for
the EU research project was classified as asynchronous and
remote,
primarily
supporting
computer-mediated
communication, and shared applications and artefacts,
facilitating meeting and decision support systems to a much
lesser extent.
The main form of computer-mediated communication
was to become simple e-mail with multiple recipients via a
common address because of the problems stated later in
this paper. All party telephone conferences were also held
on an irregular basis (every few months or so), as video
conferencing facilities were available for only one of the
four partners; the coordinating partner. The face-to-face
partner meetings, in addition to the telephone conferences,
together were the main form of decision support. The
language used by all partners was English, which was the
first language of the UoG partners only. However, there
were problems associated with the interpretation of the
intentionality of conversations, especially by text/e-mail.
Turn-taking is of course also more difficult for telephone

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

meetings. There are no obvious solutions to the former
problem, which revolves around context without the aid of
visual cues. The group dynamics altered slightly during the
first year with a change of administrator for the
coordinating partner and project; the project also was
indirectly affected by the personal problems (and
accompanying commitments) of several individuals.
The EU’s aims of any website are essentially to
publicise both the EU and the project itself. During the
early stages of the project, the development of the website
was identified as being able to provide much more than
these basic aims. By having a restricted area for partners
only, it could act as a repository for experimental data, as
well as reports, etc. These experimental results, experiment
details, and reports would be contained in a “Matrix” [7],
enabling the visualisation of the project’s current status and
progress in real-time, by all the partners concerned. It
would also contribute to formalising the planning of work
and future experiments.
Supporting shared applications and artefacts was to be
achieved through the creation of the Matrix because it
enabled information visualisation within a fixed context.
The experimental data for the project are themselves
multidimensional in nature and are part of a statisticaldatabase (held as part of a data warehouse). As such, the
data are subject to information visualisation in their own
right, with the use of clustering algorithms etc. Here,
however, we are concerned with the visualisation of the
entire project including the data, and not just the data
themselves for which we are using existing tools (e.g. for
data mining) as well as developing new ones. The Matrix
in essence is the visualisation of the metadata. The Matrix
attempted to embody all of the task taxonomy described by
Shneiderman [9].

3. Results
In order to fulfil the initial requirements of the EU, a
prototype website was developed by Bellikli [2]. The
development methodology employed was Rapid
Application Development (RAD). This website, whilst not
fully comprehensive possessed the key features, such as the
restricted area (which would later hold the Matrix) defined
during the requirements phase with the client [7]. It was
developed using DreamWeaver even though this was not
the package envisaged by the client. This was then used as
a template for the actual site developed by the coordinating
partner, who, because they did not have the expertise and
software, “rewrote” the site in html. This was perhaps a
reflection of the coordinating partner’s lack of competence
and computing skills (they were chemists). Figures 3.1 to
3.3 describe Bellikli’s website, which was evaluated and

found to exhibit some W3C compliance. Figures 3.4 and
3.5 are screenshots of the final website and the Matrix.
Attempts were also made to get the partners to exploit
an existing free communications package, namely,
Mayetec’s Village for communications between partners.
Other computer-mediated communications (CMC) tools
suggested, such as Microsoft’s Messenger, proved to be
difficult to implement because of firewalls. The problems
identified throughout the development were:
1. Only one of the four partners are fully competent
Information Systems users (the UoG).
2. One or two of the partners (the chemists and
physicists) had team members with some degree of
aversion to anything involving computers.
3. Mayetec exhibited “Sod’s Law”. It had been
successfully used for at least two other projects, but
proved strangely problematic with its list of e-mail
users. Given 2 above it took very little to persuade the
partners to abandon Mayetec.
Problems 1 and 2 were prevalent throughout the use of
any package or created site. In practice this meant a return
to the site “rewritten” in html. The notion of the website’s
Matrix, however, had since developed into a core
requirement of the project, with the website no longer just
concerned with publicity. Initially, large quantities of
experimental data were being mailed to and from partners,
with accompanying problems related to such large files.
Not all partners were receiving all e-mails, and data and emails were being lost. A common user e-mail was created
to resolve the former problem and address the latter to
some degree. The ideal solution would be that a data
warehouse would be integral to the restricted area of the
website. At a partner meeting the now extensive needs of
the website’s Matrix were fully specified, which would see
the holistic visualisation of information for the project.
This would include the characteristics of each experiment
set against the properties of each material sample, forming
a matrix of the actual work and its temporal status, with
associated experimental results, links to data files and
reports. Additionally, minutes of meetings, some internal
publications, and links and details of relevant conferences
would be placed within the restricted area of the website.

4. Discussion and Conclusions
At the present moment, a website is in existence (vis.
Figure 3.4) which is not dissimilar to the one created by
Bellikli [2] but in html, and a common e-mail address is
being used for communication between partners. A skeletal
Matrix (Figure 3.5) has also been created within the
restricted access area (“Internal”), although there are still
issues regarding links to large experimental data files as
identified by Shneiderman [9] as one of the challenges of
Information Visualisation.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The main difficulties in developing the Matrix were
both social and computing. Social difficulties resonate
around the reluctance of some users to use computer
technology, coupled with the lack of technical expertise
with respect to the coordinating partners with whom the
responsibility for this aspect of the EU project lay. In
computing terms, the Matrix is hugely disappointing and
breeches many of the guidelines for good design
(especially interaction design). It grossly exceeds the
screen size both horizontally and vertically, and appears to
be little more than a linked Word document. Whereas most
projects fail because of the poor specification of
requirements, here it can be said to be due to poor
implementation.
The main lesson that can be gleaned from this
application is that such an endeavour should not be
considered to be just a peripheral activity, and that this is
something that needs to be facilitated and resourced.
Implemented by experts, the Matrix would be a tangible
benefit in its own right, supporting collaborative work, as
well as a vehicle for good research.

[3] Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G., and Beale, R., HumanComputer Interaction Third Edition, Prentice Hall, (2003), pp.

476-508, 664-713.
[4] Card, S., Mackinlay, J., and Shneiderman, B., Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, (1999). In: [9].
[5] Faulkner, K., The Essence of Human-Computer Interaction,
Prentice Hall, (1998).
[6]Faulkner, X., Usability Engineering, PALGRAVE, (2000).
[7] Graham, D., Personal comm., (2004).
[8] Preece, J., Rogers, Y., and Sharp, H., Interaction Design
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction, Wiley, (2002), pp. 105-

137.
[9] Shneiderman, B., and Plaisant, C., Designing the User
Interface Forth Edition, Addison Wesley, (2005), pp. 580-601.

5. References

[10] Spence, R., Information Visualization, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, (2001). In: [9].

[1] Bederson, B., and Shneiderman, B., The Craft of Information
Visualization: Readings and Reflections, Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, San Francisco, CA, (2003). In: [9].

[11] Ware, C., Information Visualization: Perception for Design:
Second Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco,
CA, (2004). In: [9].

[2] Bellikli, C., Design and implementation of a website for a
research group, Unpublished final year degree project, University
of Greenwich, (2004).
0

AEP
website

1

1.1

Load
Internet
Browser

3

2
Get
conferences
information

Load
systems

1.2
Go to
AEP URL

4
Get
Information
about AEP

Enter
Forum

2.1

2.2
View
Select
Conferences Conference
information
Link

3.1
Select
Forum
Link

4.1

Select
About AEP
Link

2.2.1
Select On
Conferences
Link

Figure 3.1 Task Analysis (Bellikli, C., 2004, pp. 40).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

4.2
View
Information

5
Contact
AEP

5.1

Select
Contact Us
Link

6
Exit
System

5.2

E-mail
AEP
0
members

5.2.1
Select
E-mail
link

6.1
Exit
System

Figure 3.2 Annotated screenshot of final website (Bellikli, C., 2004, pp. 72).

Figure 3.3 Annotated screenshot of final website, showing restricted area (login) for publications (Bellikli, C., 2004,
pp. 74).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3.4 Screenshot of final website.

Figure 3.5 The Matrix. Although not clearly shown, many of the entities above are linked, for instance to data files.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

