Using Orchid Diagrams for Information Visualisation
Markus Aleksy, Ralf Gitzel, Nils Schumacher
University of Mannheim, Germany
{aleksy|gitzel|schumach}@wifo3.uni-mannheim.de
Abstract
Solving multi-goal scenario-based decision problems is
difficult, especially when preferences are uncertain.
Often, a mathematically sound solution is unsatisfactory
due to the restricted nature of the model. This paper
describes a way to visually represent these problems.
The visual representation, using flower-shaped 'Orchid
Diagrams', focuses on attracting attention to the
important
facts
without
removing
secondary
information. It also describes a special technique to
'zoom' in on certain results.

1. Motivation
One central problem of business administration is
decision making, even more so when there are multiple
non-prioritised goals. This is especially hard when large
sets of data are concerned. While computers may filter
out some of irrelevant data they cannot go past a certain
limit where intuition starts to play a major role.
There are several ways to solve these problems, some
mathematical (e.g. linear programming with binary
variables), some in diagram from (e.g. 3D bar charts).
Mathematical solutions seem to give a precise answer,
yet this is self-delusion. The solution is correct for the
model we have used. However, the information has
already been altered during the design of this model by
the reductions made compared to the real world. In fact,
the human irrational input is still present due to the
decisions regarding the model.
Diagrams on the other hand are excellent aids in the
decision process, as long as there are only 2-3 criteria.
More criteria make most forms hard to read.
As an alternative to the existing methods of solving
multi-goal scenario-based decision problems, this paper
provides a graphical presentation that allows the optical
comparison between different scenarios with far more
than 3 criteria.
Due to the nature of this diagram, the choice between
different scenarios will become simpler especially with
regard to the comparison of general success (all goal

values are beyond a certain threshold) and special
success (one aspect scores high enough to make the
comparatively low results for the rest acceptable).
The remainder of this paper is arranged in the
following way. First the most common terms used in this
paper are defined. Then scientific foundations are
presented. Section 3 describes our design and how it uses
the scientific 'tools' presented before. We close with a
case study and some comments on this work.

2. Basic Concept and Scientific Foundations
The diagram presented in this paper aims at providing
help with solving a very specific kind of decision
problem, where a scenario is picked from a set of
available possibilities according to preferences which are
not easily represented in a mathematical form.
The basic concept behind "orchid diagrams" is to
encode the most important pieces of information in such
a way as to immediately strike the attention of the
decision maker. Also, the most important (i.e. promising)
scenarios should be visually separated from the average
and bad cases. Less important information has to be
presented in an easily accessible yet non-distracting way.
To ensure such a representation we have to identify
the following factors:
y
y
y
y

What information does a scenario consist of?
Which scenarios are probably the most
interesting ones?
How can attention be attracted to a certain group
of scenarios?
How can information be encoded in a way that
does not distract while scanning all data as
opposed to the single scenario?

2.1. Scenario Information and Ranking
Before details of the "orchid diagram" concept are
introduced, we provide a couple of basic definitions to
facilitate further discussion.
In this context, a decision problem is defined as a set
of scenarios:

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

D = S 1 , S 2 , ...., S m
where m is the number of scenarios available to the
decision maker. A solution to this problem would be an
element of D, i.e a single scenario. The nature of the
process which leads to the solution is complex and
involves intuition as much as rational decision, as can be
seen in section 4.
A Scenario j is a tuple of subgoal achievements and
can be defined as
S j =(d j1 , d j2 , .., d jn ) , d ji c [0, 1 ] ≤i, j.
A subgoal achievement d ji is a rational number that is
a fraction of 1, where 1 means perfect achievement of the
subgoal requirements and 0 means complete failure with
regard to the subgoal requirements. n is the number of
subgoals that are used to measure the 'quality' of
scenarios within the context of D.
The different subgoals will be assigned preferences as
well, which take the form of standard weights,
determined at the whim of the decision maker.

y
y
y

The inclusion of qualitative goals (i.e. non-numerical
sub-goals such as shape or smell) is, in the authors'
opinion, too dependent on the individual problem to be
possible within the context of such a generic approach.
The three aspects listed above can be used to establish
a general ranking. As mentioned before, this is no
absolute indication of preference but rather a general
division into desirable and undesirable.
A scenario's rank can be expressed as
n

r j = f(i=1
✟ d ji ) ≤j
f : [0, n ] d [0, 1 ] is a function chosen to cause the
following effects on ranks:

≤i c 1, 2, .., n : p i c ‘ +
n
and ✟ p i = 1
i=1
These preferences pi will be used in section 3.1 with
the presentation of the scenarios.
Subgoal achievements may be grouped into subgoal
groups. These groups do not intersect and their union is
the set of tuple elements that comprise scenarios of D.
Subgoal groups will be used in section 3, where they are
explained further.
In the case of multi-goal decision making, a scenario
would consist of the continuous or discrete results in the
different categories. Most likely the results can be
grouped in a certain way and given vague preferences.
To illustrate these abstract definitions consider the
following example. When opening a new store a
corporation usually has the choice between several sites
which have different costs, accessibility, etc. The
question of which site to choose is represented by D. The
different sites are the scenarios Sj. The costs and other
factors are subgoals and are rated from 0 to 1 for each
site. These values are the subgoal achievements dji.
One might argue that weighing the subgoals would
allow one to simply choose the scenario where the
weighed sum is highest, yet this is true only in the
simplest cases.
As seen in the case study (section 4), the preferences
will influence which scenarios are considered "good" and
"bad", however, the actual decision might not select the
numerically superior result (even though the chosen
constellation of parameters will most likely be among
those considered prime candidates).
This leaves us with the following information:

Numerical sub-goal results
Preference between goals (in percent)
Grouping of sub-goals into general categories

y

"Good" scenarios should achieve results close to
n

1, i.e.,
y
y

y
y

n

✟ d ji m t Good w f(i=1
✟ d ji ) m 0.9
i=1

"Bad" scenarios should achieve low results, i.e.
n

n

✟ d ji [ t Bad w f(i=1
✟ d ji ) [ 0.1
i=1
There should not be many "average" scenarios,
which means the values for the thresholds t Good
and t Bad should not be "far" apart.
There should also be few "good" scenarios,
therefore t Good should be defined close to n.
f is a strictly monotone increasing function.

The choice of t Good , t Bad and f influences the
appearance of the "orchid diagram" as can be seen
section 3. Roughly speaking the introduction of f creates
a spatial segregation between "good" and "bad"
scenarios which is desirable for psychological reasons
(see section 3.2).
The exact nature of f (and thus t Good and t Bad ) is left
open for the moment. While a specific function is chosen
later on for the case study (see fig. 1), further research
might produce a function which better provides the
desired effects.
Additionally, scenarios that violate certain minimum
requirements (e.g. a single context-specific sub-goal
must be greater than a constant x) can be penalised by
reducing their rank.
On the other hand, scenarios that excel in certain
sub-goals could be upgraded accordingly (maybe
perfection in one field is more desirable than being
slightly above average everywhere). Note however, that
the goal weighing already amplifies the more important

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

y

goals with regard to the total result and thus these added
options are not further discussed here.

y

y
y
y

Fig. 1: An Example for f

So far it seems that the scenarios with the best overall
results would be those that are the most interesting ones,
yet that is not exclusively the case. While they are
definitely candidates, one must not forget scenarios that
are very ambiguous. These would have a high variance
between their best and worst sub-goal results. These
"mixed bags" especially require the attention of a human
decision maker, if they fulfil certain minimum
requirements.

2.2. Attracting Attention
The ranking described above is designed to produce
two distinct groups (this is the main reason for
introducing f). The motivation is to have a few select
scenarios which are likely to be interesting and a mass of
others of secondary importance. This allows one to
divide the scenarios into two distinct groups. Attention
focus can be aided by this as we get two distinct groups
which can be presented in contrasting styles. This idea
uses the fact that "larger differences between target and
distractors [tend] to make search easier, while larger
differences between different types of distractors [tend]
to make search harder" [5].
Attracting attention to single elements within a group
of others can be done by making them differ with regard
to "basic features". A basic feature is defined as a
property that allows "both efficient search and effortless
segmentation" [5]. Efficiency means in this case that the
search time is only diminutively influenced by the
number of elements in the set. Basically, the singletons
"pop out" of the mass of distractors.
Basic features include:
y

Size: large targets can be easily found among
small ones [1]
Shape: the exact conditions with regard to shape
are not yet fully identified, yet closure seems to
play a major role. Wolfe [5] states that "subjects
seem to be detecting deviation from a good
figure".
Motion: moving objects are easily spotted
Luminance: Wolfe [5] feels that this field needs
more analysis, yet he assumes this to be a basic
feature.
Position: spatial separation makes search easy.
Given the fact that space can be easily used to
encode numerical values (i.e. via coordinates),
this is a prime candidate, which can be made
good use of. An example for this is [3].

Some research has been done on how to combine
these features without having them interfere with each
other [3]. However this approach is only partially
suitable for our problem as will be shown in section 3.

2.3. Encoding Information in a Non-Distracting
Way
Secondary information should be available in the
diagram, yet it should not attract attention since this
would lessen the "pop up" effect of the important
features.
Probably this is unnecessary - Yantis [6] claims that
"feature singletons..., do not capture attention when they
are irrelevant". To illustrate this with an example, it
means that when someone is looking for huge red spots,
they will be able to ignore the shape. This requires the
searcher to have knowledge about the diagram though,
since they have to know what to look for, as opposed to
looking for elements that differ somehow!
On the other hand, it cannot hurt to make secondary
information unobtrusive. This leads to the question what
does not attract attention automatically.
As we have seen before, shape can attract attention,
under very specific circumstances. Small variations
however, hardly attract any attention. While there is no
hard evidence for this, it is probably possible to encode
secondary information in minor, yet visible shape
changes, and still not divert attention from the primary
data.
Unfortunately, the topic of how not to attract attention
has been largely neglected by vision science, possibly
due to the lack of application.

Colour: two different colours allow for efficient
search, multiple colours are problematic [2]

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3. Orchid Diagrams
The purpose of orchid diagrams, which we are going
to introduce in this paper, is to address the problems
described in section 1 and 2. The name was inspired by
the flower-like appearance of the individual sceanario
representations. Special care was taken to put all design
decisions on a scientifically sound fundament.
While 'orchid diagrams' look similar to "wegde
diagrams" [4] they encode information in a different way
and would be severely misinterpreted if assumed to be a
sub-type of the latter.

3.1. Design
Based on the insights described above, the
representation shown in figure 2 was chosen for
scenarios. The bars spreading out from the centre
represent the achievements in the various sub-goals. The
radius of each partial circle linearly corresponds to the
sub-goal achievement. Since all achievement values
range from 0 to 1, a scenario with maximum rank (i.e. all
subgoals achieved a 1) will be a perfect circle of
maximum size.
The width in degrees allocated to each sub-goal is
based on its importance. The width w i (in radian
measure) for sub-goal i can be computed in the following
way:

w i = 2✜ $ p i ≤i c 1, 2, ..., n

This has the useful effect that an increase of x percent
will increase the overall size of a sub-goal 'slice' by more
than x2 percent. Therefore important sections will (due to
their higher w i ) have a proportionally greater absolute
growth than the ones representing less important
sub-goals. This amplifies the visual effect of an increase,
creating a greater gap between high and low values. The
advantages of this will be addressed in the next section.

Fig. 2: Diagram for a Single Scenario

1
2

The black lines radiating from the centre divide the
sub-goals into categories (i.e. subgoal groups). The
luminance of each category is based on the total
percentage the scenario scores as opposed to the
category maximum. I.e. if all goals have achieved 100%,
it will be very bright. This luminance increase is linear.
The luminance1 for a sub-goal group with k < n subgoals
(d j(i+1) , ..., d j(i+k) ) is based on the following value:
k

l=

✟ dj (i+c)
c=1
k

An additional option (not shown in the example)
would be to change the colour of those scenarios which
surpass a certain threshold.
Fig. 3 shows how scenarios are put into relation in the
actual diagram. The x-axis is divided into equidistant
positions where the scenarios are placed in an order
based on their ranking r. The y-axis position shows the
actual ranking value2. Therefore, scenario position can be
determined like this:
Assume that the scenarios are already ordered, i.e.
r 1 [ r 2 [ ... [ r m .
m−j+1

Now, define x j = 1 − m+1 x max as the scenario
position on the x-axis.
The position on the y-axis is defined as:

y j = r j $ y max ≤j c 1, 2, ..., m

3.2. Rationale
Why has this form been chosen for the orchid
diagrams? As mentioned before (section 2), the goal is to
attract attention to the most promising scenarios and
encode secondary information in a less striking way.
Position is a good way to attract attention.
Additionally, a distinct separation allows easier
establishment of group membership. Our positioning
algorithm groups high ranking values both in an x and a
y direction. Since the y positioning is not linear there will
be a distinct separation between good and bad values.
Also, the formula for x j ensures that they will be grouped
horizontally.
Size is also a basic feature which is used by orchid
diagrams. The better a solution, the bigger it will appear
in the diagram (since its bars are longer). Also due to the
different width of the bars, important areas will provide a
greater increase in size than others (see section 3.1)
Furthermore, if the option for colour change beyond a
threshold is chosen, those "chosen" scenarios will stick
out even further. Colour is a powerful tool of attraction
and a useful enhancement.

A colour space based on luminance and two orthogonal colours is used as a basis here.
Note that in this context the co-ordinate origin is assumed to be the lower left corner.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

As mentioned before, attention has also to be attracted
to "mixed bag" results that have at least acceptable
global results (i.e. greater than t Bad ). As seen in Fig. 3,
these scenarios have a very irregular shape, which
definitely attracts attention to them3. The greater the
difference between high and low values, the more
striking a scenario appears.
The secondary information about scenarios, on the
other hand, is encoded in a way to attract the least
attention possible. For example the subgroup division
will not attract attention to a single orchid, since it looks
the same for all. While a wide difference between
sub-goals will draw attention, a deviation in a single one
will not (unless the difference is extreme).
The luminance of the sub-categories is assumed to be
somewhere between strong attraction and being
unobtrusive. The intended effect is to attract attention
once individual scenarios are compared as opposed to
the grand overview.
A possible point of criticism is that there is so much
encoding and attention direction and that this might
interfere with each other. It is the authors' opinion
however, that this is not the case. First of all many
aspects work into the same direction and thus should
have an additive effect. The secondary information is
confined mostly to the shape which can be easily ignored
by a trained user, as has been hinted at before (section 2).

3.3. Handling huge amounts of data
In section 1 the claim was made that orchid diagrams
allow the handling of massive amounts of data. Given the
limited space available on a computer screen some may
doubt this statement. Yet there are several aspects to take
into account:

y
y
y

How do alternative techniques fare?
What is the scale of the representation?
What kind of pre-presentation filtering is
applied?

Using just the information above, an orchid diagram
will probably be cluttered after about 100 entries.
However most graphical solutions have this problem.
This representation tries to handle maximum information
using the following assumption: while the decision maker
wants to see all scenarios, many are not as important as a
select few (at least initially). Using non-linear
distribution along the x axis and the huge quality gap
caused by function f allows us to use a lot of space for
the promising scenarios and squeeze many more into the
rest of the display.
If the top results are unsatisfactory one can always
remove them and use the same presentation form on the
subset that were the less desirable solutions. This subset
is then displayed the same way as the original one, with
its best solutions sticking out and the rest providing less
detail. In order to achieve this "zoom" effect one could
use one of the following approaches.
One way would be to normalise the scenarios
according to the new frame - the best sub-goal
achievement value becomes 1 and all others results are
adjusted accordingly. If, for example, the best sub-goal
achievement is 0.5, all results are multiplied by two. The
reason for this is to allow the function f to again create
the gap between the desirable and not so desirable
scenarios.
A second way would be to alter f according to the
data at hand. Initially, f has its parameters t Good and t Bad
set to values to let only a certain number of scenarios
show up as "good". When zooming in on lesser results f

Fig. 3: Screenshot of the Prototype
3

Or to use the correct term - the shapes lack "closure"! [4]

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

is changed in such a way that more results qualify as
good - the ones that already were considered 'good'
before are removed from the data set for viewing
purposes, however!
The advantages of these techniques over a standard
zoom is that the represenation is again optimised for the
changed set of data and not simply enlarged.
Additionally, scenarios beneath a certain threshold
could be represented as dots instead of as orchids, vastly
reducing their space consumption without losing any of
the (initially relevant) information about general quality.
However most of these will never be of interest - if
the best picks are inadequate the rest probably will be as
well. This leads us to pre-presentation filtering. The idea
is to set certain limits that are considered inviolable. Any
scenario not exceeding these will simply not be
displayed.

4. Case Study: Hiring an IT-Specialist
Consider the following example to understand the
usefulness of orchid diagrams. Corporation X wants to
hire an IT specialist. The candidates should have
knowledge in the fields of security, networking, and
some bits of accounting knowledge. Security should be
mostly Java, with some C++ for legacy systems.
Networking knowledge should encompass CORBA and
RMI. There is no subdivision for accounting.
The company decides on the percentile distribution
for the different categories and comes up with a division
according to their needs.
The people applying for the jobs have the profiles
detailed in Table 1. Candidate D has been included
solely to show what a perfect scenario would look like
and is not discussed further. The third candidate (C) is a
real generalist, the second (B) a C++ specialist who
probably programs his own kernels at home.
Placing the data into our orchid diagram yields the
result as seen in Fig. 3. As we can see candidate C is the
best. Yet, it is immediately obvious that candidate E also
achieves decent results in two important categories. The
person with the single highest skill in one category (B) is
only of secondary interest since this ability is not a core

criterion and the person lacks a lot in the other areas.
When comparing the unsuitable candidates it also strikes
us immediately that A has practically no skill in 2 areas!
All this information is discernible at a glance. This is
a major advantage as opposed to the table the data was
derived from. One can assume that this is also far easier
to read than a three dimensional graph or a matrix with
equivalent data.

5. Conclusion
The diagram form presented in this paper allows a
presentation of multi-goal scenarios in a way that attracts
attention to the most important aspects such as overall
score and deviation from the standard (i.e. scenarios that
have both high and low sub-goal scores and are thus hard
to judge). Yet, secondary information that allows
detailed comparison between possible choices is not
omitted but rather made less distracting.
There are several reasons why these diagrams are
helpful in finding a decision. Of course while a
mathematical - operations research based - approach
always provides exact results, this is partially
self-delusional. The decision is based on a model which
consists of assumptions and aggregation, its main source
of errors. If both techniques are used, it is easier to
'rationalise' the mathematical result (as odd as this may
sound), since the intuitive choice can be matched with
the computed one and possible deviations can be further
analysed.

6. References
[1] Bilsky, A. A., Wolfe, J. M., Friedman-Hill, S. F. (1994) :
Part-whole information is useful in size x size but not in
orientation x orientation conjunction searches, in Investigative
Opthalmology and Visual Science, 35 (4)
[2] D'Zmura, M. (1991): Color in visual search, in Vision
Research, 31 (6), pg. 951-966
[3] Foltz, M., Davis, R. (2001): Query by Attention: Visually
Searchable Information Maps, Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Information Visualisation, IEEE
Computer Society, 2001, pg. 85-93

Table 1: IT Specialist Job Candidates
C++

pi
A
B
C
D
E

Java

CORBA

RMI

Acc.

0,2

0,3

0,25

0,15

0,1

0,1
0,9
0,75

0,15
0,1
0,2

0,1
0,3
0,6

0,09
0,1
1

0,4
0,25
0,3

1

1

1

1

1

0,3

0,6

0,6

0,1

0,3

[4] Small, Hugh (1998): Florence Nightingale's Statistical
Diagrams, http://www.florence-nightingale.co.uk/
small.htm

[5] Wolfe, Jeremy M.: Visual Search, in Pashler, Harold:
Attention, Psychology Press, East Sussex, 1998, pg. 13ff
[6] Yantis, S. (1998): Control of Visual Attention, in Pashler,
H.: Attention, Psychology Press, 1998

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

