Multiple Views in 3D Metaphoric Information Visualization
C. Russo Dos Santos and P. Gros
Eurécom Institute
2229, Route des Crêtes
Sophia Antipolis, France
{russo,gros}@eurecom.fr

Abstract
In exploring large volumes of information, more often
than not, one single visualization is not sufficient for grasping the whole data set. This may be due to different reasons:
the screen real-estate is limited, the user’s capacity for comprehending a large data set also has limits, different views
or perspectives of the same data may be needed to grasp all
the details, and so on.
Multiple visualizations allow the user to explore large
amounts of complex information more easily and rapidly.
We believe that one of the strengths of 3D metaphoric information visualization will emerge from the combined use of
several interacting tools, each potentially depicting different views of the information. This paper presents work done
on using multiple views for the visualization of abstract information via metaphoric representations.

1 Introduction
Challenges regarding how we visualize information are
being posed not only by the sheer quantity of data and the
limited space for visualizing it, but also by the diversity of
tasks the user wants to perform. Besides, the user does not
always have a specific task, such as a question that needs a
concrete answer. Frequently, the task is more exploratory
than targeted – in what is commonly designated as data exploration [5] – and may change as new data is apprehended.
The user then needs different visualizations, eventually simultaneous, to accomplish different goals.
In addition, and contrary to scientific visualization where
the information has an intrinsic natural representation, in
the case of abstract data there is no “correct” way to display
the data, or one that is valid for every application scenario.
This paper presents work done on multiple visualizations
in the context of the CyberNet project [4]. The CyberNet
project uses the concept of service to define the data set to
be visualized and visual metaphors to depict the abstract

information. We have developed several different visualization tools that use three-dimensional metaphoric worlds to
depict the information. Each visualization tool uses different visual metaphors according to the data to be visualized
and the user’s task, thus providing multiple views.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
some related work regarding multiple views. In Section 3
we describe our approach. Sections 4, 5, and 6 present some
examples of multiple views relating to the visualization of a
Network File System (NFS), network data, and web server
logs, respectively. Finally, in Section 7, some conclusions
are drawn.

2 Related work
Related work in the field of multiple views has increased
substantially in the last few years. This may be due to an
increase in the amount of information to be visualized, and
to the realization that one single view is no longer sufficient.
Also, the computing overhead need to implement and display multiple visualizations is less and less relevant as the
computing power increases exponentially – especially for
the graphics, where the improvements made a noticeable
difference.
In a work dealing with information retrieval applied
to provide tourist information to the ancient city of Nara
in Japan – WING (Whole Interactive Nara Guide) – [6]
presents a multiple view system with four different views.
The four views are called Map, Content, Category, and Index View. All the views are linked together so that a name
chosen in the Index View is located and displayed in the
Map view, for instance. The system integrates smoothly a
visualization technique, a keyword search technique, and a
category search technique.
[12] also presents an integrated information visualization system that allows for multiple views. It comprises an
information-centric workspace (Visage), a tool for creating
integrative visualizations for the workspace (SAGE), and
a tool for dynamic user interaction (SDM – Selective Dy-

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

namic Manipulation). The combination of these three systems enables the user to communicate with the workspace
in multiple complimentary ways.
More recently, [11] distinguishes between multiple
views and multiform visualizations: multiple views describe multiplicity in visualization (various realizations of
the data depicted in separate windows); multiform visualizations describe a change in the visual representation
method (the visualization is depicted in a different form). It
also presents five groups of reasons to use multiple views,
how to generate multiple views from different stages of the
visualization data flow model, and a multiple views checklist to help developers. Throughout this paper we will use
the term multiple views to express multiplicity, even when
there is a change in the visual representation method.
[8] introduces a taxonomy for multiple windows coordinations. It proposes a generalized multiple window coordination capability, so that the user can create custom environments for information seeking. It uses two basic user actions – selecting items and navigating views – to arrange coordination in a 2x3 matrix, identifying three possible comselecting
binations for coordinations: selecting items
items, navigating views
navigating views, and selecting items
navigating views. The putative applications
are demonstrated with mockups.
The Snap-Together Visualization, presented in [9], provides a user interface for users to “snap” visualizations together. It enables users to specify their own coordinations
between different visualizations in order to construct custom data-exploring interfaces. Snap interconnects visualizations tools developed by other researchers in the field,
and allows for constructing coordinated browsers to rapidly
explore and navigate data and relationships.
After ascertaining that, although multiple views systems are common and helpful, little specific guidance was
available for the persons designing them, Baldonado and
Kuchinsky [1] established a set of guidelines to help designers. These guidelines are divided in two sets: when to
use multiple views and how to use multiple views. For each
guideline, a justification is given, and the pros and cons of
using it are assessed. We have used these guidelines to validate our use of multiple views.

According to Baldonado’s et al. work on guidelines for
using multiple views [1], there are four rules to help deciding when multiple views should be used:
Rule of Diversity states that multiple views should be used
when there is diversity of attributes, models, user profiles, levels of abstraction, or genres.
Rule of Decomposition states that complex data should
be partitioned into multiple views to create manageable chunks and to provide insight into the interaction
among different dimensions.
Rule of Complementarity states that multiple views
should be used when different views bring out
correlations and/or disparities.
Rule of Parsimony states that multiple views should be
used minimally.
Our tools comply with the guidelines above. For instance:

¯ we have created multiple views when the target audience is diverse or when the attributes changes, as is the
case for the web server analysis tool (Section 6). This
is in accordance with the diversity rule.
¯ we have divided a large volume of data, in order to
concentrate on a smaller set, so that the data that interests most the user is made to stand out clearly (NFS
visualization, Section 4). This complies with the rule
of decomposition. We also provide a global overview
of all the data, so that the user is able to get the whole
picture – we find that having a general overview is always useful to acquire context knowledge.
These are only two illustrative examples (more examples
can be provided, also for the other rules of complementarity
and parsimony) that stress our approach to multiple views.
In general, they are created when the data changes, the target audience changes, the data under the spotlight changes,
or the change in the visual representation brings out a detail
that otherwise would probably go unseen.

3 Our approach

4 NFS visualization

The related work cited above (e.g., [12] [9] [11]),
as well as some other earlier work not described here
(e.g., [10] [13] [7]), may use different approaches to multiple views, but all agree on one thing: multiple views can
help making sense of information – the ultimate goal of
information visualization. However, multiple views must
each bring some added value. They must shed new light on
the representation, in order to be useful.

We have developed a visualization tool to represent information regarding the Network File System service (NFS
service). This service is characterized by an enormous
amount of data. We have developed several views for the
NFS service: one to visualize all the data set and others
views that display only a subset of the NFS data. These
other views, representing a reduced amount of data, allow for the emphasis to be put on the relevant data under

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(a) Overview (financial district)

(b) Overview (residential district)

Figure 1. NFS visualization using a city metaphor.
scrutiny for that particular visualization. Furthermore, the
visualization of smaller subsets reduces the risk of overwhelming the user with a large volume of complex data,
some of it not relevant for the particular task in question.
For the NFS service visualization tool we have used the
city metaphor. This metaphor revealed itself an appropriate choice due to the large number of mapping parameters
available to map the NFS data, which has a high dimensionality. In the city metaphor, information is visualized using
the structure of a real world city. In our implementation
there are districts, residential blocks with low height houses
and also financial blocks with tall office-resembling buildings. There are also roads and trees.
The metaphor is quite easy to grasp as the hierarchical
relations are evident from theirs real world counterparts:
cities contain districts, that contain blocks, that contain
houses and buildings, and so on. The visual effect is quite
impressive and provides lots of different elements and visual parameters to map information on. On the other hand,
the city metaphor is not recursive – thus, it is not a valuable
option for visualizing recursive services. In the next sections we present some of the multiple views available for
the NFS service visualization, using the city metaphor.

4.1 Overview
Figure 1 shows two views for the whole data set describing the NFS service. This general overview allows,
nonetheless, for immediate knowledge regarding the NFS
service. For instance, the user can easily identify servers
and clients. A computer is mapped on a district and each
disk is represented by a building; additionally, each client
mounting that disk is a floor on the building. On the other
hand, each imported disk is mapped on a house. In this way,

“financial” districts, i.e., districts with tall buildings, identify unambiguously servers. Mutatis mutandis, “residential”
districts, i.e., districts with low houses, clearly identify the
clients. This is a powerful visual perception immediately
evident upon first inspection.

4.2 Disk size
Figure 2 (a) depicts a visualization of information regarding the NFS service. The data represented in a subset of
the data represented in Figure 1. The emphasis is put on the
size of the disks and on identifying disks that are system’s
partitions.
In view of the foregoing, in Figure 2 (a) the size of the
disks is mapped to the height of the buildings. For the
houses representing the imported disks, the color hue maps
whether the disk is a system disk or not. The user can thus
easily identify large disks and which of their imported disks
are non-system disks.

4.3 Disk status
The data displayed in this view is a subset of the NFS set.
The focus is on disk status: the number of users mounting
the disk and the number of open filehandles they have. The
information regarding the users and the filehandles is immediately perceived as is uncluttered by other non-relevant
data.
Figure 2 (b) shows a visualization of this information. In
this view, each disk is represented by a district (square), and
each client mounting that disk is represented by a building.
The number of open filehandles is mapped on the number
of windows present in each building.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(a) Disk size view

(b) Disk status view

Figure 2. NFS visualization using a city metaphor.

5 Network data visualization
Regarding network data we have developed different visualization tools, each focusing on different aspects of the
network, and using different visual metaphors. In the next
sections we will give examples for the visualization of network topology, workstation data, and file systems information.

5.1 Network topology
We have developed a network topology visualization tool
for depicting the topology of a computers’ network – we
have used Eurécom’s intranet as an example. Due to the
strong hierarchical characteristic of the network topology
service and the fact that the number of different entities to
be visualized was relatively small, the conetree metaphor
was a manifest choice.
The conetree metaphor is fairly omnipresent in information visualization reference bibliography [14] [2] [3]. This
metaphor is generally associated with displaying hierarchical information due to the immediate visible hierarchy appearance. It is a recursive metaphor so it is able to map
recursive data. However, the number of different visual parameters available for mapping information is quite limited.
A conetree metaphor is thus used to display the network
topology and some additional information regarding the
network’s performance, as is depicted in Figure 3 (a). The
hubs are cones with a blue box at the top and the switches
are visualized as red boxes. The machines connected to a
given hub are represented as spheres placed at the base of
the corresponding cone.
The connections between the different elements –
switches, hubs, and machines – are depicted as cylinders.

Additional data is mapped on the cylinders: the size corresponds to the transmission bit-rate of the connection and the
color saturation to the packets’ loss rate. The hub’s rate of
lost packets is mapped on the color saturation of the cone.

5.2 Workstation data
Figure 3 (b) shows information regarding workstations.
The metaphor used is a solar system metaphor. The solar
system metaphor, in our current implementation, is fairly
simple. It uses stars, planets, and satellites to map information. The structure is given by the orbits of the various
elements. The hierarchical organization is provided by the
different orbital relationships: planets are attached to a star
and satellites are attached to a planet.
In Figure 3 (b) workstations are depicted as stars (cubes)
with planets, representing users, orbiting around. The users
are mapped on spheres – color hue corresponds to the Unix
group, size to memory usage, and color saturation to CPU
time. Between the workstation and the users, satellites represent user processes that are mapped as cylinders. The
mapping on the cylinders visual parameters is coherent with
that of the spheres: size memory and color saturation
CPU.

5.3 File system data
In order to visualize the contents of large file systems we
have developed a file systems visualization tool. The visual
metaphor that revealed itself more adequate to display large
volumes of hierarchical information, as is the case with file
systems, is the pyramid metaphor.
Like the conetree, the pyramid metaphor is also recursive. It uses the concept of nested pyramids to display infor-

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(a) Topological view (conetree)

(b) Workstation view (solar system)

(c) File system view (pyramid)

Figure 3. Network data visualization using different visual metaphors.
mation. It is also usually associated with the visualization
of large hierarchies of information.
Conceptually, the pyramid metaphor is similar to the
conetree metaphor, using a hierarchy of pyramids instead
of cones. Also the number of different elements and visual parameters it provides for information mapping is quite
similar to the conetree metaphor. However, we feel that for
very large hierarchies, the pyramid metaphor has a better
performance than the conetree metaphor: the visual clutter is reduced in the former. This might be explained by
the bottom-up construction of the pyramid metaphor that
allows for an uncluttered view from above, in opposition to
the conetree metaphor that uses a top-down construction.
Multiple views have been developed to be able to exploit
(visualize) the file system according to different parameters.
Essentially, the file system’s structure is always encoded in
the same manner – hierarchically with nested pyramids –
and the data under scrutiny is color coded (color hue). In
the multiple views, the color hue can thus encode the file
type, the file owner, the file date, or the file security details.
Figure 3 (c) shows an example of color hue encoding the
file type.

mation is represented in three different views: geographic
view, temporal view, and site view. Both the data and the
view are selected from a selector interface.

6 Web server data visualization

6.2 Temporal view

The analysis of Web server logs is a hot topic nowadays
particularly because of the e-business explosion. Our objective was to design a Web server logs visualization tool that
uses 3D technology to present the information to the user.
The information is displayed in different 3D metaphoric
worlds, customized according to the needs (e.g., temporal,
geographic representation), or the target audience (e.g., web
master, sales personnel).
The implementation is fairly simple at present. There
are three data types that we visualize: the number of hits,
the traffic generated, and the number of hosts. This infor-

The temporal view allows the user to compare data in a
temporal manner. This view uses a library metaphor to display the temporal data. The data is represented in a library
containing several bookshelves; each bookshelf is subdivided into shelves upholding series of books.
There are three levels of segmentation: bookshelves,
shelves and books – where data is sorted respectively by
week, by day, and by hour. The hierarchical structure is
provided by the fact that bookshelves contain shelves and
shelves contain books. Figure 4 (b) depicts the temporal
view for the web server logs visualization tool.

6.1 Geographic view
The geographical diagram allows the user to situate and
compare data from a geographic perspective. The metaphor
used is a landscape metaphor. The landscape metaphor uses
a information landscape to visualize data. The information
is placed in a virtual landscape, usually using the shape of a
vertical bar or 3D spike. It was inspired by the File System
Navigator [15].
In the geographic view (Figure 4 (a)) we have used an
information landscape with a world map to encode position.
Details-on-demand are available by selection.
Although there is basically only one element (the vertical bar) to map information on, this metaphor is interesting
because position can be effectively used to encode information – as in Figure 4 (a) where the position on the world map
encodes country information.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(a) Geographic view (landscape)

(b) Temporal view (library)

(c) Site view (pyramid)

Figure 4. Web server logs visualization tool using different metaphors.

6.3 Site view

References

The site view is a representation of the actual hierarchy
of the web site – directories and pages. This view allows for
visualizing the most popular pages, for instance, or the files
that are more frequently downloaded.
Figure 4 (c) shows an example of the site view. Again,
as in the case of the file system visualization (Section 5.3),
the metaphor used to represent the hierarchical organization
of the web site is a pyramid metaphor. The structure of the
web site is mapped on the structure of the pyramid and the
actual information regarding, for instance, the popularity of
the pages, is color mapped.

[1] M. Q. W. Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchinsky.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information visualization. In Advanced Visual Interfaces, 110–119, 2000.
[2] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings
in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 1999.
[3] C. Chen. Information Visualisation and Virtual Environments. Springer-Verlag, London, 1999.
[4] Cybernet: http://www.eurecom.fr/˜ abel/cybernet
[5] J. Goldstein, S. F. Roth, J. Kolojejchick, and J. Mattis. A framework for knowledge-based interactive data exploration. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing,
5(4):339–363, 1994.
[6] T. Masui, M. Minakuchi, G. R. B. IV, and K. Kashiwagi.
Multiple-view approach for smooth information retrieval. In
ACM Symposium on UIST’95, pages 199–206, 1995.
[7] S. Mukherjea, J. D. Foley, and S. Hudson. Visualizing
complex hypermedia networks through multiple hierarchical
views. In Proceedings of ACM CHI’95, 1:331–337, 1995.
[8] C. North and B. Schneiderman. A taxonomy of multiple window coordinations. Technical Report CS-TR-3854,
1997.
[9] C. North and B. Shneiderman. Snap-together visualization:
A user interface for coordinating visualizations via relational
schemata. In Advanced Visual Interfaces, 128–135, 2000.
[10] K. Perlin and D. Fox. Pad: An alternative approach to the
computer interface. Computer Graphics, 27:57–72, 1993.
[11] J. C. Roberts. Multiple-View and Multiform Visualization.
In Visual Data Exploration and Analysis VII, Proceedings of
SPIE, pages 176–185. IS&T and SPIE, January 2000.
[12] S. F. Roth, M. C. Chuah, S. Kerpedjiev, J. A. Kolojejchick, and P. Lucas. Toward an information visualization workspace: Combining multiple means of expression.
Human-Computer Interaction, 12(1/2):131–185, 1997.
[13] B. Shneiderman. Dynamic queries for visual information
seeking. Technical Report UMCP-CSD CS-TR-3022, 1994.
[14] R. Spence. Information Visualization. ACM Press, 2001.
[15] J. Tesler and S. Strasnick. Fsn: The 3d file navigator. Silicon
Graphics Inc., 1992.

7 Conclusions
Multiple views per se are not a guarantee of a useful visualization tool. Their usage must be justified and they must
bring some added value to the tool. This added value priority is to ease user’s task – this entails a better user visual
perception and comprehension of the data displayed.
In this paper we present some of our work on multiple
views, illustrated by examples taken from the visualization
tools that we have implemented. In the examples that we
gave, we tried to always present the motivation behind each
different view. The multiple views have been validated in a
number of different tools for different applications, ranging
from network topology visualization, to file systems visualization, or to web server data analysis.
Further work should be done in the field of user interaction and the combined use of different tools. The ultimate
goal would be to create a global information workspace
where all the services were integrated. Up until now, this
integration is not transparent to the user – each tool constitutes a different application.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

