Financial Reminiscences:
An Example of Art Based on Information Visualization in Finance
Yasuhiko Saito
INES Corporation
sai@ines.co.jp
Abstract
Useful techniques for information visualization allow
engineers or analysts to produce works of art. A work
entitled “Financial Reminiscences” is an example of such
works. This work has been produced using a visualization
technique for financial analysis. This technique is not only
a tool for generating images. It is closely related to the
information visualized in the work. Thus, the audience
needs to understand the visualization technique and then
to analyze the information.

1. Introduction
Although an information visualization technique is
evaluated on the basis of usefulness of the technique, users
of the technique are interested in not only usefulness but
also artistic expressions generated by the technique. For
example, some media artists use visualization techniques
in order to generate fantastic images. For these artists, the
generated images are more important than the information
from which the images are generated. On the contrary, the
visualization technique used in my works is closely related
to the information. In other words, the technique is useful
in helping us to analyze the information.
I have produced a series of works of art based on a
visualization technique for financial analysis. These works
require the audience to understand the technique used in
the works and to analyze the information visualized in the
works. I argue that it is possible for engineers or analysts
as well as artists to produce works of this style of art.
In my work presented in this short note, I attempt to
visualize dry financial data gracefully. In order to predict
stock prices, investors draw various kinds of charts day by
day. However, these charts are not graceful. I think that
investors should use more graceful charts so that they can
cover economic losses by aesthetic profits.
The remainder of this note is organized as follows. In
Section 2, the visualization technique used in my work is
described. In Section 3, I show that this technique is useful
by applying this technique to a system for checking stock
prices using a cellular phone. In Section 4, my work based
on this technique is explained.

2. A visualization technique
I have developed a technique for financial analysis [1].
In this technique, outlines and features of information are
visualized using portfolio textures. A portfolio texture
represents a frequency distribution as a texture composed
of numerous colored dots.
A frequency distribution is defined as a mapping
f:C→F, where C is a set of categories and F is a set of
frequencies. A frequency distribution can be represented
as a pie chart. Each sector of the pie chart is colored. A
color mapping is defined as h:C→H, where C is a set of
categories and H is a set of hues. Let h(c) be the hue of a
sector corresponding to c, where c is a member of C.
Given a frequency distribution and a color mapping, a
portfolio texture is generated as follows:
(1) A pie chart representing the frequency distribution is
drawn using the color mapping.
(2) The pie chart is decomposed into numerous dots.
(3) These dots are mixed so that they are arranged on a
plane randomly and densely.
A portfolio texture is defined as a rectangle area clipped
from the plane on which the colored dots are arranged.
When we visualize a stock portfolio using a portfolio
texture, it is necessary to prepare the following frequency
distribution. Let pt(s) be the price of a stock s included in
the portfolio, where t indicates a trading day. Let rt(s) be
the price change rate of s. That is, rt(s) is computed as
rt(s)=|pt(s) − pt-1(s)| ⁄ pt-1(s). We define C={0, 0.001, 0.002,
…, 0.065}. Each member of C is a price change rate. The
maximum rate is 0.065. If the price change rate of a stock
is greater than 0.065, it is regarded as 0.065. Let ft(c) be
the frequency of c in C. That is, ft(c)=n, if |{s|rt(s)=c}|=n.
For each c in C, h(c)=4000c. Thus, we obtain H={0, 4,
8, …, 260}. Each member of H is a level on a color scale.
Key colors on the scale are arranged as red < orange <
yellow < green < blue < indigo < violet.
We can use a portfolio texture instead of a pie chart. A
pie chart represents a frequency distribution as a set of
sectors. On the other hand, a portfolio texture represents a
frequency distribution as a single texture. Because of this
difference, a set of portfolio textures is more helpful than a
set of pie charts, when we observe a large number of or a
long sequence of frequency distributions.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3. An application of portfolio textures

5. Conclusion

Investors can get stock price data in real time using
cellular phones. In order to reduce risk, however, they
need to hold a large number of stocks. As a result, it is
difficult to check the stock prices one by one. Since screen
sizes of cellular phones are small, this problem is crucial.
From this point of view, I propose a system for checking
stock prices using a cellular phone [2]. In this system, a
portfolio texture displayed on a small screen of a cellular
phone visualizes a stock portfolio. Checking the portfolio
texture, we can decide whether or not to check detailed
information on each stock included in the portfolio.
The portfolio texture indicates whether the portfolio is
stable or not. If the texture contains more red, orange and
yellow dots than green and blue dots, the portfolio is
stable. This is because the stable portfolio includes many
stocks of which price change rates are small. Thus, it is
not necessary to check detailed information on each stock
included in the stable portfolio. On the contrary, if the
texture contains more green and blue dots, the portfolio is
unstable. This is because the unstable portfolio includes
many stocks of which price change rates are large. Thus, it
is necessary to check detailed information on each stock
included in the unstable portfolio.

Engineers or analysts can produce works of art using
information visualization techniques. One of such works
has been presented. The visualization technique used in
the presented work is not only a tool for generating images.
It is closely related to the information visualized in the
work. Thus, the work requires the audience to understand
the visualization technique and to analyze the information.

References
[1] Saito, Y.: A Visualization Technique for Extracting Rules
from Series of Multivariate Data, IPSJ Transactions on
Database, Vol.40, No.SIG6(TOD3), pp.1-11, 1999 (in
Japanese).
[2] Saito, Y.: A Study on Information Visualization for Small
Screens of Cellular Phones, JST Journal of Information
Processing and Management, Vol.44, No.12, pp.846-854,
2002 (in Japanese).

4. A work of art based on portfolio textures
I present a work entitled “Financial Reminiscences” as
an example of art based on portfolio textures. As shown in
Figure 1, this work consists of many portfolio textures,
each of which is generated from stock price data of 23
Japanese automobile companies. The textures arranged in
the upper part are generated from the data in 1989 and the
textures arranged in the lower part are generated from the
data in 1990. Dates of trading days are printed under the
textures. If the sum of all stock prices of day t is greater
than or equal to that of day t-1, the date is printed in green.
If the sum of all stock prices of day t is less than that of
day t-1, the date is printed in red.
In 1989, most of textures contain more red, orange and
yellow dots than green and blue dots. As a result, these
warm textures make us feel comfortable. In 1990, however,
we can find a number of cool textures containing more
green and blue dots. The difference between 1989 and
1990 implies a turn of the tide in the Japanese stock
market. That is, this work reminds us that the Japanese
stock market bubble burst at the beginning of 1990.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 1. “Financial Reminiscences”

