Tracking Knowledge of Emergent Domains
AbdulMohsen Al- Thubaity and Khurshid Ahmad
Department of Computing
University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey. GU2 7XH. UK
{ a.althubaity, k.ahmad }@surrey.ac.uk
Abstract
Knowledge is communicated through the so-called
semiotic systems: written text, images, mathematical and
chemical symbols, and so on. The knowledge of emergent
domains is yet to standardize its symbol systems which
simply adds to the (creative) chaos inherent in such
emergent systems. The analysis of change in written text,
amongst the most changeable semiotic system at the
lexical level at least, may reveal a consensus in the use of
terms. Terms denote concepts and textually help us to
understand how knowledge evolves in an emergent
domain.
The emergent domain of semi-conductor
physics, specifically nano-structured tunnel diodes, is
studied as an exemplar. This is our attempt to establish a
method, which covers a broad range of texts, journal
articles, patent documents and state-of-the-art review
papers, to observe the emergence of a new domain. In
each of the four knowledge conversion phases a domain
community appears to prefer certain lexical items and
uses an appropriate text type.

1. Introduction
The emergence of new domains has been studied by
philosophers, latterly by information scientists and in the
last 25 years by sociologists (of science) and researchers
in knowledge management. In this paper we outline a
method of studying this emergence by analysing the
language used by the workers in a given domain.
Any domain community invests significant energy into
revising and refining existing concepts and methods as
embodied in journals and advanced textbooks. New
ideas, such as those contained in proceedings of
conferences and, lately, publications of research
directions, are looked at carefully and sceptically. These
publications are written by leading members of the
domain community and are supported by national and
transnational research organisations. These members
define the subject, suggest ideas that may lead to
revolutionary concepts or devices, and list fundamental

issues that are to be explored. They also explore societal
and economic impacts of the advances.
Philosophers,
especially
epistemologists
and
ontologists, focus on how knowledge evolves in general:
they are interested in the structure and function of
knowledge. There is a dispute within philosophy as to
whether or not knowledge is justified true belief or if it
displaces belief. Both the justification and displacement
play a crucial role in the emergence of new ideas, and in
the way in which old concepts and methods are discarded.
During the last century, philosophers suggested that
science was a major institutionalised source of knowledge
and that it borrowed basic notions from philosophy,
fashioned them according to its needs and, in turn, gave
new inputs to philosophy. The development of physics
and biology during the 19th and 20th centuries inspired a
new branch of learning within philosophy called the
“philosophy of science.” One key exponent of this new
branch was the logical-positivist philosopher Karl Popper
who suggested that knowledge evolves through iterative
refinement and experimentation on an accepted body of
knowledge.
Information scientists, including experts in automatic
information retrieval and researchers in library sciences,
take much cognisance of citation patterns; how the
reference made to one author by another in his or her
paper, and vice versa, appears to help in creating
knowledge landscapes. The co-citing authors then form a
virtual community putting forward a specific idea or
method within their domain. The current claim is that
citation patterns can lead to the identification of the
“essential structure of a domain” (see, for example,
reference [2]).
State-sponsored programmes for
evaluating the research performance of academics and
research scientists use the citation metric very seriously,
and methods have been developed to understand the
impact of citations, leading to a new term, citation impact.
The end of the Second World War demonstrated the
impact of science and technology on the lives of people at
large. Many others, including sociologists, studied this
impact. Here the belief was that science is a social
activity and its progress and impact can be studied by
traditional methods of observation and quantification

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

developed by sociologists. If science is indeed a peoplecentred activity, and has more than a modicum of input
from organised government, then it can be deemed to be a
preserve of history as well. Methods of historiographical
study have been used to study how subjects develop.
Thomas Kuhn’s (1970) name is mentioned frequently in
the context of history and sociology of science. He
suggested that scientific activity is conducted in two
modes, normal and revolutionary. The normal mode is
that of consolidation of extant ideas and the formation of
clearly defined groups of people who are dedicated to
those ideas. Theories are refined in the normal mode and
experimental methods devised to confirm theories. The
revolutionary mode, as the name suggests, challenges
extant norms, leading to new ideas and new experimental
techniques to verify the ideas.
During the 1960s it was becoming apparent that
knowledge was just as important an asset for an
organisation or a state as labour and capital.
Management researchers revisited major issues in
philosophy; the notion of tacit knowledge, the
undocumented knowledge based on experience that
people usually carry in their heads and largely
communicated through non-verbal symbol systems, was
given considerable attention. Nonaka and Takeuchi [12]
wrote a landmark text on knowledge management. They
focused on how knowledge is converted from tacit to
explicit, combined with other knowledge and then
embedded in the culture of an organisation.
This
knowledge conversion process was crucial for businesses
hoping to remain competitive in rapidly changing and
often global marketplaces. The subject of knowledge
management is now quite broad, covering as it does
management sciences, cognitive sciences and computing.
We have already remarked that tacit knowledge is
essentially a philosophical concept; the notion of
knowledge flowing within an organisation involves issues
related to how people form and work in groups, compete
with each other, and how organisations accept or reject
new ideas. Above all, knowledge management affects the
role of researchers within an organisation and emphasises
what the so-called knowledge engineer can do in order to
leverage knowledge from the so-called knowledge
workers and convince the knowledge officers of the
import of the leveraged knowledge. Nonaka and Takeuchi
[13] and Takeuchi and Nishiguchi [12] show how this
knowledge conversion process is essential for harnessing
innovation and encouraging best practice.
Our preliminary results indicate the presence of some
or all of the four phases of knowledge conversion in some
of the emergent domains of knowledge: Socialization: A
process of sharing experiences and thereby creating tacit
knowledge such as shared mental models and technical
skills; Externalisation: A process of articulating tacit
knowledge into explicit concepts; Combination: A

process of systematising concepts into a knowledge
system, involving combining different bodies of explicit
knowledge;
Internalisation: A process of creating
shared mental models or technical know how, created
through socialisation, externalisation, and combination.
Internalisation is facilitated when knowledge is
‘verbalised or diagrammed into documents, manuals, or
oral stories’ [13, p65]. Typically these phases are
discussed with data that is largely subjective and
observational.
Each of the knowledge conversion phases involves a
trace. The trace is a document found in both formal and
informal documents. Formal documents like research
papers, patent documents, state-of-the-art reviews and
project plans, as well as informal documents such as
memoranda exchanged within an organisation and
comments on formal documents, are perhaps the only
tangible record, or trace, of the endeavours of a group of
people. These endeavours are articulated through the use
of one or more natural languages, as well as graphs and
images. This is in addition to the devices and artefacts
that are produced by the group. What is also important in
the study of these different experts is their focus on key
concepts and ideas, again articulated through the agency
of language.
Language plays an important role in helping to
conceptualise very complex ideas, especially when
scientists and technologists discuss phenomena that
cannot be directly observed. Consider the developments
in quantum theory in the earlier 20th century where
indirect observations were articulated through terms like
uncertainty principle, complementarity principle and
wave particle duality. More recently, quantum theory
played an underlying role in the development of so-called
nano technology: a technology that helps in the
construction and utilisation of functional structures with
at least one characteristic dimension measured in a
hundredth or a thousandth millionth of a metre (10-7 to 109
metres).
We outline a method based on how scientists change
the meaning of an existing word or, more rarely, invent a
new word to signal the arrival of a new concept or device.
Our case study is based on the emergence of resonating
tunnel diodes, a high-speed switching device that is
crucial for a new generation of communication and
computing systems. Here we see a term, diode, which
entered the English language in the late 19th century to
describe a device that could control the flow of currents in
a thermionic device.
The mechanism of the same name is now used to
regulate the current within a semiconductor device: the
tunnel diode refers to an apparatus where the current is
controlled through the quantum mechanical phenomenon
of tunnelling wherein particles appear to surmount
barriers with less than commensurate energy. Resonating

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(as in resonating tunnel diodes) is a term that explicitly
refers to another quantum mechanical phenomenon
whereby ‘resonance’ is created by the ‘reflection’ of the
electrons travelling in a specially engineered crystal in
which a thin insulator material has been incorporated; the
thinness is measured in tens of nanometers – a nanometer
being 10-9 meters.
Our method is based on a chronological study of
research papers that refer to a key concept and see how
this concept has influenced developments within the same
field. We have looked at the use of the term tunnelling
from 1850 to modern times. In our retrospective study we
show how this term was used by a small number of
scientists to propose the so-called Esaki, now tunnel,
diode in the 1970s. Furthermore, we go on to show how
this exotic concept has been converted into prototype
devices. Our study involves research papers published in
refereed journals, in this case the American Institute of
Physics’ Physical Review, and the study of patents
relating to tunnelling; the patents were obtained from the
US Patent Office’s website.
We show that a mixture of quantitative and qualitative
approaches to the emergence of new ideas may form the
basis of a method to visualise information for detecting
and predicting innovation.

2. Literature Review
Scientometric studies focus on the references found in a
research document, usually a research paper. The names
of the citing and cited authors and their organisations,
together with keywords and the dates of publication of the
citing article and cited article, help create a ‘map’. This
map shows the ‘intellectual debt’ of the citing author(s) to
the cited authors [8]. Citation analysis has been used in
recent times to study developments in the emergent multidisciplinary domain of fullerenes and nanotubes [9], a
hybrid of fullerene chemistry and nano-scale solid-state
physics; it has also been used to understand the usage of
computer programs in the computation of the molecular
structure of complex chemicals [4].
Patent citation studies have been undertaken to observe
the knowledge ‘flow’ between science and technology
with special reference to (advanced) semiconductor
devices [10] and the automobile industry [13]. Meyer has
studied the patent citation ‘relations’ - that is, the citation
of nano-technology patents in nano-science papers. He
suggests that, despite the overlap in the keywords of titles
of the papers (in nano-science) and the patents (in nanotechnology), nano-science and nano-technology appear to
be two separate disciplines. Pilkington, Dyerson and
Tisser [14] have studied the evolutionary field of the (all-)
electric vehicle (EV): these authors have studied how the
US automobile industry has responded to environment
and safety regulatory requirements. Their focus is on how

the industry is moving from a proven sustaining
technology (i.e. the fossil-fuelled internal combustion
engine) to an unproven disruptive technology
(electrically-powered engines). They have found that the
number of US patents filed in the EV domain compared to
all US patents follows significantly different patterns.
This suggests that the regulatory effects are spurring
technological changes over and above the usual cyclical
business considerations. Pilkington et al have performed
a ‘content analysis’ and have classified the patents
according to whether they referred to marine, road or
other vehicle type; a third of the US patents did not make
any reference to the class of vehicle.
Appleyard and Kalsow [1] have attempted to formulate
a model of alliance formation between a key
semiconductor manufacturer, namely Intel Corp., and
organizations in the USA, Western Europe, Japan, Taiwan
and Korea. The alliance partners were identified by the
number of references their employees made in their own
research articles, to the papers published by authors
whose institutional affiliation suggested that they were
working for Intel Corp. Appleyard and Kaslow, with
advice from colleagues in their sister engineering
departments, collected 449 articles. This corpus of Intelciting journal articles comprised at least ‘one of
approximately 65 keywords’ provided again by their
engineering colleagues. This study showed that the
Taiwanese and Korean organizations were weakly aligned
with Intel compared with the other three (trans-) national
groups. The closely aligned partners have somehow
‘outpaced’ the weakly aligned ones.
Generalizing on the referencing/citing behaviour of
large multinational organizations is one key to tracking
how knowledge evolves, diffuses and in some cases is
used. Note also that there is a growing emphasis on
understanding the ‘content’, through a more imaginative
use of keywords and phrases in journal articles and in
patent documents. It is important to remember that papers
are published, and patents are filed, by individuals and
that the referencing/citing patterns of individual authors
may complement the rather broad-based nature of the
studies we have cited (we are aware that the language of
patents is suffused by legal terminology as well as
specialist terms whereas journal articles by specialist
terms).

3. Resonant Tunnelling Diode: A case study
in knowledge evolution and diffusion
We have focused on an individual author and the terms
coined by him to track the evolution of a multidisciplinary enterprise. We have looked at one of the
most active areas in physics: physics of solids, especially
semi -conductor physics, and within semiconductor

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

intellectual indebtedness shown by such cross-referencing
indicates the existence of a community. It is important,
nevertheless, not to only focus on the names but also on
the contents. This is the central argument of this paper.

4. Tracking Discovery
There are three parts to our analysis: (a) First we trace the
use of the term tunnelling in an authoritative publication
over the last 50 years or so; we have chosen the American
Institute of Physics’ Physical Review as our source here;
(b) Second, we have performed a frequency analysis of
the term resonant tunnelling in Physical Review and in
the US Patent Office Database over approximately the
same period; (c) Third is a study of key terms in state-ofthe-art reviews.

4.1 Rise and fall of tunnelling
Within the corpus we have chosen, there are 3333 articles
whose titles contain the term tunnelling/tunneling and
there are 392 abstracts that comprise the term. The term
starts to appear in the Physical Review publications in the
time period 1950-1959 and then increases rapidly after
that. Note the boost to the number of publications after
1973 following the award of the Nobel Prize jointly to
Leo Esaki, for building ultra fast and ultra small tunnel
diode, Brian Josephson, for predicting supercurrents in
superconducting diodes, and Ivar Giaever for discovering
electron tunnelling in superconductors. Figure 1 shows
the growth behavior of the term tunnelling from 1956 to
2001 in the Physical Review journal. The frequency of
occurrence of tunnelling within publication titles starts to
be significant between the middle of the 1980s to the
middle of the 1990s, and then stays constant. This
increase is due to the emergence of new products and
applications dependent upon electron tunnelling.
250

Number of Articels

200
150
100
50

19
98
20
01

19
92
19
95

19
86
19
89

19
80
19
83

19
74
19
77

19
68
19
71

19
62
19
65

0

19
56
19
59

physics the discussion appears focused on ‘nanostructured
materials ’. Leo Esaki, our chosen author and one of the
pioneers in this field, claimed in 1999 that ‘nearly half of
the semiconductor physicists in the world are working in
this area’ [7; p6]. Esaki’s Nobel Lecture was entitled
‘Long journey into tunnelling’ [5] in which he elaborates
a number of terms he has introduced into this ‘new
physics’ of nano-scale: tunnel diode, tunnelling electrons,
tunnelling spectroscopy, negative resistance in metaloxide semiconductor junctions, negative resistance due to
resonant transmission, and the periodic structure
superlattice. These terms appear with varying frequency
in journal articles and in US patents over the last 40 to 50
years. Esaki has over 20 patents to his name and the
American Physics Institute has published over 55 of his
research papers.
In 1957 Leo Esaki published experimental evidence of
electron tunnelling through nanoscale barriers [6]. In his
experiment, Esaki narrowed the Ge p-n junction to 10nm
and thereby reduced the length of the tunnelling path.
Over the years Esaki and his colleagues have shown how
to create multiple barriers within semiconductor devices
by impregnating with an insulating material. This led
them to observe the resonance scattering of electrons in
this superlattice. The goal of Esaki’s work is to make
faster switching devices and memory devices for the next
generation of computers. The longer-term goal is to
produce a quantum computer where the computation is
carried out at an atomic level rather than at the macromolecular level as is the case now.
Esaki’s influence has been considerable. This is borne
out not only by the citations of his original paper, ‘the
most cited paper in 1985’ [7], but also by the reference to
his patents in subsequent patents approved by the US
Patent Office; his 23 patents have been assigned in
roughly equal numbers to the US Army (10) and his then
employers, IBM (13). His 1980-approved patent, entitled
‘tunnel diode’ (US PTO No. 4,198,644) has been cited in
17 other US patents, filed between 1981-1999; one of the
patents filed in 1981 refers to two of Esaki et. al’s patents.
The 'tunnel diode' patent cites four of Easki's earlier US
patents (3626257, 3626328, 4103312, 4137542); there are
citations to two other patents, one patented by one of his
fellow IBM workers at the time. Esaki et al’s patent on a
semiconductor bulk oscillator (US PTO 3626328, filed
1969) has a citation to a fellow IBM-worker and another
Nobel Laureate, Herber Kroemer (US PTO 3467896, filed
1969). Kroemer’s patent refers to Esaki’s first patent on
heterojunction triodes (USPTO 3209215, filed 1962). A
systematic analysis of these patents shows that the
patentees show their ‘intellectual debt’ [7] to their peers.
There may be something else in addition to the
intellectual debt according to Pilkington because US
patent lawyers err on the side of caution and cite relevant
and irrelevant patents as well [14]. Excessive caution or

Years

Figure 1. The growth of articles with titles
containing the word tunnelling from 1956 to 2001

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

4.2 Resonant tunnelling: Usage in Physical
Review and US Patents

25

20

We then searched the US Patent Office’s (US PTO) web
site for all machine-readable patent documents that
contain the term tunneling (the equivalent British English
is tunnelling). Note that the USPTO database comprises
ASCII texts, which can be analyzed by computer
programs for computing frequencies, and that there are
older patents (c.1960’s) that are only available as
facsimile images and therefore cannot be analyzed by a
computer system. The search results showed that there
are 487 titles, approved since 1974, that contain the word
tunnelling in four major fields of geotechnics (78 patents),
physics (390 patents), medicine (8 patents) and
communication networking (11 patents).
Table 1. The consolidation and ‘absorption’ of
the term tunnelling in Physics and other
subjects.
Field
Start
End
No. of patents
year
year
Geotechnics
1947
2001
78
Physics
1947
2001
390
Medicine
1983
1999
8
Communication 1993
1999
11
Table 1 shows that patents in Physics more frequently
include the term tunnelling, perhaps appropriating and
refocusing the term from Geotechnics, and it appears that
the term is also being used, albeit rarely, in Medicine and
Telecommunications. The table also shows that the term
has not been used in US patents titles for
Telecommunication and Medicine since 1999.
Comparison of the abstracts of the US patents with the
abstracts of journal papers from Physical Review shows
an interesting trend especially in the case of resonant
tunnelling diodes. Between 1980 and 1994, the usage of
the term resonant tunnelling increased by a factor of 7 in
the abstracts, followed by a decline in usage by as much
as a factor of 2. In contrast, the term is used with
relatively the same frequency during 1985-1999: note that
there is no reported usage of this term in the patent
documents before 1984 (see Figure 2).
The rise and fall of the use of a term may indicate its
novelty and relative obsolescence respectively. Tracking
this change in journal papers and in patent documents
may help to understand whether or not a concept or object
related to a given term has reached certain maturity and
practical usage.

15

10

5

0
8 0-8 4

8 5-8 9

90 -94

95 -99

PROLA

3

9

22

11

US Patent

0

4

7

10

Figure 2. Resonant tunnelling as a keyword in
Physical Review Online Archive (PROLA) and US
Patents

4.3 Terminology fashions in state -of-the -art
reviews
State-of-the-art reviews commissioned by peer-review
bodies are important in tracking the growth of a subject.
We have looked at four such reviews: first, a mo nograph
on Low Dimensional Semiconductors, published in 1985
[15] containing a chapter entitled ‘Towards 2000’; the
second and third publications, published in 1999, by (i)
US National Science’s Nanotechnology Research
Directions (NRD), and (ii) European Commission’s
Information Science and Technology Programme’s
Technology Roadmap for Nanoelectronics (RM). The
fourth publication is National Nanotechnology Initiative
(NNI), published in 2000 by the US National Science and
Technology Council. The frequency (per one hundred
thousand words) for the two terms diode and tunnel show
a decrease over the period 1985 to 1999; the decrease in
the frequency of the latter is more marked than that of the
former (Table 2).
These terms were identified
automatically by our program System Quirk (available
freely at http//www.computing.surrey.ac.uk /Quirk).
Table 2. The changes in the frequency of key
single terms in semiconductor technology
during 1985-1999 (terms per 100000).
Total No. of
Diode
Tunnel
words
Kelly (1985)
6559
152.0
244.0
RM (1999)
28593
35.0
251.8
NRD (1999)
93364
16.1
60.0
NNI (2000)
54739
7.3
14.6
The frequency of compound terms in the reports
published in 2000 when compared with those published in
1985 indicate the concepts and artifacts that have become
more fashionable during the interceding 16 years; for
example devices based on tunnelling systems and

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

instruments for observing the quality of these devices
have gained more prominence (Table 3). Like the single
terms, our program System Quirk automatically extracted
the compound terms.
Table 3. The changes in the frequency of key
compound terms in semiconductor technology
during 1985-1999
NNI NRD RM Kelly
Diodes
0
2
6
2
Resonant
Tunnelling
(RT)
RT
Devices
1
1
3
0
RT
Device
0
0
2
0
Circuits
RT
Transistors
0
1
3
0
Microscopy
0
7
1
0
Scanning
Tunnelling
(ST)
ST
Microscope
1
7
1
0
ST
Spectroscopy
0
1
0
0

5. Afterword
The socialization phase in Esaki’s works includes
references to earlier experimental work that suggested
that there is a sudden upsurge in current with only small
applied voltage in certain classes of semiconducting
materials; Esaki’s experiments established the notion that
tunnelling may be responsible for the upsurge rather than
any other mechanism. The publication of his papers,
initially only in IBM house journals and then in the
prestigious Physical Review, may be regarded as the
externalization phase of knowledge conversion. This
phase led to the combination phase where work in
superconductivity influenced the work in tunnelling
semiconductors leading to a strange oxymoronic term
superconducting semiconductor diode; despite the early
death of this term the field is burgeoning.
The
internalization phase is marked by international
conferences, learned journals on the subject of nanostructured materials, and by the references to Esaki’s
patents and papers. The new socialization process has
begun in the last ten years where recent work in
Buckminsterfullerene is being used by nano-scientists and
technologists in the laboratory manufacture of so-called
carbon nanotubes: the material to power future
computers. We are currently assembling a complete
corpus of texts published by Leo Esaki and tracing
changes in his use of terms and changes in the way he
references other workers in his field. This corpus will
include his research articles and patents.
We are
attempting to demarcate the four phases of knowledge

conversion by changes in the language of the nanoscience
and technology community.
Bibiliography
[1] Appleyard, M.M. and G.A. Kalsow. 1999. ‘Knowledge
diffusion in semiconductor industry’. Journal of Knowledge
Management. Volume 3 (No. 4). pp 288-295.
[2] Chen, C., & R.J. Paul. 2001. Visualizing a knowledge
domain's intellectual structure. IEEE Computer, 34(3). pp 65-71.
[3] Compano R., L. Molenkamp, and D.J. Paul. 1999.
Technology Roadmap for Nanoelectronics.
Brussels:
Microelectronics Advanced Research Initiative (MELRI
NANO) - European Commission IST Programme on Future and
Emerging Technologies.
[4] Boyd, Donald B. 1997. Evidence that there is a future for
semiempirical molecular orbital calculations.
Journal of
Molecular Structure: Theoretical Chemistry. .Vol 401. pp219225.
[5] Esaki, L. 1974. ‘Long journey into tunnelling’. Reviews of
Modern Physics. Vol 46 (No.2) pp 237-244.
[6] Esaki, L. 1958. New Phenomenon in Narrow Germanium pn Junctions. Physical Review, 1958,109,603.
[7] Esaki, L. 1999. The Evolution of Nanoscale Quantum
Effects in Semiconductor Phys. Nanostructured Materials, Vol.
12, pp. 1-8.
[8] Kochen, M. 1987. ‘How do we acknowledge intellectual
debts?’. Journal of Documentation Volume 43. pp 54-64.
[9] Marx, W., M. Wanitschek, and H. Schier. 1998.
Scientometrics on fullerenes and nanotubes. Electronic
Properties of Novel Materials - Progress in Molecular
Nanostructures. AIP Conference Procedings, 442, 533-543.
[10] Meyer, M.S. 2001. Patent citation analysis in a novel field
of technology: An exploration of nano-science and nanotechnology. Scientometrics, Vol 51, pp. 163-183.
[11] Nanotechnology Research Directions. 1999. Washington:
Office of the President (of the USA) National Science and
Technology Council’s Committee on Technology.
[12] Nonaka, I., and T. Nishiguchi. 2001.
Knowledge
Emergence. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
[13] Nonaka, I., and H. Takeuchi. 1995. The KnowledgeCreating Company. New York: Oxford University Press.
[14] Pilkington A., R. Dyerson, and O. Tissier. 2002. The
electric vehicle: - Patent data as indicators of technological
development, World Patent Information, Vo. 24, pp. 5-12.
[15] Kelly, M. 1985. Low Dimensional Semiconductors.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Acknowledgements
A. Al-Thubaity wishes to thank the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for a PhD scholarship. Khurshid Ahmad wishes to
acknowledge the support of the UK Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council Grant (Scene of
Crime Information Systems Project, GR/M/89041) and of
the European Union’s GIDA (Generic Information
Decision Assistant) Project grant. Thanks are also due to
Lee Gillam and Mariam Tariq for their helpful comments .

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

