Visual Model for one CAD Tool’s Algorithm Representation
Galina Yaitskova
Moscow Institute for Microprocessor Systems of RAS
yga@mike.imvs.ru
Abstract
Visual representation of one algorithm’s mathematical
apparatus from the field of Computer Aided Design (CAD)
Tools of computer hardware is suggested.
Visual representation of the algorithm constitutes
animation sound-film.
The rich in the content of the paper is the verbal
elucidation of visual representation forms, such as "static
images", "dynamic images", "moving", "scenario", and so
on, and also - the comparison of these forms with the
mathematical conceptions.
The problem considered is an extraordinary way of
learning of serious mathematical apparatus of algorithm
designed for software realisation in CAD tools application.
Really, it is needed in modern teaching process sometimes.
It is supposed to accompany the report by animation
fragment demonstration in variant of teacher's explanation
of serious material. This fragment will present a little
peace of algorithm working for a very simple example.

1. Introduction
It is called attention to report a representation of
mathematical algorithm has been developed for software of
one application in Computer Aided Design Tools. This
algorithm is the main one solves the semantic problem on
test pattern generation for fault detection in electronic
circuit. The algorithm itself is rather difficult for
understanding and it is needed well readiness in the field of
CAD Tools development to be good in test design for
project design. We use the animation for training of
personal (designer of electronic project) that deals with this
application as user to help him.
The matter is in that one does not oblige the internal
algorithms but only he is able flexible manage by tool.
However, an outward of this tool greatly unlike on an
internal algorithm. The work is perform rather well until a
user finds oneself not to be able to search the strategy of
solving supernumerary situation with test generation. In
such case the knowledge of internal algorithm working
allows to be equal to the task. This knowledge could be
superficial, however it is necessary that it should be
striking, graphic, remained in one memory, and figurative.

Reminding about potential new strategy should be
occurred to him as if subconsciously.
Animation sound-film in co-operation with quite
scientific professional explanation of algorithm achieves
the goal.
In the article we explain techniques of conversion of
mathematical abstractions in animation images therefor we
need to advert to apparatus specific of algorithm.
Believe it is not so complex for understanding in such
extent but yet need to explanation why such representation
allows solving the serious psychological problem.
The representation of mathematical abstractions in the
form of visual animation images helps to accent the
attentions of studious on learning subject due to some
psychological points:
-Sudden imaging interpretation engraved in pupil mind
after lesson
-Natural disagreement with images interpreting, situation
interpreting involves in being interested learning of main
subject;
-Creative needs lead to the deep penetrating in subject
field.
The subject field for which visual model was tried is Dalgorithm (by Roth [1], for simplicity). This algorithm is
used as the main method of automatic test pattern
generation in the most scientific and commercial CADapplications. The idea of using visual model for
representation one of the methods has not as its object to
teach the proper method with its helping. It could take a
very rich manpower to do full-length film. And what is
more it may has an opposite reaction.
The main purpose of such model creation is in
stimulating of positive emotion as the reply on the
resistance of inexperience. Friendly interface being done
by visual model promotes the better perception of studied
material. This visual animation model is not adequate
representation of serious mathematical algorithm. Its
psychological meaning is in excitation positive emotions.
In the paper the mathematical apparatus of represented
method is described in brief. However if it is possible to
look through it in [1] we could expect more understanding
of our interpretation idea.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

2. Some words about algorithm itself
For our experiment we choose ATPG D-algorithm by
Paul Roth. Name J. Paul Roth is well known for specialists
in the field of test pattern generation. He suggested in 1962
to use cube complexes calculus for TPG formality. He
introduced D-notation. He created method of ATPG for
combination circuits on the base of proposed apparatus [1].
He proved that it is an algorithm in mathematics sense and
called it D-algorithm. Now D-algorithm modifications are
the bases of test design tools.
D-notation now is tribute respect to P. Roth. Modern
investigators keep Roth D-notation for good and failed
circuits distinguishing and also some useful conceptions:
d-cube, singular cover, D-intersection, intersection rules,
double step pass: driving forward and driving backward.

2.1. What exactly have been represented:
mathematical conceptions – notions and
operations
It is needed keep in mind that it isn't our task to tell about
mathematical conceptions of algorithm itself. In this
section we will concern only those conceptions which have
been represented (italic).
To synthesise test pattern for a circuit, which is given as
a logic net on primitive gate base AND, OR, NOT, means
to create such values vector of input co-ordinates that
allows to appear good or fault maintaining point on the
control point. Because in the essential path method a set of
points which are analysed simultaneously is structurally
connected path that it is said that input co-ordinates values
vector has to make sensitive given path.
So the first notions are introduced: logic net based on
elementary gates and the connections between elements;
the path also: the structural connection of elements.
Let us consider some more conceptions in style of Roth’s
d-notations. Primitive d-cube: it is value vector of input coordinates in which path co-ordinate has sensitive symbol d,
bd (notd), another co-ordinates have some logic values for
checking sensitive inputs by output. It is said that sensitive
input manages by output. Singular cover: it is the set of
singular cubes - values vector of input-output co-ordinates
of element so the output value is ensured by input coordinates.
Thus we introduced some more notions: symbol alphabet
α{d, bd, 1, 0, x} with sensitive symbols and logic symbols;
primitive d-cube of forward driving; and elective set of
singular cubes for backward driving –singular cover.
The procedure of values assignment, which provide the
sensitiveness of some path, is come to forming of primitive
d-cube for every element of the path in forward phase in
that way the current values don't contradict those which
have been assigned already and which are TC-cube and to
choice singular cubes from singular covers for providing

elements in backward phase which don't contradict values
of TC-cube also. It is the D-intersection operation.
Intersection rules of α -symbols from TC-cube and dcube or singular cube from S-cover are determined with
help of intersection matrix. Some of matrix elements
(rules) are operative and the others are not-operative ones.
The difference is in leading to taking decisions in cases of
getting operative D-intersection on any co-ordinate in
resulting TC-cube.
Some conceptions of operation apparatus are introduced
also: primitive d-cube constituting; value assignment;
singular cube choice; intersection; not-operative and
operative rules of D-intersection; TC-cube combining.
The appointment order of providing logic values and the
order of backward/forward steps is accepted the following:
-Forward driving:
-Forming of primitive d-cube on the next in turn element
of path
-Unambiguous justification of inputs for all elements
(input implications)
-Unambiguous justification of outputs for all elements
(output implications)
Cycle for all path elements
-Backward driving:
-Ambiguous justification of the next in turn element
-Unambiguous justification of all elements inputs (input
implications)
-Unambiguous justification of all elements outputs
(output implications)
Cycle for all ambiguous elements.
Two unambiguous justification operations together with
primitive d-cube forming constitute one step of forward
driving and so for backward driving. The meaning of
unambiguous justification operations might be simply
illustrated on the example of singular cover. One can
provide 1 on the AND output the only one way – the
element is unambiguous provided. One can provide 0
output on the same element by tree optional ways –element
is an ambiguous provided.
The first fragment of animated film demonstrates
information running in logic circuit the image of which
represents simultaneously logic net and TC-cube.
There are following algorithm components in the
fragment:
-One step of forward driving:
-Primitive d-cube forming on element
-Implication of inputs
- Implication of outputs
-Once more step of forward driving
-One step of backward driving:
-Ambiguous justification

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3. The connection of main image forms with
mathematical apparatus
The image forms are described in this section. There is
no possibility to tell about all forms having been demanded
to create strong system of representation. The most general
forms are described and those of them which were
employed in the first fragment and which maintain the text
of article.
Tree main image forms are used. Apparatus of notions is
represented by static images. Sometimes the lasts have
motion details. Apparatus of operations is represented by
dynamic images, i.e. by moving of static images.
Interaction of static and dynamic images which
represents synthesis algorithm itself is combined in
animated film scenario.
Thus:
Mathematical notion ----------> static image
Mathematical operation ----------> dynamic image
Mathematical algorithm ----------> films scenario

3.1. Static images
Simple static image. Any mathematical apparatus notion
has its own visual image in form of static image-picture.
The simplest notions are represented by original picture the simple static image.
3.1.1. Extended forms of static images.
Combine static image. The example: stage of plot
evolution is the combination of simple static images and is
static image too. It is alike the definition of logic net is
determined throw the other definitions in mathematical
notions.
Passive and active static images. Using static images for
implementation of dynamic image and combining static
and dynamic images in scenario require making difference
between the same image in different plot situations. Alike
mathematical notions have different functional load in
different moments of mathematical algorithm working:
from passive value, which are appropriate to element
output to active value, on base of which the singular cube
is chosen. To distinguish active and passive modes of the
same image it is used details of motion. Thus, sensitive dimage and logic symbol-image, which is used for dynamic
image representation, have arms and lags; but the same
logic symbol-image in passive mode (in static picture)
hasn't motion details.
Static picture - it is combine static image which is come
out by combination two or more heterogeneous static
images.

3.2. Dynamic images
Dynamic images are intended for representation of
apparatus of operations and naturally are realised by
dynamic of static images.
Simple dynamic image. Dynamic image is begun with
static image stirring up and is finished with alteration of
static picture and/or a new static image stirring up – with
choice of the next dynamic image if the receiving of
operative signal (operative D-intersections, for example) is
the result of operation concluding. So the alteration of
model state combine image and static picture is the result
of disappearance of d, appearance logic rows - ranks at
fortress entrances, passing of logic symbol images from
entrances to exit grounds.
3.1.2. Extended forms of dynamic images
Composite dynamic image is the result of composition
two or more dynamic images. All of these dynamic
images, besides of the last, are concluded by appearance of
operative signals and by making active of the next
component of composed dynamic image. The last one is
finished by alteration of static picture.
Active static images have different authorities in
accordance functional importance for algorithm.
Authorities so as details of motion are intended for creation
dynamic images and for plot connections and are realised
by means of moving: sensitive symbol image moves with
grate velocity but its motions are restricted: it isn't fussy
active participant. It has been done accent that it is hero.
Active logic symbol image has more motions: for example,
it climbs on a roof of fortress. Its functions are reduced to
estimation of situation. Passive symbol images move only
in accordance with dynamic symbol motions (on
command).

4. Representation of notions and operations
by animation images
4.1. Notions
Elementary gates. Logic net based on functionally
different logic element AND, OR, NOT, INP, OUT. Gates
are represented as an architectural construction: fortresses
(image) through which sensitive symbol image has pass.
The ground (image component) on which fortress tower
(image component) is placed likes a technical literature
portrayal of gate. Fortress has some closed doors (image
component) - inputs of a gate. The door, which is
correspond to that sensitive symbol come, can open and
pass it when primitive d-cube is created on the events
evolution ground. An arch (image) is used for NOT
representation.
Logic net. The combine static image – stage constitutes
net elements which are presented by two fortresses with

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

OR-ground, three fortresses with AND-ground and two
arches and connections of logic net, which are represented
by roads (image) between fortresses placed on common
light-blue ground. The common ground (static image
complete component) blue colour underlines the fact that
moving image have the only way to pass on roads don't try
to avoid fortresses.
Symbol alphabet 〈 {d, bd, 1, 0, x}. Symbol alphabet is
represented by set of images like of doll figures. They are
static images. But, as it was spoken about, the symbolimage, which take part in actions, could be active or
passive images. Distinguish is appeared in presence motion
details in their portrayal. So the sensitive symbol (image) d
and logic symbols (images) 1 and 0, which forms primitive
d-cube have arms and lags but logic symbols (images) 1, 0,
x as values in TC-cube haven't motion details.
TC-cube. In definition TC-cube is values of net elements
(model states), which are appropriated them to current
time. The model value is put as a passive image placed in
door hollow or on the ground at fortress entrance. The set
of passive symbol images combines passive combine
image - state, which forms static picture – country
together with stage (combine static image)

4. 2. Operations
Primitive d-cube forming. The appearance (dynamic
image component) an active d symbol-image in front of a
door of fortress causes appearance (dynamic image
component) needed logic symbol-images in front of
another fortress doors; door opening (dynamic image
component) and d-disappearance (dynamic image
component gives whole image name) behind the door.
Camera is carried over the door. Primitive d-cube is
formed.
Unambiguous justification of inputs/outputs is
represented by composite dynamic image, which consists
of two dynamic images, one of which corresponds to
analysis of element inputs-output vector and other to
assignment of values.
Inputs/outputs are provided simply (uniformly) in the
cases when suitable conditions are created on its output
and inputs/inputs and output. The composite dynamic
image, which represents this element of operation
apparatus, consists of two dynamic images: passing
(dynamic image component gives whole image of analysis
name) of the symbol-image from ground to fortress roof
with changing (dynamic image component) its location
(estimates the input/output situation) and appearance
(dynamic image component gives whole image of values
assignment name) needed symbol-images in front of doors
of fortress/penetration (dynamic image component gives
whole image values assignment name) through open door
on output ground of fortress (camera is carried out the
door) and coming back (completing component of dynamic
image) of stirring up symbol in initial point. If situation

don't correspond to possibility of unambiguous
justification images don’t appear in front of doors, doors
don't open and takes place ineffectual coming back
(dynamic image substitution) of active symbol-image.
Ambiguous justification is represented by composite
dynamic image consisted of two dynamic images, one of
which corresponds to analysis of input-output vector and
the other to choosing of singular cube. Ambiguous
justification is an optional procedure in its own sense. The
composed dynamic image, which represents this element
of operations apparatus, repeats passing dynamic image
and is complemented by dynamics of other dynamic
image: some rows of static combine images - ranks are
constituted from static symbol-images representing
singular cubes appear in camera on fortress's entrance
ground. Ranks are combined in singular cover static image
- legion. The visual accent on the last rank finish rank
appointment (dynamic image component gives whole
image of singular cube choosing name).

5. Graphic tools
It is could be enumerated main visual tool’s means were
used in the first film fragment:
-Pictures
-Cover texture
-Moving objects
-Camera displacement
-Colour palette, and colour changing.
Colour palette and cover employment. Choice of path for
sensitive symbol passing is out of the first fragment. Here
it has been chosen and this fact is pointed by picked out
light colour shade roads between fortresses. Sense path
making, which is general purpose of event evolution, is
painted (in golden, used for intensification of emotion
effects) in binary dynamics: road is painted after
disappearance d-image behind fortress door. The light-blue
colour of common ground was told above. Strict grey with
silver shade colour of symbol-images approach them to
serious of mathematics abstractions even in spite of dolly
details. Laying-walling of fortress, intricate doors as
though hint that a gate is also the only mathematical
model, the form of real circuit element representation,
"black box" with known functional models (here: primitive
d-cubes and singular cover).
Moving dynamics. Introducing of complementary
moving dynamics (besides of dynamic images) on the one
hand provides copulas in events evolution and on the other
hand - served for perception effect increasing. The
example of dynamics employment for plot copulas is
propagation of input values that have been assigned to
element outputs. In representation: division into two
(bifurcation - dynamic image) symbol-image and double
(twin - static image) moving from one fortress entrance to
exit of another which replaces here dynamic image

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

corresponding to operation of intersection of d-cube and
TC-cube (dynamic image D-intersection).
Camera displacement. It serves for completeness of
dynamic image, for movement dynamics representation
and for pass quantum from one dynamic scenario episode
to another, or from one stage of algorithm to another.
Unfortunately space limit excludes more commentary.

8. References
[1] J.P. Roth, "Diagnosis of Automata Failure: A
Calculus and a Method", IBM Journal of Res. and
Develop., 1966, v.10, N4, pp. 278-291.

6. The plot of animation film fragment itself
D-image move on picked out road from point of
departure (hasn't a static image in the fragment) to nearest
obstacle - fortress. It isn't possible to pass over the fortress.
It is possible to pass through the obstacle only if send for
necessary helpers which know the fondest key word that
turned on the door to penetrate D into fortress and to quit
it. It is d-cube forming.
Employees of subsidiary departments must prepare the
caring out of the important task. So only they know some
constituents of fondest key word. These departments are
located on driveways; the part of department employees
has been organised already but others employees have
being appointed. It is the input implication.
Since the long path lies ahead of cherished goal – to
bring tidings on the output strategic point that it is worth
messengers sending out to drive-off-ways where is
fortress's friendly service could be able to prepared doorhelpers beforehand. It is output implication.
All sorts of intricacies intrigues, occurrences, incidents
await missionary, helpers and messengers on the roads.
(But it is the main topics of the next fragments.) There is
and the dependence upon moral of the mass which have
been guessed among them (in this fragment). It is an
ambiguous justification.
Moving such a way on the roads and settlements of
fortress country, Gateland, with the intricacy cyberethical relations, missionary can (in this fragment) or
not to achieve cherished goal: to bring glad tiding
('Scheme is good') to the out land of fairyland
Gateland.

7. Conclusion
The following report could confirm the result. Only two
students have made the final project successfully among
students (group of 12 people) studied material without
attracting the visual model in teaching; but the same task
did not cause difficulties among students listened the
learning material with using the visual representation
model in teaching process.
We intend to accompany the report by animation film
(fragment) demonstration in variant of teacher's
explanation of serious material (fragment is sound-film).
This fragment will present a little peace of algorithm
working for a very simple example.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Supplement

GATELAND

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Teaching method consists of the following main stages:
•
Traditional telling about studying
method with introducing all mathematical notation
and operation of the apparatus.
•
Visual demonstration of example with
explanation of mathematical concepts only. Visual
actions are not explained. Interpretation of them is
the individual meter of students.
•
Showing of hole animated fragment with
numerous free accompanying
But as the explanation of theoretical material on the
example there are some independent visual fragments
which correspond steps of mathematical actions for the
demonstration. And teacher comments only mathematical
process. The individual picture consists from two parts: the
upper is animated subfragment, which is corresponding to
mathematical action disposes in lower part of picture. The
whole picture includes the schematic of logic net of
explaining example. The yellow marker indicates the
current point on schematic that appears on the screen in
considering individual picture and which are explained in
mathematics forms and actions in the low part of picture.
Now we’ll present teacher’s explanations
(Teacher:)
Let us consider the example to demonstrate the
performance of algorithm’s steps. You can see in the right
upper corner logic net to create test for the path with
numbers 9, 15, and 16. Note, that in our model of circuit
logic net is defined so that element - is the connection
between gates: sometimes one is only input wire in a gate;

sometimes - only output and sometimes it is an output of
one gate and is an input of the others.
Initial states of model elements are undetermined or xstate and TC-cube for net is X.
The first step (and you can see it on the first fragment) is
d-cube forming on the first element of chosen path. The
sensitive primary input is element number 9; providing
inputs which ensure the expose of sensitivity on the output
15 are elements 12 and 13 in logic 1. The general form of
current d-cube in TC-cube context or in common model
state you can see in figure 1: sensitive symbol is assigned
to element 9; logic value 1 is assigned to elements 12 and
13 and we can expose sensitive value nod on 15 element.
The second step and the second fragment are the
intersection formed d-cube with current model state or TCcube. As I told, in this moment TC-cube is equal all x’s on
every element of net. Xs are replaced to the points for
clear. Changing logic 1 on 12 element on logic 0 in this
figure is the result of peculiar of model state
representation.
The next operation, which we need to do in algorithmic
sequences, is inputs implication. Two elements appear in
event scale after previous step. They are: 12 - logic 0 and
13 - logic 1. As you can see value logic 1 on the element
13 could be simple justificated by assigning logic 1’s on
elements 4, 5, and 6, but value logic 0 on 12 element
couldn’t be simple justificated, it is an ambiguous
justification, and now we left it and we will deal with it in
the other mathematical operation and in the other step of
algorithm. After assigning logic values on 4, 5 and 6

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

elements we need to intersect formed s-cube with current
TC-cube. As we can see this intersection is satisfied, i.m. it
is not conflictive.
Fourth fragment is accordance to the next step of
algorithmic procedure - to output implication of 14
element as output of gate which could be assigned due to
presence of dominant value logic 1 for gate OR on element
12. The providing input elements 7 and 8 could be defined
in x-state (for free common state insuring). The consistent
intersection of formed s-cube with current TC-cube takes
place in this case too.
All operations of one step of forward driving are
performed. We can move forward on once more element.
And 5th fragment demonstrate d-cube forming on the next
gate in the path - assigning sensitive symbol notd on the 15
element assigning providing values logic 0 on elements 10
and 11. So the sensitive symbol is exposed on primary
output 16. The intersection operation of formed d-cube
with current TC-cube is successive.
Now we have no new elements in event scale for
implication operations. Logic values were assigned on the
primary inputs in the last step. So the forward driving
procedure is finished.
Backtrack procedure is the second part of common test
generation process.
In our example it is presented by only one fragment.
Logic 0 on 12th element, which we have not provided in
above step, is in the event scale for procedure of an
ambiguous justification. Singular cover for logic 0
providing on 12 element contains 3 c-cubes. Any one
could be chosen. We choose the last and try to intersect it
with current TC-cube. The intersection has success.
Defined elements are primary inputs. So the backtracking
is finished, and whole process of test generation for given
path is finished too.
Such a way we would construct test for each path of the
logic net. And each such test proves the good information
pass and faults absence on the considering path.

Employees of subsidiary departments must
prepare the caring out of the important task. They
are needed since only they know some constituents
of fondest key word. This department is located on
driveways; the part of department employees had
been organised already but others employees have
being appointed. It is the input implication.
Since the long path lies ahead of cherished goal to bring tidings on the output strategic point that
it is worth messengers sending out ahead on all
ways where are fortress's friendly service could be
able to prepared door-helpers beforehand. It is
output implication.
All sorts of intricacies intrigues, occurrences,
incidents await missionary, helpers and
messengers on the roads. There is the dependence
upon moral of the mass, which have been guessed
among them too. It is an ambiguous justification in
whole.
Moving such a way on the roads and settlements
of fortress country Gateland with the intricacy
cyber-ethical relations missionary can (in this
fragment) or not to achieve cherished goal: to
bring glad tiding ('Scheme is good') to the out land
of fairyland Gateland.

After this serious explanation students may listen the
humorous animation interpretation comment for had been
considered test pattern generation.
The following, for example or one can think out an own
history.

D-image move on picked out road from point of
departure (hasn't a static image in the fragment)
to nearest obstacle - fortress. It isn't possible pass
over the fortress. It is possible to pass through the
obstacle only if send for necessary helpers which
know the fondest key word that turned on the
door to penetrate D into fortress and to quit it. It
is d-cube forming.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

