Visualisation of the Semantic Web: Topic Maps Visualisation
Bénédicte Le Grand, Michel Soto,
Laboratoire d'Informatique de Paris 6, France
Benedicte.Le-Grand@lip6.fr; Michel.Soto@lip6.fr
Abstract
Topic Maps provide a bridge between the domains of
knowledge representation and information management
by building a structured semantic network above
information resources. Our research at LIP6 aims at
visualizing this semantic layer efficiently, which is a
critical issue as Topic Maps may contain millions of
elements.
This paper is divided into two parts. First, we depict
briefly basic Topic Maps concepts. Then, we discuss
Topic Maps visualisation requirements and we study
how existing visualisation techniques may be applied to
Topic Maps representation. We conclude by giving a few
directions that could lead to the "ultimate" Topic Map
visualisation tool.

1. Introduction
The standards developed in the context of the
Semantic Web provide means of adding semantics to the
data available on the Web. XML is a first level of
semantics which allows users to structure data with
regard to their content rather than their presentation.
However, more semantics can be added with the
Resource Description Framework (RDF) or Topic Maps
standards. RDF was developed by the World Wide Web
Consortium [14] whereas Topic Maps were defined by
the International Organisation for Standardization [4].
The Topic Map paradigm was recently adapted to the
Web by the TopicMaps.Org consortium [13]. Both RDF
and Topic Maps aim at representing knowledge about
information resources by annotating them; these
standards are compatible.
Topic Maps provide a bridge between the domains of
knowledge representation and information management.
They build a semantic network above information
resources, which allows users to navigate at a higher
level of abstraction. However, Topic Maps are
multidimensional knowledge bases and they may be
very large. Users may still have problems to find

relevant information within a Topic Map, therefore, the
issue of Topic Maps visualisation and navigation is
essential.
This paper is organised as follows: first we present
Topic Maps basic concepts; then, we discuss Topic Maps
visualisation requirements and we study how existing
visualisation techniques may be applied to Topic Maps
representation. We conclude by giving a few directions
that could lead to the "ultimate" Topic Map visualisation
tool.

2. Topic Maps basic concepts
Topic Maps are a new ISO standard [4] which allows
to describe knowledge and to link it to existing
information resources. Topic Maps are described as the
"GPS of the information universe", as they are designed
to enhance navigation in complex data sets. Although
Topic Maps allow to organise and represent very
complex structures, the basic concepts of this model –
topics, occurrences and associations - are simple.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 1. Example of Topic Map

A topic is a syntactic construct which corresponds to
the expression of a real-world concept in a computer
system. The figure 1 represents a very small Topic Map
which contains four topics: XML Europe 2000, Paris,
Ile-de-France and France. These topics are instances of
other topics: XML Europe is a conference, Paris is a
city, Ile-de-France is a region and France is a country.
A topic may be linked to several information
resources – e.g. Web pages - which are considered to be
somehow related to this topic. These resources are called
occurrences of a topic. In the Topic Map represented on
the figure 1, occurrences of the topic Paris may be
URLs pointing to some pictures or maps. Occurrences
help organise data and understand their context by
providing means of linking real resources to abstract
concepts. It is important to notice that topics and
information resources belong to two different layers.
Users may navigate at an abstract level – the topic level
– rather than directly within data.
The concepts presented so far – topics and
occurrences – allow to organise information resources
with regard to a concept. However, it is interesting to
describe relationships between these concepts, which is
possible in Topic Maps through topic associations. An
association adds semantics to data by expressing a
relationship between several topics, such as XML
Europe 2000 takes place in Paris, Paris is located in Ilede-France, etc. Every topic involved in an association
plays a specific role in this association, for example, Ilede-France plays the role of container and Paris plays
the role of containee.
One advantage of Topic Maps is that they add
semantics to existing data – by organising and
describing them – without modifying them. Moreover,
one single Topic Map may describe several information
pools and several Topic Maps may apply to one single
information pool.
In this section, we described Topic Maps basic
constructs: Topic Maps contain topics which are
connected by associations and which point to
information resources through occurrences. Topics
Maps can enhance navigation and information retrieval
in complex data sets by adding semantics to these
resources. However, a topic may have a high number of
dimensions, as it is characterised by its name(s), its
type(s), its occurrence(s) – the resources which are
related to it - and the role(s) that it plays in associations.
Moreover, Topic Maps may also be complex because of
their size: they may contain millions of topics and
associations.

3. Topic Maps Visualisation
As stated in the previous section, Topic Maps are
very powerful but they may be complex. Intuitive visual
user interfaces may significantly reduce the cognitive

load of users when working with these complex
structures. Visualisation is a promising technique for
both enhancing users' perception of structure in large
information spaces and providing navigation facilities.
According to Gershon et al. [3], it also enables people to
use a natural tool of observation and processing – their
eyes as well as their brain – to extract knowledge more
efficiently and find insights.
In the following, we first present the goals of Topic
Maps visualisation. Then we review different
visualisation techniques which may be applied to Topic
Maps representation.

3.1. Visualisation goals
The goal of Topic Maps visualisation is to help users
locate relevant information quickly and explore the
structure easily. Thus, there are two kinds of
requirements
for
Topic
Maps
visualisation:
representation and navigation. A good representation
helps users identify interesting spots whereas an efficient
navigation is essential to access information rapidly.
According to Schneiderman [11], "the visual
information-seeking mantra is: overview first, zoom and
filter, then details on-demand".
3.1.1. Representation requirements. First of all, users
should be provided with an overview of the Topic Map.
This overview must show the main features of the
structure in order to deduce the Topic Map’s main
characteristics at a glance. Visual representations are
particularly fitted to these needs, as they exploit human
abilities to detect patterns.
The first thing we need to know about a Topic Map is
what it deals with, i.e. what its main concepts are. Once
they are identified, more structural information is
needed, such as the generality or specificity of the Topic
Map. This kind of information should appear clearly on
the representation so as to help users compare different
Topic Maps quickly and explore only the most relevant
ones in detail. The position of topics on the visual
display should reflect their semantic proximity. These
properties can be deduced from the computation of
Topic Maps metrics, as shown by Le Grand and Soto [7].
Moreover, Topic Maps are multidimensional
knowledge bases. Topics, associations and occurrences
are characterised by many parameters, which should
appear somehow in the visualisation.
The requirements we stated before are not
compatible, as it is not possible – nor relevant – to
display simultaneously general information and details.
We can compare this to a geographic map; a map of the
world cannot – and should not – be precise. If a user is
interested in details, she must precise her center of
interest, for example by choosing a specific country. As

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

in geographical maps, we need to provide different
scales in Topic Maps representations.
Moreover, visualisations should be dynamic to adapt
to users' needs in real time. Combinations of time and
space can help ground visual images in one's experience
of the real world and so tap into the users' knowledge
base and inherent structures.
3.1.2. Navigation requirements. A good navigation
allows users to explore the Topic Map and access
information quickly. Navigation should be intuitive so
that it is easy to get from one place to another. Several
metaphors are possible: users may travel by car, by
plane, by subway or may simply be “teleported” – as on
the Web - to their destination. The differences lie in
what they see during their journey. From a car, they see
details, from a plane they have an overview, etc.
Navigation is essential because it helps users build their
own cognitive map – a map-like cognitive representation
of an environment - and increase the rate at which they
can assimilate and understand information.
Free navigation should be kept for small structures or
expert users as the probability of getting lost is very
high. For beginners, who do not know where to start
their exploration, predefined navigation paths are
preferable until topics of interest are identified.
To sum up the visualisation goals, the whole Topic
Map should be represented in order to help users
understand it globally. This overview should reflect the
main properties of the structure. However, users should
be able to focus on any part of the Topic Map and see all
the dimensions they need. Providing these several scales
requires the use of different levels of detail. Finally,
users should be able to navigate easily and intuitively at
these different levels of detail.
In the following section, we study which
visualisation techniques meet our requirements and may
be used to represent Topic Maps.

associations, it becomes necessary to use sophisticated
graphs visualisation techniques.
Graphs and trees are suited for representing the
global structure of a Topic Map. However, trees are
better understood by human beings since they are
hierarchical. Trees are easier to interpret than graphs.
Topic Maps are not hierarchies and thus may not be
directly represented as trees. However, it may be
interesting to transform small parts of the Topic Map
into trees. By doing so on a little part of the Topic Map
(to avoid clutter), we may benefit from the advantages of
trees.
The challenge of graph visualisation is to provide
graphs which display many nodes but remain readable. A
first solution, proposed by Munzner [9], is to use
hyperbolic geometry – instead of euclidian geometry –
which allows to display a very large number of nodes on
the screen. Another solution to the lack of space on the
screen is to represent Topic Maps in three dimensions. A
3D interactive Topic Map visualisation tool – UNIVIT
(Universal Interactive Visualisation Tool) - was
implemented by Le Grand and Soto [6], which uses
virtual reality techniques such as 3D, interaction and
different levels of detail, as shown on figure 2.

3.2. Visualisation techniques
Many visualisation techniques are currently available
to represent complex data. Among them, graphs, trees
and maps seem to be the best suited metaphors for Topic
Maps visualisation.
3.2.1. Graphs and trees.
Representing Topic Maps as graphs seems natural as
they can be seem as a network or graph of topics and
associations.
The Topic Map shown on the figure 1 is displayed as
a graph consisting of nodes and arcs. However, this
simple representation may become cluttered and difficult
to interpret when the size of the structure increases. As a
Topic Map may contain millions of topics and

Figure 2. UNIVIT Representation
Moreover, the quality of the visualisation can be
increased by an efficient node positioning, which makes
it possible to intuitively derive information from the
distance between nodes. For instance:
• topics linked together by an association may be
represented close to each other in the graph.
• topics of the same type or pointing to the same
occurrences may be clustered.
Graphs and trees meet our first requirement since
they may represent the whole Topic Map. However,
users also need to see detailed information about the
topics they are interested in. This second requirement,
which consists in representing all the different

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

parameters of a Topic Map (name, type, etc.), may be
really challenging. Different shapes and colors may be
used to symbolize various dimensions of nodes and arcs
of the graph. However, the number of different shapes,
colors, icons and textures is limited, which makes this
kind of representation unsuited to a Topic Map
containing millions of topics and associations.
In order to display detailed information, it is thus
necessary to focus on a part of the Topic Map. A graphlike overview of a Topic Map helps users understand the
structure globally and select specific topics they may be
interested in. Once a topic is selected, it is easy to
display very precise information about it. Once users'
needs are clearly identified, a useful way to represent a
Topic Map is to display a list -or index- from which it is
possible to select a topic and see related information.
The navigation is usually the same as on Web sites:
users click on a link to open a new topic or association.
An example of such a visualization is provided by the
Ontopia Omnigator [10], as shown on figure 3.

Figure 4. Mondeca's Topic Navigator
3.2.2. Maps. Topic Maps aim at enhancing navigation
within complex data sets. In the real world, maps are
used to achieve this goal. It is thus natural to consider
representing Topic Maps as maps.
A map should display the most significant elements
of the structure. The location and the size of these
elements on the map is essential. In the Tree-Maps
proposed by Bruls et al. [1], data is reorganized so as to
reflect the relative importance of topics, as shown on the
figure 5. These Tree-Maps may be used to represent
Topic Maps.

Figure 3. Ontopia Navigator
We showed that the global view and precise
parameters could not be displayed at the same level of
detail. It is essential that users can navigate easily from
one level of detail to another. Some tools already
provide interactive graphical visualizations. Mondeca’s
Topic Navigator [8] builds graph representations in realtime, according to what users are allowed or need to see
(figure 4).

Figure 5. Tree-Map
One of the challenges of Topic Maps visualisation as
maps is to find optimal coordinates for the topics. The
Self-Organizing Maps (SOM) algorithm, proposed by
Kaski, Kohonen et al. [5] can be used to achieve this by

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

organising the topics onto a two-dimensional grid so that
related topics appear close to each other. Factor analysis
can also be used to compute topics coordinates. Davison
[2] explains how the multi-dimensional scaling (MDS)
algorithm uses similarity measures between topics to
provide a 2D map of the structure. The figure 6 is an
example of map which represents a small Topic Map
about rock music.

Figure 7. Themescape Representation

Figure 6. MDS Map
The ThemeScape software by Cartia Inc. (1992)
provides different types of maps. They look like
topographical maps with mountains and valleys, as
shown on the figure 7. The concept of the layout is
simple: documents with similar content are located close
to each other and peaks appear where there is a
concentration of closely related documents. Higher
numbers of documents create higher peaks. The valleys
between peaks may be interesting because they contain
fewer documents and more unique content. The labels
reflect the major two or three topics represented in a
given area of the map, providing a quick indication of
what the documents are about. Additional labels often
appear when we zoom into the map for greater detail.
We can zoom to different levels of magnification to
declutter the map and reveal additional documents and
labels.
This visualisation is very interesting since it
combines different representations in several windows.
Users may choose one of them according to the selected
type of information.
Visual tools may utilise animated 3D landscapes
which take advantage of human beings' ability to
navigate in three-dimensional spaces, recognize patterns,
track movement, and compare objects of different sizes
and colors. Users may have complete control over the
appearance of data. Virtual reality techniques include
interactivity and the use of different levels of detail
(LOD). Immersion in virtual worlds makes users feel
more involved in the visualisation.

A representation of Topic Maps as virtual cities,
developed by Le Grand and Soto [7], is shown on the
figure 8. Topics are represented as buildings which
coordinates are computed from a matrix of similarities
between topics. Users may navigate freely or follow a
guided tour through the city; they may also choose to
walk or fly. The properties of topics are symbolised by
the characteristics of the corresponding buildings, such
as name, color, height, width, depth, etc. Occurrences
and associated topics are displayed in two windows at
the bottom of the screen. As human beings are used to
2D, a traditional 2D map is also provided and the two
views – the map and the virtual city – are always
consistent.

Figure 8. Topic Map as a Virtual World
Users may explore the world and interact with data.
However, they may get lost in the virtual world. In order
to avoid these problems, predefined navigation paths are
also proposed. The different levels of detail make it

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

possible to display many scales: details appear only
when the user is close to the subject of interest.

4. Conclusion

[2]
[3]

In this paper, we presented Topic Maps basic
concepts. These structures may be complex, thus
efficient visualisation techniques are essential. We
reviewed different types of visualisation metaphors,
especially graphs, trees, maps and virtual worlds. Some
of them may represent efficiently the global structure
while others are better at displaying details or providing
interaction with data. In fact, each technique is wellsuited for a specific level of detail. The best way to
benefit from the advantages of each method is thus to
provide several levels of details for the representation of
Topic Maps. This can be done by displaying several
windows or by selecting the most appropriate
representation at a given level of detail. A specific
visualisation tool is usually adapted to display a certain
amount of data. The limit of this approach is that giving
users too many options may confuse them and result in
an over-complicated interface.
If only one tool is to be used for visualisation, the
Topic Map may be filtered or clustered to reach the scale
at which the tool is useful, which was proposed by Le
Grand and Soto [7]. This is achieved through a
conceptual analysis of the Topic Map, which allows us
to characterize the structure and identify the topics
which are the most relevant to users needs.

[13]

5. References

[14]

[1]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

Bruls, M., Huizing, K., van Wijk, J. J., 2000,
Squarified
Treemaps,
Proceedings
of
Joint

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Eurographics and IEEE TCVG Symposium on
Visualization, IEEE Press, pp. 33-42.
Davison M. L., 1992, Multidimensional scaling,
Malabar, Fl, CA : Krieger Publishing.
Gershon, N., Eick, S.G., 1995, Visualisation's New
Tack: Making Sense of Information, IEEE Spectrum,
pp. 38-56.
International Organisation for standardization (ISO),
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), Topic
Maps, International Standard ISO/IEC 13250:1999, 19
April 1999.
Kaski, S., Honkela, T., Lagus, K., Kohonen, T., 1998,
WEBSOM – self_organising maps of document
collections, Neurocomputing, volume 21, pp 101-117.
Le Grand, B., Soto, M., 2000, Information management
– Topic Maps visualization, XML Europe 2000, Paris,
France.
Le Grand, B., Soto, M., 2001, XML Topic Maps and
Semantic Web Mining, Semantic Web Mining
Workshop, ECML/PKDD 2001 conference, Freiburg,
Germany.
Mondeca,
2001,
Topic
Navigator,
http://www.mondeca.com/site/products/products.html.
Munzner, T., 1997, H3: Laying Out Large Directed
Graphs in 3D Hyperbolic Space, IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization.
Ontopia, 2001, Ontopia Topic Map Navigator,
http://www.ontopia.net/solutions/navigator.html
Shneiderman, B., 1996, The eyes have it: a task by data
type taxonomy for information visualizations,
Proceedings of 1996 IEEE Visual Languages, Boulder,
CO, pp. 336-343.
ThemeScape
Product
Suite,
http://www.cartia.com/products/index.html
TopicMaps.Org XTM Authoring Group, 2001, XTM:
XML Topic Maps (XTM) 1.0: TopicMaps.Org
Specification.
World Wide Web Consortium, 1999, Resource
Description Framework (RDF) Model and Syntax
Specification, W3C.

