Innovative Pedagogies for 21st Century Multimedia Education:
An Introduction to the USC Annenberg Center for Communication Multimedia
Literacy Program
Stephanie Barish, Richard Edwards, Steve Anderson, & Janine Fron, University of Southern
California Annenberg Center for Communication Multimedia Literacy Program
Abstract
th

In the 20 century, literacy meant the ability to
read, write and present cogent arguments on paper. In
the 21st century, literacy is going to extend well beyond
that and into what could be termed, ‘a language of
screens.’
This paper provides an overview of USC’s
pedagogical strategies and theoretical precepts of an
innovative educational initiative. Currently in its fourth
year, USC’s Multimedia Literacy Program is dedicated
to clarifying and expanding definitions of 21st Century by
introducing multimedia technology -- coupled with a

critical awareness of visual culture -- into higher
education curricula. The program is fundamentally
interdisciplinary, adapting the theories and methodology
of cinema, television and new media studies to address
the specific needs and culturally relevant issues of
academic departments in the humanities, fine arts, social
sciences and physical sciences alike. At the heart of the
program is a unique emphasis on multimedia authorship
which compels both students and faculty to undertake
their own multimedia projects.

Introduction: A Pedagogical Period of Transition
The
digital
revolution
—
networked
communications, electronic mail, the Internet, digital
authoring devices, and other emerging technologies — is
not only transforming the functioning of business, social,
and everyday life but also has the capability to
fundamentally change the landscape of higher education.
Suddenly powerful tools previously available only to the
business
community
and
entertainment
and
communications industries are accessible and easy to use
on every home computer. Anyone with a computer can
now not only directly receive complex information,
advertisements, art, entertainment, and other forms of
media, but can develop his or her own sophisticated
media communications in a myriad of digital media
formats, and distribute them on the Internet to a
conceivably unlimited audience. The nature of
publication and distribution — along with the
relationship between author and audience — is being
transformed for the first time since the emergence of the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

printing press, changing the way we receive, process,
and impart information.
The implications of this evolution spread far beyond
the technologies themselves. Text, image, sound,
movement, and interactivity are becoming a part of our
daily language, and the very definition of literacy must
be examined within these new contexts. One can no
longer be a writer without understanding the
implications of hypertext upon narrative and story, can
no longer profess to having a trained analytical mind
without understanding the conceptualization of a nonlinear argument, a non-verbal expression, database
logics, audio-visual semiotics, screen language, and
interface design. And even more, understanding must
incorporate the varied cultural contexts and social
signification of the new media.
The question, in this increasingly technologized and
image-saturated world, is, what is the necessary extent of
one's relationship to these processes? Unless one works
in the entertainment, media, or communications

industries, where does one learn and study this? Turning
to institutions of higher education, one finds that
although the role of technology has expanded vastly, few
institutions are prepared to address the larger questions
about how media affect understanding and, by extension,
what it means to be genuinely educated and literate in
today’s world.
Because of the speed with which this technology
revolution has overtaken us, most universities have not
had the lead-time to address technology in a thoughtful
and systematic way. Many have found themselves
bound to implement new policies and build new
infrastructures as a crucial factor in their ability to recruit
and retain top students. Often new media centers have
been established with a dedication to “teach with
technology” — which usually involves training
professors to put course syllabi online, augment lectures
with video or an Internet connection, or incorporate listserves and online bulletin boards into out-of-class
discussions. Institutions have built vast networks, wiring
their classrooms for broadband data, providing highspeed Internet access to dormitories, enabling wireless
communication in libraries and student centers, and
boasting expansive computer labs and multimedia-ready
auditoriums. Others have begun to explore the potential
for distance learning. But administrators and educators
are often left scrambling to meet the opportunities (and

justify the expense) presented by this new infrastructure,
resulting in an approach that begins, and mostly ends,
with the technology itself. Institutions without a
mechanism for addressing these changes critically are
locked in a reactive rather than proactive position,
prevented from moving forward and developing
increasingly
sophisticated
pedagogical
and
epistemological practices.
Today's universities are simultaneously presented
with the problem of incorporating changes that are at
once theoretical and practical. But while this creates
challenges and obstacles throughout higher education, it
is also a great opportunity to reshape our understanding
of literacy in the face of great cultural evolution.
In 1998, the Multimedia Literacy Program was
launched as an experimental pilot initiative, to explore
these very issues. The active media of learning and
dissemination have been transformed, changing forever
the relationships between author and audience and
learner and subject. The implications of this shift within
society are political, social, and economic; in academia
they will be no less broad or significant. The Multimedia
Literacy Program, by addressing these issues and their
implications head-on, is leading the way toward actively
changing the processes of teaching and learning in the
twenty-first century.

Program Methodology: Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Through its generous funding from the Atlantic
Philanthropies, USC Annenberg's Multimedia Literacy
Program has already made progress toward developing a
foundation for a “novel teaching paradigm," to use the
words of the initial grant proposal, that embraces new
possibilities provided by emerging media technology in
order to "build upon existing written literacy to explore
an enhanced literacy — one that incorporates still and
moving images, aural communication, and multimedia
applications, as well as the written word."
The Program emerged without clear pedagogical
models to follow, and it is still working with faculty,
graduate students, researchers, administrators, and
hundreds of undergraduate students to build appropriate
experimental models through which to develop adaptable
tenets of its methodology.
Understanding the
multidisciplinary nature of the undertaking, the Program
built its program with such varied USC departments as
English, History, Political Science, Sociology, Slavic
Languages and Literatures, Religion, Art History, and
Philosophy, and has since reached out to even more
varied disciplines such as medicine and physics. The
Program recruited and worked with established faculty

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

participants who were interested in actively engaging
themselves in the integration of multimedia into the
classroom in ways that had not been possible before.
These pioneers have themselves become a formative
component of the Program, helping to address complex
issues as well as build a framework for the many new
faculty and graduate students eager to participate.
Words alone cannot meet and express all the
pervasive ideas and concepts that constitute
the reality of our time. To match this
challenge, new modes of analytical thought
and understanding are only just beginning to
emerge from evolving forms and combinations
of media. As we absorb the visual, audio, and
combined media into our daily lives, what will
it mean to be truly literate and, by extension,
educated in the 21st Century? And in what
ways will this subvert, change, fit into, and
even support the Ivory Tower?
The seed for the University of Southern California’s
Multimedia Literacy Program emerged from these
questions and the resulting realization: if students

graduate without being able to “read and write” in new
and emerging media, they are not truly literate in the
language of their own society.
Established in 1998, this experimental learning
initiative — then internally known as the "New Literacy
Project" — sought to redefine literacy in higher
education in view of the impact of computer
technologies. As its nickname suggests, the "New
Literacy Project" was predicated on the assumption that
the era of the personal computer had given rise to
entirely new ways of communicating and using
language. Theories of new media touted the ability of
computers to create non-linear associations in textual
and visual composition. In literature, "hypertext" (which
allows a reader to choose various pathways through a
story) was said to have revolutionized the nature of
written composition, while digital video and non-linear
editing promised to transform the way stories were told
on film, video, and television. Coupled with the
economic prosperity of the last decade of the 20th
century, these technologies and their cultural products
easily captured the attention of American consumers and
investors. With technology stocks skyrocketing and dotcom entrepreneurs redefining the American dream,
digital media seemed poised to revolutionize all aspects
of American culture. It was within this somewhat
frenzied cultural milieu that the "New Literacy Project"
came into existence.
Initially, the Project recruited faculty and courses
from USC's interdisciplinary, undergraduate Thematic

Option honors program. The students who are admitted
to this highly competitive and academically rigorous
program were viewed as ideal candidates for the New
Literacy Project's progressive pedagogical experiment.
For the first two years, Project staff developed strategies
for integrating computer-based media authorship into the
curriculum of Thematic Option courses in History,
Political Science, Religious Studies, and English
Literature. In many cases, however, the honors students
who participated in the program proved to be among the
most resistant to efforts to depart from academic
conventions. This was not true in all cases — indeed,
Thematic Option students completed some outstanding
and highly successful work. In retrospect, however, the
Program has come to understand their resistance as
symptomatic of the threat which the tenets of the
Multimedia Literacy Program pose to traditional
academia. In academia, as in any institutional system, an
economy of values and rewards has developed over time
from which certain individuals benefit more than others.
Those who are rewarded most profusely by an existing
system clearly have the most to lose when changes to
that system are introduced. Thus, the unfamiliarity of
multimedia authorship caused great concern among
students whose identities were significantly linked to
conventionally defined academic success. Although we
still encounter varying degrees of initial technophobia
among students, the overall sense of resistance at the
student level has been greatly diminished as technology
has become more and more common.

Conclusion: Dynamic Authorship
From the beginning, the Program's strategy centered
on a dynamic partnership with three groups of
participants: the faculty, who would provide courses,
content, and institutional support while driving the
program from "above"; teaching assistants with the
necessary conceptual skills and understanding for
bringing multimedia into higher-education courses; and a
core constituency of multimedia-literate students who
would benefit from this new form of literacy and provide
the most basic engine for change.
This constituency has proven to be among the most
powerful stimulants for the Program's dissemination
across the campus and beyond. Faculty actively recruit
their own colleagues to the Program, speaking not only
of the shot in the arm this gives their teaching but, in
many cases, of its impact on their research. Teaching
assistants from across the campus continue to contribute
to the Program’s ongoing workshops and tout their
participation in the Program as they look for post-

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

graduate work within their disciplines.
In some
disciplines in which multiple undergraduate courses have
been taught, experienced students have begun to actively
seek out additional Multimedia Literacy courses and
have encouraged their other professors to participate.
In its first years, the Multimedia Literacy Program
thoughtfully built its methodology and its facilities,
distinguishing itself from the many “teaching-withtechnology” programs at other universities through many
characteristics, including the following:
• Strong roots in the critical understanding of
media through cinema and visual studies;
• A focus on the conceptual implications of
integrating each form of media appropriately into
each academic discipline;
• The collaborative dynamic that is encouraged
between the teaching assistants, the faculty, and
the students; and
• Its focus on participant authorship.

In particular, the Program worked to create an
environment in which course content and multimedia
techniques serve one another, rather than struggle with
each other for the precious classroom and out-of-class
hours of students and instructors alike. In the meantime,
it has also recognized the need to develop its
instructional programs that make it possible for all the
Program's participants to get the most from their
participation, and through the years Program’s faculty
and graduate students have worked together to develop
and expand the Institutes, symposia, workshops, and
training seminars to provide broad instruction in the
practical and theoretical bases of the program. Through
these efforts, the approaches developed by the Program
have emerged as a unique voice in the effort to find a
place for new-media technology in teaching and learning
in higher education.
The students who have taken the Program’s courses
have encountered a variety of new experiences and some
unexpected results that help to serve, and go beyond, the
original goals of expanding notions of literacy. Some

courses opened themselves to group critique and
analysis, to which the new media naturally lend
themselves, exposing the students to new presentation
challenges and further reconsideration of their own work
in relation to that of others. Due also to the Program’s
emphasis on student authorship, the students’ conception
of their own work in general has developed to the point
where many undergraduates see themselves, and are seen
by others, as doing original research and publishing.
Some students continue working on the projects long
after the semester has ended and the grades have been
turned in. One project won first prize in the University
of Southern California’s Undergraduate Symposium for
Creative and Scholarly Work for its original research,
original images, and scholarly work.
Special thanks to Elizabeth Daley, Executive
Director of the USC Annenberg Center for
Communication and Dean of the School of CinemaTelevision; Richard Weinberg, USC School of CinemaTelevision; John Seely Brown and all MLP participant

Bios
Stephanie Barish, MLP Program Director
Stephanie Barish is a prominent figure behind
leading multimedia initiatives that are defining a new
literacy for the 21st Century. In 1999, Ms. Barish was
invited by USC’s Annenberg Center for Communication
to direct its Multimedia Literacy Program, to change the
way faculty and students interact with education. Recent
speaking engagements include United Nations World
Media and Television Conference, National Science
Foundation’s Symposium on Knowledge and Distributed
Intelligence,
and
Massachusetts
Institute
of
Technology’s Media in Transition Program. Ms. Barish
is a credited Producer and Director of Survivors:
Testimonies of the Holocaust, the Shoah Foundation's
1999 award-winning interactive CD-ROM. Survivors
interweaves the video testimony of Holocaust survivors
from the Foundation's archive into a broad historic and
geographic context, and is presently being used in
classrooms and museum education programs throughout
the United States. Ms. Barish received an MFA in Film
Production and an MA in Social Science from the
University of Southern California.

Richard L. Edwards, MLP Postdoctoral
Fellow
Postdoctoral Fellow, Richard Edwards specializes in
the theory, practice and aesthetics of new technologies,
especially the educational, social and political

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

implications of new media from the advent of video to
the digital age. He is the author of several articles on the
relationship between activism, politics and new media.
From 1997-1998, he was a Presidential Fellow in USC’s
Leadership Institute, an initiative headed by Warren
Bennis and Steven Sample. Richard Edwards received
his Bachelors degree in English Literature from the
University of Chicago and his Masters degree in Critical
Studies from University of Southern California’s School
of Cinema-Television. Currently, he is nearing
completion of his Ph.D. in Critical Studies at USC.

Steve Anderson, MLP Postdoctoral Fellow
Steve Anderson has a Ph.D. in Film, Literature and
Culture from the University of Southern California and a
Master of Fine Arts in Film and Video from CalArts. He
is the designer of "Dreamwaves," a Web site devoted to
dreams and dream-based art. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow at USC's Annenberg Center for
Communication where he researches new media
pedagogies and teaches interactive media design in the
Annenberg Center's Multimedia Literacy Program.

Janine Fron, MLP Program Specialist
Janine Fron is the Program Specialist for the
Multimedia Literacy Program at USC’s Annenberg
Center for Communication. During the past decade, Ms.
Fron worked with Chicago-based collective (art)n as a

Visiting Artist and Creative Director, contributing to the
group’s pioneering advancements in Computer Graphics
and Virtual Reality. Ms. Fron's work with (art)n is in the
permanent collection of the Santa Barbara Museum of
Art, International Center of Photography, and the
Smithsonian Institution. Ms. Fron co-authored papers for
Computers & Graphics, IEEE and The University of

Chicago’s Cultural Policy Center. In the mid-1990s, Ms.
Fron produced a seminal digital archive for one of
America's top 100 art collections, and is associated with
the private collection as its Managing Director. Ms. Fron
has a Bachelor of Arts degree in Journalism from Loyola
University Chicago.

USC Annenberg Center for Communication
Created in 1993 through a grant from Ambassador
Walter H. Annenberg to the University of Southern
California, the USC Annenberg Center for
Communication supports active research that addresses
practical problems in the convergence of content and
digital technology.

the School of Cinema-Television and the School of
Engineering, in addition to other parts of the university.

Directed by a team of respected leaders from arts
and entertainment as well as science and technology who
embrace the cross-disciplinary ideas of its projects, the
Center identifies and explores ways in which
communication technology affects education, law,
science, engineering, healthcare, arts, entertainment and
politics.

Contact:

The Annenberg Center is not exclusively affiliated
with any one school at USC. Rather, it is an organization
that stimulates cross-disciplinary work involving three
core schools; the Annenberg School for Communication,

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Elizabeth M. Daley is the Executive Director of the
Center and Dean of the School of Cinema-Television.
Dr. Todd Richmond is the Center’s Managing Director.

Stephanie Barish, Director
Multimedia Literacy Program Annenberg Center
for Communication
University of Southern California
734 W. Adams Blvd. KCH
Los Angeles, CA 90089-7725
Tel: 1.213.743.2637 & 1.213.743.1933
E-mail: sbarish@annenberg.edu &
URL: http://www.mmliteracy.net/

