Incrementally Visualising Criminal Networks
M. N. Smith P. J. H. King
Birkbeck College, University of London
{mat,pjhk}@dcs.bbk.ac.uk
Abstract
Understanding the information gathered thus far in
a criminal investigation is of great importance,
particularly in terms of guiding its future course. Since
the late 1980s the use of software tools to provide
visualisations of this information has become
increasingly common.
The objective of such tools is to provide, in a readily
comprehendible way, the social network of all the
people involved. This may include the victims, suspects,
witnesses, acquaintances and locations of interest in the
investigation such as workplaces or nightclubs. Such
diagrammatic representations often provide the focus
for discussion among the investigating team and are
incrementally added to as new facts are discovered.
In this paper we present a brief overview of this
important subject area and discuss how such software
products could be further enhanced. We also present an
example that illustrates the basic principles using a
demonstrator we have developed.

1. Visualising Social Networks
In many application areas data is best comprehended
if presented in the form of a directed graph. This is a
consequence of the relationships between the objects of
interest in the problem domain1 being of as great an
importance, if not more so, than the attributes of the
objects. For example, if we have the information that
Angela is the sister of Brian, who is married to
Christine, who works at Daltons Bank, where she has a
colleague called Edward, and that Edward frequents the
King George public house as does Angela’s friend
Fiona, then this information is best presented as a
directed graph such as that displayed in figure 1.1.

Figure 1.1: A small social network.
Presenting data in this manner enables the viewer to
establish visually if objects are connected. Thus if we
ask if there is a connection between Christine and Fiona
who we believe are not known to each other, the
connections are readily seen.
The directed graph displayed in figure 1.1 represents
the relationships and interactions between a set of
people, and is as an example of a social network2. Due
to the decreasing costs of computer hardware and the
improved support for generating computer graphics, the
last decade has seen a marked increase in software that
supports Social Network Analysis (SNA)3, the majority
by visualising some form of network [FREE00].

2

An interesting further example is the terrorist network relating to the
tragic events of September 11th that can be found in [KREB].

1
We use the term object in this context to mean a person, entity or
thing in the problem domain that can be uniquely identified and has an
independent existence, such as a car, a picture, or a number.

3

A comprehensive introduction to Social Network Analysis is
provided in [HANN99].

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

2. Criminal Intelligence Analysis
One field where visualising social networks is of
particular importance is in Criminal Intelligence
Analysis (CIA). CIA has developed independently from
SNA and originated from a diagramming technique
produced in the early 1980s by Anacapa Sciences Inc.
[ANAC] in response to the need for more sophisticated
investigation techniques identified by United States
agencies. The fundamental approach used in CIA is to
visualise the information gathered thus far in an
investigation, or a subset of this information, using a
diagram such as that in figure 2.1; such diagrams are
often referred to as link charts. The aim is to better
understand the relationships that are believed to exist
between the objects of interest in the investigation, or to
suggest productive lines of future enquiry.

Figure 2.1: A link chart where the objects are
incident reports, people and police officers.
The work of Anacapa Sciences has proved to be the
forerunner of several software products that support
CIA. The first of these, as far as we are aware, was the
Intelligence Analyst Workbench (IAW) [SOUT92,
ICL94]. IAW was produced as the result of a series of
workshops with law-enforcement professionals in the
United Kingdom, Hong Kong and Australia. Prior to
IAW, link charts were mainly drawn by hand. However,
given the rapid development of graphics workstations
and the fact that much of the data used in an
investigation is often already held on computer systems
the way forward was soon clear. Similar products soon
followed IAW, such as WatsonÔ [XANA] and the

Analysts Notebook [I2]. These products have been
developed further in response to the needs of their user
communities and are now used by police forces, and
investigation agencies such as the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, worldwide.

3. Criminal Intelligence Analysis &
Databases
The amount of data that needs to be stored in
criminal investigations can be considerable. Therefore
such data is often stored in a database. There are
essentially two sorts of databases used: those that are
created for a particular investigation, and those that
provide for more general criminal intelligence such as
all the reported crimes in a defined region and
timeframe. Other databases are also accessed, from
which more general information may be obtained, such
as the British national vehicle registration system.
The information that is typically displayed in a link
chart bears a striking similarity to that which is stored in
a database based upon some form of binary relational
[FROS82] or associative [WILL00] data model. Such
models are based upon two simple concepts, atomic
entity types and named directed binary relationship
types. Entity types are used to model categories of
objects in the problem domain that are uniquely
identifiable and have an independent existence, such as
a person or a car. Binary relationship types are used to
model relationships between objects. Thus if the aim is
to develop a close coupling between a database
management system (DBMS) product and a system
providing CIA facilities it would be best to use a DBMS
that is based upon some form of binary relational or
associational data model.
In practice, link charts are usually constructed
incrementally over a period of time using an exploratory
interactive process with the objects and links in the
chart being frequently altered. Thus if this data was
stored within a database one can consider the elements
that are represented on a link chart as the accumulation
of the results of a number of small queries together with
direct modifications by the user.
The important characteristic of this style of
interaction is that each successive small query is
formulated in the light of the previous results that are
displayed on the chart. Thus the final chart is
constructed incrementally and could generally not have
been produced by a complex single query composed
from prior knowledge. We will illustrate this process in
the example presented in the following section.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

4. An Illustrative Example
Our example will concern the early stages of an
investigation into a small fictional drug dealing
network4. The individual of primary concern within this
investigation, at least initially, is William Stevens who
has previous convictions for drugs related offences.
William is a member of a family well known to the
police because of their strong connections within the
criminal underworld, therefore William may be in a
strong position to move any drugs.
Our example will be presented using the Exploratory
Database View Constructor (EDVC) [SMIT02]. EDVC
is a prototype query interface that allows the user to
build a personalised view of a database that may be
represented as a graph in an interactive and incremental
manner. The user begins by placing one or more objects
that represent those stored within the database on the
browsing canvas, hereafter simply referred to as the
canvas5. The user may then begin to add to the chart by
using a range of retrieval facilities [SMIT02] that allow
paths through the database to be displayed on the
canvas.
As William Stevens is our entry point into the
network we begin by placing an object representing
William onto the canvas, see figure 4.1.

investigation but is familiar with William Stevens, but
not necessarily with that name as he may use aliases,
can recognise him and possibly supply useful
information. Therefore our chart will now look like the
one displayed in figure 4.2.

Figure 4.2: The link chart displayed in figure 4.1
with a photograph linked to the object
representing William Stevens added, and with
the icon associated with the object modified to
reflect the fact that William Stevens is a
suspect.

The question mark enclosed within a circle on the
object representing Williams Stevens in figure 4.1, and
similarly in figure 4.2, indicates that this object has
links to other objects stored in the database that are not
displayed in the chart. In figure 4.3, and figure 4.4, the
question is mark is no longer present as all the links
involving this object have been added to the chart.
As William is a suspect in the investigation we will
change the default icon that is initially associated with
all the objects representing people to one that will
reflect the fact that he is a suspect. We will also
associate a picture of William with this object so that
anyone viewing the chart who is not familiar with the

We will now begin to explore the network by adding
to the chart all those objects, and the associated links,
that are directly connected to the object representing
William Stevens. The chart will now look like the one
displayed in figure 4.3.
We can see from figure 4.3 that among others we
have retrieved several members of William’s family. A
strong association among a group of individuals, such as
a family or gang, is often displayed on a link chart by
enclosing the objects representing the members of the
group within a box labelled with the name of the group6.
Therefore we will enclose the members of William’s
family within a labelled box in order to reflect their
strong association and also add a text note to indicate to
the viewer why this family is of importance to the
investigation.
The labels of the links representing the relationships
amongst the members of William’s family do not reflect
the specific nature of the relationships. It is a convention
that the links represented in an investigation will be
categorised quite generally. The specific nature of a
relationship will be stored as an attribute of the
corresponding link; that is, information stored about the
link7. However, such attribute information can easily be
viewed, and subsequently reflected in the chart by
simply editing the label of the corresponding link.
Therefore our chart will now look like the one displayed
in figure 4.4.

4

6

Figure 4.1: A link chart containing a single
object representing William Stevens.

The data used in this example is largely a subset of that provided in a
training example supplied with Watson™ [XANA].

This group may at a later date be itself represented as an object.

7
5

We use the term canvas throughout this section to refer to the display
area on which a link chart is constructed.

Links that may have associated attribute information are represented
on the browsing canvas by a labelled directed arc with the letter ‘A’
enclosed in a circle next to the label.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4.3: The link chart displayed in figure 4.2 with all the objects, and the associated links,
that are directly connected to the object representing William Stevens added.

Figure 4.4: The link chart displayed in figure 4.3 with the Stevens’ family grouped within a
labelled box, a text note added to indicate why the Stevens family is of interest in the
investigation, and the labels of the links between the members of the Stevens family changed to
indicate the specific nature of the relationships.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4.5: The link chart displayed in figure 4.4 with the objects, and the associated links, that are
connected to Nigel Robertson by a path of length two or less through the database added, and with
some modifications to the icons associated with the objects displayed.
We will now explore the network further by
retrieving and subsequently adding to the canvas all
those objects, and the associated links, that are
connected to Nigel Robertson, the supplier of drugs to
William Stevens, by a path of length two or less through
the database. The result of this operation, with a few
minor modifications regarding the icons associated with
some of the objects displayed, is given in figure 4.5.
EDVC does allow the user to filter the objects and
links retrieved by operations that retrieve paths through
the database by specifying the types of objects and links
that may be included in a valid path. However, this is

not to say that all the paths returned by such operations
will be of interest to the user. Therefore the user is free
to remove from the canvas all those objects and links
that are not of interest. The clarity of the chart may also
be increased by editing its layout, either by using one of
the automatic layout facilities provided8, or by dragging
objects to better positions.
8

These layout facilities may rearrange the objects in a circular
fashion, hierarchically, or to minimise the number of link crossings.
The later two facilities are based upon layout algorithms described in
[ERLI96].

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

One typical characteristic of models of criminal
networks is that the information you have at any one
stage in the investigation will be incomplete [SPAR91].
This is shown in figure 4.5. We have an unknown
person for whom we have no information except that
the person is female. This information is stored as an
attribute of the object and is displayed on the chart by
using an appropriate icon. This person could become a
key figure in the investigation at a later point, or may in
fact turn out to be someone already linked to the
investigation such as Susan Edwards.
It is clear from our initial lines of investigation that
William Stevens is a relatively minor figure within the
network when compared to a supplier such as Nigel
Robertson. Hence the network developed thus far would
need to be expanded upon in order to focus on the chain
of supply that leads to suppliers such as Nigel
Robertson and David Jones. Thus we can see how the
use of this form of visualisation can assist in
determining the future direction of an investigation.

4. Concluding Remarks
In this paper we began by showing how graph-based
diagrammatic visualisations enable us readily to
understand and explore social networks. We then
discussed an important application area for this
approach, Criminal Intelligence Analysis, and briefly
described how these visualisations relate to data models
and database management software that may be used for
holding the information that is displayed. This was
followed by a demonstration of the power of the
approach with a more detailed example presented using
the Exploratory Database View Constructor, a
demonstrator that was developed by the authors.
Further work is planned to include more extensive
experimentation in real world contexts, and the
development of pattern recognition and pattern
searching facilities, primarily aimed at the analysis of
telephone calls. This is discussed further in [SMIT02].

References
[ANAC]

Anacapa Sciences Inc.,
http://www.anacapasciences.com

[ERLI96]

Úlfar
Erlingsson,
and
Mukkai
Krishnamoorthy, “Interactive Graph Drawing
on the World Wide Web”, 1996.

[FREE00]

Linton C. Freeman, “Visualizing Social
Networks”, Journal of Social Structure, Vol. 1
No. 1, 2000.

[FROS82]

R. A. Frost, “Binary-Relational Storage
Structures”, The Computer Journal, Vol. 25
No. 3, 1982.

[HANN99]

Robert A. Hanneman, “Introduction to Social
Network
Methods”,
http://wizard.ucr.edu/~rhannema/networks/nett
ext.pdf

[I2]

I2, http://www.i2group.com

[ICL94]

ICL, “Intelligence Analyst Workbench”, 1994.

[KREB]

Valdis Krebs, http://www.orgnet.com

[SMIT02]

M. N. Smith, and P. J. H. King, “The
Exploratory Construction of Database Views”,
Birkbeck College, University of London,
research report BBKCS-02-02.

[SOUT92]

Blair Southerden, “Information Technology:
Support for Law Enforcement Investigations
and Intelligence”, ICL Technical Journal,
November 1992.

[SPAR91]

M. K. Sparrow, “The application of network
analysis to criminal intelligence: An
assessment of the prospects”, Social Networks
13, 1991.

[WILL00]

Simon Williams, “The associative model of
data”, Lazy Software, ISBN 1-903453-00-3,
2000.

[XANA]

Xanalys, http://www.xanalys.com

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council and IBM Research
Laboratories Hursley for funding, and would like to
thank Xanalys Ltd. and Lazy Software Ltd. for useful
discussions and for the use of their software products
for research and evaluation.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

