Application of Catmull-Clark Subdivision Method in
Plastic Injection Mould Parting Surface Design
C L Li
Department of Manufacturing Engineering
and Engineering Management
The City University of Hong Kong
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
Email: meclli@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Automation in the various tasks of the plastic injection
mould design process has attracted a lot of attentions in
the past decades. Techniques for the automatic selection
of parting direction, determination of complex 3D parting
line and the generation of parting surface have been
reported. A common strategy in parting surface
generation is the method of extrusion. Our investigation
reveals that this method fails under certain conditions,
which results in intersection between the parting surface
patch and the part surface, inter-locking between the
mould halves. To solve these problems, a new method
based on the subdivision method of surface generation is
proposed. A variation of the Catmull-Clark subdivision
scheme is employed which ensures that the resulting
surface interpolates the main parting line of the part. The
initial control mesh used in the subdivision process is
obtained by "projecting" the 2D medial axis of an
approximating polygon to 3D. An experimental program
has been implemented to verify the feasibility of the
method.

1. Introduction
CAD/CAM systems are currently widely used in the
injection mould design and manufacturing process. Given
a plastic part in the form of a CAD model, a mould design
engineer uses a CAD/CAM system to construct the detail
design of the entire mould structure and other relevant
components (such as electrodes for electric-discharge
machining) that are used in the design analysis and
manufacturing of the mould. The CAD data of the mould
are then used to generate manufacturing information
(such as CNC machining toolpath, CMM inspection
instructions, machine setup instructions etc.). Due to the
widespread application, stand-along or add-on software

packages that are specific to plastic injection mould
design, such as IMOLD (developed in Singapore),
MoldWizard (used in Unigraphics II) and PiMould (being
developed in the University of Hong Kong and will be
released soon), are commercially available. These
software packages provide automatic and semi-automatic
tools to assist the human mould designer in the various
design tasks. The algorithms employed by these software
packages in automating some of the design tasks are the
results of recent research efforts, which can be found in
the literature. In this paper, we report our investigation on
the automation of one of these design tasks, namely, the
automation of the parting surface generation. While
automatic methods for parting surface generation have
been reported in the literature, almost all existing methods
uses the method of extrusion. In addition to this method
of extrusion, we propose the use of a variation of the
Catmull-Clark subdivision surface method so as to solve
the limitations inherent to the method of extrusion.
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section,
related research work on automation in the injection
mould design process is summarized. Section 3 discusses
the commonly used method of extrusion and explains the
two limitations of this method. Section 4 discusses the
application of the Catmull-Clark subdivision surface
method in parting surface generation. Section 5 briefly
explains the implementation and illustrates a design
example. The paper is concluded in section 6.

2. Related work
Researches in the automatic determination of parting
direction, parting line and parting surface, and the
detection of undercut feature have been reported. Hui and
Tan [1] reported a method that automates the task of
parting direction determination. They devised a heuristic
function called blocking factor that measures the extent of
blockage on moulding open due to undercut. This
function guides a searching process to identify a parting

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

direction that gives minimum undercut. Visibility analysis
was used by Chen et al[2, 3] to determine parting
direction. They utilized the fact that the optimal parting
direction should give the maximum visibility of the part
along the parting direction in order to minimize undercut.
Weinstein [4] studied the use of heuristic rules to select
the optimum parting line location and draw direction.
Mouldability analysis based on external and internal
undercut features was reported by Hui [5]. Wong et al [6]
reported a method that determines the parting line on a
part with a free-form shape by an adaptive slicing
algorithm. The complex parting line is obtained by tracing
the extreme points on adjacent slices. A comprehensive
classification and recognition of undercut feature is
reported by Fu et al [7]. Other methods that determine the
parting line and parting surfaces were also reported [810]. Other tasks in the mould design process that have
been investigated include the determination of gating
locations [11], ejector types and ejecting locations [12],
and the extraction of sharp corner uncut that requires
electric-discharge machining [13]. Recently, the author
has developed a feature-based approach to the cooling
system design[14][15]. This work is different from all
existing work in CAE cooling analysis. While CAE tools
aims only at the analysis or optimization of a given
cooling system design, the author’s work focuses on the
automatic design synthesis of the initial cooling system
design.
The reported work that is most relevant to this project
includes the methods reported by Tan et al [8], Fu et al
[16] and Kong et al[10]. One common strategy employed
by these methods in the generation of the parting surface
is the method of extrusion.

Figure 1. Generating parting surface by the method of
extrusion.

However, there are two major limitations of the method,
namely, inter-locking between the mould halves and
intersection between extrusion surface and part surface.

3. The method of extrusion
The parting surface is the surface that separates the
mould insert into the core and cavity halves. Given a
plastic part and the main parting line, a common approach
to generate the parting surface is illustrated in Figure 1.
For each segment on the parting line, a surface patch is
generated by extruding the parting line segment along an
extrusion direction. This extrusion direction is
perpendicular to one of the boundary wall of the mould
insert, and is also perpendicular to the parting direction.
The extrusion surface is then trimmed by the boundary
wall of the mould insert. After extruding all the parting
line segments, a set of surface patches is obtained. Then,
corner patches are added at the junction between two
adjacent parting line segments where their extrusion
directions are different. The set of extrusion surfaces and
the corner patches then form the parting surface.

surface patch causes
inter-lock of mould
halves

Figure 2. The method of extrusion causes interlock between mould halves.

3.1 Inter-locking between mould halves
Figure 2 illustrates the problem of inter-locking. The
part shown in the figure is obtained by adding an opening
feature in one of the walls in the part shown in Figure 1. If
the method of extrusion is used to generate the parting

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

surface, the core and cavity halves contains an inter-lock
as shown in the figure. This inter-lock will prevent the
normal mould opening operation. Notice that the opening
feature itself is not an undercut feature of the plastic part.
That is, the opening feature will not prevent mould
opening or part ejection, and does not require any special
design, such as a slide mechanism, for mould ejection.
The inter-locking of the mould halves is exclusively due
to the limitation of the extrusion method in generating the
parting surface.

the use of a visibility test [17]. It can be shown that a
simple 2D visibility analysis can serve the purpose. Given
a plastic part P, the main parting line PL of P that consists
of a set of parting line segments {PLSi} and parting
direction d p , the visibility test can be summarized into the
following steps:
1.

2.

3.2 Intersecting the part surface
Figure 3 illustrates an example of this problem. The
opening feature of the part in Figure 2 is further extended
to the shape shown in Figure 3. The figure shows that the
extrusion surfaces associated with the opening feature
intersect a face of the mould cavity. Obviously, such
extrusion surfaces cannot be used to construct the parting
surface.

3.

4.

A 2D projection of the parting line PL’ is obtained by
projecting the 3D parting line PL along the parting
direction d p onto a plane perpendicular to d p .
For each segment PLSi’ of the projected parting line
PL’, its visibility along the directions perpendicular
to the mould wall boundary is checked. A segment is
considered visible along a direction if for any point
on the segment, the semi-infinite line originates at the
point along that direction does not intersect PL’.
If all segments are visible in any one of the directions
perpendicular to the mould inset boundary, the entire
parting line is visible and the method of extrusion can
be used.
If not all segments are visible, then the method of
extrusion can only be used on the visible segments.
For the invisible segments, a new method based on
the Catmull-Clark subdivision method is used

All the parting line segments of the part shown in
Figure 1 are visible in at least one direction that is
perpendicular to the mould wall insert. The method of
extrusion can thus generate a valid parting surface. For
the part shown in Figure 2 and 3, obviously, there are
segments of the parting line with their projected image
not visible in any directions that are perpendicular to
walls of the mould insert. These segments do not pass the
validity test. To fill the region associated with these
segments, the method of subdivision has to be used.

Figure 3. The method of extrusion causes intersection
between extruded surface and part surface.

3.3 Validity test

It is obvious that if the projected parting line PL’ is
convex, then PL’ always passes the validity test and thus
the method of extrusion can be used. However, it should
be noticed that the convexity of PL’ is a sufficient
condition and not a necessary condition. Figure 4 shows a
part where PL’ is non-convex but visible, and thus the
parting surface can be generated by the method of
extrusion.

4. Applying the Catmull-Clark method
Due to the two problems mentioned above, it is thus
necessary to perform a test in order to determine if the
extrusion method can create a valid parting surface.
Instead of testing for inter-locking between the extrusion
surfaces and testing for intersection between the extrusion
surfaces and the part surface, which are obviously
computational intensive and thus not efficient, we propose

The subdivision methods in surface generation are
becoming very popular in computer graphics application.
Subdivision curve is first introduced by Chaikin[18], and
the extension of the method to surface generation was
pioneered by Doo [19] and Catmull-Clark [20]. The basic
approach to surface generation by subdivision can be

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

4.

5.

6.

Figure 4. The method of extrusion applied to a
part where the project image of its
parting line is non-convex.

explained as follows. Given an initial mesh, a new mesh
is obtained by adding new mesh elements along the edges
and at the corner of the previous mesh. The addition of
the new mesh elements can be considered as a "corner
cutting" process whereby the sharp edges and corners are
replaced by new mesh elements. When this process is
repeated indefinitely, Doo and Sabin [21] proved that in
the limit the mesh becomes a smooth surface.
The first step in the generation of a subdivision surface
is to construct the initial control mesh. In our current
application, the initial mesh can be considered as the
skeleton of the final surface. To determine this 3D
skeleton, a 2D skeleton is first determined, which can be
obtained by computing the medial axis [22] of a
approximating polygon. The 3D mesh is then obtained by
"projecting" the 2D skeleton to 3D.
Given a set of curves that defines the boundary of a
region to be filled by a subdivision surface, the initial
mesh for subdivision is computed through the following
steps:
1.

2.
3.

The set of boundary curves C is projected along the
parting direction d p onto a plane perpendicular to the
d p to obtained a 2D closed curve C'. To simplify the
discussion, assume that the plane lies on the x-y
plane and the z axis is thus parallel to the parting
direction d p .
A polygon P' is constructed to approximate C'.
The medial axis MA of P' is computed.

As P' may be non-convex, the medial axis MA may
contain parabolic segments. MA is simplified by
replacing these curved segments by line segments.
For each boundary vertex of MA (i.e. those vertices
lying on P'), its z-coordinate is obtained from a
corresponding point on the 3D boundary C.
For each internal vertices V of MA (i.e. those vertices
that have two or three closest points on the polygon
P'), the closest points Pi on the boundary of P' is
determined. The z-coordinate of Pi is obtained from a
corresponding point on the 3D boundary C. The
z-coordinate of the internal vertex V is obtained by a
weighted average of the z-coordinates of Pi .

After the initial mesh is computed, a subdivision
scheme is invoked to generate the surface. Various
subdivision schemes have been developed and they differ
by the way the new mesh elements are determined from
the previous mesh. In this research, a variation of the
Catmull-Clark method developed by Levin [23] is used.
Using this method, the subdivision surface can be made to
interpolate a set of curves that defines the boundary of the
surface. This is an important property as the surface patch
of the parting surface must attach to the parting line
segment.

5. Implementation and design example
An experimental program has been implemented to
verify the feasibility of the proposed method. The
program is written in C++ and run on a PC. The program
accepts as input a set of NURBS curves that defines the
main parting line of a plastic part. The output of the
program is a set of surface patches that define the parting
surface. The patches are generated by either the method of
extrusion or the subdivision method. Figure 5 illustrates a
design example generated by the program. Figure 5a
shows the plastic part. Figure 5b shows that extrusion
surface patches are generated from two segments of the
parting line, and the region to be filled by a subdivision
surface is shown. Figure 5c shows the polygonal
approximation of the region, and the control mesh for
subdivision. Figure 5d shows the subdivision surface after
4 iterations. The extrusion surface patches together with
the subdivision surface patch are show in Figure 5e.

6. Conclusion
There are two problems in most existing algorithms for
automatic generation of parting surface for injection
mould design. These algorithms usually use the method of
extrusion to generate a surface patch from a parting line
segment to form the parting surface. Our investigation

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

reveals that the extrusion surface may intersect with the
part surface, or may result in inter-locking of mould
halves and thus affects mould opening. A new method for
automatic parting surface generation is thus developed to
solve the problems. This new method employs a variation
of the Catmull-Clark method to generate subdivision
surface patches for parting line segments where the
method of extrusion fails. An experimental program has
been developed to implement the new method. The
program has been tested with real parts to verify the
feasibility of the method.

Acknowledgements
The work described in this paper was fully supported
by a Strategic Research Grant from City University of
Hong Kong (Project No. 7001194).

References
1. Hui, K. C. and Tan, S. T. , “Mould design with sweep
operations. A heuristic search approach”, Computer Aided
Design, v24 n2, Feb 1992 pp81-91.
2. Chen L L, Chou S Y and Woo T C, "Parting directions for
mould and die design", Computer-Aided Design, Vol 25, pp
762-768, 1993.
3. Chen L L, Chou S Y and Woo T C, "Partial visibility for
selecting a parting direction in mould and die design",
Journal of Manufacturing Systems", Vol 14, pp 319-330,
1995.
4. Weinstein M and Manoochehri S, ”Geometric Influence of a
Molded Part on the Draw Direction Range and Parting Line
Locations”, Transactions of ASME, Journal of Mechanical
Design, v 118 Mar 1996, pp 29-39.
5. Hui KC, "Geometric aspects of the mouldability of parts",
Computer-Aided Design, 1997, Vol 29, pp 197-208.
6. Wong T, Tan S T and Sze W S, "Parting Line Formation by
Slicing a 3D CAD Model", Engineering with Computers,
Vol 14, 1998, pp 330-342.
7. Fu MW, Fuh JYH, AYC Nee, "Undercut feature recognition
in an injection mould design system", Computer-Aided
Design, Vol 31, 1999, pp 777-790.
8. Tan ST, Yuen MF, Sze WS and Kwong KW, “Parting lines
and parting surfaces of injection moulded parts”, Proc
IMechE Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, vol
204 1990, pp 211-221.
9. Nee AYC, Fu MW, Fuh JYH, Lee KS, Zhang YF,
"Automatic determination of 3-D parting lines and surfaces
in plastic injection mould design", Annual of CIRP 1998;
47/1, pp 95-98.
10. Kong L, Fuh JYH and Lee KS, "Auto-generation of patch
surfaces for injection mould design", Proc I. Mech. E, Part
B, Vol 215, 2001, pp 105-110.

11. Saxean M and Irani R K, “Automated gating plan synthesis
for injection molds”, Proceedings of the ASME Computers
in Engineering Conference, CA, 1992, pp 381-389.
12. Wang Z, Lee K S, Fuh J Y H, Li Z, Zhang Y F, Nee A Y C
and Yang D C H, "Optimum ejector system design for
plastic injection mould", Int. J. of Materials and Product
Technology, Vol 11, No 5/6, 1996, pp 371-385.
13. Ding X. M., Fuh J. Y. H., Lee K. S., Zhang Y. F. and Nee
A.Y.C., "A computer-aided EDM electrode design system
for mold manufacturing", Int. J. Prod. Res., Vol 38 no. 13,
2000, pp 3079-3092.
14. CL Li, "A feature-based approach to injection mould cooling
system design", Computer-Aided Design, Vol 33 no. 14, pp
1073-1090, Dec 2001.
15. CL Li, “Automatic synthesis of cooling system design for
plastic injection mould”, ASME 2001 Design Engineering
Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in
Engineering Conference, 27-th Design Automation
Conference, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, September 9-12,
2001.
16. Fu MW, Fuh JYH and Nee AYC, "Core and cavity
generation method in injection mould design", Int. J. Prod.
Res., Vol 39 No 1, 2001, pp 121-138.
17. Yin Z P, Ding H and Xiong Y L, "Visibility theory and
algorithms with application to manufacturing processes", Int.
J. Prod Res., Vol 38 No 13, pp 2891-2909, 2000.
18. Chaikin G, "An algorithm for high speed curve generation",
Computer Graphics and Image Processing, Vol 3, 1974, pp
346-349.
19. Doo D, "A subdivision algorithm for smoothing down
irregularly shaped polyhedrons", Int. Conf. Interactive
Techniques in Computer-Aided Design, Bologna, Italy,
1978, pp 157-165.
20. Catmull E and Clark J, "Recursively generated B-spline
surfaces on arbitrary topological meshes", Computer-Aided
Design, Vol 10, Sept 1978, 350-355.
21. Doo D and Sabin M, "Behaviour of recursive division
surfaces near extraordinary points", Computer-Aided
Design, Vol 10, Sept 1978, pp 356-360.
22. Preparata FP, "The medial axis of a simple polygon", Proc.
6th Symp. Math. Foundations of Coput. Sci., Sept 1977, pp
443-450.
23. Levin A, "Interpolating Nets Of Curves By Smooth
Subdivision Surfaces", Siggraph 99, California, USA, Aug
8-13, 1999, pp 57-64.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(a) A plastic part.

(c) A polygonal approximation of the region
boundary and the initial control mesh for
subdivision.

(b) Extrusion surface patches and a region to be filled by a
subdivision surface.

(d) The subdivision surface after 4 iterations.

(e) Subdivision surface patch and extrusion
surface patches forming part of the parting
surface.

Figure 5. A design example that shows the use of the subdivision method in constructing the parting surface.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

