Visualizing User’s Personality and Information in 3D Environments, a Step
beyond Avatars

Ana De Abreu
T-Systems Nova Deutsche Telekom
adabreu@gmx.de

Abstract
In this paper we present an innovative approach to
visualize people’s personal information. The approach is
based on the assumption that a personal environment,
furnished by an interested and engaged person, expresses
more about himself, than a simple text or even an image
or fixed animation. We consider this personalized living
environment as innovative form of a Résumé, created with
the intention of giving a possible employer a good
impression about both: hard facts and soft skills of the
applicant. We describe a client-server-based system,
which allows professionals to create their own
personalized 3D Homepage as their Résumé.

1. Introduction: Express yourself!
Express yourself. Tell me how you live, and I will tell
you who you are.
Phrases like these are frequently used in today’s world
of advertisement. Nowadays, there is a need for people to
express their personality. Sometimes this need has no real
background and stands just for itself, but in other cases, it
is needed to express yourself for a specific purpose:
Applying for a job is one sample situation which provides
an audience (in this case the employer) with more and
more information about a person’s personality. Today,
human resources (HR) managers try to figure out what
kind of person you are on the basis of a paper C.V. Such
documents are –seen from a computer scientist’s point of
view – simple tables with “technical data” about a person.
Since people (even applicants) are humans and have a
personality, a paper C.V. is clearly insufficient for
deciding about hiring an employee or not. This is why
interviews have been invented. On the basis of a face-toface meeting humans (and HR managers) can judge
character properties much better. But an individual never
exists independently. Rather, a person lives in and with an
environment. While it is not very common to visit an
applicant’s home to find out how he or she lives, the web
and personal homepages may serve the purpose of
presenting a view to the way one likes to fashion a
personal living environment.

Martin Kurze
T-Systems Nova Deutsche Telekom
kurze@berkom.de

Today, the state of the art in terms of selfrepresentation is a personal homepage. Especially in the
IT and Multimedia Business, a personal homepage
becomes more and more a mean of self-representation,
and the reason is obvious: The Internet gives people the
possibility to let themselves be known for an almost
infinite audience, among them, prospective employers.
Thus, a market for self-representation tools has quickly
flourished: Website Wizards allow almost everybody to
create a nicely designed website, where the user is able to
customize the look and feel of a set of HTML pages plus
complement them with images, videos or sounds that
express their day a day work or hobbies. This solves the
problem of creating a self-image but it also raises the
problem of uniqueness: Everybody can have such a
homepage, and what is worst, does it accurately express
what the owner have in mind? How can you make a
difference? How can an IT Specialist stand out the rest
and show its work and skills in a not only an innovative
and accurate but, moreover, appealing way? We have
realized that for some IT Specialists, text and images are
not enough to show off the real value and originality of
their work, specially for those working developing 3D
models, a simple picture of their work may have the side
effect of underestimation.
“One image is worth a 1000 words, but a 3D Model is
worth a 1000 images”.
3D representation of the information offers the unique
possibility of being unambiguous and accurate, and
moreover, gives the viewer the possibility to explore,
manipulate and analyse it.
But 3D also causes a lot of problems:
- 3D is difficult to create for novices.
- 3D does not have a meaning by itself (some people
can not read 3D-space)
- It is easy to create confusing 3D environments
where navigation is difficult.
- 3D is not yet widely spread over the Internet and
therefore, its potentials are still unknown for a
large amount of people.
In this paper we present an approach to create a selfrepresentation in 3D that does NOT use a human
representation: Avatars [3]. An Avatar is “a graphical icon

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

that represents a real person in a cyberspace system”. We
consider that an Avatar does not say much about user’s
personality and life, an Avatar is only a dummy of
himself, a vehicle to let him walk through the virtual
space. On the other hand, our 3D Homepages Builder
offers a tool that lets the user create a virtual apartment,
customized according to his own preferences and tastes,
and complimented with his own pictures, videos, sounds
and 3D models. This 3D Homepage plays the role of
user’s real home but in cyberspace, and can be used as a
way to complement his Résumé to therefore meet
prospective employers there, and as a consequence, a
prospective employer would be able to have a glance at
the candidate’s skills and previous work, as much as, at
his personality.
This paper is organized as follows: In section 2 we
expose how IT Specialists normally advertise themselves
in the WEB, in section 3 we present our solution “The 3D
Homepages Builder”, the concept behind it and how it has
been used so far, in section 4 we present our adaptation of
this project to a 3D Résumé Creator, section 5 explains the
implementation details for the 3D Homepages Editor. In
section 6 we will talk about the results obtained, then we
will expose some future ideas and proposals based on this
idea in section 7. Finally we close with the references in
section 8.

2. Conventional approaches to advertising
yourself
The ways to present ourselves have always been
different and not so revolutionary to the date. But writing
a good résumé is not an easy task; it must be taken very
seriously since it reflects what the writer is capable of
doing for the new employer, but not only that, it also
reflects who he is, his personality, and, although people
don’t realize it or don’t actually care about it, is a key to
the success of finding a new and interesting job. A résumé
must create an impact.
But what is essentially a Résumé? The résumé is a
selling tool that outlines the prospective employee’s skills
and experiences so an employer can see at a glance, how
the candidate can contribute to his workplace. The résumé
must capture his interest in the first 10 seconds and
stimulate the desire to read it, or the applicant will be
immediately discarded.
It is important to consider, that employers normally do
not count with enough time to do their jobs, and this gets
even worse with tasks like reading résumés and doing job
interviews. For the first step, they will probably take no
more than 1 minute to glance over a résumé and send it to
the “prospective list” or to the trash bin. This screening
process is quite delicate, since the candidate counts
probably only with the impression his written Résumé has

given to the employer, but how can the candidate improve
this impression and capture the attention of the employer?
Is there a way to make him send this Résumé to the short
list, besides by being attracted by the applicant’s
experience and skills?
In Table 1 we make a summary of the types of
résumés found and our assessment or rating.
Table 1. Résumés’ styles nowadays and our
appreciation
Medium
Description
Our
appreciation
Paper
A summary of the
This is the most
applicant personal
common, which
data, studies,
will never die. It
activities, jobs,
varies between
awards, presentations, simple, formal
hobbies, etc, in short: a presentations, to
laundry list of jobs and very artistic ones,
duties
spiced up with
colours, images
and designs
2D
Along with the success This solution
Homepages and wide spreading of brought the first
the World Wide Web, résumés to the
people has found the
web, and hence, to
perfect place to
a worldwide
publish the same
audience
information collected
in a set of one or more
HTML pages,
enhanced now with
special layouts,
colours, images and
links, that offer a more
personal element
2D
The same idea as
Here people try to
Homepages before but raising the create an
plus
appealing by using
innovative and
advanced
animated graphics
appealing résumé,
graphics
technologies like Flash and it is possible to
technology or Shockwave [4], in
create well
order to bring
interactive
interactivity/dynamism solutions, but they
to the site.
lack of immersion
and the possibility
to observe or
experience
previous works.
3D
Non-existent
Our proposal
We propose that a 2D résumé could benefit by
including an invitation to the candidate’s 3D Résumé
allowing the employer to observe and experience the work
previously mentioned and moreover, to get a grip on this

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

IT or Media Specialist’s personality. Probably the
employer wont check immediately the applicant’s 3D
résumé, but that invitation will definitely be a key to send
this application to the short list of pre-selected ones, since
it surely will trigger a sparkle of curiosity on the
employers mind. Later, a job interview could take place
inside such an environment.
Moreover, besides exposing the nature of the
applicant’s experience and personality, the 3D résumé can
save the employer’s time by allowing flexibility in
scheduling such interview to the most appropriate moment
for both interested parties, especially if both are physically
separated by a long distance.
On the other hand, it is interesting to consider that
communicating ones qualifications effectively is normally
difficult, but is even harder for IT and Media Specialists:
(mainly technical people for whom just writing a project’s
user manual is a hard uphill task) for them the 3D résumé
Creator comes as a handy and appropriate solution to
make them express their career path using the tools and
language they best know.
For all the reasons just mentioned, we propose the use
of our 3D Homepage Builder as a 3D Résumé Creator for
IT and Multimedia specialists advertise themselves when
looking for a job.

in just seconds; neither 3D software nor specialized
knowledge is required; at the end, the generator collects
all the information provided by the user, along with the
necessary systems components, and builds the VRML
environment.
The second, provides a very intuitive 3D toolkit that
makes possible to edit the exterior and interior of the
environment, through which, the apartment is fully
personalized. Inside the rooms, the user is able to
insert/delete/translate objects, change their appearance,
and configure the media items.
This application is designed in a client-server
architecture driven by a database. The communication
between the VRML world and the system is completely
done through HTTP, Javascripts, and Java Servlets.
The following picture presents the result from both
processes: an apartment-like 3D HomePage customized
according to the user’s tastes and personal information.
.

3. The 3D Homepages Builder
Recently, we developed a quite advanced tool to allow
normal users to build a personalized 3D environment with
no knowledge of 3D technology and no real design
capabilities. The result is a virtual (indoor) environment,
which looks like an apartment or flat and also serves in
particular representative purposes and emotional
contentment. Therefore it pushes the idea of regular 2Dhomepage into the spatial world, the 3D Homepages.
The 3D Homepages builder lets users create a virtual
apartment containing personal media arranged according
to individual preferences. These media are presented
through “Media Items” such as picture frames, video
screens, a jukebox, and 3D models gathered in a special
media device called the Holograph. All of them, along
with the links to the user’s favourite sites, are combined
and built into a stunning 3D environment
Two main consecutive processes comprise this VRMLJava distributed application: the Generator and the Editor.
The first shows a very easy to use HTML interface (a
Wizard) in which the user creates his own 3D Homepage

Figure 1. A 3D HomePage created with the 3D
HomePages Builder

4. Our approach: the interactive 3D Résumé
Creator
Originally, the 3D Homepage Builder was created just to
complement and partially replace conventional 2D
homepage wizards offered by most ISPs (such as AOL’s
1-2-3 publish at [10]). Experiencing and exploring our
tool and its’ results (the 3D Homepages) our users
suggested a number of new application for this
technology.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 2. Diagram showing the configuration process of a media item
Some users created art exhibitions presenting their own
drawings; others built funky chat rooms to convey a new
mean of communication with their friends; a few put
pretty 3D-objects in the apartment which they either built
themselves or picked from our large list of predefined
objects.
What do all those uses have in common? They express
some aspects of the user’s personality!
All we needed to do now was to better support this
aspect of our tool to aid a user whose main intention is to
create a 3D résumé. Now the user can put his text résumé
on his 2D website (as most IT specialists do anyway)
furthermore he can enhance and upgrade it by adding a
door to his 3D Homepage where he can expose links,
images, sounds, videos and 3D models (if available)
related to his work, studies, hobbies, etc. This way he
creates an environment that tells the visitor/employer
much more.

5. Implementation
To visualize user’s data in a 3D environment for the
WEB, we use the International Standard VRML 97. The
Virtual Reality Modelling Language (VRML) is a file format
for describing interactive 3D objects and worlds [5].
Our application is dynamic because it lets the user
customize his environment, according to external data that
he might choose from the system libraries or from his hard
drive.
To facilitate the communication between the VRML
world in the client side, and the system in the server side,
we use the Scripting Interface stated in the VRML97
Specification [9] and Blaxxun’s External Scripting
Interface (ESI) for JavaScript and VBScript [6].
Inside of a VMRL world, a Script node is activated
when it receives an event. The browser then executes the
program in the Script node’s url field, which can be an
internal code, or pass the program to an external Script
code. The last idea implies sending out events holding
information of the scene and therefore, feeding the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

external processes in order to receive a further answer.
This is the way the VRML world communicates with the
external environment.
Once the information arrives into a JavaScript, this
Script is therefore able to perform some processing, call
another Script for different processing, or request a Java
Servlet [7] to process this information on the server side
of the System and return the appropriate answer to modify
the world. On the server side, the Servlet can then process
the request and also connect to the Database. After
processing, the result is sent to the client in the form of
another JavaScript that sends the answer back to the
VRML world.
To send the answer back to the VRML world we use
Blaxxun’s ESI, which allows to read and write any fields
values of named nodes.
Now we will explain the process to configure a media
item. A step-by-step diagram is shown in Figure 2.
The Web Page is configured using six frames, two of
them are essential for the communication process and they
are hidden to the user, you can identify them in the
Diagram by their names “In” and “Out”. The Frame3D is
where the VRML world is displayed. The other frame’s
functionality will be explained in the following
paragraphs. Please follow the steps identification used:
lowercase letters starting from “a” to “i”, and a subprocess
on the “e” step, ranging from “e.1” to “e.3”.
Inside of it, lives the Editing Tool: an instrument that
displays all the options available to the user when he
selects a specific object. It is important to highlight that
this tool is context sensitive and offers only the options
available for the selected object. Is interesting also to
mention the metaphor used for the Editing Tool: A Swiss
Army Knife (see Figure 3).
In the case of configuring a media item, the User first
clicks on the Media Configuration option of the Editing
Tool. The Editing tool calls the appropriate external Script
located in the frame OUT, sending it the information
about the option and the object involved (a). The external
Script sends a request to the Library Servlet asking him to
display the Multimedia Library according to the media
type the user is configuring (b). The Library Servlet then
queries the Database in order to get the necessary
information to build the Media Library Frame, and the
Choice Frame c) and d). The Choice Frame holds a couple
of selection widgets that allow the user to narrow the
visualization of the Media Library by displaying only the
desired category (dotted lines). The user may, on the other
hand, wish to use his own files already existing in the
system, or upload a new one. In the later case, he calls the
Upload Servlet, which allows him to search inside of his
hard drive and send this information to the server (e.1).
This servlet is then responsible for updating the Database
with the new Info (e.2) and for requesting the Library
Servlet, to update the Media Library Frame with the just

uploaded object (e.3). At this stage the user is able to
select up to 4 different media files (from the system set or
from his own set) to configure the media item, so as he
clicks on the snapshots shown in the Media Library
Frame, the information is sent to the Work Frame to build
the new configuration (f). Once he is satisfied with his
configuration, he clicks on a Submit button, sending the
request to the Editor Servlet (g). The Editor Servlet
receives this information, does the necessary process to
obtain the VRML code that accurately corresponds to the
configuration of the selected Media Item with the selected
Media Files, and sends a JavaScript code as answer to the
IN Frame (h). This JavaScript Code is then triggered by
the “onLoad” event and updates the corresponding VRML
object using Blaxxun’s ESI(i).

Figure 3. 3D HomePage Builder’s picture frame
configuration page
Figure3 shows the Media Configuration Process of the 3D
Homepages, previously described in Figure2.

6. Results and Conclusion
The general approach of 3D Homepages has been
presented to, and interactively explored by numerous
people, experts and novices, artists, IT-specialists and
Internet surfers. Although no formal evaluation has bee
carried out, it can be stated that the approach and its’
implementation was greatly accepted.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Using 3D Homepages as résumés is a new way of
looking at these virtual environments and the tools to
create them. As a matter of fact, our test partners proposed
this use more or less directly, when they explored the
original 3D Homepages Builder. Thus we expect this
approach to be not just innovative but also to work.
Results:
- Since there is no settled and generally accepted
visual
language
for
3D
résumés,
misunderstandings may occur.
- Since an applicant’s personality is exposed
through the design of the apartment, the result
may lead to a rejection answer if the employer
dislikes or misunderstands it, and hence, find this
person inappropriate for his team, even if his
professional
background
fulfil all the
requirements (e.g. using a dark and scaring
apartment style). This situation can be compared
with a voice mail system, where you use
“individualized” welcome phrases; this may be
meant to be funny but can rather result in
rejection.
- Navigation through 3D virtual spaces is still a big
issue for non-experienced users, it may lead to a
disorientation and therefore the dissatisfaction of
the employer. [2]
For applicant’s applying abroad, the 3D Résumé comes
as a very appropriate solution for both parts: the applicant
and the employer, because it is quite difficult to set up a
physical interview (unless the Company is willing to
spend some money in flying a candidate just for an
interview), therefore, this interview may take place inside
of such an environment and thus the employer can get a
glimpse of the applicant’s personality, which is the main
goal of a job interview.

7. Future Work
On a quite different order of ideas, the 3D Homepages
Builder enhanced with the multi-user processes, could be
used as a virtual psychiatry clinic, where the user may
meet his psychiatrist and this would be able to talk and
analyse the configuration done in the environment, it
would be interesting to prove the effects of the first tool to
visualize one’s personality in 3D.
In general terms, the 3DHomepages has proved to be
an excellent tool to let the user present his information and
to let his personality express as he configures his virtual
environment, therefore, is the ideal tool to be used inside
of Virtual Communities.
As further work we consider essential to develop the
multi-user version where more than one user can get
together inside of a virtual flat. In terms of a job hunting
process, the multi-user version would allow the user to
meet the prospective employers inside of the environment

and talk about his previous work shown through Images,
Videos, Sounds and 3D Models attached to the
corresponding Media Items, specially if both parts are
physically separated by a long distance that prevents them
to meet. Therefore it would be a very innovative and
useful enhance for the already existing career service
WEB portals.
In addition, the 3D Résumé can be accompanied by our
User Tracing Technology: a tool to observe users inside of
a client-server based virtual environment. Together with
this tool, the applicant is able to rate the success of his 3D
Résumé by finding out how many people visited the flat,
where do they come from, where did they walked along,
and how long did they spent watching the media items. [1]
In Addition to the formal evaluation of the “regular”
3D Homepage approach, we intend to perform a more
formal evaluation on the acceptability and functionality of
the 3D-résumé-approach. This evaluation will include
usability aspects too.

8. References
[1]

Martin Kurze: “Measuring Navigation and Orientation
Activities in 3D Virtual Environments”. In: Proc.
OZCHI 2000, 4th-8th Dec. 2000, Sydney, Australia., pp
316- 321.

[2]

C. Russo, P. Gros, P. Abel, D. Loisel, N. Trichraud,
J.P. Paris: “Metaphor-Aware 3D Navigation”. IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization 2000
(InfoVIS 2000), October 9-10 2000, Salt Lake City,
Utah.

[3]

Humanoid
anim.org/.

[4]

Macromedia, Inc: http://www.macromedia.com/

[5]

The Web3D Consortium: http://www.web3d.org/

[6]

Blaxxun Interactive: http://www.blaxxun.com/

[7]

Java Servlet Technology:
http://java.sun.com/products/servlet/index.html

[8]

3Dhomepages builder: http://web3d.berkom.de/

[9]

VRML97 Specification:
http://www.web3d.org/technicalinfo/specifications/vrm
l97/index.htm

[10]

http://hometown.aol.com/hmtwn123/index.htm

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Animation

Working Group: http://h-

