The Virtual Articulator
- Applying VR Technologies to Dentistry
Dipl.-Inf. Alexander Bisler

Dipl.-Math. Ulrich Bockholt

Dipl.-Inf. Gerrit Voss

Fraunhofer Institute for
Computer Graphics (IGD),
Darmstadt, Germany
abisler@igd.fhg.de

Fraunhofer Institute for
Computer Graphics (IGD),
Darmstadt, Germany
bockholt@igd.fhg.de

Centre for Advanced Media
Technology (CAMTech),
Singapore
vossg@camtech.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The use of Virtual Reality (VR) techniques for
Computer-Aided Diagnosis is revolutionizing the
medical routing in various medical disciplines.
Especially in the field of dentistry VR in combination
with CAD/CAM technologies offers a high potential for
implant planning/design resulting in a higher accuracy
and a shorter therapy time period. The geometry of the
teeth is recognisable and digitisable using an intraoral
camera, the implant models can be designed with
specialized CAD systems and the final implants are
generated using a CNC machine. In this context the
“Virtual Articualtor” (VA) completes the digital
manufacturing pipeline and offers the possibility to
consider patient-specific jaw biomechanics in the
implant generation process. The objective of this
project is the development of a system for dental
occlusion diagnosis. For this important diagnosis in
today’s dental routine the mechanical articulator is
used. The VA simulates and augments the
functionalities of the mechanical articulator. Therefore
it takes a digital 3-D representation of the jaws as input
data, generates a simulation of the jaw movements, and
delivers a dynamical visualization of the occlusion
points. The high technical demands to the system are
given through the high accuracy necessary for dental
applications and the large models that have to be
handled in the system.

1. Medical Background
The articulator is a widespread device for the
dental diagnosis used for the analysis of occlusions and
the evaluation of the implant’s fit during the chewing
process. But the traditional device shows some
imponderabilities caused by the static presentation of
the occlusion points while the significance of a dynamic

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

analysis is helpful in many cases. That is the reason
why the project called the “Virtual Articulator” (VA)
in cooperation with the Policlinic of Dentistry in
Greifswald ([1], [2]) and the Kettenbach GmbH was
established with the goal to transfer the functionality of
the articulator to a computer simulation and to enhance
the diagnostic possibilities.
The objective of the software is a core system for
dental occlusion diagnosis that can be enhanced with
additional functionalities for implant design or
orthodontical intervention planning via plug-ins.
Occlusion describes the situation when the teeth of the
lower and the upper jaw are in contact during chewing.
The occlusal conditions form the basis for the
diagnosis of dysfunctions and dysmorphologies which
is decisive for the therapy planning and the implant
design. These malfunctions can be eliminated e.g. by
grinding off the teeth or by remodelling a bridge.

2. Requirements
As input data for the VA system 3D-models
(surface represenations, i.e. triangle meshes) of the
patient’s lower and the upper jaw are generated using a
3D-scanner to scan plaster impressions of the jaws.
Furthermore, patient-specific motion data of the jaw
movements is captured. This data is obtained using a
device called the Jaw Motion Analyzer (JMA) from the
Zebris company. This device measures  with the use
of ultra-sound  the position of three tracking-sensors
which are fixed to the patient's lower jaw. These
continuous measurements describe the physiological
movement of the patient's lower jaw.
After loading these three data sets, the simulation
of the patient-specific chewing-movement can be
started. While the lower jaw movement is simulated,
the VA system detects the occlusion points of the teeth
using a ray-based collision detection algorithm ([3]). If
the Jaw Motion Analyzer tool is not available, different

jaw motions can be defined via parameters, as it is the
case in the mechanical articulator. The following
movements can be defined: protrusion, retrusion,
laterotrusion as well as an opening/closing movement.
All parameters, that can be adjusted using the
mechanical articulator, can also be modified within the
VA System (e.g. the Bennett-angle, immediate side
shift, shift angle, etc.).

3. Visualization
Important advantages of the virtual over the
mechanical articulator are given in the visualization
possibilities. The VA User Interface consists of up to
four quadrants (cf. figure 2). The first quadrant shows
the top view of the upper jaw, the second of the lower
jaw. While the simulation is executed the detected
occlusion points are marked wandering over the teeth
surface synchronized to the jaw movements.
Furthermore, those parts of the teeth‘ surface are
emphasized, which nearly get in contact with the
opposite jaw. Therefore a maximal distance can be
defined corresponding to the thickness of an occlusion
paper used in the mechanical articulator.

way parallel studies of a virtual and a mechanical
articulator are performed and the results are
comparable.
The third quadrant displays both, the lower and
upper jaw in a 3D-view. A clipping plane can be used
to cut off some of the teeths‘ geometry to get a detailed
view of every region of interest (cf. figure 1). The forth
quadrant visualizes the condylar path.
The simulation of the jaw movements can be
easily run using a video control panel which offers the
possibilities to play an animation forward or backwards
in a normal speed or faster.

4. Discussion
The results of the collision detection during the
simulation of the patient-specific chewing movement
are not always contact points but areas where a tooth,
belonging to the lower jaw, penetrates a tooth which
belongs to the upper jaw. These can be caused by
several reasons:
x Measurement errors during the 3D-scans
x Measurement errors during the ultra-sound
scanning of the chewing movement
x In the patient’s mouth teeth are not totally fixed but
move a little bit when they collide with the
opposite tooth. This movement of each tooth is not
simulated.
Since penetrations are physically impossible, the
deepest penetration during an animation frame is
searched and the lower jaw’s position is corrected by
pushing it away from the upper jaw. By this method it
is ensured that only real contact points remain.
Nevertheless, other occlusion points are also pushed
away and lose their contact. To make even these areas
visible not only the remaining contact points are
colored but also areas on the surface which come close
to the opposite surface.

5. Results

Figure 1: Clipping planes
Additionally, the dynamical distribution of the
occlusion points can be accumulated to a static
representation. This representation is equivalent to the
resulting output of the mechanical articulator and so it
is helpful for an evaluation of the VA system. In this

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The advantage of the VA system compared to
customary methods is that the situation of the occlusion
points is dynamically visualized  while the jaw is
moving  and not statically as it happens when the
mechanical articulator is used. The user can see how the
occlusion points are wandering over the teeths‘ surface
and can analyse the order of the occlusions. This results
in a higher accuracy of the diagnosis. The program runs
on a fast PC with a fast 3D-graphics card.

6. Outlook

Acknowledgements

The Virtual Articulator enhances the working
procedures which are limited by a conventional,
mechanical articulator. The system offers many
possibilities suitable for integration into CAD/CAM
technologies and bridging the gap between intra-oral
tooth scanning and computer-aided implant design. In
future versions several additional functionalities are
developed:
x Simulation of an orthodontical operation with the
ability to modify the position of the teeth to
evaluate the results of the changes.
x Planning of the optimal position of an implant
using CT-data and 3D-data of the implant.
x Virtual design of bridges and crowns with the
ability to send these data to CAD/CAM-systems.

We thank Prof. Dr. h.c. Dr.-Ing. José L. Encarnação for
providing the environment in which this work was
possible. We also thank all our colleagues and students
at our laboratory, especially Laura Wagner and Mario
Becker, for their contribution to this project

References
[1] Kordaß, B., Gärtner, Ch., Gesch, D., “The Virtual
Articulator - A New Tool to Analyse the Dysfunction and
Dysmorphology of Dental Occlusion”, Aspects of Teratology
2:243-247, 2000
[2] Kordaß, B., Gärtner, Ch., “Virtual Articulator – Usage
of Virtual Reality Tools in the Dental Technology”,
Quintessence of Dent Tech 12:75-80, 2000
[3] Zachmann, G., “Optimizing the Collision Detection
Pipeline”, Proc. of the First International Game Technology
Conference (GTEC), Hong Kong, pp. 18-21 January 2001

Figure 2: The GUI of the Virtual Articulator

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

