COMPUTER AIDED CHAIR DESIGN SYSTEM USING FORM FEATURES
Mio Matsumoto and Hideki Aoyama
Department of System Design Engineering, Keio University, Japan
E-mail: haoyama@sd.keio.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper deals with “Computer Aided Chair Design
System” based on form features of chair elements that
constructs the 3-D product model of a chair from a sketch
drawn by a designer. In design processes of a chair, a
designer usually wants to express his/her idea of the form
and structure of a chair by drawing sketches because
sketching is one of the most desired manners for expressing
designer’s idea. Besides, CAD data of a chair are
essential in its manufacturing processes. In this study, a
system is proposed to construct the 3-D CAD data of a
chair by arranging form features of chair elements with
fitting them on a sketch. The system enables designers to
easily make the 3-D chair models from their idea sketches
and to evaluate the design-form by figures from the various
visual angles.

1. Introduction
Sketching is the most convenient and easiest way to
express designer’s idea and thinking on the product shape
because it can be executed by only a pen and a paper and
does not prevent a designer elaborating his/her idea.
Sketches are then used to express the product shape in the
initial stage of design processes. The same technique is
applied for designing chairs [1]. After drawing sketches,
a physical model such as a clay model, a wooden model, an
expanded polystyrene model, and so on is created
according to the sketches and the computer model is
constructed from measurement data of scattered points on
the physical model. This process is called “Reverse
Engineering” [2] as shown in Fig. 1(a), and the same
process is also applied in designing and manufacturing
processes of a chair.
Much time and a huge cost must be needed for creating
a physical model in the process of “Reverse Engineering”.
However, in spite of investment of time and cost, the
physical model falls into disuse after constructing the
computer model. Therefore, a method to construct a
computer model without creating a physical model is

Image Sketch of Chair
Physical Model
Measurement &
Data Processing
Computer Model
(a) Reverse Engineering

Image Sketch of Chair

CAD Based on
Form Feature
Elements of Chair

Computer Model
(b) Proposed Process

Figure 1. Chair design process
desired in order to avoid such wasteful process in design.
In order to construct a 3-D model without a physical
model, a chair design system [3] was developed. In the
system, a chair model is constructed by combining
components with very simple forms so that the form
variations are restricted.
Therefore, a new process for chair design shown in Fig.
1(b) is proposed in this paper. In the proposed process,
the computer model of a chair can be easily constructed
from an idea sketch without creating the physical model by
a chair CAD system developed in this study. The
peculiarity of the CAD system is to directly make a chair
model by combining the elements constructed by form
features according to a sketch. The shapes of form
features can be easily changed by easy operations using a
computer mouse.
The developed CAD system is
described in the following.

2. Proposed chair design process
As shown in Fig. 1(b), the proposed chair design
processes start with drawing a sketch of a chair. The
CAD model is constructed from a sketch in the following
procedures.
(a) A sketch is fed into the developed chair CAD system

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

a r6
a
Back

r3 r1
r4
r2

r5

c

r2

Seat

Leg(s)

r4

r1

r3

b

c

b

Figure 2. Office chair elements

d
f
e
(a) Support type

a

(b) No support type

Figure 4. Parameters defining back feature
r5

r6

r3
r4

r1

a

r2
b

c

Ns:
Number
of
surfaces b

d

d

Figure 3. Parameters defining seat feature

e

a

Ns: number
of surfaces

f
c
Nl: Number
of legs

b

Position(x3,y3)

Position(x1,y1)
Position(x2,y2)

d
c

g

by a scanner and the sketch data is
(b) No support type
(a) Support type
displayed on a TV screen.
Figure 5. Parameters defining leg feature
(b) The visual point of the sketch is
automatically identified from the sketch
data.
(c) The most similar form feature is selected for
a chair element drawn on the sketch and is arranged at
the position accurately fitted to the sketch with
adjusting the shape by the parameters defining the
form feature.
Figure 6. Examples of seat features
(d) When all chair elements drawn on the sketch are
arranged on the TV screen, the 3-D model is
completely constructed.

3. Form features of chair elements
The objects of the chair CAD system developed in this
study are office chairs. As show in Fig. 2, an office chair
basically has the following elements:
l
seat,
l
back,
l
leg(s), and
l
armrest(s) (as optional element).
Figures 3, 4, and 5 show the parameters to define the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 7. Examples of back features

Figure 8. Examples of leg features

h

i

forms of the seat feature, back feature, and leg feature.
The parameters are easily changed by computer mouse
operations so that the forms of the seat feature, back
feature, and leg feature can be transformed for matching
with the seat form, back form, and leg form of a sketch.
Figures 6, 7, and 8 show the examples of seat features,
back features, and leg features constructed by giving
different parameter values.

A
B

D
C

4. Procedure to construct 3-D chair model
(a) Sketch data

4.1. Identification of visual point of sketch
It is supposed that designers draw sketches with
perspective. In order to set the form features of the chair
elements according to the sketch displayed on a TV screen,
the visual point of the sketch must be identified.
The visual point of a sketch is identified from the four
corner point data of the seat indicated by a computer mouse.
In the identification, it is assumed that the seat is bilateral
symmetry and horizontal.
When a sketch data is
displayed on a TV screen, the four corner points A, B, C,
and D of the seat are indicated by mouse clipping
operations as shown in Fig. 9(a). In Fig. 9(b), the points
E and F are the center points between the points A and D
and the points B and C, respectively. The line G-H is the
horizontal line on the point F, and the angles B-G-F and
E-H-F are 90 degrees. x1 and x2 are the length between
the points F and G and the points F and H, respectively.
y1 and y2 are the length between the points B and G and
the points E and H, respectively. Consequently, the angle
θ of the visual point for the front of a chair and the angle φ
of the visual point for the horizontal are derived from
equations (1), and (2).

 y2 ⋅ t 

 x2 

θ = arctan

φ = arcsin

y1 ⋅ y 2
1
= arcsin 
x1 ⋅ x 2
t

(b) Parameters to identify
visual point

(c) Modeling coordinate system
Figure 9. Identification of sketch visual point

(1)
(a) Seat feature with
(b) Adjustment of form
initial parameter values
of seat feature

(2)

Figure 10. Arrangement of seat feature

where, t is a variable depending on the view angle for the
horizontal. Identifying the visual point: the angles θ and
φ makes the coordinate system for chair modeling as
shown in Fig. 9(c).

4.2. Arrangement of form features and adjustment
of element forms
4.2.1. Arrangement of seat feature. When an operation
of seat feature arrangement is executed, a seat defined with
initial parameter values is arranged as shown in Fig. 10(a).

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 11. Arrangement of features

(a) Wire frame model

(a) Sketch data

(b) Solid model

Figure 12. Constructed 3-D model from sketch

Then the parameter values defining the seat feature are
adjusted by easy mouse operations in comparing the form
of the seat feature with the seat form of the sketch.
Consequently, the 3-D seat element matching the sketch
seat is constructed as shown in Fig. 10(b).
4.2.2. Arrangement of back feature and leg feature. In
the same manner as seat feature arrangement, the back
feature and leg feature are arranged and their forms are
adjusted to the sketch. Figure 11 shows the result of
arrangements of the adjusted seat feature, back feature, and
leg feature on the sketch.

(b) Wire frame model
Figure 13.

4.2.3. Construction of 3-D chair model. Figure 12 (a)
and (b) show the wire frame model and solid model of the
final result of the 3-D model constructed from the sketch
shown in Fig. 9(a).
Another test to construct the 3-D chair model from a
sketch was executed. Figure 13(a) shows the sketch of
the test. And Figure 13 (b) and (c) show the wire frame
model and solid model, respectively, constructed from the
sketch.

(c) Solid model

3-D model construction from sketch

(4) It was confirmed by simple tests that the developed
CAD system was effectiveness for designing an office
chair.
(5) The advantages of using the CAD system are to easily
construct the 3-D model from a sketch of a chair and
to examine the designed chair form by modifying the
chair form and changing the chair color in the virtual
space.

5. Conclusions
6. References
This study is summarized as follows:
(1) Design processes of an office chair starting from
drawing a sketch was proposed.
(2) A CAD system using chair element features to easily
construct the 3-D model of a chair from a sketch was
developed.
(3) In the construction of the 3-D model using the
developed CAD system, the form features of chair
elements are arranged and adjusted according to the
sketch displayed on the TV screen.

[1] Charlotte, Peter Fiell, 1000 chairs, TASCHEN, 1997, p. 175,
193, 226, 252, 256, 283, 325, 364, 421, 424, 555.
[2] T. Varady, R. R. Martin, J. Coxt, “Reverse engineering of
geometric models –an introduction”, Computer-Aided Design, Vol.
29, No. 4, 1997, pp255-268.
[3] P. Yunhe, G. Weidong, T. Xin, “An intelligent multi-black
board CAD system”, Artificial Intelligent in Engineering, 10,
1996, pp. 351-356.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

