Integrating Learning and Visualization Technologies in Orthopaedics –
Establishing the Virtual Orthopaedic European University
S.Grange1, 2, J. Burrill2, K. Kumar3 T. Wu4, , T.Bunker1
1. Royal College of Surgeons of England, London, United Kingdom
2. Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom
3. Queen Anne Hospital, Portsmouth, United Kingdom
4. Helmholtz Biomedical Engineering Institute, Aachen University of Technology, Aachen, Germany
Abstract
Digital technologies offer a working environment for
familiarisation with new surgical procedures and
management of clinical case audit. To enhance access
and control of these virtual workspaces an eXtensible
Mark-up Language (XML) based interface has been
developed. This links the educational environment of the
Web Based Training (WBT) scheme to the clinical data
collection from ongoing trials in Orthopaedics. The
Virtual Orthopaedic European University (VOEU)
infrastructure encompasses the normal working
environment of engineers and clinicians using computer
assisted surgery tools adopting dedicated interactive
media. XML based interface enables users to
communicate using material mediated for their specific
needs allowing adaptive media based upon user
experience and knowledge base. This combines
declarative (factual) content with feedback from a
clinical (procedural) case-based training and evaluation
environment. By using XML interface, we were able to
cater for the different user hardware and software
resources, media content and language of presentation,
and incorporate virtual environment simulations. By
constructing a framework based upon already
established standards, we anticipate the applicability to
other surgical disciplines. This will enable the
development of networking computer architectures to
assist the assimilation of multiple sources and media.
The interface offers the opportunity to collect data from
computer assisted orthopaedic surgical systems
embedded in an educational environment that is
quantitative rather than descriptive. This will help the
development of data repositories for mining, providing
feedback upon clinical case management.

1. Introduction
1.1 Who needs a Virtual University?
There are three underlying motivators for the
Information Society philosophy being applied to
orthopaedics:

• Constantly updating knowledge base for both
procedural and declarative learning.
• Limited user time and computing expertise.
• Specialist knowledge base varies according to
experience and application.
With respect to the last of these, it is necessary to
classify clinical knowledge into:
Essential. Part of the core curriculum relating to
safety issues. Every trainee must be evaluated and
demonstrate passable skills on every occasion. Should
the trainee not be able to achieve a satisfactory standard
then they will not be able to be awarded the relevant
qualification. There is no negotiation with respect of
these.
Important. This is also part of the core curriculum.
Although time is not formally available to test this, it will
be included within the questions of the core modules.
The varying ability to pass this will constitute the grade of
performance.
Inspirational. There is the need for a course to
contain material that demonstrates various issues around
the subject. In particular it adds background to assist with
reflective learning. This does not need to be evaluated
formally.
This background, blended with the variety of user
experience
encountered,
necessitates
virtual
infrastructures for the training and evaluation of surgical
performance. This requires reliable robust systems for the
collection of data from both real-life and simulated
environments. The data can then be used for both teaching
of novice surgeons and the comparison of effective
training techniques for different types of surgical
intervention. We adopt the approach of the collecting data
from four main fields. These are:
• Multimedia Educational Modules, which provide the
declarative (factual) base of material for the
education of the users.
• A Virtual Classroom environment for exchange of
views, and monitoring of progress.
• A Virtual Observatory for the collection of data from
simulation systems and the actual intra-operative data
collection

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

• Novel Modalities of Simulation(1;2)]for the
emulation of surgical procedures for training and
experimentation focusing upon micro-surgery.
Combining the above disciplines within one working
environment, the virtual university infrastructure(3)] aims
to meet the needs of clinicians to combining clinical,
educational and research duties.
The Virtual Orthopaedic European University was
established to address the issues of data access,
presentation and development of a structured learning
environment for the training of novice surgeons.

1.2 The End Users
Surgeons are mobile well-educated individuals whose
work demands excellent availability of educational
material that is up to date and focused to their particular
learning situation. This reflects the need for life long
learning (refresher) material as well as the ‘just in case’
archives. New material is being collected constantly and
this needs to be properly evaluated and integrated into the
learning infrastructure appropriately.
This paper explains the process of data collection
and retrieval. The system is being developed in a way that
will support more sophisticated media including virtual
environments.
The XML(4)] foundation presents the user with data
in a form that is interpretable for their level of knowledge
and experience. The system is fully scalable with respect
to the number of collectable cases. It records a permanent
archive of clinical procedures. Because of the sensitive
nature of the material, the security issues are addressed at
the server level and consent must be obtained from
patients.
Part of the educational strategy employed [5] relies
upon the evolving university concept to allow for the
updating and upgrading of educational material in light of
new results, using analysis of incoming data from
ongoing clinical trials for the evidence base. This
acknowledges that a virtual university is a living
infrastructure that evolves with time, due to changes both
in its underlying philosophy and staff.
The construction of metadata standards for the core
components, that abide by already approved standards
such as the Dublin core, Learning Object Metadata and
Information Management System (IMS), leads to a
philosophy where components are ‘living entities’ whose
survival within the university infrastructure relate to their
relevance to users. Applicability (the ability to apply the
technologies
for
other
applications),
and
expandability(5;6)] are vital characteristics of components
in VOEU.

2. Methodology
2.1 Can we develop a reliable knowledge grid
for orthopaedics?
Tim Berners-Lee originally led the WWW
development at CERN in the 1980’s. He established
HTML for the structuring of physics related documents
and files.
A philosophical rule of HTML was that it would
convey the structure of a hypertext document, however it
does not provide detail as to its presentation. In fact as a
member of the broader group of standard generalized
mark-up languages, it falls short of providing other
functions that are of value for the sake of maintaining its
Generalisability(7)]. HTML does not provide information
that relates to the individual using the document. This can
be introduced by allowing differing security levels access
to parts of websites so that ‘privileged’ access can be
granted. We do not however envisage that level of control
of files as compatible with the role in healthcare, and
could even be potentially unethical.
CERN provided a multiplatform, multicultural,
microcosm in which to nurture the concepts that led to the
evolution of the WWW. The pressures for information in
medical applications are different and unique. The
development of an evidence based culture combined with
the progressive adoption of protocol driven services has
led to the need to support such a philosophy with the tools
to make appropriate peer reviewed information available
directly to the clinician.
The approach to integrating the various components
falls upon a graphical user interface referred to as a
‘visual integrator’. This is primarily a web browser HTML reader. Although add-ons are used for very
specific functions, the majority of information must be
presented to the user inside the frame of a standard
HTML page, using scripts. Different components adopt
different approaches to this – including the development
of PERL, Java & php server scripts, and the use of
Microsoft SQL server Active Server Pages (ASPs) – see
figure 1.
To develop components that can be easily integrated,
the web pages have a standard format adopting style
sheets, allowing extension to other platforms with
pervasive computing issues in mind. The media is
supported by standard practices and is prescribed by a
media report.

2.2 Provision
of
customized
multimedia
educational modules to the user
Surgery requires the operator to be versed in both
practical (procedural) skills and factual (declarative)
knowledge. The Virtual Orthopaedic European University
is based upon the most recent technologies and standards

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

User Group
•
•
•

•

Undergraduate Medical Student (UG)
Postgraduate Basic Trainee (BST)
Postgraduate Higher Trainee (HST)
Postgraduate Masterclass (MC)

Central Server
•
•

•

WWW Server
SQL Server SQL + Database
PERL Script

User Client
•
•

•

WWW Browser
XML Viewer
Java

Distributed Data Collection
•

•

‘Local’ Virtual Observatory Database
Centre 1, Centre 2 etc.

Figure 1.VOEU System Architecture Overview
for Learning Environment (VLE) development(8;9)]. The
repository for educational packages is referred to as the
Multimedia Educational Orthopaedic Modules (MEOM)
component of VOEU. It is being built as an XML
application based on Information Management System
(IMS) Meta-data and Content Packaging standards.
Using IMS nomenclature every educational item is
treated as a resource whether it is a whole tutorial, a web
page, multiple-choice question (MCQ) or an image. Each
resource is described by Learning Object Meta-data
(LOM) and can be used and reused in different context as
the educational content developer sees fit. In the current
version of VOEU the content can be organized in a varied
but static way i.e. it is based on hierarchical structures of
its governing content packaging Document Type
Definition (DTD). Learner tracking will be developed
allowing dynamic content building according to the
individual’s profile similar to the earlier Intelligent
Tutoring Systems (ITS).
The MEOM development concentrates on two areas:
building an automated orthopaedic knowledge repository
and serving it to the learner in the most educationally
effective way. Figure 2 provides an overview:
Every educational resource, accompanied by its
metadata will form an XML instance/document validated
against the VOEUmetadata.dtd and stored in the
repository. Content providers will be able to add
resources automatically through an HTML form.
Conversion of HTML to XML (and back) is handled by
proprietary software.

2.3 Dynamic Review Journal
Demonstrating the benefit of differing clinical
approaches upon a small population of cases without
considerable variation in outcome is difficult. In VOEU, a
set of software tools offers an environment for
accumulation of data, for mining to provide up to date
reporting of various outcome measures set against the
types of intervention. This forms the basis of the
‘Dynamic Review Journal’, which will focus upon:
• Medical evaluation of the submitted cases generating recommendations about the application of
Information and Communication Technologies in
orthopaedic surgery.
• Technical and ergonomic evaluation to detect
technical weaknesses in current Image Guided
Orthopaedic Surgery (IGOS) systems. This will also serve
to find potential fields of insufficient training in the usage
of this technology.
To assure quality, the cases that are output by the DRJ
must be technically and medically validated. The
technical validation is managed by constraints upon data
collection. The medical validation is by the peer review of
case results on an annual basis. The process for this is still
in construction. A Static Review Journal (SRJ) which
stores and archives preprints and published articles,
termed ePrints, is currently available.
It is likely that peer review will remain the most
proficient indicator of performance during training for the
foreseeable future. Results are only credible if peer
reviewed and are available for scrutiny. An infrastructure
has been developed to support this by logging an
individual’s performance, in conjunction with the
development of multimedia tools to guide the trainee.

HTML form to
gather content

Content validation
and approval

Building orthopaedic
knowledge repository
based on IMS Meta-data
Standard

XML

Personalization of content
HTML page(s) to
display content

Displaying orthopaedic
knowledge to the learner
based on IMS Content
Packaging Specification

Figure 2. HTML communication with XML forms

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

2.4 Personalized Libraries
Gaining and retaining knowledge are personalized
processes and needs to be customizable to the level of the
individual. The first stage is to match the user to a specific
group who require core knowledge for their work. This is
culturally acceptable within the medical infrastructure and
the society because the population accepts the fact that
different ‘grades’ of staff have differing job descriptions
requiring demonstration of differing levels of knowledge.
The consortium adopts the perspective of the users.
This involves educationalists, engineers and clinicians.
The users, and the wider group of stakeholders, whose
working practice is influenced by the development of
such organizations, are outlined in Appendix I. Other
groups may be added upon request subject to a rapid
prototype model of development.
The users are likely to develop their own preferences
for how it is used. Data is therefore collected and stored
centrally to allow the user to modify their preferences in
accordance with the level of their expertise, matching the
presentation of the data to the appropriate level of
knowledge and experience.

3. Results
Development of a virtual shoulder arthroscopy
environment is already at the Beta testing stage – see
figures 3&4.

for paradigm (problem based) teaching and allow central
collection of adequate data for both interim and long-term
analysis of surgical progress.

Figure 4. MRI Scan (Shoulder) Labeler
Once the framework is in place and fully tested, it
will be enhanced by the development of patient specific
databases of information, including the potential to build
patient specific virtual environments for the practicing of
surgical procedures. This leads to the opportunity to
create a range of different safe virtual testing
environments for the design and evaluation of new
surgical tools. The URL for this is available via the
project website; http://voeu.ecs.soton.ac.uk/ .

4. Discussion

Figure 3. Virtual Environment Simulation
Interface
One of the intrinsic advantages of designing, building
and emulating minimal access surgery, is that the user is
in effect already immersed within the appropriate
operating environment, since they obtain a view of the
operating environment indirectly via a monitor. The
display system (interface) replicates the normal colour
high definition (HDTV) monitor with which all the
operators are familiar, avoiding cognitive dissonance.
As Beta testing continues, it is possible to refine the
applications so that they will be available to a wider
audience, to adapt by adding new virtual environments
and building a repository of cases that can be used both

The vocational training(10)] of anyone whose work
involves clinically invasive procedures requires the best
from that individual with regards to decision-making and
psychomotor skills, thus the development and monitoring
of these is vital. Ultimately simulator based skills training
will become integrated within the framework of clinical
governance (the quality assurance of clinical service
delivery).
The methodology of previous task analysis for
evaluation of surgical skills training was based upon the
practical limits of what could be achieved with the
available equipment at one site, and also the expert
analysis of tasks (11;12)]. The results were inconclusive
with a small number of trainees, as would be anticipated.
It is therefore clear that a larger number of trial candidates
are required. This is being addressed by the development
of virtual observatories within the Virtual Orthopaedic
European University (13)].

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3.1 Who benefits from a Virtual University?

VOEU has established DTDs and these may
ultimately be integrated into an educational schema
The appropriate knowledge category depends upon
though this is not currently planned.
the clinical role that the individual plays and their stage of
VOEU’s role as a knowledge construction tool,
training. It is thus the responsibility of course conveners
integrating concept mapping with supporting data
to ascribe various XML tags to learning objects to match
repositories offers a powerful base to support research,
the syllabus for the grade of the trainee. This allows for
clinical and educational tasks. Analysis via the dynamic
focused presentation of material to the user group. This is
review journal will update intervention records
achieved by providing ‘Look-up’ tables for each grade of
automatically with the mainstream orthopaedic
trainee.
community being able to review results personally and
Improved functionality results in increased
evaluate them in a digital peer reviewed framework.
complexity of the interface by using a derivative of
XML plays a significant role in system integration.
Structured Generalized Mark-up Language (SGML). The
This will allow different simulation systems, each with
XML abides by standards being evolved for this domain
the capabilities to provide training and evaluation in
by IEEE and where possible, the international
specific sub-skills, to contribute data for evaluation. It
organization, Health Level Seven (www.HL7.org). This
will facilitate statistical analysis of a suitably sized
will ensure greater compatibility between the interfaces
population of surgeons, saving effort by providing
that are used for the control of surgical procedural trainers
different grades of user with the appropriate information
(simulators).
that they require.
There are potential pitfalls though. The most
The relevant information is included in the syllabus
significant of these is security. Although the system is
of the Educational Modules. This brings the university to
stable (and likely to display good survivability
life as it evolves with the collection of reviewed data. The
characteristics) (14) the open nature of the network, and
database will host the relevant learning cases collected
its potential application for providing communication
clinically that will then be used as test cases for validation
portals between the machines can provide a vehicle for
purposes of surgical simulators. This will attempt to
corrupting software (viruses) also.
resolve the self-referential paradox, that; “One cannot
properly assess the performance without first knowing the
5. Conclusion
performance of the population who are testing it”.
Simulated virtual environments can then be designed into
Virtual University infrastructures are no longer
the interface as portals.
optional. They are essential. From an acorn, great oak
The data of simulator performance will progressively
trees grow, and so too with the university (XML)
improve in accuracy and ultimately provide a system of
infrastructures, since these tools will greatly assist data
assessment with the underlying foundation of a large
mining and thus all areas of future work within the
population of surgeons, due to the use of distributed
environment. These tools should be free at the point of
computing architecture to develop this important
delivery for users who are likely to be granted access via
database.
institutions and societies.
The aim of future work is to ensure that these
devices assure compatibility
between the intra-operative
Central Server
User (Client)
tools developed for the
SQL
training and microsurgical
statement
Query
operating environments plus
WWWWWWVO Database
the extension of the archive
Browser
Server
SQL-Server
of cases for testing of new
Results
tools and offering pervasive
HTML
document
viewing of clinical visual
data. The simulations will be
linked via the adaptive hyper
media system to act as
Distributed Data
portals spiced with the
Collections in
particular links requested by
Data Collection:
Data Collection:
Clinical Centers
the user. This helps to
WWW-Server
WWW-Server
integrate
visualization
Center A
Center B
process with the learning
content
Figure 5 Virtual Observatory System Architecture

... ...

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

6. Appendix I - Stakeholders who use
VOEU
Stakeholders who do not use VOEU
Stakeholder
Group
1. Pre-Clinical
Student
2. Pre-Clinical
Student
3. Clinical
Student
4. Clinical
Student
5. Clinical
Student
6. PreRegistration
House Officer
7. General
Surgical Senior
House Officer
8. Orthopaedic
Senior House
Officer
9. Registrar
10. Registrar
11. Registrar
12. Registrar
13. Post FRCS
Orth
14. Post FRCS
Orth
15. Consultant
16. Convenor
17. Assistant
Convenor
18. Tutor
19. Developer
20. Developer
21. Reviewer
22.
Administration
23.
Administration

Stakeholder Class

Name
(Tag)

Pre-Clinical Student Years 1 UG1
Pre-Clinical Student Years 2 UG2
Clinical Student years 3

UG3

Clinical Student years 4

UG4

Clinical Student years 5

UG5

Pre-Registration House
Surgeon

PRHS

Basic Surgical Trainee

BSTG

Basic Surgical Trainee
Higher Surgical Trainee Years 1
Higher Surgical Trainee Years 2
Higher Surgical Trainee Years 3
Higher Surgical Trainee Years 4
Higher Surgical Trainee Years 5

BST0
HST1
HST2
HST3
HST4
HST5

Higher Surgical Trainee Years 6
Masterclass
Course Convenor

HST6
MC
CCON

Assistant Course Convenor
Tutor
Researcher orthopaedics
Researcher Computer Science
Research Reviewer

ASCON
TUT
ORTH
CS
RV

System Administrator

SYSAD

Educational Administrator

EDAD

Stakeholder
24. Public
25. Academic
Registrar
26. Finance
Officer
27.
Accommodation
Officer
28.
Administration
for computing
29. Bookshops

Name
Stakeholder Class
(Tag)
General Public
PUB
Senior Educational
Administrator for Educational
Institution or School
SEDAD
Financial Officer in Accounting
and Management roles
FIN
Accommodation Officer for
Conferences
Administrative Computing
Services
Medical Book Shops, suppliers
etc.
Medical Publishing companies,
including commissioning
editors
Business Service Centre,
including advisors
Conference Administration
Office
Medical Education
Development Unit

30. Publishers
31. Business
Services
32. Conference
Secretariat
33. Medical
Educators
34. Examinations
Department
Examinations Office
35. Public
Relations
External Relations Department
University Department of
Orthopaedics staff not involved
36. Orthopaedics in VOEU

ACCOM
ADCOM
BOOKS
MPUB
BUS
CONF
MEDU
EXAM
PR
ORTHO

7. Acknowledgements
The European Commission supports this project
(Project VOEU, IST-1999-13079, Information Society
Technology Program).
The authors wish to recognise the effort of the
Intelligence, Agents and Multimedia Group (IAM) at the
University of Southampton, United Kingdom – Pr. Les
Carr, Dr Gary Wills and Mr Guillermo Power, for their
work upon the Dynamic Review Journal development
based upon Open Archives Initiative (OAI) protocols.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

8. References
[1] Grange S., Bunker T., Cooper J. Networking virtual reality
for shoulder arthroscopy. British Journal of Healthcare
Computing 13[10], 26-28. 1996.
[2]

Exeter Virtual Worlds Shoulder Arthroscopy Simulator.
London: Brunel Univ Press, 1997.

[3] Hazemi R, Hailes S. Reinventing the Academy. In: Wilbur
S, Hazemi R, Hailes S, editors. The Digital University.
London: Springer, 1998: 7-24.
[4] T.Bray, C.M.Sperberg-McQueen, J.Paoli, E.Maler.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0. W3.org 2. 2000.
[5] Wactlar H.D., Christel M.G., Gong Y., Hauptmann A.G.
Lessons Learned from Building a Terabyte Digital Video
Server. Computer 82[2], 66-73. 1999.
[6] Witten W.I., Mc Nah R.J., Jones S., Apperley M.,
Bainbridge D., Cunningham S.J. Managing Complexity in
a Distributed Digital Library. Computer 32[2], 74-79. 1999.
[7] Tim Berners-Lee, Mark Fischetti. A solution: Hypertext.
Weaving the web. London: TEXERE Publishing Ltd, 1999:
229-252.
[8] Linda Harasim. A Framework for Online Learning: The
Virtual-U. Computer 32[9], 44-49. 1999.
[9] Schatz B., Chen H. Digital Libraries: Technological
Advances and Social Impacts. Computer 82[2], 45-50.
1999.
[10] Dearing R. The Dearing Report. Dearing R, editor. 1,
Ch13. 1997. Natioonal Committee of Inquiry into Higher
Education (NCIHE).
[11] Bunker T.D., Schranz P.S. The art of diagnosis in the
mystery shoulder. Clinical Challenges in Orthopaedics: The
shoulder. Oxford: ISIS Medical Media, 1998: 1-23.
[12] Preece J. What is HCI? Human-Computer interaction.
Harlow: Addison-Wesley, 1998: 3-27.
[13] VOEU Consortium. Virtual Orthopaedic
University. IST - 13079 - 1999 . 2001.

European

[14] Ellison R.J., Fisher D.A., Linger R.C., Lipson H.F.,
Longstaff T.A., Mead N.A. Survivability: Protecting your
critical systems. IEEE Internet Computing 3[6], 55-63.
1999.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

