Change Blindness in Information Visualization: A Case Study
Lucy Nowell, Elizabeth Hetzler, and Ted Tanasse
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory1
Richland, Washington 99352 USA
E-mail: [Lucy.Nowell|Beth.Hetzler|Theodore.Tanasse]@pnl.gov

Abstract
Change blindness occurs when people do not notice
changes in visible elements of a scene. If people use an
information visualization system to compare document
collection subsets partitioned by their time-stamps,
change blindness makes it impossible for them to recognize even very major changes, let alone minor ones. We
describe theories from cognitive science that account for
the change blindness phenomenon, as well as solutions
developed for two visual analysis tools, a dot plot ( SPIRE
Galaxies) and landscape (ThemeView™) visualizations.

1. Background
Information visualization systems portray a scene to
communicate key elements of an information collection,
such as similarity, metadata, and change over time. The
scene’s design and the mapping of information attributes
to visual portrayal depend on many considerations, such
as user context and information needs, human perception
and cognition capabilities, the nature of the collection,
and the display capabilities at hand. One tradeoff inherent
in the design of such visualizations is a choice between
adding a second visual portrayal or communicating more
information with an existing one. For example, many visualizations use a 2- or 3D scene to portray similarity and
metadata in a collection of documents [2, 12, 13, 21, 18].
To portray change over time, one could add a complementary visualization or incorporate the additional data to
the existing one; in some cases, a combination of the two
might be preferred. A simple method for showing time
change within an existing portrayal is to filter what is
shown by the selected time period and then update the
display as the time period changes. This method has two
undesirable effects. First, if the display change is abrupt,
the user may experience change blindness, making the
changes hard to recognize. Second, even if the change is
smooth, the larger context of the currently displayed information is lost. This paper describes methods for adding
portrayal of change to two different visualizations, one
based on a dot-plot portrayal and the second based on a

landscape metaphor. We also describe a third approach,
using an added visualization whose sole function is to
represent change.
The systems we address are aimed at helping users perform tasks of information triage, choosing which documents and information phenomena within large collections and steady streams of content deserve attention. The
primary goal of information visualization is to help users
glean insight from large collections of information, including text documents. SPIRE (Spatial Paradigm for Information Retrieval and Exploration) [8, 34] was explicitly designed to help analysts reduce the amount of time
they spend monitoring information sources and increase
the time they spend analyzing the content of large document collections and understanding the issues reported.
The original motivation for SPIRE came from information analysts, who face significant challenges dealing with
the growing amount of information, most of it
unstructured text. SPIRE automatically produces a
suitable knowledge base of topics (similar to keywords)
that distinguish among groups within the document
collection under analysis. It then creates n-dimensional
vectors that characterize each document with respect to
those topics. The document vectors are clustered and
projected from n-space into 2-space; the 2D projection is
used to create the visual representations.
The SPIRE ThemeView™ visualization (Figure 1) depicts the topical content of a collection as a landscape,
where hills and mountains represent strong emphasis on
one or more closely related concepts—the higher the
peak, the stronger the emphasis on that theme or group of
themes. Color also reflects the strength of emphasis on
themes. The tops of peaks that represent the strongest
theme concentrations are very bright yellow. Moderately
strong themes are red, and themes with minimal strength
are blue. The colors are blended, so that a single high
mountain will shade from blue at the base to red to bright
yellow at the top. This visualization is particularly good
for helping analysts jump-start their understanding of the
collection – it conveys the main themes in a collection
and an overall sense of how they are related.

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is managed for the U.S. Department of Energy by Battelle Memorial Institute under
Contract DE-AC06-76Rl0-1830.
1

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

The SPIRE Galaxies visualization, which is reminiscent
of the night sky, is shown with the same data set in Figure
2. This visualization represents each document as a small
green dot; the collection as a whole looks like a universe
of “docustars.” Closely related documents cluster together
in a tight group while unrelated documents are separated
by large space. Larger open orange circles represent cluster centers. The distance between points indicates their
thematic similarity. Thus, if points in the visualization are
close together, then it is likely that the corresponding documents contain thematically similar information. If they
are far apart, the documents probably are thematically
diverse. For our users, this is effectively like related documents automatically sorting into the correct piles. Similar approaches are seen, for example, in [1] and [5].

the current window, while progressing through the
collection by essentially moving the selection window. A
new range may overlap an old one, so that a range with 3day intervals for a 4-day collection will have 2 windows
that overlap for 2 days. The Time Slicer can also be set to
increment the displayed information objects by gradually
adding documents for additional time periods.
The Galaxies Time Slicer, shown with its controls in
Figures 3 and 4, presents a separate window that maps
time to a histogram, where each bar in the histogram
shows the number of documents for a particular period of
time. If the user selects two or more bars in the control
window, only the documents for those time periods are
shown in the Galaxies window. The user can move the
selection window from one period to another or progressively expand it. The dots representing individual documents come and go with selection or deselection of the
time slice in which they fall, as shown in Figure 5
depicting time slices for each of 3 consecutive days.
There is no visible way to distinguish which icons belong
to which time period other than their appearance or disappearance in response to user action. There is no visual
distinctiveness to the new documents and no representation at all of older documents that have fallen outside
the current time slice and thus vanished from the display.
This makes it difficult for users to remember relative age
of documents, particularly in large data sets, and impossible to capture the knowledge in a still image. Furthermore, multiple images are not available at once. It is also
difficult to detect trends in the collection.

Figure 2. SPIRE Galaxies visualization

Figure 3. SPIRE Galaxies filtered by the Time
Slicer

Determining the relative age of documents is often
important to our users, as they seek to recognize emerging
events and trends in a collection. SPIRE’s Time Slicer
functions as an automated sequential query. That is, the
user specifies a range of time (e.g., 1 day or 3 months)
and the system selects information objects that fall within

Figure 4. Time Slicer control for Figure 3

Figure 1. SPIRE ThemeView visualization

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Figure 5. Galaxies slices depicting days 1 - 3

Figure 6. ThemeView Time Slicer Days 1 - 3
Similar problems occur with the SPIRE ThemeView
Time Slicer. In this Time Slicer, changes to the landscape
occur when the selection window in time changes. This
may mean that new peaks appear and old ones vanish or,
more commonly, that the height and color of peaks
change subtly during progression through the collection.
The problem is illustrated in Figure 6, showing data from
3 different days. As with the Galaxies Time Slicer, users
must rely on memory to recognize how the ThemeView
landscape changes from one slice to the next. The problem is even worse when users attempt to identify trends in
the collection, so they must remember a sequence of
changes.
SPIRE users experience change blindness when they
are using the Time Slicer and find themselves unable to
identify what has changed from one time period, or slice,
to the next, or when they are unable to remember what
was different in the previous slice.

2. Change Blindness
Change blindness is a well-known problem in human
visual perception that occurs when people do not notice
changes in visible elements of a scene [28]. This phenomenon is studied under multiple rubrics, including
change detection and inattentional blindness [16, 7, 19,
27]. Change blindness may occur even when changes to
the scene are fairly dramatic, such as changing the person
to whom a subject is speaking during an interruption or
making major changes in the color or arrangement of objects. Psychologists noted the problem of change blindness as early as 1953 [11]. Increasing interest has led to

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

numerous studies of the phenomenon in recent years,
some of which are discussed below.
Researchers have developed several different explanations for the occurrence of change blindness, a few of
which we discuss here [28]:
• Overwriting
• First impressions
• Nothing is stored
• Nothing is compared
• Feature combination
Overwriting is believed to occur when the mental representation of a scene is blanked out during an interval or
is wholly replaced by the mental representation of the
new scene. In this widely accepted view, any changes to
the scene are undetectable unless the observer had already
abstracted information about the changed element, because the observer has no basis for comparison. “When
the new visual information comes along, it simply replaces the old … leaving only the abstract representations
of the initial display. Accordingly, successful change detection occurs only for the attended objects, and even
then, it may be limited to a comparison of abstracted
information rather than of visual representations [28].”
The theory of first impressions suggests that “observers
accurately encode the features of the initial object or
scene and then fail to encode the details of the changed
scene (which is often the current percept) [28].” Proponents of this model [9,10, and others] suggest that the
primary goal of scene perception is to understand the
meaning of the scene. If changes in the scene do not affect

the meaning, then there is no benefit in changing the
mental representation of the scene.
The related theory that nothing is stored suggests that
it is unnecessary for observers to develop any mental
representation of the scene, because the world itself is sufficient representation [6, 9]. Because no details of a scene
are stored in the observer’s memory, there is no basis for
comparison when elements of the scene are changed.
Thus, changes are undetectable.
Another theory suggests that observers do store a complete mental image of scene elements, but nothing is
compared between the old and new representations when
changes are made [4, 28]. Because no comparison occurs,
no changes are detected. Research does suggest that there
are memory traces of the old representation and that
changes can be detected if the observer is asked to do so
[30]. Note that failure to attend, suggested as a cause for
change blindness [26, 23, 24], may also lead to failing to
compare. Recent work suggests that observer attention
must be focused specifically on the item that changes for
recognition of change to be assured [26, 24, 25].
An older and generally discredited theory of feature
combination suggested that “two consecutive views are
overlain and combined” in memory, so that essentially
“observers are unable to keep the two views separate, and
partial representations of each are combined to form a
new, ‘coherent’ representation of the scene [28].”
A more thorough discussion of change blindness is
beyond the scope of this paper. For a comprehensive
review, refer to [29].

3. Portraying Document Age in the Galaxies
Visualization
Analysts reviewing the time sequence of documents in
a collection are often interested in quickly identifying the
most recent documents. These should easily stand out.
The other documents’ relative age should be apparent, but
it need not map to easily identifiable absolute age. Thus
we wanted a graphical representation that allows the newest documents to be seen pre-attentively, while the other
document ages can be intuitively ordered. We sought a
way for users to quickly identify changes as they step
through a data set’s timeline.
Pre-attentive features are visual aspects of objects that
are perceived very quickly, almost instantaneously, regardless of the number of objects in view [31]. In SPIRE,
as in many other dot-plot visualization systems, several
pre-attentive graphical attributes are already used for
representing other information, making those attributes
less suitable for portraying age. The spatial layout of the
icons represents similarity among the documents. Color
may represent group membership, selection, or metadata
values. Size is not a good choice, because the large
number of document icons makes occlusion a concern.
Similarly, most shapes are problematic, because they may

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

also increase occlusion. Therefore, we sought a method to
portray relative document age among many documents in
the presence of constraints on the possible encodings.
We developed a prototype to simulate time-stamped
documents in a Galaxies-style display, allowing us to
research alternatives. The prototype mapped document
age optionally to any set from the following:
• angles from 90 degrees to 0
• line length
• color progression (such as yellow to green to blue)
• bright to dim progression
• perspective depth
• left to right spatial progression.
The prototype was designed to operate with a set of
newswire documents. The timeline for the entire document set is divided into a series of equal segments (time
slices). At any given moment, the visualization represents
a window of time consisting of some number of slices.
This window can be moved back and forth through time,
one slice per step.
Along with line angle, we experimented with spatial
progression for age encoding based on the general layout
of the documents under the Galaxies projection. The
prototype allows 3D rotation, enabling several different
visual effects. For example, in one view, we use
perspective depth to make it seem that as documents age,
they recede into the center of the screen (see Figure 7), or
that they spread to the edges (not shown). In Figure 7,
color, line and length redundantly encode age. In Figure
7, color, line and length redundantly encode age.
Rotating to a third orientation simulates a situation
where the 2D projection of Galaxies is conceptually
placed in a plane perpendicular to the user’s line of sight
and on one edge of the screen . Then the documents seem
to move across the screen toward the projection plane,
landing in their final locations and building up the
Galaxies view over time.
Such spatial progressions have interesting effects.
However, based on user feedback, we chose not to override the inherent meaning of the documents’ spatial location by using such techniques for age encoding.
The solution we adopted was to use line angle and
length to portray document age, as shown in Figure 8.
Angle is a pre-attentive feature that is less commonly
used and that proved very effective for this application. A
vertical line can be identified pre-attentively among a set
of lines whose angle differs sufficiently either to the right
or to the left [35]. The other graphical encoding options
were deemed too conflicting with other encodings used in
SPIRE. Note that in Figure 8, glyph colors represent
group membership, as indicated by the legend.
We conducted a simple formative usability evaluation
of this solution for encoding age in a dot plot with two
participants who were already familiar with SPIRE. Our
goal was to see if the users could easily understand the
age encoding, use it to identify the newest documents, and

compare relative ages across a small set of time slices.
Participants were asked to carry out a series of simple
tasks, such as selecting documents from particular time
periods and identifying which of two documents was
more recent. Without age encoding, participants had to
change the time window to answer the questions. With
age encoding, they could modify the time window or
interpret the line angle and size. Both participants opted to
interpret the encoding, though in dense regions of the
screen they sometimes needed to zoom in to compensate
for over-plotting.

Participants were able to correctly interpret and use the
age encoding for all questions asked. In answer to a subjective questionnaire, both said that identifying relative
document age was easier with the encoding and that the
encoding added to their interpretation of the dot plot view.
Both indicated that they were very likely to use this age
encoding if it were incorporated into an application.
These capabilities have been implemented in a new
version of SPIRE, as shown in Figure 8, with the same
data used for Figure 3. The new Galaxies Time Slicer
allows the user to turn on or off age encoding. In the
current implementation, we use a vertical line to portray
new documents. Based on guidance from a local human
factors expert, we have used a minimum difference of 15
degrees between the vertical (and most recent) slice and
the previous slice. Earlier slices are shown at progressively smaller angles ending at a horizontal (0 degree) for the
oldest slice displayed.
We are currently using an exponential decay function
to control the angle differences between 75 and 0 degrees.
This gives us the desired behavior, where new slices are
easily distinguished and older slices can be compared relative to each other.

4. Candidate Solutions for ThemeView

Figure 7: Progression of documents from the
perimeter towards the center.

Figure 8. Document age encoding implemented
in the Galaxies Time Slicer

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

A solution to the change blindness problem for the
SPIRE ThemeView Time Slicer should meet two criteria:
• The user should be able to see where the new
landscape contours will be while the old contours
are still visible. This is needed to make the capability more useful for analysis.
• At any point during the change, the user should be
able to determine which landscape contours are
emerging and which are vanishing, so that a
screen capture or printout of the display can be
correctly interpreted.
We investigated several techniques for drawing attention to changes from one time slice to another:
• Morphing
• Cross-fading
• Using a wireframe in combination with changes in
color and translucency.
Morphing is a technique that creates intermediate steps
between two images by taking some data from each image to create each intermediate step. Changing the ratio of
data from each image allows creation of a sequence of
images that gradually becomes less like the first image
and more like the second. When animated, the sequence
has the appearance of motion. For example, if a particular
ThemeView location is low in one slice and high in the
next, the intermediate steps will show that location as appearing to smoothly grow. This apparent motion makes
the areas of change noticeable, but at any given time it is
not possible to tell what came before or what will eventually appear, nor can the viewer determine which charac-

teristics came from which image. Furthermore, morphing
does not help the user remember the changes.
Cross-fading also depends on using both the first and
second Time Slice images. While the first image is
present, a very pale, translucent version of the second is
added in. The first image grows progressively dimmer
and more translucent while the second becomes progressively brighter and more opaque, with the process ending
when the first image has completely vanished and the
second has reached full brilliance and opacity. This technique allows the user to see the two states at once, but the
user must remember where in the process the system is at
any given moment. That is, if we capture the image on the
screen at any point in time, it is not apparent which parts
of the image will get brighter and which will fade away
— the user cannot tell which direction the process will go.
The solution that we recommend, shown in Figure 9,
involves several simultaneous patterns of subtle change in
the visual display that we believe address all of the suspected causes of change blindness. We use a white wireframe for the emerging contours. The wireframe appears
as soon as the transition from one image begins. At the
same time, we begin reducing the opacity and color
saturation of the vanishing contours. The emerging contours, shown by the wireframe, begin to fill with translucent color that gradually becomes brighter and less
translucent. At the same time, the vanishing contours
become progressively dimmer and more translucent.
When the emerging image reaches opacity, the wireframe
vanishes and the old image has completely faded away.
Use of this combination of techniques

•
•

Draws attention to the areas of change
Shows elements of both the old (vanishing) and new
(emerging) image at all times, so there is no reliance
on the user’s memory for access to this information
• Uses different graphical methods for the old and the
new, so that it is possible to distinguish between them
at any point in time; the visual difference also facilitates comparison and thus detection/recognition of
what has changed
Of the single-window solutions we investigated, this is
the only one that meets all of our criteria for design success. Though we have not yet had the opportunity to
conduct a usability evaluation for the design, we have
received positive feedback from people to whom we have
demonstrated the initial animated mock-up. We have
therefore implemented this solution in a standalone prototype that works with data from a SPIRE data set.
ThemeScan, shown in Figure 10, is a completely different approach to the change blindness problem, using
three distinct windows: one for the old set, one for the
new, and one that “scans” the difference between the two.
The user sets anchoring endpoints for the scan line in the
first ThemeView window, which shows the older data,
and a scan line connects the two endpoints. A scan line
also appears in the second window, depicting the ThemeView with the later data, at the corresponding location.
The third window, the ThemeScan, shows a graph with
lines representing the cross-section of both ThemeViews
at the scan-line. As the user drags the scan line across the
ThemeView, the cross-sections represented in the ThemeScan window change to reflect the new position.

Figure 9. Moving from one time slice to another with a wireframe and variable translucency.

Figure 10. ThemeScan visualization of changes between time slices

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

With this approach, there is no reliance on the user’s
memory of either the old or new ThemeView, because
both are present in separate windows. There is no perceptual or memory burden for comparing the two,
because differences in the contours can be examined in
the separate profile lines of ThemeScan window.

5. Related Work
Rather than attempt to summarize all the work in the
area of temporal displays, we concentrate here on the
particular problems addressed by this work. The problem
illustrated by the Galaxy design is a dot plot where the dot
locations are determined by other variables and may not
be used to convey time. One method for showing time in
a fixed-position dot plot is to show only a single time
frame, which varies either under user control or under
some preset time elapse. Dynamic queries [1] are based
on this approach. With dynamic query filters, as the user
moves slider controls, the document icons are immediately shown or hidden, to match the date range selected.
For dot plot displays, assigning particular object
attributes, such as date, to graphical attributes, such as
color, size, or shape is another common technique. In
[18], Nowell surveys recommendations on encoding
choices and describes the Envision system, which lets a
user interactively assign document metadata to various
possible encodings. She also reports results of an
experiment comparing particular individual and combination encodings that she tested using that system.
Littlefield & Nicholson [14] developed a technique using encoding and animation to show multiple slices of
data at a time, using color in a looping video display. Current dot positions are shown in white, future positions red,
and past positions yellow. The slices are shown in
sequence, looping through 11 data slices, with the encodings mapped accordingly at each step. They conclude that
the combination works better than showing only the
current slice values at each step, because the latter
requires more memory load on the users.
The problem illustrated by the ThemeView example is
to show time changes between two (or a series of) complex surfaces. One possible approach is to show all images in the series at the same time, as in Figure 5 and as
described in [32].
Animation for change has been incorporated into many
systems (see for example [3]). MacEachren [15] provides
an excellent discussion of animation for cartographic and
geographic displays, including potential user controls of
the animation display.

nificant problem for information visualization systems
whenever user tasks require recognition of differences
between two or more images, scenes, or video frames.
Continuing research on change blindness is significant
for developers of information visualization systems because it is leading to new theories about how vision
works, how we build and maintain internal models of the
world, and what information these models contain [17, 26
22]. In particular, the completeness of our internalized
information is called into question. Furthermore, the importance of focused attention as a factor in perception is
strongly supported by a number of studies [26, 23, 24,
etc.]. One theory suggests that change that occurs late in
the exploration of a scene is less likely to be detected
[20]. One recent study suggests that domain-specific
knowledge increases sensitivity to change [33]. Observer
interest also seems to be a factor in determining which
information about a scene is internalized [20]. These and
other emerging theories about change blindness and
perception represent opportunities to improve the effecttiveness of information visualization systems.
Acknowledgements. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Information Visualization team at Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory, especially Jim Thomas.
Our special thanks also go to our client, Dr. Russ Rose
and our sponsors from the U.S. Government. We also
thank the anonymous reviewers whose guidance helped
us improve this paper.
References
1.

2.

3.

4.

6. Conclusions and Future Work
We have described several methods for addressing the
problem of change blindness in SPIRE’s Galaxies and
ThemeView Time Slicers. Change blindness is a sig-

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

5.

Ahlberg, C. Shneiderman, B. Visual Information
Seeking: Tight Coupling of Dynamic Query Filters
with Starfield Displays. Proc. CHI ’94. ACM Press,
313-317.
Andrews, K. (1999) Visualising Cyberspace:
Information Visualization in the Harmony Internet
Browser. In Card, S., Mackinlay, J.., and Shneiderman, B. (eds), Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, San Francisco:
Morgan Kaufmann, 493-502.
Bragatto, P., Mazzino, N., & Palamidese, P. (1991)
Animated Visualization of Scalar Fields. Proc. of
Second Eurographics Workshop on Animation and
Simulation, Vienna, 115 – 127.
Brewer, W. & Samarapungavan, A. (1991) Children’s theories vs. scientific theories: Differences in
Reasoning or Differences in Knowledge? In R. R.
Hoffman and D.S. Palermo (eds), Cognition and
the Symbolic Processes: Applied and Ecological
Perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc., 209-232
Brodbeck, D., Chalmers, M., Lunzer, A., Cotture,
P. (1997) Domesticating Bead: Adapting an Information Visualization System to a Financial Institution. In Proceedings of IEEE InfoVis ‘97, IEEE.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

Brooks, R. (1991) Intelligence Without Representation. Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139-159.
Carpenter, S. (2001) Sights Unseen. In Monitor on
Psychology, 32(4), April 2001. Available at
http://www.apa.org/monitor/apr01/blindness.html
Crow, V., Pennock, K., Pottier, M., Schur, A.,
Thomas, J., Wise, J., Lantrip, D., Fiegel, T.,
Struble, C., York, J. (1994) Multidimensional
Visualization & Browsing for Intelligence Analysis, Gviz ’94: Graphics & Visualization
Conference, Richland, WA,
Dennett, D. (1991) Consciousness Explained.
Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
DiGirolamo, G. & Hintzman, D. (1997) First
Impressions Are Lasting Impressions: A Primacy
Effect in Memory for Repetitions. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 4(1), 121-124.
French, R. (1953) The Discrimination of Dot Patterns as a Function of the Number and Average
Separation of Dots. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 46, 1-9.
Hendley. R., Drew, N., Wood, A., and Beale, R.
(1999) Narcissus: Visualizing Information. In Card,
S. K.; Mackinlay, J.D., and Shneiderman, B. (eds),
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann,
503-511.
Leuski, A. and Allan, J. (2000) Lighthouse:
Showing the Way to Relevant Information. In Roth,
S.R. and Keim, D. A. (eds), Proceedings of
Information Visualization 2000, October 9-11, Salt
Lake City, UT, 125-129.
Littlefield, R. & Nicholson, W. (1982) Use of Color
and Motion for the Display of Multi-Dimensional
Data, Multivariate Analysis Workshop, 1982 DOE
Statistical Symposium, Idaho Falls, Idaho, October
13-14.
MacEachren, A. (1995) How Maps Work. The
Guilford Press, New York. 422-433.
Most, S.,Simons, D., Scholl, B., & Chabris, C.
(2000) Sustained Inattentional Blindness: the Role
of Location in the Detection of Unexpected Dynamic Events. In PSYCHE, 6(14), December, 6-14.
Noe, A., Pessoa, L., & Thompson, E. Beyond the
Grand Illusion: What Change Blindness Really
Teaches Us About Vision. In [29], 93-106.
Nowell, L. (1997). Graphical Encoding for
Information Visualization: Using Icon Color,
Shape, and Size to Encode Nominal and
Quantitative Data. Doctoral dissertation for the
Virginia Tech Department of Computer Science,
Blacksburg,
VA.
Available
at
http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd111897-163723/

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

19. O’Regan, J. (2001) Change Blindness. In Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Available at
http://nivea.psycho.univ-paris5.fr/ECS/ECSCB/html
20. O’Regan, J., Deubel, H, Clark, J., Rensick, R.
(2000) Picture Changes During Blinks: Looking
Without Seeing and Seeing Without Looking. In
[29], 191-212.
21. Olsen, K., Korfhage, R.,,Sochats, K., Spring, M., &
Williams, J. (1993) Visualizing of a Document
Collection: The VIBE System. In Information
Processing and Management 29, 1 (1993), 69-81.
22. Pani, J. (2000) Cognitive Description and Change
Blindness. Hmmm. In [29], 107-126.
23. Rensick, R. (2000a) The Dynamic Representation
of Scenes. In [29], 17-42.
24. Rensick, R. (2000b) Visual Search for Change: A
Probe into the Nature of Attentional Processing. In
[29], 345-376.
25. Rensick, R., O’Regan, J., Clark, J. (2000c) On the
Failure to Detect Changes in Scenes Across Brief
Interruptions. In [29], 127-145.
26. Shapiro, K. (2000) Change Blindness: Theory or
Paradigm? In [29], 83-91.
27. Simons, D. & Chabris, C. (1999) Gorillas in Our
Midst: Sustained Inattentional Blindness for
Dynamic Events. In Perception, 28(9), 1059-1074.
28. Simons, D. (2000) Current Approaches to Change
Blindness. In [29], 1-15.
29. Simons, D. (ed) (2000) Visual Cognition: Special
Issue — Change Blindness and Visual Memory, 7
(1/2/3) January-March.
30. Simons, D., Chabris, C., & Levin, D. (1999)
Change Blindness Is Not Caused by Later Events
Overwriting Earlier Ones in Visual Short-Term
Memory. Manuscript in preparation.
31. Triesman, A. (1980) Preattentive Processing in
Vision. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image
Processing 31: 156-177.
32. Tufte, E. (1983) The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, Graphics Press: Cheshire, CT. p. 42.
33. Werner, S. & Theis, B. (2000) Is “Change Blindness” Attenuated by Domain-specific Expertise?
An Expert-Novices Comparison of Change
Detection in Football Images. In [29], 163-174.
34. Wise, J., Thomas, J., et al. (1995) Visualizing the
Non-Visual: Spatial Analysis and Interaction with
Information from Text Documents, in Proceedings
of IEEE ’95 Information Visualization.
35. Wolfe, J., Friedman-Hill, S., Stewart, M.,
O’Connell, K. (1992) The Role of Categorization in
Visual Search for Orientation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18(1), 34-49.

