A Browsing System for a Database Using
Visualization of User Preferences
Hideaki Kanai and Katsuya Hakozaki
Graduate School of Information Systems
University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585, JAPAN
e-mail:hideaki@computer.org and hako@is.uec.ac.jp

Abstract

however, it is not lirnitecl to the book. It represents
the content, a similarity degree toward user preferences and a history of user strolling action. Moreover,
the configuration is adaptable to change in the preferences. There are some property views according to
these features in information space. In this environment, the users stroll through the space with changing
the views, and become aware that there are information sets which they seem to be interested in.
As follows, we survey related works and discuss the
problems in Section 2. Wc explain about our approach
and the design features in Section 3. Wc explain about
a prototype system in Section 4, cvaluate thc system in
Section 5 , and then discuss its future works in Section
6 . Finally, we have some concluding remarks.

T h i s paper describes a browsing system for n
database using visualization of user preferences. T h e
s y s t e m has the following features: (1) T h e use of 3 0
thumbnail objects t o represe,nt their contents and properties, (2) T h e use of some property views and multidimensional scaling (MDS) t o lay out the objects in
information space, and (3) T h e use of update mechan i s m t o perform the adaptive visualization to changes
in user preferences. In this environment, the user becomes aware that there are information sets which the
u s e r seems t o be interested in, f r o m objects in informat i o n space, and stroll there.

1 Introduction

2

As a search method in the current digital libraries,
keyword searching, namely retrieval by bibliographies
and keywords has been used. l n keyword searching,
appropriate keywords make it possible to retrieve target information. When people who do not know appropriate keywords of target books wish t o look for
the books, we have to stroll in real libraries after all.
Recently, strolling techniques of information space are
applied to database retrieval, and are highlighted. The
techniques are called “Browsing.”
In order to browse in information space efficiently,
it is necessary t o provide users with the space that reflected user preferences, and understandable information objects that visualized the preferences. This paper
presents a browsing system that allows users to stroll
through information space (e.g. cinema database, novel database, ...) using visualization of user preferences.
The information sets in database are represented as 3D
thumbnail objects. The object is called “Document”;

Most of the popular WWW search engines represent the documents that match the iiser’s queries as
pages of scrolled lists. It is difficult for users to judge
whether the lists are interesting for them at a glance,
because of lack of displaying the relation between user’s
interests and pages, and the similarity between pages.
There are some visualization systems that represent
these relationships as nodes and links. For examples,
DocSpace[l] is a visual information system for documents. The system displays documents and keywords
as nodes, and relations between documents and keywords as links. WebPath[2] is a 3D navigation system
for Web pages. The system represents each page as a
cube labelled with page’s title, and connects each cube
with Web’s hyper-links. These systems are suitable
for grasping the relations and the relevant documents.
However, it is difficult to understand the contents at a
glance.
There are some systems that allow users to recog-

~

277
0-7695-0743-3/00$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

Related Works

Figure 1. Display image of a prototype system.

ure 1 shows a user interface of the system, which consists of library space, personal bookshelf, a Web page
of cinema data, and a control panel. The library space is information space of our system. The personal
bookshelf has same function as bookmark of usual Web
browsers. The user strolls through library space while
changing property views (i.e., similarity view in this
figure). When the user finds an interesting cinema object, the user clicks it and can access the corresponding
Web pages. Moreover, when the user takes an interest
in it, the user can register it t o the bookshelf.
As follows, we focus the visualization techniques in
the system. The features include:

nize contents of documents. The systems visualize documents as thumbnails icons and arrange them in information space. For examples, Workscape[3] is a cleanslate design for an office document management system under the user’s control. WebBook[4] is a 3D Web
browser that allows multiple pages t o be viewed simultaneously and organizes the pages into books. Several
books can be kept in a 3D desktop, Web Forager. Dat a Mountain[S] is a 3D bookmark manager using spatial memory based on 3D spatial cognition capabilities,
which allows the users to place Web pages at arbitrary
positions on an inclined plane in a 3D desktop virtual
environment. These systems enable the users to look
up, manipulation documents. However, in particular
the relation between documents, user preferences and
strolling action history are not clearly highlighted.

3

Our Approach

We propose a browsing system that allows users t o
understand whether documents in information space
are interesting from information objects which visualize user preferences. The objects represent contents of
documents and these features as 3D thumbnail objects.
There are some property views according to these features in the space. The configuration of objects varies
according to these views. We developed the prototype
system for a cinema database, which was limited according to the field of user’s interests beforehand. Fig-

0

The use of 3D thumbnail objects to represent the
contents, the similarity between user preferences
and document features, user strolling action history. The object is called “3D book object.”

0

The use of some property views and multidimensional scaling (MDS)[6] to lay out the objects in
information space. The space is called “Library
space.”

0

The use of update mechanism to perform the adaptive visualization to changes in user preferences.

3.1

3D Book Object

3D book objects represent documents as 3D thumbnail objects in library space, In the surface of an 3D

278

Object-€3’high similarity

(d) Armrigemen; in
!$‘
-VI

*

alphaheticdl &er

(b) Arrangenient by MDS

’-\*

2

\

*’b

* r2r

Figure 3. An example of library space.

Object-A low similarity

The average view is based on an average degree of each
property of the whole uscrs. Here the similarity is defined as a distance between both features. L1 distance
(i.e.) Manhattan distance) is used. Other properties
are incntioned later.
3D book objects in libraiy space are laid out by
tlie similarity above. The similarity is calculated nsing MDS[6], specially “Quantification Theory Type I11” based on the relevance matrix between all objccts
and a set of weights in D C H ineritioiied later. This
method reprcscnts the similarities of objects spatially
as in a map. Namely, it represents objects judged siniilar to one another as points close to each other in a
map. For example, Figure 3 shows the library space
of a cinema database. Figure 3 (a) and (b) show that
eacli object is arranged in alphabetical order and by
tlie similarity of objects using MDS respectively.

Figure 2. 3D book object reflected similarity

hook object, image cover of a docuiiieiit is texturemapped as thumbnail. When users take a walk through
library space, they recognize the content easily. The
size arid transparency of a 3D book object are usecl
for each property view of library space. Tlie object which has larger size, it iiieans that the object lias
inore corresponding property. The object which lias smaller transparency, it means that the object has inore
corresponding property. By comparing these objects, it
is casy for users to understand the difference of p r o p
orties they show. Moreover, the difference of transparency makes it easy for users to recognize a remote
object from a current viewpoint without being blocked
hy the other low-property objects. For example, the
siiriilarity space mentioiled later is shown in Figure 2.
In this figure, Object-A and Object-B are almost equal
in size visually; however, it is understandahlc that the
similarity of Object-B is higher than that of Object-A
according to the transparency degree.
In order to express plural property views with a 3D
book object, each side of an object is corresponding to
each property, and thc transparency is corresponding
to only property view a user selects. It is easy to recognise the balance of two corresponding properties by
observing the object from a view of each axis.

3.2

3.3

Update of library space

Update of library space is done in two cases. Tlic
first case is that a new document is registered into library space. In this case, the object is laid out near
similar objects. And then, user’s viewpoint is set in
it. Here, L1 distance is used for the similarity. The
last case is that user preferences are updated. The size
and transparency of objects are re-calculated. As for
the update process of user preferelices at this work, we
consider tliat changes in user preferences appear in user strolling action history. Namely, when a user reads
some documents frequently arid is very interested in
them, his/her preferences can be considered to become
nearly equal to features of the documents. The converse case would also be thought. Therefore, the features of user strolling action history are mapped to tlie
whole document’s features, and then the preferences
are updated according to the mapped features. This
process is sliown in Figure 4. As follows, we describe
thc definitions of document features, user preferences
and features of strolling action history.
Document features are represented by the vector space model, which is one of the most common way

Configuration of Library Space

Library space is space where users stroll through
with changing property views based on user preferences
and strolling action history. The property views are
“similarity view,” “history view,” “interest view” and
“average view.” The similarity view is based on a degrce of similarity between each document’s featurc and
user preferences. The history view is based oii a degree
of each user strolling action history. The interest view
is based on an interest degree which each user inputs.

279

DCH

I

Figure 5 shows an example of library space from
similarity view before and after changing in a subject’s
preferences. Note, the layout in this figure is arrangement of lattice. The clear objects (e.g., Object-B and
C) in Figure 5 (b) show that the similarity became
higher. On the other hand, the unclear objects (e.g.,
Object-A) in in Figure 5 (b) show that the similarit y became lower. Although some objects in Area-A
have never been accessed by him, the similarity became higher in Figure 5 (b). Therefore the subject can
understand whether unknown documents the subject
does not access yet are suitable for the subject. This
function is useful as one of recommendation facilities.

RCH

Figure 4. Updating process of user preferences.

4

Prototype System

We apply our prototype system for browsing the
cinema database (http://us.imdb.com/). The information about cinema such as director and casts, and the
ranking information which the Web page users vote
are stored in the Web site. The system architecture is
server-clients system. The server is used for library space generation, user’s personal database management
and etc. The server is implemented by Java (JDK 1.2)
and VRML 2.0, CGI Scripts written in Perl. The client
is a user interface of our system, which is implemented by Netscape Communicator 4.7 on Windows 98 P C
with Cosmo Player 2.1:plug-in software for VRML 2.0.

of modeling. Namely the features are expressed as a
vector of numerical weights t o each keyword of a document. The range of a weight is from -1 to 1. The
larger the value becomes, the more the fitness for the
corresponding keyword becomes. The document features for all documents in library space are expressed
by a matrix D C H , which is called “Document character matrix.” The element of D C H in the i-th row
and the j - t h column means a weight wij of a keyword
Kj in a document Di.
User preferences mean a user’s tendency toward document sets, and are also expressed by the vector space
model. The vector is called “Reading character vector:
R C H . ” The keyword sets in R C H are same as the
sets used in D C H , and the initial weight is registered
by each user.
User strolling action history means a property of user’s actions in library space. The property consists of
two types: “user reading history” and “user interest” in
this work. The user reading history is defined as a total of the number of reference of a document in each
reference type (e.g., reference in library space, registration into personal bookshelf, and reference in the
bookshelf). For a document Di, the user reading history hi is expressed by ( C i y p e = ,W t y p e . n t y p e , i ) . W t y p e
and ntype,i
represent a weight and a total of the number
of reference in each type. For all documents in library
space, the property is expressed by a vector of hi: H .
The user interest means an interest degree of each
document which a user referred to. For a document
D j , the user interest ij is expressed by i ( C ; = , r k ) .
It means that an average of the degree which a user
inputs whenever the user refers t o it. rk is an interest
degree which a user inputs in k times, and its range is
from -1 t o 1. For all documents in library space, the
user interest is expressed as a vector of ij: I .

5

System Experiment

We examined whether or not this system would actually browse in information space effectively. This study examined which a t cases of strolling in library
space or Not-library space, users access a lot of documents that they seem t o be interested in.
Subjects and Materials: Nine subjects are members of our laboratory. 100 titles which randomly selected from the previous cinema database were used
in this study. 20 keywords based on the category
of the database: “Comedy,” “Romance,” “Action,”.. .
were used. The weight sets of D C H were the average of weight sets assigned by our laboratory member.
The initial weight set of R C H for each subject was
assigned by himself. In this study, the value of each
coefficient used for calculating each property is decided
temporarily by try-and-error method. The verification
is left for a future work. Here, W, = 0.1, Wb = 0.3 and
W, = 0.6 were used in hi. X = 1.0, Q = 0.3 and ,B = 0.7
were used in the updating process. We emphasize on
the user interest rather than the user reading history,
because it is requires to input an interest degree manually in our system.

280

(b) Similarity view after changing

(a) Similarity view before changing

Figure 5. An example of library space from similarity view before/after changing in user preferences.

Table 2. Results of the number of kinds of documents that each subject did not refer to in
both library space and Not-library space, and
the average of interest degree.

Table 1. Results of the number of kinds of documents that each subject referred to in library
space and Not-library space, the average of interest degree and the time it took the subject
t o complete the experiment in each space.

Library space
Subject
A

B
C
D
E
F
G

Library space
5
Kind
26
0.35
21
0.72
, 4
0.75
23
0.58
6
0.53
27
0.59
32
0.73
17
0.77

t
18
13
9
11
3

34
31
26

Not. brary Space
Kind
21
26
0.42
10
0.80
40
0.53
7
0.14
24
70
16

H
I
Total
Avg.of i
- Avg.of t
i: average of interest degree, t: time that
to complete the experiments (minutes).

- I

; took

-

Not-librarv mace

0.53
F
G
H
I
Total

19
55
11

3
88

-0.18
0.42
-0.06
0.64

0.30

- 0.519
Average
i: average of interest degree.

0.262

subjects

Procedure: The subject strolled through the library space and explored documents that the subject
seems t o be interested in. When the subject found the
documents, the subject manually inputted the interest
degree by the slider bar on the system. The procedure
repeated itself till the subject judges to finish looking
for interesting documents. This test was also applied
t o other space without property views. The space is
called “Not-library space.” In the space, there are 3D
book objects of the same size and same transparency.
Results: Table 1 shows the number of kinds of documents that each subject referred to, the average of interest degree and the time it took the subject t o complete the experiments. In most subjects, the number of
kinds of documents accessed in the library space is less

than that in Not-library space. The average of interest
degree in the library space is higher than that in Notlibrary space. The average time in the experiment of
the library space is shorter than that in the experiment
of Not-library space.
Table 2 shows the number of kinds of documents
that each subject did not refer to in both library space and Not-library space, and the average of interest
degree. The average of interest degree that most subjects inputted in the library space is higher than that
in Not-library space.
Discussion: It was found from the result of Table
1 that the strolling of the library space enabled the
subjects t o find more number of interesting documents
faster than that of Not-library space.
According t o the subject’s comments, we assume
that the documents which they referred t o in both li-

28 1

brary space and Not-library space are interesting for
them and others are not so interesting for them. Hence,
it was found from the result of Table 2 that the strolling
in the library space prevented them from referring to
documents which they do not have much interest in.
Therefore, it is clear from this study that our system
can perform the effective strolling as follows:
e

The system facilitates users to find more number
of interesting documents faster.

a

The system prevents users from accessing to documents that they do not have much interest in.

browsing objects there. From the user study, the usefulness such as the following things about our method
become clear: (1) The system facilitates users to find
more number of interesting documents faster. (2) The
system prevents users from accessing documents that
they do not have much interest.

References
[l]J. Tatemura, “Visualizing Documents Space
by Force-directed Dynamic Layout ,” Proc. of

IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages (VL ’97),
pp.119-120, IEEE Computer Society, 1997.

6

Discussion and Future Work

121
. . E. Frcon, G. Smith, “WebPath - A ThreeDimensional Web History,” Proc. of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (Info Vas ’98),
pp.3-10, IEEE Computer Society, 1998.

According to the user study described in the previous section, the effectiveness of our techniques is confirmed. currently, there are some problems as follows.
Visualization: For larger-scale library space, focus-tcontext techniques (e.g., fish-eye views concept)
might be used. We will apply one of fish-eye views[7]
to clusters based on similarity between objects in library space. In addition, there should be information
filtering function for more efficient information exploration. We will use Magic Lens filter[8] that is a visual
interface utilized a lens metaphor for a dynamic query
system, and let each lens acts as each property view of
library space.
User model: The user model in this paper is simple so that the user preferences are defined as one vector on keyword space, and user strolling action history
is defined as the number of access of a document and
an interest degree. The vector must be prepared every
field of target database. We will use a technique to handle various interests of a user in a gross (e.g., a machine
learning technique based on agents[9]). Moreover, we
will use the time factor to represent the strolling feature, because particularly, in case of multimedia data
(e.g., video), display time is important.
System evaluation: We did the user study described in the previous section. More rigorous user
studies should be done. For examples, it is to evaluate the scalability of system using larger-scale library
space, and to ascertain our method with changing the
value of each coefficient.

7

[3] M. J.Ballay, “Designing Workscape: An Interdisciplinary Experience,” Proc. of Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’94), pp.10-15, ACM
Press, 1994.

[4]S. Card, G. Robertson and W. York, “The WebBook and the Web Forager: An INformation
Workspace for the World-Wide Web,” Proc. of
Human factors in computing systems ’96 (CHI
’96),pp.111-117, ACM Press, 1996.
[5] G. Robertson, M. Czerwinski and et al, “Data
Mountain: Using Spatial Memory for Document
Management,” Proc.of ACM symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’98),
pp.153-162, ACM Press, 1998.
[6] S. Schiffman, M. Reynolds and F. Young, “Introduction to Multidimensional Scaling:Theory,
Methods, and Applications,’’ Academic Press,
1981.
[7] D. Schaffer, Z. Zuo, and et al, “Navigating hierarchically clustered networks through fisheye and
full-zoom methods, ” ACM Trans. on ComputerHuman Interaction, Vol 3, No. 2, pp.162-188
(1996)
[8] K. Fishkin and M.C. Stone, “Enhanced dynamic
queries via movable filters,” Proc. of Human factors in computing systems (CHI ’95),pp.415-420,
ACM Press, 1995.

Conclusions

In this paper, we introduce an idea of browsing
method that allows users to browse in information space with visualization of user preferences. In this environment, the users become aware that there are information sets which they seem t o be interested in, from

[9] A. Moukas and G. Zacharia, “Evolving a
multi-agent information filtering solution in Amalthaea,” Proc. of first international conference
on Autonomous agents (Agents ’97),pp.394-403,
ACM press, 1997.

282

