Japanese Cultural and Digital Art Resources on the Internet

Yukihiro Itoigawa
Nihon Unisys Ltd.
1-1-1 Toyosu, Koto-Ku, Tokyo, 135-8560 Japan
E-mail:itoigawa@dp.u-net surf. ne.jp

Japan. We should decide whether this phenomenon is a social

Abstract

problem or not. Despite trends we have personal computers and
I had been engaged to develop information resources for

chance to use Intemet, we must study hard about how to use

network business and about five years ago the Internet spread

personal computers and have convenience emotion on

globally. My research on human communication via the Internet

netsurfing or information retrieval. My research presents that

had discovered several domestic problems in Japan. If we want

only 8 % of people have their home page and provided Japanese

to promote Internet business and culture communication by

culture oriented content, such as digital art drawing,

WWW, we should consider bumped experiences though, looking

announcement of chorus, information of rice culture and rice

forward for such experiences were not accidental. We should be

sales, collection of strange name and multi media content like

able to estimate our experience towards a specijk destiny. This

3D art. This is an indication of under use of personal computers

paper

for communication in Japanese society.

tries to address some of the experiences on

communication via the Internet within Japanese culture. Using

Let us trace the background of home page producers.

case studies, this research paper points out very important

Considering university as information resources provider

guideline for digital drawing. The author examines various

empirical study was carried out at Japanese universities. From

computer-generated

cross-cultural

1995 I went to about 35 universities and academic places in

interactions. The data used in this research was compiled data

Japan for scientific research presentation on cyberspace. The

@om surveys of approximately 1,000 subjects and considered

survey unexpectedly revealed that Japanese universities lost

about 7 digital products. We believe that the emerging field of

good communication with people. At 35 universities and

digital art would have much to gain from improved cross-

academic places domestic and international conferences were

cultural communicutions, eventually giving rise to art works

held and many researcher were concentrating on speaking about

comparable to those created by Van Gogh, Picasso, or

their own themes and experiences. In respect to the Internet use

Magritte.

and e-mail communication, about 30 % of universities have not

products

based

on

communicated fiequently after that conference and the Intemet

1.Trend in Japan

infopation resources couldn't be used as usual. This shows that
even at universities, academicians are not yet fully makmg use

The Internet in Japan shows trends of biporailization in

of the Internet technology.

t e m of buying and use of personal computers. It was reported

The other hand, Intemet crime has become a great threat and

that the percentage of buying personal computer is increasing in

shocking news and Intemet crime concemed medicine bargain

the rich communities as their income is more than 12 million

were held by researchers in famous and leading universities in

yen. The other who their income is less than 3 million yen has

Japan. Also hacking into home page of Japanese government
offices were scaled up and skdled Japanese hacker said that it

difticulty to buy easily. This difference is increasing now in
0-76954743-3/00 $10.00 0 2OOO IEEE

54 1

was easy to enter official home page by hacking. There has to

for excluding anxiety under cyber space. He said that

be a new strategy about Internet security. Hacking is an

"

important international problem, because it showed critical

chance, we mean something like a guess. Why do we make

relation between Japan and another country after second war.

guesses? We make guesses when we wish to make a judgment

Japanese worked at research laboratory pointed out Japanese

but have incomplete information or uncertain knowledge. We

must think and begin to make good relation between other

want to make a guess as to what things are, or what things are

"

Chance

is a word which is in common use in everyday living. By

countries sometime has bad emotion to Japan. Information will

likely to happen. Often we wish to make a guess because we

be provided well on Internet to c l w some of the issues on

have to make a decision. For example: Shall I take my raincoat

Japan and foreign countries, so that Japan may improve its

with me tomorrow? For what earth movement should I design a

international relations.

new building? Shall I build myself a fallout shelter? Shall I
change my stand in international negotiation? Shall I go to class

2.Strong Power of Image on the Internet

today?
Sometimes we make guesses because we wish, with our

We could communicate each other on the Internet and could

limited knowledge, to say as much as we can about some

discover suggestion about complicated matter, sometimes

situation. Really, any generalization is in the nature of a guess.

mysterious with doubt in judgement as human ability

Any physical theory is a kind of guesswork. There are good

So digital art has power to promote new

guesses and there are bad guesses. There are good guesses and

communication and we could understand easily about the fact.

there are bad guesses. The theory of probability is a system for

Brilliant team wrote excellent scenario like Wiley product.

making better guesses. The language of probability allows us to

assessment.

speak quantitatively about some situation which may be highly
variable, but which does have some consistent average
behavior.
The encounter could promote as the ultimate digital inside
story . . . [It] throws more light on the psychology of women, and
the profound changes brought about by the women's movement,
than a dozen tomes filled with psychological jargon. Kathanne
Graham said that she well remembered the columnist Walter

Lippmann once telling her how hard it was , even for him who
wrote all the time, to get back into writing after only a few
weeks. We could recognize information is very important and
image has strong impression.

3.New Network Generation

Figurel. By Washington Post writers group:
See HONOR on the web www.Wileytoons.com

Researchers in universities had recognized .the Internet had
The author had considered about probability for accident

more positive possibility and probability to provide social effect

encounter to develop social psychology. James Clerk Maxwell

in Japan. They could show merit of Internet use. In spite of rare

said " The true logic of this world in the calculus of probability

communication with universities, there is new route by Internet.

". We could have chance to encounter new content on home

The case study of researchers provides the fact that bumped

page. Richard P.Feynman had provided good idea to make clear

people made their home pages and we could know sometimes
542

iI
i

j

I
I

'

i
I

amusing and useful mformation in addition to educational

pointed out a critical about Internet control across Internet

information. A researcher sometimes goes to secondary school

streams. He argued that the Internet has over the years been

and high school to teach students. He or she could provide text

growing in a wild m e r , just like a wild fire burning in some

for students on Internet and hdshe could observe students'

forests in the southern part of Sudan during dry season imagine

behavior as a new net generation. The Net generation is defined

who could manage to control such fire when everythmg is dry.

as people who were born after 1977. Two researches make their

Not even those who set the fire seem to know when it will cool

home page and two showed characteristic merit. One likes

down. Even technology experts know how best to control in

amusing game made for everyone's consumption. He dscovered

vain the growth of Internet and its related technology leave

the trend of student behavior on the Internet use, such as making

alone staying on the cutting edge of technology. It is obvious

small group consisted by five and they continued amusing

that for technology experts to remain competent, they got to stay

themselves on using the Internet every time. The other was

abreast of the technological developments now and then, least

interested in UFO and he had linked one UFO homepage on his

they find themselves left behind the Internet bandwagon.

homepage. The author also discovered that most of private

5.GOOd Impressive Emotion

homepage are made by favorite culture oriented people, such as
favorite in novel, game, UFO and collection of unusual name, of
course English is very important global communicationbut rate
of English homepage are very few in private homepage.
Researcher of industrial engineering said it is only below 10 %.

So we should discuss how to communicate with foreign
countries on Internet.

4.Bumped researches on WWW
Most researchers from abroad have their own homepage and
are constantly communicating to each other have effective
influence on research world. But most businessmen could not
have homepage. They only show company's homepage address
on their name cards. Despite exchangmg card we couldn't
confirm their private homepage address. Reviewing Internet use
Figure 2. New Year Card from Cairo without comment

in Japan to consider localization, we can discover easily famous
domestic places, such as Ohoita prefecture and Yamada village

By E-mail we could collaborate with another culture.

in Toyama prefecture by television or newspaper. Good leaders

Someone pointed about probability. '' I absolutely agree with

and good relations with the citizen promoted new cultural

Feynman and you. Guess usually proceed necessity and that

movement in active local places. Research has revealed that

there are good ones and bad ones two. To say a guess is a

Morioka city in northern part of Japanese Honshu island is a

probability sounds simplicity of the theory of probability, which

very vivid place and another places belonging to Morioka have

is mainly based on high order abstraction of chances of

excellent activity to promote multi media culture.

happening justifiable or quantifiable. All of which mainly rests

Summarizing information resources in university and

on scientific calculations''.

cultural movement in developed countries on the Internet use,
we could review opinion of web developer Ben K. Daniel who

543

6.Psychological Access and Cross Culture

of those who currently communicate by e-mail in English are
professionals., The author initiated a survey concerning junk e-

As a psychologist, I discovered such kind of emotion,

mail from abroad.

The majority of the responses from

thorough my impression and several Japanese psychologists

Japanese systems engineers (both men and women) said

have been warning about the tendency of new Internet world,

expressed opinions such as: "They're difficult to understand," or

which seems to be a chaotic place with uncertainty, anxiety and

"I don't read them because they're in English." 'One person

misunderstanding. This psychological problem is researched on

requested a translation device. But considering true professional

across culture area. In England despite the availability of

communication we discover re-send function. I show the case of

physical access to computers, the question of psychological

professional in operating systems who had done perfect

access remains unresolved. We need international collaboration

debugging in U.S.A. After thirty years American professional

concerning worldwide communication under cyber space.

had memorized his activities and visited to his office in Japan

Interaction between researchers and communication with

for '' Hello" saying. Like this example professional has rare

English and images will promote rapid increasing and new

common experience each other. Also Picasso and Braque had

discoveries on Internet. Nowadays lifelong, we can enjoy

common word, "cubisme". I should be looking forward new

Internet as a space for travel. But in t h ~ sarea someone said that

drawing era. It will begin with real time communication by

if we can't understand how to use and what is purpose of the

professional each other in the area of creative thinking.

Internet use definitely, we will surely discover waste of time.

As communication via e-mail becomes popular, the

We must take care about education on Internet use. Basically

opportunity to communicate with strangers has increased.

from elementary school, we have the duty to teach politely

Does this mean that we are in the process of building a global

about cyber space communication. If we neglect such a duty,

network society'? Professionals play a significant role in the

there will exist people who can abuse the Intemet use and have

areas of communications and the arts.

tendency to ignore new cultures. Of course it is possible to have

meaningful relationships by the skilled harnessing of computers

good living standard without the Internet. But at the moment

for the sake of communications, even at the level of creating

there seems to be a slight chance to stay out of the Internet.

sophisticated art works.

They can establish

The author would love to hear your

views on the current state of telecommuting for the home, as
well as on art.

7.Static Japanese Social Systems
Today, it has become interesting to discuss about cyber
space

systems,

environment

and

Japanese

culture.

Communication on the Internet promotes new artistic
production. For instance, we could see great paintings at
museums, exhibition centers and at department stores.
Furthermore, there are paintings and digital library, such as
Figure 3. A FUNNY CREATIVE UNIT -NAUGHTY BOYS

Image Mall Japan. Despite all. there are several problems in

-Made by Luke + Sam + KENTA (Japanese Family)

Japan where there are many galleries. Common opinions in
galleries for digital art and commercial transactions of digital

But despite its potential for facilitating cross-cultural

museum are strongly negative because of its expendability.

communication, language remains a significant barrier. Most

Some buyers who sometimes go to New York to buy arts

544

complained that digital art was defilement for excellent arts. On

time. Also Internet was stimulated for students in universities.

the other side the painter draw sometimes with digital art and

Russian novels were understood critically by students. I think

sometimes with oil colors. Transaction systems were said to be

these problems as cultural problems that are worth paying

bad to promote new creative digital art. As a result a few

attentions, also in fact can also be seen as real economic

professional could product digital art, which are only fit for

problems. Considering these result we must continue to discuss

commercial transactions. I think these problems are worth

what part of cyber space systems is bringing benefits for us and

paying attentions as cultural problems, also in fact can also be

consider how to improve in future.

seen as real economic problems. The systems have themselves

&Interaction between Movies and Digital Art.

the ability to discriminate excellent products totally from other
products.

Kenichi Iwata is a professional film-maker, influenced in h s
imagery (Figure 5) from other movies he has admired. In an
interview concerning his work, he states that the motivation
behind the use of computers in Ius work comes from director
Wim Winders.

He goes on to say that Winders’ works “Der

Himmel Uber Berlin“ and ”Paris. Texas” stimulated his desire
for creation. From Iwata’s case we must study rare product case.
Iwata made only one image art, so called “NOWHEREMAN’.
It means pure art shows rare capability produced using personal
computer. Iwate has deep impression from movies. But he
shows creative product is very rare. In speed age how do you

think this fact? We must consider great painters in history to
Figure 4. Kazueko Takamori made original art ;

consider new help function.

Her art called electronic drawing

It is worth noting further that communication on the Intemet
is increasing and for that sense then, it is possible to make new
creative arts. Speclfic areas in Japan for example, such as

Morioka have cultural potentials to produce new digital art
movement. In spite of this fact a few people use the Intemet and
personal computer as information resources and tools for new
art. We should exploit further the opportunity of using the

Intemet for artistic work. Cultural impact sometimes had
occurred in exchanging New Year ‘s electronic cards. For
instance I received good New Year’s card from Egypt. It gave

Figure5 Image product by Kenichi Iwata

me an impressive motivation for new artistic creation by digital
collage and New Year’s card was presented to communicate

9.V.Gogh AND TODAY’S PROBLEMS

globally on the Intemet. At home child could make native
drawing and father made electric modification on it, so a funny

Two central preoccupations in Gogh’s work are the lives of

creative unit was presented on the Internet and we had amusing

common people - especially those depicted in traditional

545

Japanese wood-block prints, known as “Ukiyoe,” - with the

10.From Psychiatric Analysis to Art Therapy

obsession for expressing color for the sake of color. Believing
that the key to these two preoccupations could be found in

The researcher in industrial engineering mentioned he had

Japanese wood-block prints, he was influenced by the

being influenced by a psychologist in school, as a result of

techmques and color schemes of Japanese wood-block prints,

which he goes on to study psychology, as well as Intemet and

successfully incorporating quintessential elements of Japanese

game design, to which he applies basic psychological principles.

wood-block prints into his own work in a manner uniquely his

The researcher helps us make the distinction between a

own. The Japanese National Diet Library has a home page on

professional and an amateur. This researcher also attended

“Ukiyoe.“ The quality of color is available on-screen short of

discussions concerning the Intemet and devised psychological

those of the o r i p a l prints, as well as reproductions found in

games, while continuing to work in the field of industrial

books.

engineering, where computers are ubiquitous.

I suspect that it may be impossible, using current

It can be said

technology, to accurately reproduce color tones on CRT and

that he is learning about human beings by studying psychology.

LCD displays.

In games in which personal computers assume the role of

Also Shiko Munakata wanted to have reputation like YGogh
in northern part of Japan, so called Tohoku.. After hls death
many people began to study digital art and multimedia product.
Humiko Yamazaki is one of artists in the area of Tohoku.

opponent, the problem arises of the perception of personal
computers as superior agents.
In the course of her teaching, Kazueko Takamori stumbled
across the effectiveness of teaching digital art as a form of
mental therapy. By refining the process and by consciously
applying her ideas, she has established a successful mentalhealth clinic.

The techmque of art therapy is actively being

implemented in the field of mental health, and can be found in
regular classrooms. Fine arts colleges have also adopted art
therapy, incorporating computers into their programs.
Virtual Gardening was produced with the support of the
Ministry of International Trade and Industq’s Multimedia
Content Association of Japan (MMCA) outside agency. The 3D
computer graphics used in the tree growth simulation are based
on the research of Professor Norishige Chba of the Department
of Computer Science at the Faculty of Engineering at Iwate
Figure6 Humiko Yamazaki powered by regional culture

University (Tohoku area). Virtual Gardening is a revolutionary
new software title that allows us to design our own personal

Young Yamazaki had challenged any products and produced

virtual garden in stunning 3D graphics and then to simulate the

a lot of digital art. Considering her case. we could understand

growth of the trees in our garden with the passing of time. Not

power of regional culture that produced new creation. For

only this, but we can also watch the changes in seasons and

digital art there are negative opinion. Hirosh Kawanishi did co-

weather as you take a 3D virtual walking tour around the garden

work with Jasper Johns and at moment hearing my question

you designed. If we will do t h ~ splaying in our home, we could

about digital art he denied everything about it. He said to do

gain good mental health. Day by day and year by year we could

digital art is defilement for great art.

discover what is beauuful sight in nature and what is to be
obtained.
546

Acknowledgment
I wish to thank my colleagues for their comments on various

drafts of this paper. I also wish to thank Kazueko Takamori,
Kenichi Iwata, Humiko Yamazaki, Prof. Norishige Chiba, Ben
Daniel Kei and Dr. Hayder Ibraham Ali for their contributions
of splendid digital artwork for my project..
Figure7 Hobby without real nature on the Internet

References

We considered about probability and felt strong accident

[ 11 Ben Daniel, The Intemet, a Wild Weird World (WWW)

under space. We have much possibility to search new frontier

makmg the University Professor a Computer Geek or just

and languages to discuss. In Japan sometimes anti-power

Callmg for more Competence?(2000)Pedagogik Profil:

against Tokyo (big city) aroused in local area. Nowadays it was

University of Oslo

said Tohoku has power to promote multi media. The author had

[2] Richard P. Feynman, The Feynman

entered in mailing list. Tohoku multi media association had

LECTURES ON PHYSICS, Addison- Wesley

opened digital art festival and contest had been held. There were

Publishing Company, Fourth Printing 1969

excellent products presented every years. One teacher (Kiyotada
Satou)

[3] Katharine Graham, Personal fistory, VINTAGE Books, A

pointed out power of culture is aroused historical

DIVISION OF RANDAM HOUSE, INC., 1998

background from past to present. He considered about ancient

[4] Vincent van Gogh and Japan, 1992,Ashah National

Oni(Japanese fiend)that nowadays at festival in Tohoku people

Broadcasting Co. Ltd.

taught children don't to bad doing and to be polite.

[ 5 ] Y W r o Itoigawa, InformationAnalysis for Attractive

Home Page Contents:Considering Trace of Personal
Computer Communications,Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Meeting on Information Science and Technology,
INFORUM '97,JICST in Japan,1997,93-99(JICST-E File)

[6] Yukihiro Itoigawa, Psychologist'sDiscovering in CHI
area: Research Method for New Frontier, Professional
Behavior and DigitalArt,

[7] Yuluhiro Itoigawa, Creative communication on the Intemet and
Figure 8. Oni (Japanese fiend) considered as new creator

static Japanese social systems, WWW9 Culture Track, Session D:
On line CulturalApplication:The New Paradgm,

Historically Japanese hero Yoshitsune W o t o was died at near

lwww9srgl, HTML version

riverside of Kitakami Rwer. After his death several mystical were

[8] IGyotada Satou, Private home page consideringJapanese

heard. These mysteries were found in many local places. Also we could

Culture in Tohoku

find city mysteries in big city such as New York and Tokyo. In Japan
digital culture have learned about new information visualization.

[SI fiyotada Satou. Computer Graphics in SAT0 KIYOTADA

LABORATORY

547

http : / B O 2 211.8.173hndexe.html

