Creation of a Noh Mask Using a 3D Computer Graphics Technique
Akiko Tohma’t2, Katsunori Shimohara2,
Yoh’ichi Tohkura’,2,and Naokazu Yokoya’
’Nara Institute of Science and Technology
2NTT Communication Science Laboratories
akiko-t C3 is.aist-nara.ac.jp
Abstract

address these questions, the making of a Noh mask is
discussed in this paper as one case study.

To examine how computer technology can produce
delicate, audience-inspiring presentations like “Noh”, we
attempted to create a Noh mask (KO-omote) using a 3 0
computer graphics technique, by only referring to a cawed
wooden mask. It w a s p o s s i b l e t o detect several
characteristics of the mask’s structure in the creation
process. Rendering images showed the possibility that such
a specific structure is closely related to effects of subtle
facial expression changes. In order to bring more diverse
effect to audiences, we also attempted to create a computer
animation combining the mask model with story, movement,
and background images. This paper suggests the possibility
of acquiring profound experiences with the perception and
expression of “jnce”for both viewers and creators by using
a computer graplzics technique.

1.1. The viewpoint of this research
The focus of the above 3D computer graphics technique
has usually been on how to make the audience feel an
atmosphere of reality, and how the creator’s identity and
intention can be made to impress the audience strongly.
Making and expressing faces using computers can show
us familiar examples. One direction of technical challenge
is how t o imitate real h u m a n faces effectively and
automatically with as low a cost as possible. Another
strategy is, depending on the artist, to produce unique
characters often accompanied with enormously exaggerated
or simplified facial structures.
On the other hand, looking at society as a whole, it is
possible to find some existing presentation skills that have
continued to b e appreciated a n d transmitted a m o n g
communities o v e r centuries. N o h drama, a Japanese
traditional performing art, is one case. In Noh drama, the
employment of a mask (a Noh mask, also known as a fine
artistic sculpture) is given special importance. The intent
lies in the sophisticated dramatic technique of creating an
unlimited number of expressions in the mind of the viewer
by denying raw expressions with the use of a mask [2].
Indeed, it is widely known that audience members perceive
a variety of subtle changes of facial expression in a Noh
mask during a play regardless of its rigid facial structure.
Presentation techniques like the above example seem
to emphasize the importance of diverse interaction on the
level of the imagination rather than the explicit transmission
of information from a presenter to hidher audience. We
have been assuming that computer presentation
technologies can introduce such a methodology to bring us
more fruitful relationships between man and computer. To
examine this, w e attempted to create a Noh mask using a
3D computer graphics technique, posing two questions as
follows.

1. Introduction
Presentation technologies using computers continue to
progress along with the evolution of software and hardware.
To examine how such state-of-the-art technologies can
contribute in cultivating our powers of imagination and deep
sentiments, we are attempting to produce experimental
pieces using a computer technology and to evaluate them.
Previously, o n e of the authors created a computer
animation about the ongoing problem of the extinction of
wild animals [ 11. In this piece, focus was on the importance
of the theme itself, and the aim was to evoke the awareness
of a u d i e n c e m e m b e r s , t o r e a c h their e m o t i o n s a n d
imagination. A 2D computer graphics technique was used
for editing and reconstructing the related visual materials.
The focus of the next phase has been on objects that are
generated and represented by a 3D computer graphics
technique. What perceptions or impressions can audience
members obtain from this? What experiences can the
creator obtain through the creation process itself? To

0-7695-0743-3100
$10.00 0 2000 E E E

407

their own masterpieces based on examples or what are
considered to be the originals of certain types. As one
method to replicate a mask, the main curved shapes of the
mask are made from the original mask as templates. We
attempted to introduce this method to the process of CG
modeling. Our assumption is that this basic concept would
lead us to the most effective way of understanding,
reconstructing, and expressing the 3-dimensional shape of
the mask. For this reason, we did not use data obtained by
a 3D scanner.

I ) What factors of Noh masks cause such facial
expression effects?
Animation techniques that actually modify facial
structures are generally used to give facial expressions on
computer generated 3D faces. Accordingly, it is meaningful
to examine what characteristics and functions are related
to effects of a Noh mask with a rigid structure.
2) How can such factors be achieved through the
making of Noh masks on computers?
Some of a creator's specialized skills surely have to
have been transmitted and then re-created. If an action to
make some shape and the senses that are integrated to
pursue that process were the same for a person even when
using a coinputer as a tool, it would perhaps be possible
for the person to acquire some insight into mask's
structures through the experience of mask making.
One type of Noh mask called "Ko-omote" (means the
"small face", used for young female roles) represents the
esthetics of Noh well. In this paper, we explain the process
of rnaking a "Ko-omote", show some results and the
iipplication in computer animation, and mention what
future work needs to address.

Each curved shape was measured from the wooden Koomote while the work was still in progress (Figure I.). By
attaching and cutting pieces of paper, the vertical profile
shape at the center of the face, 10 main horizontal surface
curves, and the outline of the whole face were obtained.
Based on a photograph of the frontal view of the same
mask, the shapes of the eyebrows, eyes. and mouth were
traced and made into a guide drawing wid1 a facial outline
(Figure 2.).

2. The method of making a Noh mask

2.3. Modeling

2. I. Basic concept

In order to pursue the modeling process, the guide
curves and drawing made i n 2.2. were digitized and
reconstructed in 3D space on a computer (Figure 3.).The
software used for the 3D modeling was Alias/Wavefront
MAYA on an SGI Onyx?, employing NURBS surface

2.2. Measurement of the shapes

'The basic concept we propose for making a Noh mask
is "to trace the procedure for the actual carving ofa wooden

inask". Among Noh mask makers, to replicate fine old
inaster pieces is a very important task. This process has
i n u c h more meaning than a mere reproduction of the
originals. For Noh mask makers, it provides an opportunity
for directly learning enormous things about Noh masks,
and also gives a field for meeting the challenge of creating

Figure 1. A wooden mask

Figure 2. Templates, guide curves, and guide drawing

408

Figure 3. Guide curves and drawing in 3D space

modeling. To begin with an oval plane half sphere, a rough
facial shape had to he made by moving control vertices
near the guide curves, and then a detailed structure was
generated by the increase and spatial control of the vertices
(Figure 4.).
At the initial basic structure step, an attempt was made
to join horizontal curves to automatically generate a
skinned surface. Howe\,cr, tlie difference between the
generated surface and the desired surface was so large that
the surface structure had to he made only depending on
the creator's sense througliout the process. The method of
mirror image duplication of one half of the face was not
utilized, although i t is a popular choice in 3D coinpiiter
inodeling. The reason was. first, that the original Ko-omote
had an asymmetrical structure, and second, the \vor6 had
to he done while always checking the whole structure to
achieve a process similar to wood carving.

Figure 4. The modeling process

3. Results of mask making
3.1. Characteristics of the structure
The completed 3D model of the Ko-omote inask was
rendered and the results were saved as still images. Figure
6. shows a frontal image. The light source was a parallel
beam from the front of the mask. The vertical angle of the
mask was determined in consideration of the frontal view
point to\vards the man putting on the mask.
Tliroughout the process, it was possible to detect two
characteristics of the structure of the Ko-omote model.
1 ) Co-existence of a uniquely fluent curved surface and
a distinct detailed structure.
2 ) Subtle asymmetry between the left and right sides.
First, the surface began to spread from a wide forehead
through full cheeks and to the chin, creating a complicated.
hard to grasp curved structure. At the same time, a detailed
and distinct structure was made with horizontally long
shaped eyes and a mouth with the lower lip extending
t o r \ \ ~ a i . t land both sides of the mouth pulled upward.
: l l i l i o u ~ l ithe outline of the face was a nearly symmetrical
o \ J I hliiipe. the right side of the face was slightly larger
t1i;iii tlic left side against the center 01' the top line of the
iiow. 111 :idclition, tlie slightly narrow left side had a slightly
dcqwr curved surface tli;ui the right, which r;lndown from
IIic' check to the left aide ( 1 1 (lie mouth. As for tlie angle of
tlic pl;ine made h y the eye halls, the right eye inclined
sliglitly downward. and the left eye inclined slightly
upward.
To examine how these various cliaracteristics could br
rebuilt i n CG with some expression effects, more images
were generated under different rendering conditions.

2.1. Generation of' the texture

The surface irsturc was created using paiiitidrau
hol'tware (Painter. l'liotosliop. Illustrator) on a 1'C ( Figtire
5 . ) . Assuming a 3D mapped state, a 2D image of the tc'xturc'
\vas painted based on the creator's ohservaiioii wliilc
referring to selected photographs or actual imprcs\iciii\ ( i t '
Noh masks. Checking the 3D mapped iinagc l i c l p d t o
accurately correct the positions and colors. Par;i"vi-\ to:.
11ic quiility of tlic surface. such as the retlection. \WIY L'.i<:li
~li~!ci-iiiined
b!, 311 software.

3.2. Influence of vertical inclination
Based on the angle in Figure 6. as a frontal image. four

Figure 5. The surface texture

409

a : Right side

b : Left side

Figure 8. The images rotated to the left and right
Figure 6. A frontal image (0 degree)

3.3. Differences between right and left sides
patterns of vertical inclined images were rendered under
the same lighting condition. Figure 7. show inclinations
of downward 10 degrees, downward 5 degrees, upward 5
degrees, aiid upward 10 degrees. Along with the changes
i l l the angle, impression changes could be seen along the
line including the upper and lower eyelids, U-shaped curve
01' the mouth, and 3-dimensional volume of the chin. A
Noh actor gave a presentation with one Ko-omote
masterpicce [31; he i nc I ined the model s l ight Iy down ward
to express a feeling of sadness making the mouth appear
shut and the eyes appear slightly closed. When he inclincd
the model slightly upward, this gave an expression of joy
with the eyes open and the full cheeks and chin einpliasized.
The possibility exists that the subtle changes of exprcssion
shown by a CG model can partly correspond to the effects
of ai1 actual KO-omote mask.

a : Downward 10

Figure 8. shows images rotated 40 degrees horizontally
to the left and right based on the lrontal position. Regardless
of the same lighting condition, the two images show subtle
differences. A modern Noh inask maker has indicated that
a concept of carving exists based on differences in et'lects
of expression between the right ;ind left sides 141.
Considering the characteristics o f the structure on cach
side, the possibility exists that the right side of the tace
(Figure 8.21) gives a calm appearancc m d a relaxed
impression, and the left side (Figure 8.b) gives a bright
appearance and a sense of tension at a very subtle levcl.

3.4. Changes in the lighting condition
To examine the effects of lighting, frontal images were
rendered under different lighting conditions. The spot light

b : Downward 5

c : Upward 5

d : Upward 10

Figure 7. The Four patterns of vertical inclined images based on 0 degree

410

source illuminated from the top, bottom, right, and left
sides of the mask (Figure 9.). With the differences in the
direction of the light, the curved surface and edges of the
face were emphasized differently and caused different
impressions of the face.

4. Application in Computer Animation
Using the Ko-omote computer model, we attempted to
create a computer animation based on a Noh drama (Figure
IO.). The story "YUKI" is about the Spirit of the Snow;
one evening in a snowstorm, a travelling priest meets the
Spirit of the Snow. She petitions the priest to dispel her
confusion and dances quietly in the moonlight. Finally, as
dawn draws near, shy of her form being seen clearly, she
melts and disappears.
While referring to a video tape of this Noh play, we
animated the Ko-omote model with a fan also created as a
3D model so that it could seemingly walk and dance with
a human body. The software for setting key frames and
rendering movies was the same as the modeling tool ( Alias/
Wavefront MAYA). Multiple movies and images were
synthesized using Adobe After Effects on a PC for final
image sequences.
In the beginning, the text of the story appeared on the
screen to enable audiences to grasp the context behind
expressions of the animation. Background images such as
falling snow and the moonlight, which have never been
presented in a Noh play, can assist audiences in imagining
the situation. Audiences can be expected to have more
diverse imaginative experiences than watching still images
of the Ko-omote model.

a : Light from up

c : Light from right

b : Light from bottom

d : Light from left

Figure 9. The Four images rendered under
different lighting condition

clarified in the following two observations. I ) The mask
making procedure, while only rclerring to the carved mash,
enabled us to detect some specific characteristics of thc
mask's structure, such as a uniquely curved surface, distinct
edges, and asymmetry. 2) Kendcring images with different
angles and lighting conditions showed the possibility t h a t
such a specific structure is closely related to the effects of

5. Discussions and future work
The Ko-omote computer model s e e m to be able to
show some effects corresponding to actual Noli masks, as
shown in 3.. This means that the reconstruction of the
original wooden mask structure was accomplished, as

Figure 10. Three scenes from the computer animation based
on the Noh "YUKI"(The Spirit of the Snow)

41 1

movement than was possible with deliberately symmetrical
masks. The problem with symmetry is one of the active
research topics related to facial expression in psychology
and neurophysiology. Considering the effects of 3dimensional asymmetry as shown in Noh masks might give
us new view about human information processing
concerning reality, variety, or the beauty of faces.
It is also significant, especially for generating “new”
effective faces, to investigate what kind of process emerged
in the creator’s mind until a mask is completed. An
intuitive modeling technique using computer graphics can
support this investigation by bringing a systematic
experience. Such technology can provide the creator with
an environment of interactive simulation as well as an
analysis of historical or relational data.
Computer presentation technologies are widely open
to those who live in this information society, especially
for those who are eager to learn and already have excellent
expression skills in other fields. T h e viewpoint we
discussed in this paper is expected to give some meaningful
examples for c o n s i d e r a b l y increased d e m a n d s f o r
education on computer graphics expression. In addition,
without regarding this case as simply one example of
Japanese culture, the use of computer technology that
extends and enhances human senses will lead to a key for
a better and new understanding of the existing sophisticated
presentation skills.

subtle facial expression changes.
Thus, in order to create the effects of a Noh mask
expression, it is indispensable to generate and represent
specifically refined 3D facial structures. In terms of
creating such refined structures, it is questionable that an
analysis of the shapes only based on 2D projected images
or s c a n n e d 3D r a n g e d a t a c o u l d e n s u r e t h e a b o v e
reconstruction process. Additionally, by using well
c u s t o m i z e d c o m m e r c i a l s o f t w a r e , the c r e a t o r c a n
concentrate on intuitive modeling and be consistently given
visual feedback through quick shading or more accurate
rendering. Furthermore, the 3-dimensional guide curves
we used here enabled the creator to navigate toward the
master shapes without acting as a physical constraint of
the surface.
As shown in this example of a Noh mask, there should
be a delicate expression technique that assumes interaction
on the level of the imagination, relying on their sensibility.
To recognize the existence and effects of methodologies
such as the one presented here and to introduce them into
computer presentation techniques, we should pursue more
experiments in the following two perspectives, for viewers
and creators.
1) What do viewers perceive from such expression
effects? There should be differences of expression effects
with various factors (e.g., angle, light, movement, surface
texture, background image, context, etc.)
Minoshita et. al. performed an experiment on the
perception of facial expression using photographs of Noh
masks at different vertical angles and reported that subjects
could recognize various emotional states including effects
similar to those intended in Noh drama [ 5 ] . By referring
to such existing studies, we should first examine whether
a computer model can be used as a stimulus in comparison
with a n actual mask. Consequently, possible future
experiments for an analysis of expression effects using
psychological or physiological indices will be planned with
the regulation of many environmental parameters. These
examinations might bring practical suggestions toward
future computer presentation technologies that do not
conflict with human physiology and can even heighten our
sensibility. An immersive display system can also be used
to project 3D objects. As a concept of examining the
capability of emerging display technologies, some new
possibilities will be examined.
2) Why and how do creators generate shapes with such
expression effects? There should be a relationship between
an expression effect and the notable structure modification
such as asymmetry.
As s h o w n in 3.3., t h e K o - o m o t e model has an
asymmetrical structure. Having asymmetry is probably a
characteristic developed to meet the demand for masks
which could express a wider range of emotions with subtle

6. Acknowledgement
W e are grateful to Dr. Ryohei Nakatsu and Mr. Jun
Kurumisawa (ATR Media Integration and
Communications Res. Labs.) for preparing the machine
environment and providing technical and artistic help; and
Mr. Michishige Udaka and Ms. Ogamo Rebecca Teele
(Kongoh style of Noh) for loaning us an unfinished wooden
Ko-omote and offering precious advice.

7. References
[ I ] A . Tohma, “Differcnt Eyes”, SIGGRAPH Video Review
lssuc 129: sigKIDS Theater Program 21, 1998.

[2] K. Komparu, ?%e Noh Theater, Weathcrhill/Tankosha, 1983.
[31 I. Kongoh, Noli to Nohnien, Sogensha (in Japancse), 1951.

141 Y. Syodai-Hori,S. Masuda, and M. Miyano, Nohnien Karisho
to Utikata, Tankosha (in Japanese), 1998.

[SI S. Minoshita, S. Satoh, N.Morita, A. Tagawa, and T. Kikuchi,
“The Noh mask test for analysis of recognition of facial
expression”, Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 53, 1999,
pp. 83-89.

412

