Performance Measures for Training Spatial Knowledge in Virtual Environments
using Division, Inc & VEGA Marine Geometric Models
Elizabeth Henderson
Royal Military College of Science
.
Cranfield University
Shrivenham, Wilts., UK

Jim Patrey
Robert Breaux
Naval Air Warfare Center
Training Systems Division
Orlando, Florida, USA
E.G.Henderson@rmcs.cranfield.ac.uk { PatreyJE, BreauxRB } @navair.navy.mil
used to refine systems requirements and also to
compare design concepts, other benefits are early
problem diagnosis, creation of contingency plans etc.'

Abstract
Spatial knowledge, often used in military operations, is a
significant component of military skills. It includes
knowledge of the relationships of one object to others, the
movement of objects relative to others the relationship of
the human to each of the objects, and this involves
perception and awareness of the humans' position within
the situation. Key ingredients include both time and
distance perceptions by the human '
Recently, the military have been exploring the use of
virtual environment technology; the focus for training
systems has been on simulation of the environment and
behavior of the objects from a mathematical modeling
perspective.
This paper will examine two of the major factors
involved in Performance Metrics for use within Virtual
Environments the focus of this research will be
performance measurement of the training environment
using US Naval case studies, implementing geometric
modeling.

[41

2. Spatial Knowledge & Geometric Modeling
in Virtual Environments
Spatial knowledge, often used in military operations, is a
significant component of military skills. It includes
knowledge of the relationships of one object to others, the
movement of objects relative to others, the relationship of
the human to each of the objects, the perception of those
objects by the human, and the human's awareness of his or
her position within the situation. Key ingredients include
both time and distance perceptions by the human. One
instance, ship-handling skills, requires that the conning
officer on the bridge of a ship be able to judge relative
motion and distances of the other ships in the environment.
The officer then must issue orders to own ship to navigate
the desired course. In another instance, urban terrain
warriors must be able to judge a hostage situation within a
building or group of buildings, navigate themselves to key
locations and engage the opposition without harm to
themselves or the hostages.
Recently, the military has been exploring the use of
virtual environment technology to allow close interaction of
military personnel with the objects in their environments,
but without the cost and danger associated with using real
terrain or real objects. This has been explored for both
human systems and information systems technology
applications. The focus for training systems has been on
simulation of the environment and behavior of the objects
from a mathematical modeling perspective. What is
potentially more challenging is immersion of the student in
an environment that is designed to teach the breadth of
spatial knowledge. In addition to the features listed above
on spatial-temporal relationships, time & distance
measures, and one's own situation awareness, there enters

1. Introduction
Human Performance Metrics is one of the most crucial
areas when evaluating virtual environments in other words
'virtual worlds'. Many studies have carried out in this area
to try to establish the success of training within an
interactive virtual training environment. However, the
success in evaluating performance measurement using PC
based VR systems is quite impressive to say the least.
Human Performance Measurement should not be carried
out in isolation. Another important aspect of measurement
is systems evaluation.
'There are many practical reasons for systems
evaluation. For example at the outset of development,
i.e. the prototype stages, evaluation studies can be

524
0-7695-0743-3100$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

Figure 1: Performing an underway replenishment task
the opportunity for agents who are not a part of the
immediate visual environment to impact the success of the
student.
For example, the instructor in a scenario of two ships
maneuvering together, so that one may replenish the
supplies and personnel of the other ship, may not be a part
of the "real" world scenario, but be very much an agent to
ensure the success of the student maneuvering the ship in
the training scenario. Likewise, the commanding officer
who is responsible for the total readiness of the ship, may
want to experience junior officers of varying skill levels
performing various critical ship maneuvers, in order for the
Commanding officer to hone the skills required to teach and
oversee the proper operations of the ship. Rather than trust
to fate, the commanding officer, as student, may wish to
experience these risky encounters in a virtual environment
where agents behave in a manner similar to junior officers,
so that the commanding officer, now acting in a "train the
trainer" scenario, may develop techniques that will be
valuable later aboard the real ship with real junior officers.
In one study by the U.S. Navy, officers were required to
perform an underway replenishment task. Their job was to
command their ship to approach, overtake, and come along
side another ship (called an oiler) that contained fuel and
supplies for transfer (Figure 1).

3. Performance Measures
Some of the performance measures included time to
complete the task, course and course changes, own ship vs.

oiler speed, relative motion of the two ships, and commands
issued by the student. A computer speech recognition
system captured the voice commands and the
hydrodynamic ship modeling system captured the other
parameters. These variables are also being used as a
knowledge elicitation feature, to capture how experts
perform the same task, for comparison with novice
students. Overall measures include time required for
approach, track, and how well alongside station is
maintained by the student. Finally, actual tracks of
approach and alongside will be compared to determine
whether there are natural phases of the task, with
concomitant performance measures that allow evaluation of
student progress and skill acquisition.
One of the significant challenges in the above-described
scenarios is the development of performance measures that
will guide the proper development of the student's skills
within the virtual environment. We may want to ask,
"When is the student doing well? or "When is the student
doing poorly, and what feedback is needed to correct
performance?"
To help answer these questions,
NAWCTSD has examined the task of the Conning Officer
and some of the techniques by which they are trained.
Next, we developed a virtual environment test bed to
explore ways to improve that training [5, 2, 31. In addition,
cognitive framework has been considered within which the
measures would guide decisions on scenario development
[I].
The above scenario was created on an SGI machine
(http://www.sgi.cod) using Division, Inc and VEGA

525

Marine (http://www.paradigmsim.com/)
software packages
(see [3] for complete design information). Superscape
appears to be very much a tool designed for corporate use
rather than VE lab use. It may therefore provide a
mechanism to develop these systems for PC desktop
systems, thereby reducing the cost of the systems. VEGA
Marine may also be capable of running on a high-end PC.

4.3. The Screen Layout Editor
The default screen layout supplied with VRT can be
changed and augmented using the screen layout editor. The
size and position of the window onto the virtual world can
be altered, and several Windows created if required.
Additional information can be displayed using instruments,
from decimal numbers to dials and bar charts. These can be
placed anywhere on screen, and can be copied.
A backdrop image (in PCX format) can be loaded, either
in a window or around it, allowing labels to be placed on
instruments, and icons defined. Icons can be set up as
active screen areas, which can be assigned a function or a
short SCL program to be executed when they are clicked on
by the mouse. This allows user-friendly icon driven fiont
ends to be built for complete stand-alone applications.

4. Superscape
The major component of the Superscape suite of
software modules, VRT contains all the tools to create
virtual worlds and stand-alone applications. These include:
the Superscape Visualiser (also available separately), which
supervises the real time visualisation of the virtual world; a
World Editor, which provides facilities to build virtual
worlds with intelligence and dynamics; and the Shape
Editor, which allows the construction of building block
shapes for inclusion by the World Editor. These, along
with the Texture Editor, Screen Layout Editor, Keyboard
Editor, Sound Editor, Dialogue Box Editor and the DXF
Import and Export facility are all integrated into a single
package. Also included is a library of over 200 objects, and
over 20 example worlds together with full documentation.

4.4. Shape Creation
The Shape Editor provides the facility for constructing
the individual shapes that make up the virtual world. As
with the World Editor, all changes are made and viewed in
real time. Shapes can be viewed in either perspective or
elevation views, where points (vertices) can be placed using
the mouse. A template can be loaded, appearing behind the
view of the shape to aid placement of points.
Shapes can be transformed, reflected and merged
together, and generated quickly using the spin and extrude
features. Meshes of polygons can also be created quickly,
and the effects of lighting on any shape calculated, again in
real time.

4.1. World Creation
Editing the virtual world is done interactively, in real
time. Any changes made can be seen immediately. Objects
can be moved, resized, re-scaled and re-coloured using
overlaid control panels, allowing movement around the
object as it is being changed. Whole objects can be
duplicated, and then dragged into place using the mouse
from one of the elevation views. By switch to a perspective
view the effects of lighting can be calculated. Objects can
be dynamically bent, or animated traditionally, giving
simulation of real movement. A multi- level undo feature
also makes the editor very forgiving. Complete objects can
be imported form the library, or exported to it, ready for use
in other worlds.

4.5. Superscape Developers Kit
The Superscape system is designed as a visualisation
and design system for Virtual Worlds.
There are
applications, however, which require more than just
interaction.
The SDK allows the user to extend the Superscape
system, adding more functions that would be difficult or
impossible to implement using the original VRT or
Visualiser. Typical applications include: interface with
external hardware, for example in control or monitoring
application; communication with other machines, for real
time visualisation of simulated or real data; utilisation of
previously written C code within the Superscape system;
and the replacement of sophisticated SCL programs with
simple instructions, which will also run faster.

4.2. World Intelligence
SCL is based on the popular language C, and can exert
direct control over all attributes of an object. The World
Editor allows editing of these SCL programs on an objectby-object basis, and changes can be made and evaluated
immediately.
VRT includes the ability to create, delete and duplicate
objects under SCL control, and to output SCL programs to
a printer. A fully functional code monitor is also included.

4.6. Overlay of additional information on the
Virtual World representation.
Superscape VRT is a total virtual studio for PCs that
create real time 3D worlds. In addition the created world

526

can be displayed on the stand alone Visualiser. Superscape
VRT consists of a suit of editions, which use to create the
world and the browser platforms: Visualiser and Viscape,
which are used to display and interact with the created
world. Visualiser is the main visualization platform for
Superscape World. It is available for Windows and DOS.
Viscape is a 3-dimension browser based on Visualiser that
can be used to display virtual worlds via Microsoft Internet
Explorer or Netscape Navigator.
Superscape VRT 5.6 seems to be one of the most
versatile applications for geometric modeling on PC based
applications of VR.

following data Collection efforts at SWOs.
The UNREP ship-handling evolution modeled on the
VETT testbed was taken to SWOs In March '98 to obtain
data for identifying and developing UNREP performance
Measures.
Twenty-five students and staff members
participated in an experiment Designed to collect data on
usability, fidelity, learning, and performance measures. The
participants ranged in rank from Ensign to Commanding
Officer. Each participant performed two UNREPS in one
session, with a short break between the two runs. For a
variety of reasons, performance on the UNREP was
recorded on only 18 of the 25 subjects, resulting in 18 pairs
of UNREP runs.
Graphic Course tracks of each run were generated, and a
panel of five experts SWOs rated performance on these
runs on a scale of zero to 100. Overall, significant
improvement occurred kom frst run to second run, and
experienced shiphandlers generally performed better than
novices. Interestingly, rank (ENS to CO) only weakly
predicted performance, as rated by the panel of experts.
The data were re-analyzed to group participants according
to experience with the specific ship modeled on the testbed
(CG-class guided missile cruiser), and this turned out to be
a much better predictor of rated course track performance.
It also suggests that our ship model and hydrodynamics
match very well with a real CG. In an effort to identify
candidate performance measures, rated performance on
each course track was compared with a variety of measures
generated from data recorded by the testbed for each
subject's second UNREP run. If viable, these performance
measures could be used to automatically assess student

5. The VETT UNREP Ship-handling
Scenario 1.1
Another study namely the VE'IT UNREP shiphandling VE
scenario was taken aboard USS YORKTOWN in January
1998 for the purpose of pilot testing testbed capabilities for
efforts to identify and develop performance measures, and
for solicitation of technical and Fidelity responses.
Eleven surface warfare officers (SWOs) with varying
levels of Shiphandling experience performed several
UNREP runs.
Their response was overwhelmingly
positive: Valuable responses included pointing out the need
for modeling the Venturi effect, adjusting the degree of
visual motion in the z-axis ("Surge") for proper fidelity, and
adding visual cues to provide size constancy for distance
estimation.
These suggestions were subsequently incorporated in the
testbed models to improve UNREP evolution scenarios for

Fig 2. Familiarization Scenario using HMD and Joystick

527

threatened the trainee feels the more able hdshe will be
able t o transfer the skills to the real environment.

performance, without the need for subjective ratings.
Some examples of the generated measures were:
0
Root mean square (RMS) from "ideal" course track
Percent duration inside Course track
Percent duration outside course track
Percent duration in "overshoot"
0
Percent duration inside the "on-station'' box
Number of requests for information (course, speed, and
range)
0
Number of engine and rudder changes.

7.References
[l] Breaux, R., Martin, M. K., Jones, S. "Cognitive precursors to
virtual reality applications", Proceedings of SimTec, pp. 2 1-26,
Adelaide, South Australia. 1998
[2] Davidson, S. Software Design of a Virtual Environment
Training Technology Testbed and Virtual Electronic Systems
Trainer (Technical Report 96-002). Naval Air Warfare Center

Training Systems Division, 1996

Each run was subdivided into phases: approach, stern
crossing, slide-in, along side, on-station, and breakaway.
Preliminary results of a stepwise regression analysis
indicated that for the stern crossing and along-side phases,
the duration inside track, RMS, and number of engine,
orders (speed changes) are highly predictive of the expert
rating, accounting for as much as 60% of the variance.
Other performance measures approach significance in
these and other phases, but analysis indicated an
insufficient number to allow for significant power. It was
therefore decided that another data collection effort was
required.
Three members of the VETT team took the testbed to
SWOs from August 1621,1998 to collect additional online UNREP performance data. Supplemental data were
collected using a demographics questionnaire, a diagram of
the Participant's plan for the on-line UNREP and a pre- and
post-VE exposure Simulator Sickness symptom checklist.
A slalom course replaced the 1st UNREP that was used in
the March data collection to lessen the time required per
Subject. Since the 1st data collection, effort clearly
demonstrated that improvement with practice does occur,
and those novices clearly differ.
From experienced shiphandlers, it was felt that two
UNREPs per subject were unnecessary. Rather, a brief
familiarization scenario would be included, both to allow
the subjects to get used to wearing an HMD, and to allow
the shiphandler to get a "feel" for how the virtual ship
handled (figure 2).
The shortened practice period enabled data to be
collected on thirty-two participants over a 5-day period,
with no apparent data loss. Each trial was recorded via
videotape and audiotape from the participant's viewpoint.

[3] Davidson, S. Design of an Open Water Shiphandling Sofiwure
Testbed (Technical Report 97-007). Naval Air Warfare Center

Training Systems Division, 1997
[4] National Research Council (1995) Virtual Reality, Scientific &
Technological Challenges, National Academy Press.
[ 5 ] Watters, R. M., Bradley, S. K. Examination Of Surface

Warfare Oficers School (SWOs) Training Environment (Special
Report 98-014), Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems
Division, 1998.

6. Summary
In summary the use of geometric modeling that is
possible from using a family of software packages,
Superscape VRT 5.6 being one, VEGA Marine being
another, is not only very effective, but also allows the enduser a danger free environment in which to learn. Not only
is this encouraging but it is also an incentive as the less

528

