Virtual Teeth for Endodontics Training and Practice
D. B. Arnold, A. M. Day, M. R. Goetz, A. Courtenay and H. I. Graham
School of Information Systems, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK
dba, amd, arc, mrg, hig@sys.uea.ac.uk
tion techniques to produce tools that will aid both practising
dentists and dental students in the education and illustration
of dental structure and procedures. In particular we are interested in endodontics, the study and treatment of the pulp
tissue within a tooth.

Abstract
This paper describes the use of Virtual Environments in endodontics. The problems associated with capturing the virtual environment
by defining and manipulating the geometric

2

shapes of teeth are illustrated. Dentists require ways of interacting with the virtual environment which closely mirror the conditions
under which they work. Touch is very important when working in the close confines of
the mouth and using instruments within dental
cavities. Therefore, the paper reports on experimentation with novel interactive techniques designed to work with the available
geometric representations of teeth. These
techniques involve combining surface descriptions with force feedback and collision
detection, to give the dentist realistic sensations in simulating treatment procedures.
Some early experiments with distributed environments are described, with potential for
collaboration in mentored training.

1

The pulp tissue that exists within the root canal structure of
a tooth is vital to its formation and development [29].
However, in cases of pulp tissue infection @ulpitis), the
tissue can be removed to allow retention of the tooth. The
process of cleaning, shaping and sealing the canals is commonly known as root canal surgery, a practice that is increasing in popularity as the quality, success rate, and patient's desire to keep their real teeth increases.

A primary difficulty in endodontic procedures is the lack of
a detailed view of the root canal network. Canal morphologies vary between teeth and patients, where unusual or unexpected structures can occur [27]. With the possible presence of canals which split or join together, as well as lateral
canals or false apices, the surgeon is disadvantaged without
a well-defined 3D view of the canal morphology. At present dentists use x-ray radiographs (or, more recently, digital
radiographs) as a reference of the tooth's canal network.
These 2D images project limited detail of the canal structure, where even the number of canals can be difficult to
determine. The surgeon must thus rely on manual tools to
determine the number of canals, length and shape of each
canal, and any other unusual anomalies in the canal network.

Introduction

Dentistry, compared to other medical fields, has not received a great deal of attention from computer visualisation
researchers. While existing medical imaging makes use of
technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and computerised tomography (CT) to produce computergenerated 3D models, very few similar advances have been
realised in modern practical dentistry. Those that have been
realised, such as mandible reconstruction [23] and simulation of the chewing process [20], fall short of providing the
dental practitioner and student with 3D views and multidimensional interaction of a reconstructed tooth model. Ow
research investigates the adaptation of volume reconstruc-

0-7695-0743-3100$10.000 2000 IEEE

Application Area

To perform the
procedure, a dentist
to the
Pulp chamber and locates each
The Pulp tissue is
removed and the 'ana's are 'leaned and shaped. The dentist
uses files and reamers of different weights to enlarge the
canals in preparation for
Once the
are prewith
gutta
Percha
Or Some Other 'lid
Pared,
are
substance. The success of the operation depends mainly on

597

For these reasons, we would regard the use of virtual environment techniques as a powerful training technique, rather
than suggest it will have immediate impact in the dental
practice. There is, however, potential impact on the practice
in the future as the problems of data acquisition have been
solved.

the quality of the seal, and the proximity of the seal to the
apex of the tooth. With this manual procedure, the success
rate can be between 65 and 95 percent [24].

3

Data Acquisition

The first stage of visualising tooth models is the acquisition
of data. While real data is preferred for authenticity, artificial or “constructed” data can also be used during prototypical investigation. To represent the 3D structure of the
tooth’s internal and external surfaces, the start data for the
3D reconstruction consists of a set of cross-sections taken
from slices along parallel planes. These images must be
refined and segmented, where structures of interest are
highlighted in preparation for reconstruction [2, 251. Typical cross sections are then composed of a number of the
closed outlines giving the periphery of the tooth and one or
more enclosed canal outlines.

3.1

3.2

Contour Editor

An alternative to obtaining real data is the use of manually
constructed artificial data. Although the authenticity of real
data is lost, artificial data can be used effectively for investigating reconstruction methods and evaluating 3D representation formats. Moreover, the arduous processes of real
data acquisition and segmentation are avoided, and the
method remains an excellent way of generating special
cases for training purposes.
The contour editor has been developed to create and modify
cross-sectional data represented as surface contours. While
it is feasible to create realistic data manually, the real usefulness of the tool is in altering existing data sets to produce
models, such as those representing unusual cases or samples
that are otherwise difficult to obtain. The data can be exported to a reconstruction application that can render the
object from the surface contours.

Obtaining Real Data

Real data can be obtained either through invasive or noninvasive means. For an invasive approach, the tooth is extracted and physically sliced, where each slice is scanned.
Non-invasive approaches use some kind of medical imaging
tool (such as CT or MRI), which outputs a series of tomographic images without destroying the tooth. Depending on
the imaging technique used, the tooth may need to be extracted before it can be scanned. Clearly this is inappropriate for providing useful data for treating the patient, but it
may provide useful training data sets.
Invasive approaches are far more time consuming and labour intensive, although the quality and resolution of each
image is better. Non-invasive methods, while faster, do not
often provide the high rate of tomographic sampling that is
available with tooth slicing. Standard CT and MRI scanning output slices with a thickness of lmm at a distance of
anywhere between 1 and 20mm apart [26]. While this is
insufficient for modelling the important small structures
within the tooth, recent developments have afforded tomographic imaging with a much finer sampling rate of 0.1”
[ 7 ] . A further disadvantage is the potential harm to the patient when using certain imaging techniques, such as radiation exposure in CT scanning or magnetic field exposure in
MRI. Higher levels of exposure are required, due to the
necessity of high-resolution tomographic scans [ 171. Medical practitioners are very wary of using imaging unnecessarily so the improved preparation for procedures would
need to be balanced at present against the downside of extra
exposure to imaging techniques.

Figure 1 : The contour editor

The editor, as shown in Figure 1, has two main display windows. The left pane displays the entire model represented
as a series of stacked cross-sections, while the right pane
displays a single cross-section. The user can draw new
contours on a given cross-section, or the contours on a
cross-section can be edited. As individual contours are
changed, these alterations are reflected in the overall crosssection set through changes in the model’s topography.

598

Additional tools are provided to aid in creation and modification of cross-sections and contours. Contour interpolation is used to create several contours over a given range of
slices, where the boundary contours are defined by the user.
The intermediate contours are interpolated from the boundary contours depending on the selected algorithm (linear,
logarithmic or inverse logarithmic), thus producing a series
of contours which alter gradually over the range of slices.
Error checking has also been implemented, preventing the
user from creating conditions that are illegal for the contour
representation.
Illegal conditions can include nonsimplicity (where a contour intersects itself) and intersection (where two contours intersect), although the explicit
error conditions are defined by the selected reconstruction
algorithm.

4

this task is elementary for a single set of contours, most data
contain multiple contours for each cross-section slice. For
such cases, these traditional solutions tend to suffer from
one of more recognised computational geometry problems.
Contour correspondence must be established for multiple
contours on adjacent planes, to establish the pairs of contours to be tiled [ 191. With only ’the given contour data, the
correspondence can be ambiguous, as shown in Figure 2. A
special case of correspondence is the branching problem,
where there are an unequal number of contours on adjacent
slices [ 6 ] . Determining the topography of the reconstructed
surface can also be ambiguous in certain branching conditions (Figure 3), as well as determining the location of the
branching point between the two cross-sections (as shown
in Figure4). Finally, the tiling problem must be solved
when tiling the vertices of adjacent corresponding contours,
where some algorithm must be selected to provide a vertex
tiling which best approximates the original surface topology
[ 11, 141. These problems highlight either ambiguous cases
with no definitive possible solution, or difficult cases where
no one solution is sufficiently robust.

Volume Reconstruction

The visualisation of the tooth data from some data source
can be termed the reconstruction of the model. The two
most common forms of reconstruction are surfwe reconstruction and volume rendering. The selection of one of
these methodologies depends on the requirements for the
final visualisation, particularly the type of visual interaction
required, and the trade-off between visual interaction and
reconstruction quality.

4.1

(4

(SI

LC)

(9

Figure 3: Contour branching ambiguity

Surface Reconstruction

For surface reconstruction, the series of image slices must
be segmented into surface contours, where the iso-surfaces
are reconstructed by tiling the vertices of contours on adjacent cross-sections. When using manually constructed data,
surface-based methods are the only viable option, given that
the data is already represented as surface contours. Since
the result of this approach is a triangular mesh of the object’s surface, it can be rendered quickly using standard
graphics hardware, allowing for real-time user navigation
and interaction.

Figure 4: Different tilings of branching contours

4.2

Volume Rendering

Volume rendering does not model the scene using geometric primitives, instead the volume is directly projected onto
the image plane. The image slices must be segmented to set
the classification and opacity of each volume element
(voxel), where a ray is cast from the viewpoint through the
voxel grid to produce the final colour for each pixel in the
image [ 151. Although this process is more computationally
expensive than surface-based methods, the rendered scene is
of a much higher quality than the former approach. Furthermore, recent developments in hardware rendering are
quickly reducing the time complexity gap between these
two approaches [ 131.

Figure 2: Contour correspondence ambiguity

Traditional surface reconstruction solutions take the contour
data and tile the vertices of adjacent contours to form the
triangular surface mesh of the object [3, 9, 221. Although

Despite many benefits, the application of volume rendering
techniques to endodontic applications is still somewhat impractical [12]. Since the main area of interest is the tooth’s

599

canal structure, these surfaces can be adequately modelled
using surface-based approaches. Furthermore, as contour
representation allows models to be altered to form new
structures via the contour editor, this strictly surface-based

representation format holds added benefits for research in
endodontic applications.

Figure 5: The Nuages reconstruction of a tooth created
using the contour editor

Figure 6: A semi-transparent view, highlighting the canal
structure

41, adaptations of the marching cubes algorithm [ 161, tetra-

hedrization of the internal volume surfaces [21], and the use
of 3D alpha-shapes [8] for non-uniform unstructured data
in Y13. We have used the Nuages program developed by
Boissonnat and Geiger [SI to reconstruct contour models
from the contour editor, using Delaunay triangulation. The
3D Delaunay triangulation produces a tetrahedral mesh of
the volume, from which the surfaces can be extracted. Examples of the reconstruction are shown in Figures 5 to 7.

5

Figure 7: A view from within the outer surface along the
canals

4.3

Using Haptic Feedback

When interacting with a patient's tooth, dentists do not rely
solely on visual input but repeatedly use touch as a major
part of any operation. Therefore, although providing an
interactive three-dimensional model to visualise an operation is extremely useful, it is not possible to simulate a
dental procedure accurately without this sense of touch.
With the advent of haptic feedback devices, it is now becoming possible to achieve this.

Surface Extraction

Some surface-based methods exist as alternatives to volume
rendering without the associated problems of traditional
surface reconstruction. These include the use of Delaunay
triangulation from the Voronoi' diagram of the vertices [ 1,

To demonstrate the possibilities of haptic feedback in this
area an example application has been developed. The Huptic Tooth Viewer has been designed for use with the PenCat
force feedback device from the Canadian manufacturer

600

Force Mesh of the visualised object. In this case, the Force
Mesh is a simple 2D array containing a height map of the
object. Using this kind of force representation restricts a
‘touch-view’ to a single aspect and the full 3D representation can only be generated with multiple views. However,
it is possible to partition the tooth to create a suitable model
for constructing a Force Mesh from any viewpoint, as
shown in Figure 8.

Haptic Technologies Inc. The purpose of the program is to
allow the operator to feel the contours of a previously constructed tooth model. To produce this desired feedback the
first stage is to transform the visual model of the tooth into
a force representation that the PenCat device can understand.
The PenCat itself is a device with just two degrees of freedom, limiting the input interaction to only two dimensions.
However, even with this restriction the simulation of a third
dimension is possible using gradient calculations from a

Figure 8: Visual and Respective Force Meshes

The time required to construct this height map varies according to a number of factors. These include the size and
complexity of the grid used, which determines the accuracy
of the generated height map and the complexity of the mesh
data combined with the amount to map.

To achieve this result a method of sampling the height of a
mesh at a given point is required. The data from this can
then be stored in a grid forming the height map.
When the tooth model is initially reconstructed (Section
4.3) the resulting data is stored as a VRML world file. This
format stores model data as a point list followed by a list of
face indices. Using a data structure such as this unfortunately provides no easy access to the mesh information
needed for the required height sampling.

In the case of the example tooth, the mesh is constructed o f
over twelve thousand faces. Using a sixty by sixty height
map grid the calculation time varies between five and
twenty seconds depending on the portion of the tooth sampled. Although not extremely fast, this performance is adequate for the experiment since this is a single pre-processing
stage which then allows force feedback from this viewpoint
in real time.

Therefore, a preliminary conversion stage was implemented
to load the VRML model into a more accessible format.
The resulting data structure allows the mesh to be stored in
a similar format as VRML for a simplified conversion process, but with built in data operations. This provides an interface onto the loaded mesh data suitable for the required
manipulations. One of the facilities provided for is that of
ray casting through the model, recording among other information, the height data of all intersected planes. By performing this ray casting operation from the viewpoint, a
PenCat compatible Force Mesh can be constructed.

Once the visual tooth data has been converted and stored in
a Force Mesh the file can be loaded in to the PenCat’s haptic viewer program where the device can create the necessary forces as the user moves the cursor over the Force
Mesh. This provides an almost solely touch oriented interaction as the only visible data is a wireframe representation
of the Force Mesh. The final stage is therefore to replace

60 1

c

I‘

Host Machine

I

Client Machine

.

I

Collision Detection
& Deformation
Modelling Server

I

I
I

E

(VRh4L Viewer & JVM)

I

I

The techniques of endodontics, in particular the reliance on
feedback through touch, make demonstrations for training
difficult to convey by conventional means. We believe that
shared virtual environments, used with personal haptic
feedback devices, offer the opportunity for imaginative and
appropriate training demonstrations. Thus, for example, the
trainer could indicate local features of the root canal and, in
the shared environment, the trainee can experience the ‘feel’
transmitted through the force feedback device.

Figure 9: A model for realistic interaction in VRML

this visual representation of the Force Mesh with the original model whilst retaining the generated forces. This enables the user to see the original model while feeling the
Force Mesh through the PenCat.
From this simple experiment, it would seem that although
the PenCat device imposes severe limitations (allowing only
two degrees of freedom) it has produced some successful
results. The user can select a segment of the tooth and is
relatively quickly able to feel its bumps and ridges with the
PenCat. This shows promise for the future of this technology, since as moderate success is possible with a two degrees of freedom PenCat, the possibilities with more expensive devices with greater degrees of freedom are
considerable. It is important to note however that using
devices that are more complex would require a completely
different interaction approach, as currently there is no standard interface for them.

Given a world containing a tooth and a file for performing
root canal work, VRML provides limited functionality in
terms of collision detection and behavioural modelling.
However, with release 2.0 [28], it can be used to create VR
worlds that can be dynamically modified in several ways.
Of these, the External Authoring Znte$ace (EAI) [ 181 provides an elegant way of addressing complex 3D modelling
problems in a parallel fashion.
The EAI allows a VRML world and a Java applet embedded
in the same HTML document to communicate with each
other. This leads to a model for the problem of realistic
interaction within a VRML world as illustrated in Figure 9.
Within this model, as the web page is loaded on the client
machine, the files for creating the VRML world are read by
a server process on the host machine which creates its own
abstract representation of the world. The two representations (visual and abstract) are initially synchronised. The
VRML world communicates any change in state, brought
about by user action, to the applet. The applet communicates these changes to the server process. For example the
server process would detect collisions between file and canal wall, and calculate any resulting deformations, such as
the file flexing down the tooth canal. Any alterations in the
state of any object within the world are forwarded to the
Java applet, which amends the node corresponding to that
object.

6 Realistic Interaction in VRML
With the emergence of the Internet have come many tools
that lend themselves readily to certain aspects of visualisation. Web browsers are now sophisticated pieces of software and the increasing availability of plug-ins extend their
functionality still further. In particular, there are now several proprietary systems for implementing Virtual Reality
(VR) over the Internet. One of the most exciting developments is the Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML)
and its associated browser plug-ins. These technologies are
also suitable for distributed applications using intranets.

602

Brazilian Symposium of Computer Graphics and Image
Processing (IEEE CS Press, 1997) 136-140.

This approach allows web-based implementation of a complex and processor intensive modelling task with a tidy
separation of concerns; the server machine handles collision
detection and deformation modelling, while the browser
As only
machine concentrates on VRML rendering.
changes of state are communicated, limited bandwidth o r
low speed connections benefit because data exchange is
kept to a minimum. This is particularly important for remote working and remote practice/training without large
downloads. T h e instructor records/monitors on the server
but feedback rates would allow touch feedback to take place
locally, probably using intelligence embedded in the device
rather than object processor cycles.

7

C. L. Bajaj, E. J. Coyle, and K-N Lin, Arbitrary topology
shape reconstruction from planar cross sections, Graphical Models and Image Processing 58(6) (1996) 524-543.
J-D. Boissonnat, Shape reconstruction from planar cross
sections, Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing 44 (1988) 1-29.
J-D. Boissonnat and B. Geiger, Three dimensional reconstruction of complex shapes based on the Delaunay
triangulation, in: INRIA, Rapports de Recherche 1697
( 1992) 1-22.
Y-K. Choi and K. H. Park, A heuristic triangulation algorithm for multiple planar contours using an extended
double branching procedure, The Visual Cotnptr/er I O
(1994) 372-387.

Conclusion and Future Work

T. Darvann, L. Bjemdal, and G. Thucsen. Visuuli:u!ion
of
Tee//i
fi.ot1r
Micro-(.'I'.
http://M;ww.lab3d.odont.ku.dk/inaiiidocs/Projecls/M icroCT/

This paper has described the application of surface reconstruction techniques to build realistic tooth models for use
in endodontics. Interaction with the virtual tooth has been
enhanced using a simple haptic feedback device and the
problem of fast realistic interaction with such a web-based
VRML world has been addressed.

H. Edelsbrunner and E. P. Mucke. Three-dimensional
alpha shapes. ACM Transac/iotis on Grupliics 13( I )
(1994) 43-72.

Future work will incorporate interaction with tooth models
using various virtual instruments. With haptic feedback and
realistic interaction working as co-operative processes
communicating through a VRML world, the user will know
when a virtual instrument touches a canal wall and how or if
it bends around corners. The new generation of 3D haptic
feedback devices will be used so that the user can 'feel' as
he sees the instrument being directed through the root canal.
It is clear that using haptics in this networked environment
will throw up additional network and system challenges.

8

A. B. Ekoule. F. C. Peyrin, and C. L. Odet, A triangulation algorithm from arbitrary shaped multiple planaicontours, ACM Transactions on Grapliics l O ( 2 ) (199 I )
182-199.

ETHOS project. http://www.ethoseurope.org/
H. Fuchs, Z . K. Kedem. and S. P. Uselton. Optimal stiiface reconstruction from planar contours, C o ~ n ~ t ~ ~ ~ n i ~ ~ ~ ~ /ions of / / l e ACM 20( 10) (1977) 693-702.
M. R. Goetz, The Application of Surface Reconsti-uction
Techniques in Endodontics, MSc //iesis. subinifird I O / h i ,
School of It~ormationSys/ems. Universiiy of Eu:crs/ Ail
glia, 1998.

Acknowledgements

This work has been partially supported by the Virtual Environments workpackage (WPO6) of the ETHOS project 1 IO].
par1 funded by the European Fourth Framework programme.

9
[I]

121

M. W. Jones, Acceleration Techniques for Volume Rendering, chapter 14, 253-286, in: Visualiration and Modeling, R . Earnshaw, J. Vince, and H. Jones, editors (Academic Press, 1997).
E. Keppel. Approximating complex surfaces by triangulation of contour lines, IBM Journal of reseurdi curd dew/optnen/ I9 ( 1975) 2- l l.

References
N. Amenta. M. Bcm, and M. Kamvysselis. A new Vorono]-based surt'acc reconstruction algorithm. in: Proceedings of SlCGRAPll '98 (Orlando, Florida. August

M. Levoy, Display of surfaces from volume data. / E l X
Cottipurer Graplzics and Application 8(3) ( 1988) 29-37.

1998).

W. Lorensen and H. Cline, Marching cubcs: A high

M. Anguh. A. Silva. Multiscale Segmentation and Enhancement in Mammograms, in: Proceedings of /lie X

resolution 3D surface construction algorithm, Compu/er
Graphics 2 l(4) ( 1987) 163- 169.

603

P. B. Lockhart, S. Kim, and N. L. Lund, Magnetic resonance imaging of human teeth, Journal of Endodontics

18 (1992)237-244.
C. Marrin, Proposal for a VRML 2.0Informative Annex
- External Authoring Interface Reference, Silicon
Graphics
Inc.
(1997)
http://cosmosoftware.com/developer/movingworlds/spec/ExternalInterface.html
D. Meyers, S. Skinner, and K. Sloan, Surfaces from
contours, ACM Transactions on Graphics 1 l(3) (1992)

228-258.
K. Myszkowski, G. Okuneva, J. Herder, T. L. Kunii, and
M. Ibusuki, Visual Simulation of the Chewing Process
for Dentistry, chapter 24,419-438,in: Visualization and
Modeling, R. Eamshaw, J. Vince, and H. Jones, (Academic Press, 1997).

G. M. Nielson and J. Sung, Internal volume tetrahedrization, in: Proceedings of IEEE Visualization '97 (Phoenix, Arizona, 1997)221-228.
J-M. Oliva, M. Penin, and S. Coquillart, 3D reconstruction of complex polyhedral shapes from contours using a
simplified generalized Vorono'i diagram, Computer
Graphics Forum 15(3) (1996)C-394-C-408.

S. Seipel, I-V. Wagner, S. Koch, W. Schneider, Threedimensional visualisation of the mandible: A new
method for presenting the periodontal status and diseases, Comput. Meth. Programs Biomed 46 (1995).

C. J. R. Stock, K. Gulabivala, R. T. Walker, and J. R.
Goodman, Color Atlas and Text of Endodontics, 2"d Edition (Mosby-Wolfe, 1995).
A. L. Thomas, Contouring Algorithms for Visualisation
and Shape Modeling Systems, 99-176,in: Visualization
and Modeling, R. Eamshaw, J. Vince, and H. Jones,
editors, (Academic Press, 1997).

M. W. Vannier, C. F. Hildebolt, R. H. Knapp, G.
Conover, N. Yokoyama-Crothers, G. Wang, 3D dental
imaging by Spiral CT, Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine,
Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology and Endodontics 84(5)

(1997)561-570.
F. J. Vertucci, Root canal anatomy of the human permanent teeth, Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, and Oral Pathology 58 (1984)589-599.

The Virtual Reality Modeling Language ISO/IEC DIS
14772-1,
Silicon
Graphics
Inc.
(1997)
h ttp://cosmosoftware.com/developer/movingworlds/spec
.DIS/index.html
R. E. Walton and M. Torabinejad, Principles and Practice of Endodontics, 2"d Edition, (W. B. Saunders Company, 1996).

604

