Domain Visualization for Digital Libraries

Chaomei Chen
The VIVID Research Centre
Department of Information Systems and Computing
Brunel University
Uxbridge UB8 3PH UK
Email: chaomei.chen@brunel.ac.uk
question, experience of search, and the familiarity of the
search space. The so-called vocabulary mismatch problem
refers to the ambiguity of term selections and the
meanings assigned to the same word by people with
various background. Therefore, it would be particularly
helpfbl in practice if users can have a wider range of
options in forming queries of different nature. For
example, it is common to see search functions designed to
allow users to specify the search scope in terms of
languages, media, years of publication and other extrinsic
attributes.
In this article, a major motivation of the work is to
exploring the use of domain visualization as an alternative
means of accessing intellectual structures as well as
scientific literature of a given subject domain. Domain
visualization relies on various analysis and modeling of a
subject domain, drawing up communicative structures,
trends, and patterns identified in quantitative and
qualitative data.
Domain visualization aims to reveal the most
significant and profound intellectual structure associated
with scientific research in a subject domain. The
pioneering work includes Atlas of Science [ I ] and more
recent work [2, 31 at the Institute for Scientific
Information (ISI), author co-citation analysis of
information science [4] and hypertext [ 5 ] .
This article describes domain visualization based on
author co-citation analysis of data from the Science
Citation Index. This domain visualization not only enable
researchers, scientists, and learners to explore and keep
track of the development of knowledge in a specific
domain, but also provides an interface that facilitate the
search of scientific literature on the Web.
This article is organized as follows, First, we introduce
related work in domain visualization and digital libraries
of scientific literature. Second, we describe how the work
extends our previous research in author co-citation
analysis, especially in revealing the structure of a highdimensional space of specialties. Then, we illustrate how
this domain visualization can be linked to an independent
search engine of citation, developed by NEC Research

Abstract
Domain visualization aims to reveal the most
signtficant intellectual structure associated with a subject
domain. This article illustrates how domain visualization
enables novel ways of accessing scientijk literatures in
digital libraries. The domain of computer graphics is
visualized based on a citation analysis of articles
appeared in the prestigious IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications over I8 years (1982-1999). The derived
high-dimensional domain structure is uncovered through
the use of various visualization and animation techniques.
Author co-citation maps open up new ways of visual
information retrieval. Not only can users explore domain
visualizations as a virtual landscape, but also invoke
queries directly to a digital library. In this article, the
domain visualization is linked to various citation-related
information of scientific literatures on the Web through
NEC 's Researchlndex system.

1. Introduction
Understanding and tracking the development of
scientific knowledge is a crucial part of scientific activity.
It is an increasingly challenging for students, researchers,
and even domain experts to keep track of the vast amount
of scientific publications in the information age. A wide
variety of users need tools that can help them to synthesis
relevant scientific literature as a whole as well as
effectively retrieve specific publications. In this article, we
describe our research in domain visualization aiming to
provide users with a wider range of ways to explore
scientific literature and make sense of long-term trends in
the development of scientific knowledge.
'Traditional information retrieval typically uses a query
ofikeywords as a starting point. One can refine queries
subsequently based on the intermediate results of retrieval.
It is well known that keyword-based query formation is
very vulnerable, relying on the knowledge of the subject in

0-7695-0743-3/00
$10.000 2000 EEE

26 1

Institute, to enable users to search scientific literature from
different perspectives. Implications on digital libraries are
discussed.

search the database on various bibliographic attributes of a
document such as the author, article title, and journal title,
but also use the citation context hnction to retrieve
excerpts from citing documents and find out the context of
individual citations. This is an invaluable tool for
researchers to judge the nature of a citation.
In order to enable users to search citation databases
more actively, one must develop various query-formation
aids to help users to take advantage of being able to form a
multiple facet query. However, to hlly benefit from the
facility of searching scientific literature on the Web using
the name of an author as a starting point, one must have
additional in-depth knowledge of researchers in a
particular subject domain. Currently, such information is
not yet readily available.

2. Related Work
The notion of association is a broad and widely used
concept in digital libraries, information retrieval, and
hypertext. For example, the strength of association
between two documents is traditionally determined based
on patterns derived from word-frequencies. One can
define other types of association, such as co-citation and
state transition models [5, 61.
A central idea in the legendary Memex is trailblazing,
i.e. making connections, in a vast information space [7].
Bibliographic citations play a similar role in shaping the
scientific literature and to some extent the scientific
community itself. In order to improve the integrity and
accessibility of scientific literature, technologies have
been developed for tracking the growth of scientific
disciplines. Two remarkable examples are classic citation
indexing and autonomous citation indexing. Citation
indexing is well-established with ISI's long-lasting
efforts, who produces Science Citation Index (SCI) and
Social Science Citation Index (SSCI). Autonomous
Citation Index, developed by researchers at NEC, is a
promising Web-based approach.

2.1

2.3

Author co-citation analysis (ACA) aims to discover
intellectual structures from author co-citation data [4]. In
ACA, instead of articles or journals, individual authors
are used as data points in the literature. ACA uncovers
how authors, as domain experts, perceive the
interconnectivity between published works. An in-depth
author co-citation analysis was reported by White and
McCain [4] in 1998. They analyzed the domain of
information science based on author co-citation data
drawn from 12 key journals in the field. Their work
demonstrates the strength and potential of ACA, although
it is still a time-consuming process. Inspired by this
landmark work, we have been exploiting the potential of
ACA in strengthening and augmenting domain
visualization. In this article, we will illustrate how an
intellectual structure of a subject domain can be derived
with ACA. In addition, we will show how co-citation
maps of authors provide a new way of organizing and
accessing digital libraries.

Classic Citation Indexing

Originally, citation indexing was motivated to break
the barrier in subject indexing. By drawing upon the
profound practice of citation in scientific literature, it is
intended that citation indexing can reveal the underlying,
intrinsic structure of the body of scientific knowledge.
IS1 has devoted to represent the structure of scientific
literature for many years. Its pioneering Atlas of Science
[I], based on document co-citation analysis, revealed the
macro-structure of disciplines such as biochemistry and
molecular chemistry. Recently, IS1 is increasingly
interested in the applicability of visualization technologies
for mapping science as a whole [2].

2.2

Author CO-Citation Analysis

3. Domain Visualization
In this article, domain visualization is presented
through the analysis and modeling of the field of
computer graphics. All the articles appeared in one of the
core computer graphics journals, IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications (CG&A), are included in the
analysis. On the one hand, the present study aims to
reveal the intellectual structure of information
visualization. On the other hand, the study is designated
as a starting point of a longitudinal process of tracking the
development of the domain knowledge. Key journals and
conference proceedings identified in this study, such as
ACM Transactions on Graphics, will be incrementally
added to our database in subsequent studies.

Autonomous Citation Indexing

Recently, researchers at NEC Research Institute have
developed a Web-based citation database system called
Researchlndex', which allows users to search for various
citation details of scientific documents on the Web [SI.
Researchlndex currently supports an experimental
database for computer science, which already contains
hundreds of thousands of records. Not only can users

' Formerly known as CiteSeer.
262

3.1

Data Collection

The bibliographic data were drawn from the SCI
database. IEEE CG&A was launched in 1981. The SCI
database covers articles published in the journal over the
past IS years, fiom the second volume in 1982 through the
current volume in 1999. Other types of publications in the
journal, such as editorial and report, were excluded from
the analysis.
The sample citation data refer to a total of 10,292
unique articles together with the names of 5,312 unique
first authors. The data revealed a total of 1,820 citing
authors. A total of 353 authors who have been cited for
more than 5 times in CG&A were selected. A domain
landscape was subsequently derived from the co-citation
profiles of the 353 top-sliced authors as if 1,820 CG&A
authors rated the proximity of each pair of authors by
their citations.

3.2

Identifying Specialties

Factor analysis was based on the co-citation profiles of
353 authors. A principal component analysis (PCA) was
applied to the 353-by-353 matrix of authors in order to
identify salient dimensions that can characterize these
authors. In information science, these dimensions are
called specialties, which represent sub-fields of a subject
domain.
In order to determine the nature of individual
specialties, we examined the context of citations
associated with authors who have predominant profiles in
each specialty. We used Researchlndex to retrieve the
context of citations for authors with the highest factor
loading in each factor. For example, because Whitted had
the highest factor loading in the first factor, we searched
his name in Researchlndex. His most frequently cited
work over the Web was his CACM article in 1980, which
has been cited for more than 50 times on the Web. It
echoed its profile in IEEE CG&A. We examined a series
of citations to this article and determine the nature of this
author’s contribution. The profiles of leading authors in
each specialty were established in this way. The specialty
was named after the most common characteristics
identified in the citation context. The following excerpts
from Researchlndex illustrate this process for Whitted’s
article:
Whitted, T. An improved illumination model
for shaded display. Comm. ACM 23 (1980),

3.3

Mapping the Knowledge Domain

Author co-citation networks were submitted to
Pathfinder network scaling in order to simplify and
highlight the most essential relationships of the subject
domain. We embedded the Pathfinder networks into a 3D
virtual world and then superimposed additional
information so as to present a domain landscape of the
domain to users. We included a time series of citations as
colored stacked bars and depicted the results of factor
analysis using factor-loading-based color encoding. Users
can zoom in and out in the virtual domain landscape to
explore its structure and content.

343-349.
- .- - ..

Details
Correct
- Ray Tracing with MetaHierarchies James Arvo - Apollo Systems Division of
Hewlett-Packard - 300 Apollo Drive - Chelmsford,

-

MA 01 824 arvo@pollo.hp.com, arvo@yaIe.edu

263

The 3D landscape reinforces the semantics of the
author co-citation network. For example, authors located
towards the center of the network are likely to have made
a profound impact to the field, whereas authors located in
remote areas to the center are more likely to be known for
their special and unique works.
On top of the author co-citation network, the citation
time series of each individual author over the 18-year
span was color-mapped to a stacked bar. The length of
each section of the stacked bar, displayed in a unique
color, corresponds to the frequency of citations of the
author in a particular year. Citations in recent years are in
bright yellow, and citations in earlier years are in darker
colors. By looking at the color towards the top of an
author's citation bar, one would be able to tell whether
this author's work is currently in its peak or its peak has
passed. Domain analysts will be able to identify rising
stars, those authors with an extended range of bright
colors in their citation bars, or falling stars, whose citation

bars are largely covered by dark colors. In addition, such
domain landscapes allow users directly access
bibliographic and full text digital libraries.

4. RESULTS
4.1

Author CO-Citation Analysis

Factor analysis identified 60 sub-fields of the domain
according to the 353 authors' citation profiles. Two of the
most predominant factors explained 13% and 11% of the
variance, respectively, whereas the top 5 factors accounted
for 39% of the variance.
In order to determine the nature of the major factors,
we listed the names of 10 most predominant authors for
each top-5 factor (see Table 1). We then examined the
citation profiles of these authors to establish why they
were cited.

Table 1. Factor membership. Top 10 authors ranked by factor loading of five most predominant factors, explaining
39. 1% of variance in the author co-citation profiles.

4.2

popular blobby model. This factor, therefore, indicates a
specialty that includes pioneering works in rendering and
computer-generated images.

Specialties in Context

The nature of five most predominant specialties was
identified according to citation contexts for leading
members of each specialty.

4.2.2. Computer vision. The second specialty is labeled
as computer vision. This group includes a number of
pioneering researchers in computer vision, including
Tilove's set membership classification on intersection
problems and detecting collision paths. Search on
ResearchIndex has revealed a total of 263 citations of
Ballard and Brown's book, entitled Computer Vision.
These authors' works represent some typical research in
computer vision.

4.2.1. Rendering and ray tracing. The first specialty is
predominated by several well-known computer graphics
scientists in classic rendering techniques, including
Whitted's illumination model for ray tracing, Williams'
classification of level of details, the Cook-Torrance
lighting model, and the famous Phong shading model.
Whitted's original article in 1980 is ranked as the 2"dmost
cited work for a total of 30 times in the IEEE CG&A data.
One of the most cited authors in IEEE CG&A, James
Blinn, also appeared in this group. He has received a total
of 91 citations, ranked as the third. Blinn's seminal work
on implicit surface modeling is known through his

4.2.3. Geometric modeling and computer-aided design.
Several names in the third largest specialty are related to
the concept of spline. Splines are curve and surface
representations defined with piece-wise polynomial

264

functions. This group is dominated by the presence of
computer-aided design and geometric modeling.
Bezier's name appears in the top 5 of this group, whose
name has been associated with a number of fundamental
concepts in geometric modeling, including the famous
Bemstein-Bezier patches and Bezier clipping. The
Bemstein-Bezier representation has been extremely useful
in characterizing multivariate spline bases. Bezier
Clipping is an iterative clipping method which takes
advantage'of the convex hull property of Bezier curves,
and clips away regions of the curve that does not intersect
with the surface.
Bezier surfaces defined over a triangular domain are
often called Bezier triangles. It was Sabin who first
generalized Bezier to triangular B-splines. Sabin is on the
top of the membership list according to factor loading on
this factor.

the computation of the length of a shoreline. The
shoreline becomes longer and longer as the resolution of
the map increases because one must account for every
new visible creek for higher resolutions. Zipfs Law,
which is also explained in Mandelbrot's book, qualifies
that the degree of popularity is exactly inversely
proportional to rank of popularity. A number of citations
to Mandelbrot's work applied this law to the modeling of
behavioral patterns such as accessing documents on the
Web. The relatively predominant position of fractals in
factor 5 suggests that this specialty shares some common
interests in modeling of the nature, especially human
figures, facial expressions, animal behavior, coastlines,
and mountains.

4.3

Mapping the Knowledge Domain

4.2.4. Image processing. Ray tracing and direct
projection methods are the basics for generating directly
rendered images. In ray tracing, viewing rays are sent
through each pixel and integrated through the volume. In
direct projection, each cell of the volume is projected onto
the screen. In contrast to the ray-tracing specialty
identified earlier, this image processing specialty
corresponds to a group of researchers often associated
with direct projection. The first two names ranked in this
factor, Dan Gordon and Gideon Frieder, were frequently
cited for their work in direct project. This specialty also
includes researchers in image processing, especially in
processing brain images and contour interpolation.
Interpolation between contours is a general problem in
computer graphics. This problem has been dealt with by
algorithms that address the correct mapping or correlation
of contour points at one level with those at an adjoining
level. This specialty is therefore characterized as image
processing.

4.4

Author Co-Citation Network

First, we used factor loading of the three most
significant factors to color the author co-citation network
(see Figure 1 frame 0). The central area is in red, which
corresponds to the most predominant factor. The green
area to the left indicates the second most predominant
factor of the field. The blue area to the right represents the
third factor. Note that the entire network has not been
completely covered by colored areas, suggesting that
authors outside the colored areas must be characterized by
high-dimensional factors.

4.5

Animation of High-Dimensional Specialties

In order to reveal the high-dimensional nature of the
field, authors in each specialty were highlighted in turn in
a sequence of animated frames (see Figure 1 frame 1-5).
Areas associated with the current specialty will become
brighter. The glowing area helps users to identify the
position of a specialty in the global context of the entire
network.

4.2.5. Modeling the nature. The fithlargest specialty is
related to the modeling of the nature, including human
figures, facial expressions, flocking behaviors of birds,
coastlines, and mountains. For example, the Jack humanbody animation system, developed at the University of
Pennsylvania's Center for Human Modeling and
Simulation, is a landmark work in computer graphics and
especially in the simulation and animation of realistic
movements of human figures. Parke's parametrized facial
modeling approach is also a predominant player in this
specialty group. This specialty group also includes
Reynolds' pioneering work in simulating flocking
behavior in birds. Research in related areas has frequently
referred to this model.
Fractals, coined by Mandelbrot, have been used to
describe spiky, irregular or variegated objects, such as
coastlines, mountains, and crystals. A common example is

Figure 1. An animation sequence with areas of
specialties glow one after another.

265

4.6

organize a digital library such that one can browse
through the network of authors and retrieve articles by the
same author (see Figure 4).
In addition, because the author co-citation map is
derived from a trustworthy source IEEE CG&A, it
provides a reasonable reference framework to
approximate the underlying intellectual structure reflected
by scientific literature on the Web. Domain visualization
enables users to search Researchlndex, a citation-oriented
search engine, more intuitively (Figure 5). Users can
select an author directly from the author co-citation map,
or in fact any author with the same color of specialty, and
pass over to ResearchIndex as a dynamic query. Users can
further explore the work by the same author as well as the
view of others in citation context.

Domain Landscape

Figure 2 is a screenshot of the domain landscape
resulted from the analysis of IEEE CG&A model and two
models generated earlier on ACM Hypertext conference
proceedings and ACM CHI conference proceedings. The
landscape model integrates several significant structures
such as author co-citation networks, citation time series,
high-dimensional specialties. The 3D landscape invites
users to explore trends and peaks of citations, clusters of
authors, and shortest paths connecting two different areas.

Figure 2. Domain visualization of computer graphics
based on IEEE CG&A.

Figure 3 shows two elevation models of the specialty
space. The upper model is colored by corresponding
factor loading found with each author. The lower one is
colored by the total number of citations received. The
highlighted pair of points in the two models corresponds
to an author in the first specialty.

Figure 4. Click on “Whitted-T” in the map and examine
a list of articles by the same author.

Figure 3. Elevation models of a specialty space.

Figure 5. The author co-citation map enables users to
search Researchlndex by author and by specialty.

Once we have an author co-citation map of a subject
domain, it opens a variety of potentially useful ways to
organize scientific literature. For example, one can

266

IEEE CG&A as a prestigious journal reflects significant
aspects of computer graphics. Of course, it is not the only
journal in the field. There are a vast amount of
publications in the literature on this subject. In order to
gain a comprehensive picture of the subject domain, one
must consider other influential sourccs, such as journals
and conference proceedings. As these relationships within
a discipline become clearer, one can expect that mapping
scientific disciplines will result in usefiil roadmaps to
guide researchers to locate expertise as well as individual
publications.
The practical use of the approach has implications on a
variety of research fields, including digital librarics,
info miat ion visual izat ion, c i tat ioti ana I y s i s, and doniai n
analysis.

5. Discussions
Domain visualization driven by author co-citation
analysis not only provides a medium for users to explore
the intellectual structure of a subject domain, but also
offers new ways of organizing and accessing scientific
literature in digital libraries and the Web. Domain
analysts can follow hyperlinks from authors in a domain
visualization model to corresponding citation contexts in
Rcse~rrchlndex and exa in i ne first-hand i t i for in at ion
concerning the contcxt of citations. A domain
visualization model can also provide users an information
retrieval gateway so that one can access scientific
publications via a network of authors. Citation analysts
can study both citation and co-citation patterns directly
within the visualization model. For new researchers, the
persistent domain visualization model will give them a
standing point to jump-start their own mental image of the
field or as a reference framework to form their own
understanding of the knowledge domain.

7. Acknowledgements
'I'lie author would like to acknocvlcdgc tlic fiinding from
the 1, i b rary and I ti for nia t io ti C o m m i ss io 11 and t lie 13 r i t i s I i
research counc i I t<PSRC:.

6 . Conclusions

8. liefcrenccs
I n this article, we have describcrl an example of using
domain visualization to enhancc the organization of'
digital libraries as well :IS to keep track of the
tlevelopmcnt of knowledge. We havc derived ii citationbased snapshot of the field of c o ~ i i p t ~ ~graphics
cr
as tlie
initial domain visualization. On the one hand, ttic data
were directly drawn from SCI, this metliodology is
readily applicable to other sub-jccts and knowledge
domains covered by the SCI database. On the othcr hand,
tlie SCI-based snapshot provides ii meaningful standing
point for LIS to exploit the intellectual structure on tlic
Web. Because of our improved understatiding of ttic
s ul3.j cct doniai ti, the doma i ti v isua I iza t ion derived koni t lie
trustwoitliy sot~rceprovides a t~sef~il
reference franie\4ork
iii the new context.
We have einpliasizcd a harmonic integration of' scvcral
tecliniques. including Pathfinder networks, I'actor
analysis, animation of a Irigli-dimensional specialtl, space.
We have also highlighted the coiinoctioii between o u r
work and /ie,setr,cl7/r7~/e.~, which has played iiti
instrumental role in helping us to irssess the details and
nature of various citations. A closer integration of' thesc
tech n iq ti es w i 1 I cons id erab I y :id va nce o 11r ii b i I it y to track
tlie growth of knowledge and to augment contempor:ir!'
theories and practices of organizing and accessing digital
libraries.

267

