Issues in Participative Use of an Historic City Millennial Web Site
Nada Bates-Brkljac, John Counsel1
Faculty of the Built Environment,
University of the West of England, Bristol, England
Telephone: 01 17 9656261 ext 3902
Nadezda.Brkljac @ uwe.ac.uk

Abstract
Staffat the University of the West of England (UWE) have
been engaged with other agencies in a collaborative
process to create a millennia1 web site for the citizens and
city of Wells. The development of this site on the WWW is
a part of a wider investigation which is both an attempt to
understand the effective design of web-based records of
localities in terms of content and structure, as well as to
set up a method for recording historic sites.The initial
goals are to: record the built environment at the turn of
the millennium; integrate this with existing records and
archives; create a vehicle for the general public to
contribute to records; and assist all sections of the
community in gaining a richer understanding of their
heritage. This paper examines the expectations of the
agencies involved, the manner in which these have been
implemented on the Web using multi-media, and the
feedback and response to date which has in turn modcjied
the focus of the project.

1. Introduction
With the meteoric development of the Internet, the World
Wide Web changed from a static, text filled 2D space into
a shared three dimensional, interactive space in which is
possible to meet and collaborate with people
simultaneously. Map images with limited interactivity
(Putz [l]) have been surpassed by and replaced with GIs
as a critical component in the development of virtual
cities (Smith [ 2 ] ) .Virtual environments generated from
accurate digital geometric information have been created
to facilitate decision making in planning, urban design
and development control. Virtual reality urban and
heritage models have found further uses in a range of
virtual meeting places, from for example virtual field
study courses to virtual tourism. Staff in the Faculty of the

Built Environment at the University of the West of
England (UWE) have been exploring, for the past four
years, the potential for associating 3D models with a
variety of other information using multimedia tools. The
interactive interface offered by WWW browsers enhances
previous computer aided design (CAD) based models of
buildings and landscape. At the same time multimedia
tools enable multiple different representations of realworld objects to be viewed on screen at once and
explored interactively by their recipients without the
overhead costs of an expensive CAD system and the skills
needed to use it. Associated hyperlinks enable a broader
range of connections to be freely formed among the
different representations and associations made between
graphical and non-graphical attributes. At W E , to
convey urban experience on the Web we started looking
at multimedia applications, which may provide a credible
sense of presence without additional 3D modelling in the
CAD sense. Although 3D urban models in VRML are not
quite as complex or as detailed as their predecessors made
in CAD systems, they can be interactively experienced,
and that experience can be scripted. One of the main
disadvantages of the VRML models in particular, and VR
in general, is a lack of the animated behaviour of crowd
scenes, traffic and plant movement which give life and
credibility to urban areas.
Our study for a Millennial Web site for the historic city of
Wells aimed to employ a Web based 3D VRML model of
the city as a metaphor of the city (Dodge et a1 [3]),as a
visual interface and a gateway to a wide range of
information. In addition an extensive use of panoramic
images attached to the static images of the localities was
intended to convey a real experience of the city. We also
introduced some real life effects through integration of
digital video and sound into the scenes, but this further
raised the question of when to model and when drawing
or map, film or image alone may suffice.

119
0-7695-0743-3100$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

view in VR on high-end Silicon Graphics installations.
Developments in 3DS Max, in processor speeds and
graphic cards over the last few years have still not enabled
models of this size and complexity to be engaged with in
real-time without sacrificing the photo-realistic detail that
provides a credible sense of presence. Those high-end VR
systems which are capable of optimising and simplifying
the data are still expensive and exclusive and therefore
not widely available for collaborative group working or
public participation. Bourdakis [5] identified a trend in
commercial VR applications in 1996 'of focusing/tuning
commercial VR applications towards immersiveness and
human computer interface in restrictively small geometric
databases'.

2. The CAD based urban area models
2.1 The Bristol model
In 1995 the Faculty of the Built Environment at UWE
received a commission to model part of Bristol to create a
VR experience to demonstrate the millennium proposal to
the Commissioners in conjunction with Bristol 2000,
Bristol City, Division Ltd. and Aardman Animations.
Two models were created, one representing the existing
area and one as proposed (Counsell, Phillips [4]). The
models that resulted were considered to be at the lowest
level of detail to acceptably convey a visual sense of
presence to interactive VR users. The models were based
on a combination of UK Ordnance Survey 2D map, other
data procured by Bristol City such as 3D street survey
data and drawings submitted for planning approval, and
bespoke photographic surveys. Resulting 3D models were
too large area and too complex to achieve an acceptable
frame rate on Division's own state of the art VR
equipment. The commissioners were shown video created
from a renderfarm approach using 3D Studio instead.
Keeping the models up to date, as an accurate reflection
of changes on the ground, has developed into a major data
management problem. Piecing in new CAAD models
received from Architectural Practices to visualise them in
context as part of the planning negotiation process has
often taken staff at Bristol City several days of work for
each instance. Because the model is so complex and so
proprietary the Bristol City staff operate as a specialist
visualisation bureau service.

3. Recent investigation
While much WWW based narrative is currently 2D or
text dominated UWE have been exploring the use of 3D
CAD models, VRML and various multimedia
presentation techniques on the Web. The asynchronous
process used to create photo-realistic video from CAD 3D
is filmic. With increased experience it becomes apparent
that the techniques of film making from storyboard to
script and editing are entirely applicable to this process
(Counsell, Phillips [6]). The success of the resulting video
sequence also depends on the strength of the underlying
narrative, which is therefore likely to be more loaded
towards one application or outcome rather than any
others. While this approach is appropriate for an
architectural practice wishing to publish its proposals in
the best possible light to client or the public it is does not
support a broader collaborative engagement in design or
unbiased evaluation of alternatives. Therefore UWE has
since concentrated on interactive real-time and
uncircumscribed exploration through VR and their
applications. Mitchell defined designing a building or
development as fundamentally a collaborative,
interdisciplinary, geographically distributed multimedia
activity (Mitchell [7I). If this collaborative digital
multimedia activity is integrated and disseminated online, and encompasses a large enough urban area, it could
provide the context and constraints for future
development and serve to inform and engage the public.
Smith argues for a broader VR across the Web based
involvement in this activity so that it 'should be both
usable and attractive to the public, the planner, the private
sector and the political representatives involved in the
planning process. A system should offer collaborative
group interaction, with groups deciding and acting
together to plan an environment for the good of the whole'
(Smith [SI). These considerations led UWE to start

2.2 The Tower of London model
UWE was commissioned in 1996 by Historic Royal
Palaces (HRP) to model the environs of the Tower of
London to create illustrative material to support bids for
funding to the Heritage Lottery Commission. Two models
were created, an as proposed and an as existing model.
Both models were highly detailed. All structures, hard
landscape and trees were modelled in 3D down to street
furniture, railings and kerbs. These models were used to
generate video from a renderfarm, and very highresolution still images for presentation material. Both
models were based on detailed 2D survey drawings of all
the buildings and landscape procured by HRP. Other
bespoke 3D, photographic and video surveys were
obtained. Drawing detail was automated, turned into 3D
and managed within AutoCAD. At the time both models
were too large with too high a polygon count to easily

120

investigating the possibility of creating a multimedia
heritage web site with an interface that is intuitive and
easy to use through which to retrieve information or to
experience a narrative.

4. Selection of Appropriate Media
Binks et a1 state that for non-specialist visitors to
Museums and Galleries, the aim is to give them an overall
picture, to explain what is happening, what is being
revealed, and what its significance is. For repeat visitors it
is necessary to also explain what has changed since the
last visit. They add that the interpretation will need to be
presented at a variety of depths. They suggest that themes
and stories presented in a logical sequence relating to
route from the human angle, which are participatory,
which explain the detective story, effectively provide
living history for the visitor. (Binks et al. [9]). Other
research has also shown that animated and interactive
exhibits are more valuable than static presentations.
’Above-expected interest was shown in the dynamic,
animated, or changing presentations represented by
movies, changing lighting, and audio sequences .... all the
sequences with less-than-expected interest involved
flatwork, suggesting a greater preference for threedimensional presentations’. (Washburne RP & Wagner JA
[lo]). Sharpe uses this research to argue that an
interpretative audience prefers those interpretative media
who are most closely associated with entertainment, and
that the dichotomy of education and entertainment
parallels that of inertness and animation. He also records
that participation increases retention and that multimedia
is necessary to cater for a variety of levels of information.
Visitors in fact are discouraged by reading while looking
at objects and prefer an audio commentary (Sharpe
GW[ 111). The HMSO guide adds that the medium chosen
to communicate the message should avoid dominance of
any other media used, gain visitor interest and establish
rapport. They also endorse interactive participation as
particularly important for younger children and advocate
self-paced material that enables an appropriate pace for
the casual visitor. They define the task as helping visitors
to ‘imagine accurately’ while producing a conservationist
response. They infer that the chosen approach should
obtain feedback by testing the recall of the visitor and that
a conservationist response is produced. (HMSO [ 121).
While firsthand experience of parts of heritage sites is
possible for many visitors there are problems of access for
the disabled and the elderly. Howell argues that if we
consider people in our profile who have perceptual
problems then an analogue within the CAD system can be
used, with careful consideration, to present that part of the

building which cannot otherwise be perceived. ‘Ihave to
say that a description of a cathedral by, say, Willis or le
Duc is often a brilliant analogue. It is almost inevitable
that words will have to accompany the visualisations and
auralisations ... the words... could be transcribed into
signing alongside a picture or subtitles provided for the
deaf or hard of hearing.’ (Howell P. [13]. The National
Trust for example owns over 900 properties. They define
their properties as fragile and beautiful and at the same
time physically and historically complex. This is
described as often making them hard for visitors to
understand and rendering much of the information about
them difficult to access. Archives and libraries are
generally not available to the public because they are so
fragile. They have sought various means using
multimedia and visitor centres to both overcome these
barriers to access and to convey a clear overview and
sense of context to the visitor.

5. Wells 2000 Record Project
The development of the Wells 2000 Record site on the
WWW is a part of a wider investigation at UWE. It is
both an attempt to understand the effective design of webbased records of the urban form in terms of content and
structure, as well as to set up a method for recording
historic sites. Wells 2000 Record is a joint project
between UWE and the Carlisle Jessop architectural
practice in Wells. The WWW has been chosen as a visual
interface because it can deliver interactive multimedia
elements including interactive 3D VRML models, it is
cross-platform and provides a basis for virtual debate and
discovery through the use of technology, which allows
synchronous and asynchronous communication. The main
aim of the project is not to recreate the city on computer
screen but to identify it by telling the story about the city
as a place at that particular point in time. The initial
design of the site has been based on continuing research at
UWE in several related areas to the 3D modelling, design
of multimedia web sites (Brkljac, Counsell [ 141) and
(Counsell, Brkljac [ 15]), as well as conducted research
about the architectural history of the city (Scrase [16]).
The Wells 2000 Record project has two aspects, a
presentation of the city now and an historical aspect. Both
aspects should enhance and inform each other. While
accessing and viewing information about the city’s
present it should be also possible to step back through the
time and reveal 3D models of the city from the 13th
century, for example, and find information based on the
academic research about the history of the buildings, plots
and places.

121

created from the first edition of the map made in 1888, to
avoid copyright issues.

The initial idea was to represent the present-day built
environment of the city by a 3D VRML model, which
would be a collection of data in geographical coverage.
Consideration was to be given to the experience of a
“typical” visitor in order to help them to grasp the essence
of the city. The guided tour of selected locations would
offer information about each site and allow the visitor to
access information about places. In the context of heritage
the project would offer means to recreate the city as it was
and help to educate visitors ‘not so much about their
history, but in how to explore, interpret and respect them.’
(Virtual heritage [17]). In terms of research into the built
environment of the cities it is intended to represent a
database for architects, planners, urban designers and
historians. At the same time the project aims to create a
vehicle for the general public to contribute to the records.
It is anticipated that this will assist all sections of the
community in gaining a richer understanding of their
heritage thereby reinforcing a city-wide sense of identity
and enabling informed discussion on the future
development of the city and its environs. In the longer
term, once sufficiently detailed records have been
developed, it is intended to expand the objectives. The
result will be a project, which both, assists to a critical
understanding of our past, facilitates comparison with
other aspects of our culture as well as of other cultures,
and provides the community with access to practical
information on maintaining and conserving our heritage.
As a presentation medium the assembly and integration of
mixed media would offer the user sufficient control to
present the information contained within in a variety of
different situations and to a variety of interested parties.

Figure 1. 30 VRML model of the city of Wells
with web pages attached

A gallery of photographs collected is being linked to short
video clips with sound, showing sequences of the city life.
Both 3D VRML models, the present (Figure 1) and
historic, are intended to be generated with Pavan software
from the source data entered into the MapInfo GIs.
Historic 3D models will provide a platform for tracing the
evolution of the city, where 3 different city models (13”,
16th and 19” century) may be experienced interactively
and used to trigger events, behaviours and database access
in those worlds. In addition still images combined with
text will form the content of an underlying database. The
models can be viewed in Cosmo Player 2.5 or in Cortona
1.O VRML browsers.

6. Methods of visualisation
Once completed the Wells 2000 Record web site will be
divided into 3 main sections: Zone A will contain
approved material and record of the city’s present. Zone B
will contain an historic database with 3D models of the
city throughout history. Zone C will contain material
collected but neither validated nor verified which then,
after being reviewed, will be transferred into Zone A or B.
The site has been composed of a small number of key
elements: web pages containing text, maps and images
aerial photographs, panoramas, 3D VRML models and
short video clips. Graphical content prevails and text is
limited to 100 words per page. All multimedia
presentations of the city and interaction with the site start
from the ‘home’ screen. A primary aerial photographic
interface has been linked by GIS to the underlying
database. The map used for 3D modelling has been

Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the city with hotlinked
panoramas

An aerial photograph (Figure 2) registered to
approximately scale of 1:lOOOO has been used to create a
hot spot map. Users of the ‘hot spot’ navigation screen
access 360 degrees panoramas of various locations within

122

the city when clicked on the marked spot on the map. A
key provides a content list of places in alphabetical order
and their position on the map.

Videofootage of the city (Figure 4) is being recorded at
different times of year and day in order to show the life of
the city throughout the year 2000. The use of video-clips
and sound adds value to the multi-media character of the
site. Sequences are edited into clips 10-15 seconds long.
The loading time of files is therefore greatly reduced while
acceptable quality is maintained.

7. Progress to date

Figure 3. Interactive 360 panorama embedded
in the web page

Chosen locations are regarded as those of the most interest
for visitors, educational institutions and town people in
general. The hot spot map was created using Pavan Web
Publisher, an additional feature of Pavan software where
raster images imported into the GIS system generate

This paper represents work in progress hence some
aspects are not yet fully accessible on the public web site.
The pilot web site was published on the Internet in
November 1999. It contains a basic skeleton of the
project, 3D VRML model of the part of the city, an
oblique photograph with hot spots, linked panoramas,
videofootage with sound and a gallery of photographs
from the past and present. The 3D model has been linked
with the text pages giving an insight into the history of the
properties in the High Street as an example. Collection of
the data to built historic models is in the progress and the
intention is to compile models from accurate base map
data as a foundation. Although our goal remains that of
interactive web site containing 3D representation of the
city which will convey a credible sense of the built
environment we have to accommodate the fact that the
targeted audience is world wide. Therefore we are looking
into possibilities of setting up links to other relevant sites
and projects and allow issues to be viewed from national
and international perspective.

8. Wells 2000 Experience

Figure 4. Video clip of the Market Place
at the busiest time of day

HTML files. Interactive Panoramas (Figure 3) have been
created using Photovista software, resized and embedded
as applets into the web pages. A series of photographs
were taken in circular view with 35-mm lens, edited and
blended together into one seamless image to recreate 3D
image of the place. File sizes were various but when
resized to the scale appropriate for the design of the web
pages loaded from the Web very quickly. In order to view
the interactive panoramas on the Internet the Photovista
plugin has to be present on the host computer.

What our research sought to address was whether the
web site with 3D VRML models could be used for
‘constructive’ collaboration. The collaboration was to be
constructive in two ways. Firstly, it should make
constructive use of the site and not simply consist of
using the web space for social chat or as an on-line guide.
Secondly, since we are able to model through history we
intend to use them as a visual database which on
exploration would by clicking on a particular building
trigger access to an underlying data base. Upon creating
the site it soon became clear that the advertising and
commercial potential of the project were the most
immediate needs from the site. Therefore we decided to
design 3 different zones of the site in order to have more
control over the data placed on the site. The audit team

123

based on metadata such as author and expiry date. We
see this trend is now being reversed with the increasing
use of active server pages generated on demand from
databases. A variety of multimedia outputs are becoming
available on demand as active server pages and this is our
next challenge.

has been created from experts for the several different
areas, who meet on a monthly basis in order to edit
information and release data for publishing and
community use.
There were two main drawbacks to the Wells 2000
Record project. Firstly, finding copyright free visual
content for the project-web site is a challenge. Maps, as
well as aerial photographs are easy to order and obtain but
we could not afford them within the confines of the
budget. Therefore we have created our own maps. The
work involved collecting data appropriate for 3D
modelling and updating the old, copyright free maps of
the city. With aerial photographs proving to be even more
difficult and costly, we had to commission a company to
take the limited and exact number of photographs we
needed. Photographs of the city's present were taken by a
professional photographer and old photographs obtained
from private collections. We used panoramas to create
visual sequences of the most interesting parts of the city
but they are at the same time the busiest places during the
day. In order to achieve quality images the time for taking
photographs had to carefully chosen -the smallest number
of pedestrians and cars have to be within the camera focus
to minimise subsequent editing.

10. References:
[l] Putz S. Interactive Information Services Using the WorldWide We6 Hypertext, paper presented at the First Intemational

World-Wide Web Conference, 1994
[2] Smith A. Virtual Cities-Towards the Metaverse, Virtual
Cities Resource Centre, 1998, on line at
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uWplanning/virtualcities.html

[3] Counsell, J., Phillips, R. A Procedural Approach to
Simplification of Detailed 3D Cityscape Models for Virtual
Reality Use, In JEC-GI96 Proceedings, Second Joint European
Conference & Exhibition on Geographic Information, published
by 10s Press Amsterdam, March 1996.
[4] Dodge, M. Doyle, S. Smith, A. Fleetwood, S. Towards the
Virtual City: VR &Intemet GIS for Urban Planning,
Proceedings, Virtual Realiq and Geographical Information
Birbeck
College,
1998,
or
Systems,

http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uWpublicationslbirbecWvrcity.
html
[5] Bourdakis, V. from CAAD to VR, Building a VRML model
of London's West End. Proceedings of 3"' UK VR-SIG
conference, DeMonfort University, Leicester, July 1996, on line
http://www.cms.dmu.ac.uWVRSIG
at:
[6] Mitchell, W.J.: Virtual Design Studio, ed Wojtowicz, J.
Published by Hong Kong University Press, 1995.

9. Conclusion

htpp://www.arch.usyd.edu.au/kcdc/joumal/voll/dcnet/
[7] Smith, A. Metaworlds and Virtual Space - Towards the
Collaborative Virtual Design Studio in Proceedings of the
Intemational Joumal of Design Computing DCNET'98 ,1998
,on line at:
htpp://www.arch.usyd.edu.au/kcdc/journal/voll/dcnet/
[8] Counsell, J. Phillips, R. Appropriate Data for Navigable 3D
Cityscape Interfaces to Urban Information Systems', In JEC-

The initial idea behind the Wells 2000 Record was to
create a web site with substance, to give it enough critical
mass to be attractive and interesting, but also have content
set in 3 layers of depth of information. The first layer of
information would be for the WWW visitors who only
skim through the site looking for general information. The
second layer should give more details, reveal history, and
explore the multimedia site using the most of the content
and media. The third level should be in-depth information
about the city and research conducted which would be
disseminated on the Web. In this form the project would
represent an elaborate management information resource,
unique in that the content is designed to help to describe
the city as a place, support decision processes and used
for educational institutions as a targeted audience. The
inclusion of existing research and background information
would provide educational elements, which would serve
as an introduction to the built environment and history in
the community and beyond. Genuine interactivity of the
site, once when the limits of navigation tools used are
accepted, is its main feature but at the same time, users
are empowered to filter a large quantity of information
from the site. Our previous experience shows that
increasingly complex web-sites require an underpinning
database management system to manage pages and links

GIP7 Proceedings, Second Joint European Conference &
Exhibition on Geographic Information, published by 10s Press

Amsterdam, March 1996.
[9] Binks G, Dyke J, Dagnall P, 1988, 'Visitors Welcome, A
Manual on the Presentation and Interpretation of
Archaeological Excavations', published by HMSO.
[IO] Washbume RP & Wagner JA, 1972. 'Evatuating Visitor
Response to Exhibit Content' in Curator 1972, XV 3 pp 248-254)
[ll] Sharpe GW, (Ed).1976. 'Interpreting the Environment', J
Wiley & Sons inc.
[12] HMSO 1975. 'Guide to Countryside Interpretation Part 1,
Principles of Countryside Interpretation and Interpretative
Planning; published by HMSO
[13] Howell P, 1995, 'Perception, Disability and the
Conservation Element', in Joumal of Architectural
Conservation, No 2 July 1995 pp 63-77.
[14] Brkljac, N. Counsell ,J.' Usability of Associated GIS and
VRML Urban Models',Proceedings of 1999 IEEE International
Conference on Information Visualization, IEEE Computer

Society, Los Alamitos, California,USA, pp550-556
[15]Counsell, J. Brkljac, N. 'A Role for VRML as a Multimedia
Backbone in Interpreting Cultural Heritage Sites', Proceedings
of 1999 IEEE Intemational Conference on Information
Visualization, IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos,
California,USA, ppll5-122

124

[16]Scrase, T ‘Wells: the anatomy of a medieval and early
modem property market’, University of the West of England,
1993
[171 Virtual Heritage web site at http://www.virtualheritage.net

125

