Towards a 3d Visualisation Framework
for Construction Planning with Procession
Steve North
Virtual Reality Centrefor the Built Environment
University College London WClE 6BT UK
steve@tevenorth. com
Abstract
The construction industry traditionally uses two
dimensional visualisation techniques to analyse project
progress. This usually takes the form of an ‘s-curve’, so
called because of the characteristic plot shape (anecdotally
generated by resource application take-up in many
projects). Analysing project progress in this manner
provides a ‘single view’ guide to data trends. The building
blocks of projects are ‘tasks’. Deeper interpretation of a
project might require studying individual s-curves for each
task. Indicative pattems can go unrecognised in this mass
of unfiltered visual data. ‘Procession’ is an information
visualisation software tool. It has been developed to
provide a more comprehensive representation of project
progress, utilising a three-dimensional data surface. In
addition to offering a ‘single view’ navigable data-surface,
Procession also intelligently filters and emphasises tasks,
according to the significance of their deviant performance
parameters.

DEVlATlON LEVEL ( Y )
DEVIATION
RAMETERS (X)

TASK

Figure 1. A 3d framework for construction
planning, source: [3].
Therefore, a project with no deviations from the project
baseline will produce a flat data surface. Procession’s data
surface is actually a ‘carpet plot’, generated by a scalar
algorithm. The three dimensions are achieved fiom a twodimensional set of points, which are warped in the direction
of the surface normal. The amount of warping is controlled
by the scalar value. The point set is determined by the threedimensional framework’s ‘tasks’ and ‘deviation
parameters’ dimensions. The scalar (or height values) are
provided by the framework’s ‘deviation level’ dimension
(see Figure 1). A fourth and non-spatial dimension is
provided by colour mapping the data surface. This equates
to the significance of the deviation level, as calculated by
intelligent filtering and significance recognition.

1. Introduction
The rationale for Procession’s three-dimensional
framework for construction planning is suggested by
previous work on multi-dimensional morphological
frameworks, in the field of systems engineering [ l ] [ 2 ] .
Figure 1 shows the conceptual framework, with ‘deviation
parameters’, ’deviation level’ and ‘tasks’ as its three
dimensions [3]. Deviation level represents units of time or
money, which deviate from the flat terrain of the project
baseline.
The three framework dimensions map to Procession’s
data surface, as follows:
The X axis maps to the deviation parameters dimension
The Y (height) axis maps to the deviation level
dimension
The Z axis maps to the tasks dimension.
The values for X and Z define a two-dimensional plane,
with Y providing the height scalar values.

Figure 2. An example of a navigable 3d data
surface, source: author.

577
0-7695-0743-3100$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

Figure 3. Procession’s windows interface,
source: author.
Procession is a stand-alone information visualisation
[4] [5] application developed for the Microsoft Windows
95/98/2000/NT platform. It is capable of opening data files
both from a local computer and from an Internet web
server. Procession is an MDI (Multiple Document
Interface) application (see Figure 3), which is to say that it
can have several visualisation windows open
simultaneously. Procession was developed in the C + +
language, utilising MFCs (Microsoft Foundation Classes).
Procession’s three-dimensional graphics functionality is
provided by VTK (the Visualization ToolKit), an ‘open
source’ system providing a C++ class library, and a choice
of Tcl/Tk, Java, and Python as interpreted languages [6].

2. Methodological outline
Current research is focusing on the evaluation of
Procession. The main aim of this is to determine whether
clients perceive Procession’s progress reporting
information to be more useful than currently utilised
approaches. As a secondary aim, it is hoped that the
evaluation will prove informative concerning the
suitability of the conceptual three-dimensional framework.
In order to evaluate Procession, comparative research will
be conducted, making use of interview protocols and rapid
prototyping. This evaluation is intended to determine a
selected construction client’s level of satisfaction with the
quality and format of the project progress information
provided.
In order that Procession’s informational provision
improves on the current model, a requirements capture
stage is being undertaken. A planning data set has been
obtained of a ‘live’ construction project. The researcher
used this data as a skeleton to create simulated projects,
with different sequences and outcomes. The purpose of
this is to provide a testing ground for Procession, which
must be unfamiliar to the construction client (there would
be no motivation for information requests). The fictional
project scenarios are based on a real nineteen-month
project to refurbish flats and houses on an ex-local

authority estate, in an inner-city area. The ‘live’ project
objectives were: to provide new and clearly defined street
patterns, to enlarge the individual gardens and to remove
crime-ridden pedestrian routes. The total estate consists of
517 housing units (individual houses and flats). The ‘live’
project focuses on 252 of these units (123 houses and 129
flats).
Work on the houses will be conducted with most of the
tenants in situ. A unique aspect of the project is the ‘porch
turnarounds’ on the houses. This entails making the back
of the house into a new entrance porch. The houses are
given enlarged back gardens by gains made from old
pedestrian ways. The new front gardens have parking
spaces. Flats receive basic internal refurbishment. For
example: kitchen fittings, vinyl kitchen flooring and
decorations. Extensive landscaping is being conducted on
the estate’s communal areas. This includes turf laying,
tree-planting, re-routing of gas mains and drains, new
street patterns and improved estate lighting. Costs for the
‘live’ project were estimated from a construction industry
standard pricing book [7]. The total budgeted cost before
the project started was estimated as E6,247,849 (see Figure
4).

In order to generate project scenarios with a high level
of realism, it was decided to identify real ‘unacceptable’
risks within the original budget and schedule. The two
most serious risks were then used as a basis for
‘problematic’ issues, which were then fictionalised into the
two scenarios. The identification of unacceptable risks was
achieved using the risk analysis software tool Riskman
Professional (see Section 3). When running through the
research scenarios, construction clients taking the role of
development workers will receive project progress reports
at seven quarterly milestone intervals.

Figure 4. ‘Live’ project summary task budgets
before commencement, source: author.
Each of the simulated projects has had quarterly
milestone files produced, to represent each of the progress
reports throughout the project. These files will be stored
on the researcher’s laptop computer, in the CSV (Comma

578

hourly paid rates were not applicable. Instead, the labour
and material costs were obtained from an industry standard
pricing book [7] and calculated on a per house, block or
site basis. In the initial version of the project budget, sums
were applied as ‘fixed cost’ resource elements. Testing
revealed that Earned Value (see Section 4) fields required
for Procession seemed not to be functioning as expected
when this approach was adopted (i.e. BCWS and BCWP
values not present). Instead, a new baseline file was
created with the ‘cost’ values cut and paste as ‘fixed costs’
directly attached to tasks (i.e. there were now no
resources). Allocation of resources to tasks was done as
units, rather than as a percentage. Number of available
resource units was set to an arbitrary high figure (lO,OOO),
to make sure that sufficient were available. Each ‘fixed
cost’ was set to ‘accrue at prorated’. ‘Actual Costs’ were
calculated automatically by Microsoft Project. A
‘Baseline’ was saved. The baseline provides a record of all
budget values before project commencement. These are
then used for later analysis during the project lifecycle.
In order to generate possible scenarios from the data
set, risk analysis (in the form of Monte-Carlo simulations)
was applied to the Microsoft Project file. The Microsoft
Project compatible software tool Riskman Professional
(see www.riskdriver.com/riskmantooi/) was used to
identify potential project outcomes.

Separated Value) format. The milestone files compress a
project of nineteen months into as many minutes. For this
research, it has been decided that ‘real time’ simulation of
a project is not practical. For example, a construction
client’s need for information conceming the progress of
‘on-site’ projects is likely to make up a vital, but
proportionally small part of their workload. As the
requirement for this information may happen at
unpredictable times, it does not seem a sensible use of
resources to attempt direct observations of the construction
client’s behaviour on a ‘live’ project. The prototypes will
be evaluated by several different construction client
volunteers.
The interview questions will consider the quality of
information provided by the construction clients’ current
methods of progress reporting, allowing for later
comparison with the prototypes. Construction clients will
also be asked about their general familiarity with
computers. After working with each prototype,
construction clients will describe their perception of
information quality. One protocol section will relate to
functional aspects of the software prototype. Its purpose is
to assess not the quality of the information that Procession
presents, but the usability of the software. As such,
reference will be made to standard guidelines for userinterface design.
In order to verify construction client’s actual level of
informational understanding, the data for each of the
simulated projects will include one or more ‘problematic
issues’ (i.e. an apparently trivial deviation factor that
might result in catastrophic project failure). These issues
will be specifically fictionalised to be more obviously
detectable in Procession, than with traditional reporting
methods. The protocol will contain questions relating to
the construction clients’ awareness of these hidden issues.

3. Generating visualisation data from project
scenarios
In Section 2, the overall evaluation methodology was
introduced. This section will now discuss in more detail
the transformation of the original ‘live’ project data into a
visualisation format suitable for Procession. Early on in
the research sequence, a decision had been made to make
Procession compatible with the market-leader project
management package, Microsoft Project. Therefore, the
‘live’ project data was obtained in this format. The original
project durations, dependencies and schedule were left
unchanged.
In project management terminology, ‘resources’ are the
materials and labour costs assigned to a specific task.
Resources had not been assigned to the tasks in the
original file and so assumptions were made about example
resources that could be applied (i.e. the sub-tasks,
materials and labour required to achieve the stated tasks).
As the durations were pre-determined, resources based on

Figure 5. ‘Live’ project summary tasks and their
scheduled durations before commencement,
source: author.
Monte-Carlo simulations can be thought of as
“statistical simulation methods, where statistical
simulation is defined in quite general terms to be any
method that utilizes sequences of random numbers to
perform the simulation” [8]. First described during World
War 11’s Manhattan Project, Monte-Carlo simulations are
now widely used, both in hard science and for predicting
games of chance [8]. Riskman uses Monte-Carlo
simulations to analyse the likelihood and impact of
specified risks. A project consists of tasks, related by
precedence
constraints (in project management
terminology, a PERT network). In a simplified model,
each task has a duration and a set of allocated resources.

579

After completing a large number of simulation cycles,
Riskman calculates each task’s criticality to successful
project outcome. Riskman outputs its results as Microsoft
Excel charts and in its customised Microsoft Project
‘Simulation View’. In the next section, this paper will go
on to describe the results achieved when Riskman (and
traditional project management visualisation techniques)
were applied to the ‘live’ project data used for this
research.

Performance Indices provide a third approach to
progress analysis. In this method, two curves are plotted
(see Figures 9 and 11). One represents cost and the other
schedule. For both plots, a flat.horizonta1 line at E1
indicates that E1 expended is earning & I of completed
project. Values below E l , suggest that the project is either
over-budget or behind schedule. In addition to providing
‘to date’ progress, the performance indices also indicate
the underlying future trends in the project. The two curves
represent:
CPI (Cost Performance Index)
= BCWP/ACWP
SPI (Schedule Performance Index)
= BCWPBCWS

4. Existing project visualisation methods
The traditional method for reporting on project progress
is the s-curve. This is generally utilised to analyse
performance against budget in one of three ways. Most
common of the three is ‘eamed value analysis’ (see
Figures 6 and 7). This provides the budgeted cost of
completing the tasks actually finished at an observation
point. This sum is the ‘eamed value’. Comparing this with
the amount actually spent, is a good indicator of project
performance. There is an acronym for each of the three
curves plotted against each other for eamed value analysis
[91:
ACWP (Actual Cost of Work Performed. Actual cost of
performing the completed tasks).
BCWS (Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled. The
planned budget for the scheduled tasks).
BCWP (Budgeted Cost of Work Performed. The
planned budget for the tasks that were actually completedthe eamed value).
In Completion Cost analysis (see Figures. 8 and lo), an
s-curve plots three lines against each other to compare the
original budgeted cost of the project and the revised cost,
from the point of observation. There are three acronyms
for these curves [9]:
BAC (Budget At Completion. The planned budget).
EAC (Estimate At Completion. The cost at completion
revised as project progresses)
=ACWP+((BAC-BCWP) x (ACWP/BCWP))
ETC (Estimate To Complete. The cost required to
complete the project as at time ‘T’)
= (BAC-BCWP) x (ACWP/BCWP)

Figure 7. Scenario 2-entire project earned value
s-curve, source: author.

5. Conclusion
The Monte-Carlo simulations revealed two summary
tasks which were categorised as having attached risks of
an ‘unacceptable’ level. The first of these was the
summary task ‘scaffolding and temporary roofs and
refurbish existing roofs on some houses and flat blocks’
(see Figures 4 and 5) which had the following
unacceptable risks associated with it* Constraints on availability of extemal scaffolding
components, impact the whole product.
Requirements provided to scaffolding subcontractors
are ambiguous.
Sub-contracted scaffolding task disturbs project
progress.
Sub-contracted scaffolding task is badly managed and
followed up.
Workloads were under-estimated to gain contract.
Required security level for the project is higher than
usual because some tenants are remaining in occupation.
Organisation of key access to occupied properties becomes
expensive and time-consuming.
Project is innovating in its field (porch tumarounds- see
Section 2).

Figure 6. Scenario I-entire project earned value
s-curve, source: author.

580

three months. Scenario 2 sees the estate vehicle access
restricted and most of the tenants remaining in residence.
When the initial work on roads and pavements began in
the third quarter, the situation became unmanageable. All
works relating to the communal estate areas (roads,
pavements, hard landscaping and horticulture) started to
slip and their durations extended. As discussed in the last
section, traditional visualisation techniques were used to
analyse the entire sequence. A series of two-dimensional
s-curves were produced. BAC (Budget At Completion),
EAC (Estimate At Completion) and ETC (Estimate To
Complete) were plotted against each other up to milestone
7, as a costhime s-curve. The expected total cost of the
project (before it started) was E6,247,849. By the end of
scenario 1's planned project time-scale, E6,169,170.78had
been spent and in order to complete (behind schedule), an
additional f14,533,790.3 1 was required. The total project
cost would then have spiralled to f20,781,638.82 (see
Figure 8). In scenario 2, 100% of the f6,247,849 predicted
costs had been spent by the end of the planned project
time-scale and in order to complete (behind schedule), an
additional E56,751,522.90 was required. The total project
cost would then have spiralled to f62,920,693.68 (see
Figure 10).
CPI (Cost Performance Analysis) was plotted against
SPI (Schedule Performance Analysis) as an s-curve to
identify trends within the project progress. For scenario 1,
the CPI and SPI showed that both the schedule and the
budget trends were deteriorating rapidly before the first
milestone. In the second quarter, both budget and schedule
stabilised. By the third milestone, a slight improvement
was seen in both curves, however they quickly dipped
back and continued at approximately E0.30 for the rest of
the schedule. At completion, the project was equally
behind schedule and over budget (see Figure 9). Scenario
2 saw both the schedule and the budget plans deteriorating
rapidly before the first milestone. In the second quarter,
the budget stabilised, while the schedule continued to slip.
By the third milestone, the schedule was stabilising and it

Figure 8. Scenario l-entire project completion
cost s-curve, source: author.

Figure 9. Scenario l-entire project performance
s-curve, source: author.
The second identified summary task was 'site hard
landscaping and initial work on roads and pavements' (see
Figures 4 and 5), which had the following unacceptable
risks associated with it* Feasibility study on impact of road and service rerouting is missing.
There is a low awareness of possible technical
problems.
When estimating costs, some activities are not
quantifiable or have no reference in archived projects.
Project risks were not assessed or are dificult to assess.
Economical and political context has an influence on
project and can be changed by unilateral decision at a high
level. This particular project has to take particular regard
of tenant opinion.
Project environment is evolving.
Technical difficulties are a real challenge.
Detailed assessments of cost and time scale are not
compatible with project budget and schedule. Planning
does not take into account this fact and relies on false
hypotheses.
The two unacceptable risks were fictionalised into
scenarios (with embedded 'problematic' issues). In
scenario 1, the scaffolding sub-contractor failed to remove
house scaffolding according to schedule, extending the
duration of the roofing tasks and delaying the
commencement of the porch turnaround work by almost

Figure 10. Scenario 2-entire project completion
cost s-curve, source: author.

581

continued to mirror the budget curve, with a differential of
approximately E0.20. This continued until the scheduled
completion date, with only a slight budget recovery in the
last quarter. At completion, the project was still very
behind schedule and over budget. The final CPI value
reveals that EO. 10 of value was being earned for every E1
spent (see Figure 11).

Procession were exported from each of the Microsoft
Project milestone files (i.e. 14 files total). In the next stage
of the research, construction clients will apply the
Procession initial prototype to the scenario milestone files.

6. Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a UK Office of Science &
Technology Foresight Challenge Award. The Virtual
Reality Centre for the Built Environment is an
interdisciplinary initiative between University College
London, Imperial College and a consortium of UK
construction industry partners.

7. References
[ 11 A.D. Hall, “Three-dimensional morphology of systems
engineering”, IEEE Transactions on System Science and
Cybernetics, SSC-5(2), USA, 1969, pp.156-160.
[2] K. Pohl, “The Three Dimensions of Requirements
Engineering: A Framework and Its Applications”,Information
Systems 19,3, USA, 1994, pp.243-258.
[3] S . North, “Procession: using intelligent 3d information
visualisation to support client understanding during construction
projects”, Visual Data Exploration and Analysis VII, Robert F.
Erbacher, Philip C. Chen, Jonathan C. Roberts, Craig M.
Wittenbrink, (Editors), proceedings of SPIE (The International
Society for Optical Engineering) Vol. 3690 (24h-26” January
2000, San Jose), ISSN 0277-786X, ISBN 0-8194-3578-3, USA,
2000, pp.356-364.
[4] S.K. Card, J.D. Macklinlay and B. Shneiderman,Readings in
Information Visualization- using vision to think, Morgan
Kaufmann, USA, 1999.
[5] C. Chen, Information Visualization and Virtual
Environments, Springer-Verleg,USA, 1999.
[6] W. Shroeder, K. Martin, and B. Lorensen, The Visualization
Toolkit,Prentice Hall, USA, 1998.
[7] Davis, Langdon and Everest, Spon’s Architects’ and Builders’
Price Book, one hundred and twenty fifth edition, DavisLangdon
& Everest (Editors), E. & F.N. Spon, UK, 2000.
[8] CSEP, “Introduction to monte-carlo methods”, The
Computational
Science
Education
Project,
USA, 1995.
http://csepl .phy.oml.gov/CSEP/MC/MC.html,
[9] K. Forsberg, H. Mooz and H. Cotterman, Visualizing Project
Management, John Wiley & Sons, USA, 1996.

Figure 11. Scenario 2-entire project performance
s-curve, source: author.
BCWS (Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled) was
plotted against BCWP (Budgeted Cost of Work
Performed) and ACWP (Actual Cost of Work Performed)
to produce an s-curve of Eamed Value (see Section 4).For
scenario 1, expenditure stayed almost as expected (ACWP
and BCWS tracked each other throughout) but eamed
value (BCWP) slowly deteriorated throughout the
sequence. Therefore, the work completed by the planned
completion date had cost far more than budgeted and the
schedule had proven to be over optimistic (see Figure 6).
Throughout scenario 2, ACWP almost followed the budget
in the baseline schedule, but increased in task durations.
This resulted in the scheduled expenditure (BCWS)
levelling out to match a longer time-scale. Despite slow
improvement through the sequence, the earned value
(BCWP) was so low compared with the ACWP, that the
situation became irretrievable (see Figure 7).
The sequence outcome for scenario 1 was:
Project had run out of time and budget to complete. No
cost overruns had been incurred to date but more h n d s
would be required to continue.
The sequence outcome for scenario 2 was:
Project had run out of time and budget to complete. No
cost overruns had been incurred to date but funds totalling
many times the original budget would be required to
continue.
Finally, two sets of seven milestone Microsoft Project
files were generated, one for each scenario. To simulate
progress at each milestone, changes were made to the
tasks, in terms of their durations and percentages
complete. For each scenario, it was necessary to work
through the milestone files chronologically. This is
because Microsoft Project always passes revised estimates
onto the next milestone in the sequence. CSV data files for

582

