Effects of Desktop 3D World Design
on User Navigation and Search Performance
John Waterworth
Department of Informatics
Ume&University
jwworth @ informatik.umuse

David Modjeska
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
modjeska @dgp.utoronto.ca

especially for scientific and industrial tasks. The hallmark
of such techniques is a mapping from a source data domain to a destination visual domain, where taskdependent objects and relationships become apparent and
available. A secondary goal is to offload part of the burden of conscious information processing to the human
perceptual system [ 11. While often powerful, existing
techniques generally place the user in a third-person perspective with regard to data, or perhaps in a first-person
perspective in a limited visual space. Richer possibilities
for exploiting human navigational knowledge are open
for research and development,
VR uses the techniques of computer graphics to present a model world to the senses through a variety of
computer media, ranging from full-body immersion to
traditional desktop display. The applications of VR to date
have primarily been in engineering and architectural design (CAD), communication (virtual communities), and
entertainment (computer games). All of these applications
are based more or less directly on real-world phenomena,
yet none of them explores in depth the potential of VR as
a medium to represent abstract information. Recent research on wayfinding in VR suggests that human navigation skills transfer effectively from real into electronic
worlds, in many cases [2]. If this is so, an opportunity
exists to use VR for large-scale information visualization
tasks. Such usage would have considerable benefits for
accessing and communicating large information sets.
While proposals and guidelines for such virtual worlds
exist [3,4], few (if any) tested implementations have been
described in the research literature.
The best opportunities to use VR for large-scale visualization now lie with hierarchical data, for two reasons.
First, the world’s largest information structure is the Web.
Web sites often have a roughly hierarchical structure.
While software engines have greatly helped searching,
browsing has received less support. Second, several wellknown research prototypes of information landscapes for
unstructured data exist. These prototypes are often constructed using statistical analysis techniques [S,61.
At Umei University and the University of Toronto, a
research project is investigating the visualization of hier-

.Abstract
Desktop virtual reality (VR) offers a powerful environment for visualizing structure in large information
sets. I n well-designed virtual worlds, users can employ
skills from wayfinding in the real world. This paper reports the development and testing of a series of prototype
VR worlds, designed to support navigation during
irlformation visualization and retrieval. Results indicated
that
users
subjectively
preferred
naturalistic
envirorznzents over abstract ones, but that users
objectively searched better in environments that had
rigorous hierarchical structure, and support for both
overview and detail. In comparison with a hypertext
interface, the final virtual world design elicited more
enjoyinerit, without worsening search performance
significantly, when appropriate training time was
allowed. This prototype shows the potential value of
navigable VR that is engaging and useful for everyday
irlforination exploration.

1. Introduction
Two recent trends in human-computer interfaces are
striking. First, as the volume and complexity of the information sphere grows, more advanced techniques are
needed to visualize and manage it. Such techniques, generally known as instances of information visualization,
can be seen as moving downward from abstraction to
representation. Second, as the power and sophistication of
computer technology increases, its ability to simulate the
world also increases. Such approaches, generally known
as VR, can be seen as moving upward from concreteness
to abstraction. These two trends are starting to meet in the
domain of information visualization using desktop VR.
This meeting enables significant improvements in the
everyday accessibility of large information sets.
Information visualization addresses the problem of
representing various data types for the end-user, so that
the data can more easily be understood, managed, and
communicated. A variety of techniques has been developed to handle both structured and unstructured data,

215
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

including Apple Computer’s “HotSauce” [ 131, were used
to represent hierarchical information.

archical information in VR, with a focus on navigational
issues. Several prototypes have been designed, developed,
and empirically tested. Experimental tasks mix searching
and browsing, with an emphasis on user performance,
domain learning, and overall satisfaction. Participants
report the research prototypes to be engaging, memorable,
and suitable for real work. At this point, the visualization
technique looks promising for large information environments, e.g., corporate or university intranets, which
allow unified design and management.
The paper is organized as follows. Related research is
reviewed first, followed by discussion of designs and
studies, and finally general conclusions.

3. Study 1
3.1. Design
A large design space exists for building a VR landscape to visualize information. In particular, a discrepancy between semantic and spatial structure must be reconciled [ 141. Our initial hypothesis was that varying the
strength of spatial cueing would significantly affect
search performance and environmental perception. More
specifically, we expected that more spatial cueing would
result in better understanding of the environment’s information items and spatial structure. Accordingly, a set of 3
virtual worlds was designed: the worlds had different levels of visual intensity for virtual objects, but consistent
textual labels and spatial structure [15]. Each design applied the idea of Information Islands [4] to visualize a
filtered subset of a Web index. (Cf. [16].) The 3 worlds
were maximally isomorphic in features (e.g., locations,
sizes, and labels). The data set was chosen for interest to
participants and the research community. The set included
about 1500 items over 7 levels of a hierarchy, which allowed for rich detail and computational tractability.
The first design was most naturalistic, with colored objects and grayscale labels. This design, the Day World,
had strong color and lighting cues (Fig. 1). Virtual objects
were laid out to maximize imageability by Lynch’s guidelines: islands, cities, neighborhoods, and buildings (“districts”); mountains and rivers (“edges”); rivers, roads, and
bridges (“paths”); and geometric objects (“landmarks” or
“nodes”). Objects at each level were clustered around
landmarks, according to sibling groups in the data hierarchy. Color assignment grouped buildings in neighborhoods with common palettes, while ground and water
objects had naturalistic color. (A palette of 300 colors was
provided by graduate students in industrial design at
UmeH University.) Each object had a text label. To avoid
information overload, the distance from which a label was
visible varied inversely with the label’s depth in the data
hierarchy. In general, the best point from which to survey
a region was its center. Avoiding indirect navigation, users could fly freely throughout the worlds, or use a U1
shortcut to jump directly to objects of interest.
Partway between object- and text-based representations of information structure, the Dusk World resembled
the Day World with significant changes in coloring (Fig.
2). In this world, objects were desaturated 90% (as in twilight) and semi-transparent. Labels, however, had bright,
saturated colors, which were grouped by sibling relationships in the data hierarchy. The design was intended to
support shifts between perceptual modes, here object- and
text-based.
At the textual end of the design continuum was the
Night World (Fig. 3), which is essentially the Dusk World

2. Related Research
Though there exists substantial research on information visualization, only a few of the techniques most relevant to this paper will be discussed. (An overview is provided in [7].) XEROX PARC has developed a suite of 3D
tools, the Information Visualizer [ 13, which includes the
cone tree [SI and the hyperbolic browser [9] to present
hierarchical information. A goal of these tools is to shift
part of the burden of conscious cognitive processing to
the perceptual system. Animated visual transitions, for
example, aid users in tracking visualization changes. A
good description of these techniques is “focus+context”,
because they let the user focus on interesting information,
while retaining context in the visual background. It is
unclear how these techniques scale up for very large data
sets, for which an information landscape may be more
navigable and memorable. Such landscapes have been
explored in several research projects that lay out unstructured data using statistical analysis [S, 61. Possibilities for
landscapes with structured data, however, are largely unexplored.
Research on navigation in VR began with urban design
studies of the physical world. Work on legibility (imageability) showed that resident efficiency and enjoyment is
enhanced by a design with landmarks, paths, districts,
nodes, and edges in a strong hierarchy [lo]. Later work
analyzed wayfinding - the conceptual part of navigation into 3 iterative stages: mental mapping, route planning,
and plan execution [ 111. Lynch’s work mainly concerned
strategies to improve mental mapping. Recent research
concludes that wayfinding design principles from the real
world often apply to large virtual environments [2]. In
this work, global structure was recommended to support
good wayfinding. What remains is to use these principles
for structured information visualization, as this research
was conducted with naturalistic landscapes.
Design principles for information landscapes appeared
in a summary of wayfinding research with application to
virtual worlds [3]. In related work, a layout algorithm was
proposed [ 121, based on hyperbolic visualizations [9] and
cone trees [81. More abstract 3D textual environments,

216

without virtual objects. Here, the user could move in an
abstract information space, without absolute location or
distance. This design was inspired by recent prototypes
such as HotSauce and others [13]. The Night World
lacked directional lighting: it showed only brightly colored text on a black background.
The experimental VR environments were constructed
in VRML 2.0, based on a filtered subset of WWW structure. The VRML was generated by C++ code, requiring

about 7 months of development effort. The worldgeneration algorithm takes as input ASCII data in a hierarchical format: processing time is about 5 seconds per
world, and each VRML file is about 3 megabytes in size.
Such desktop VR can be viewed with the CosmoPlayer
plug-in for Web browsers. Special inputloutput devices
are not needed. A graphics card with a high frame-rate,
though, facilitates user interactivity.

Fig. 1. A view of the Day World (Study 1)

Fig. 3. A view of the Night World (Study 1)

$I,$,%

.,,,

,

+

1 , 1 4 /

Middle Ages
Medieval Studies

-

Organizations

Vikings
Antiquity OnLine d Crusades The

Fig. 2. A view of the Dusk World (Study 1)

Fig. 4. A view of the hypertext design (Study 2)
Experimental sessions were conducted on an SGI Onyx
2 computer in a VR lab over a 2-week period. Participants
were first trained in the user interface in a sample world
for 15 minutes. In each experimental world, participants
then explored freely for a couple of minutes. They then
performed a 20-minute “scavenger hunt”: a participant
received a series of paper cards, each showing the context
and name of an information item in the virtual world.
Participants were to find as many of the 10 targets as possible in the available time. A participant could skip diffi-

3.2. Methodology
To compare initial designs on user efficiency and perception, a study was run with 12 participants. The study
was a 1-way within-subjects design with 3 levels of the
factor, world design. Exposure order was fully counterbalanced. Six dependent variables were used in the study.
Five of them were self-reported: world size, exposure
duration, sense of presence, ease of use, and enjoyment.
The sixth variable was search performance.

217

cult targets. The hunt tested search performance, as well
serving to focus attention on the model worlds. After each
world, participants completed a short questionnaire, as
well as a summary questionnaire after all scavenger hunts.
Participants’ comments were also logged.

4.1. Design and Methodology
The second study was carried out using the apparatus
of the first one, but with a high-end personal computer.
For this study, a cleanly-designed HTML hypertext was
implemented using the world-generation software of
Study 1 (Fig. 4).
The study was a 2 x 2 fully within-subjects design with
16 participants. The first independent variable was world
design: VR (Day World) vs. hypertext. The second independent variable was data set: work vs. leisure subsets of
data in Study 1. Participants explored four worlds in 15minute blocks. After each block, participants were asked
to classify (on paper) five new hunt targets. This task assessed learning of domain structure. Also, a questionnaire
item about user “preference” was split into “efficiency”
and “enjoyment,” as these differed in Study 1. Finally, the
number of hunt targets was increased to 25 in anticipation
of efficient hypertext searching.

3.3. Brief Results
In general, self-reported sense of presence (F = 5.60, p

< .Ol), ease of use (F = 4.27, p < .02), and enjoyment (F
= 10.2, p < .001) were highest for the Day World, and
comparably lower for the Dusk World and the Night
World. World design had no significant effect on other
measures, not even on performance. (The overall mean
performance was 4.3 out of 10 targets.) Exposure order
had no significant effect on experimental measures.
Ease of use, enjoyment, and sense of presence were all
significantly correlated with each other (p < .OS). Similarly, ease of use, enjoyment, and performance were all
significantly correlated (p < .05). However, no significant
correlation was found between presence and performance.
There was no apparent learning effect during the study
sessions. All participants used computers often, but game
and Web index usage varied. Analysis showed no significant effect of either factor on experimental measures.
(Full results for Studies 1-3 are available in [17].)

4.2. Brief Results
In general, performance (F = 82.1, p < .OOl), target
classification (F = 8.644, p < .006), efficiency (F = 25.8,
p < .OOl), and ease of use (F = 35.3, p < .OOl) were all
higher for the hypertext interface, and comparably lower
for the VR interface. Enjoyment (F = 4.31, p < .010),
however, was generally lower for the hypertext interface
and comparably higher for the VR interface.
These measures were significantly correlated (p < .05):
performance with target classification, ease of use, and
efficiency; ease of use with efficiency and enjoyment
(inversely); and efficiency with enjoyment (inversely).

3.4. Discussion of Study 1
Most strikingly, this study showed no clear relationship between sense of presence and performance. Performance was not significantly affected by world design
or exposure order, but self-reported sense of presence was
directly affected by world design. Ease of use and enjoyment correlated significantly with both presence and performance, yet neither of these latter variables correlated
with each other. It appears that the proposed VR designs
were equivalent in usability. Participants apparently felt
more engaged with the Day World, which has potential
benefits for concentration, motivation, and long-term
learning.
The next study varied the representation and the input
data set independently. It was thus possible to determine
the differential impacts of world design and underlying
data domain on task performance.

4.3. Discussion of Study 2
In considering results of Study 2, the superiority of
hypertext for most measures was evident in performance,
target classification, self-reported efficiency and ease of
use. Hypertext is evidently a more mature technique for
information visualization and access, as reflected in better
software tools and extensive user experience. At the same
time, as in Study 1, participant enjoyment didn’t match
the most efficient user interface. In fact, participants enjoyed VR more, reflecting greater engagement and motivation. These differences suggest, though, that hypertext’s structural benefits should inform further
development in visualization of hierarchical information.
Similarly, the usability advantages of hypertext could
be considered potential standards for VR development.
Accordingly, users’ suggestions for improvements of the
research prototype, particularly those inspired by comparison with hypertext, could facilitate the iterative design
process. The resulting prototype could become a better
tool for task completion, and a more solid and sensitive
platform for future research.

4. Study 2
Given the results of the first study, it was necessary in
a follow-up study: (1) to establish a baseline of performance and perception by comparing hypertext with VR
representations, since hypertext is the dominant way of
presenting information on the Web; and (2) to investigate
the effect of different (but comparable) data sets, in order
to clarify the relationship between world design and domain data.

218

5. Study 3

significantly correlated (p c .OS). No other significant
effects of world design or exposure order were observed.
Participants reported doing less work in the efficient
design than in the naturalistic one, but performance did
not reflect this.
Participant responses varied on enjoyment of VR designs. Different participants preferred different designs.
Still, efficiency, ease of use, and enjoyment were significantly correlated with each other.
In comparison with results for hypertext in Study 2,
the largest difference was in performance. We can speculatively compare 8 efficient VR sessions in Study 3 with 8
hypertext sessions in Study 2, which used the same methodology. (Only the first 15 minutes of sessions from
Study 3 are included.) There was no significant difference
in performance, though the hypertext mean (40%) was
higher than the VR mean (25%).
Observation suggests further benefits of the efficient
VR design. Participants often returned to distant virtual
locations by recognizing visual structures, when labels
were too distant to read. Such user recognition of visual
features suggests VR’s power for memorability and wayfinding. Moreover, users expressed pleasant surprise at
the new design. It struck many as a viable representation
of Web structure, which offered some of the experiential
engagement of games.

5.1. Design and Methodology
After Study 2, many usability and performance problems in the prototype design were fixed, largely based on
participants’ comments. First, the more structured CityScape layout algorithm was used, to take better advantage
of perceptual cues in desktop VR [ 121. Such cues included
radial axes to trace parent-child relationships; circles in
the ground plane to delineate category boundaries; variable circle arcs to reflect category sizes; and circle centers
with objects and labels to convey category identities.
From a design perspective, these visualization elements
correspond to Lynch’s recommended urban elements. The
CityScape algorithm was thus less naturalistic, but more
efficient and perhaps aesthetically satisfying. Second,
many usability problems in the prototype were fixed.
Third, non-information bearing virtual objects were removed, and the rest geometrically streamlined, to improve graphics performance.

6. Conclusions
To investigate the possible combination of information
visualization and large-scale VR, a series of research prototypes was designed, implemented, and subjected to user
testing. The final prototype features a structured layout
algorithm, geometric abstraction, common landscape and
urban metaphors, and controlled variation in color palette
and landmark form. It presents a balance of algorithmic
structure and naturalistic representation. Experimental
results showed the final design to be generally usable and
liked by research participants (rated approximately 75 out
of 100 for both ease of use and enjoyment).
During these studies, the relationship between subjective reaction and objective performance remained tenuous. An exception to this trend was self-reported efficiency, which was significantly correlated with both
attitudinal and behavioral measures. Nevertheless, it is
worth recalling that software designs can also benefit
from consideration of criteria in addition to efficiency in particular, a sense of engagement, which increases motivation for task performance.
Further research is necessary to assess the promise and
limitations of this visualization approach. First, it would
be valuable to investigate efficient use of the third dimension: what VR designs would support such use? Another
issue is trade-offs between handcrafted and algorithmic
solutions to information representation. For example, to
what extent would 2- or 3D icons improve user navigation and learning, and how can such icons be efficiently

Fig. 5. A view of the “efficient” Day World (Study 3)
The main purpose of Study 3 was to validate a new research prototype (Fig. 5). Accordingly, a variation of
Study 2 was run with 8 participants: this variation compared “naturalistic” and “efficient” versions of desktop
VR. Since each participant was exposed to only two virtual worlds, hunt blocks grew to 20 minutes each. The
study was a 1-way within-subjects design with 2 levels of
the factor, world design. Exposure order was fully counterbalanced.

5.2. Results and Discussion of Study 3
In general, ease of use (F = 12.5, p < .010) and efficiency (F = 12.5, p < .OlO) were higher for the “efficient”
interface, and comparably lower for the “naturalistic”
interface. Ease of use, efficiency, and enjoyment were all

219

[6] M. Hemmje, C. Kunkel, and A. Willett, “LyberWorld -- a
visualization user interface supporting fulltext retrieval,” in
Proceedings of SIGIR ‘94, ACM, pp. 249-258.
[7] C. Chen, Information Visualisation and Virtual Environments. London: Springer, 1999.
[SI G. G. Robertson, J. D. Mackinlay, and S. K. Card, “Cone
trees: animated 3D visualizations of hierarchical information,” in Proceedings of CHI ‘91,ACM, pp. 189-194.
[9] J. Lamping, R. Rao, and P. Pirolli, “A focus+context technique based on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing large
hierarchies,” in Proceedings of CHI ‘95, ACM, pp. 401408.
[lo] K. Lynch, The Image of the City. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT, 1960.
[I 13 R. Passini, Wayfinding in Architecture. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1984.
[ 121 C. Keshkin and V. Vogelmann, “Effective visualization of
hierarchical graphs with the Cityscape metaphor,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on “New paradigms in information visualization and manipulation” (1997), ACM, pp. 5257.
[13] E. Rennison, “Galaxy of News: an approach to visualizing
and understanding expansive news landscapes,” in Proceedings of UIST ‘94,ACM, pp. 3-12.
[I41 C. McKnight, A. Dillon, and J. Richardson, Hypertext in
Context. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University, 199I .
1151 D. Modjeska, “Parallel Worlds: spatial and textual representations of information structure,” in Proceedings of the
Workshop on Personalized and Social Navigation in Information Space (1998), Swedish Institute of Computer
Science, pp. 130- 137.
[ 161 A. Dieberger, “Providing object-based navigation for the
World Wide Web,” in Proceedings of COSIT ‘9.7,
Springer, pp. 93- 106.
[ 171 D. Modjeska, Desktop virtual-reality modeling of hierarchical data. Doctoral Dissertation. Toronto: University of
Toronto, 2000, forthcoming.

incorporated into VR visualization? Given the novelty of
the medium, another potential line of inquiry concerns the
immersion offered by different hardware and software.
What effect would such equipment have on the issues in
this paper? Finally, it is worth considering possibilities for
very large-scale, dynamic structures such as the Web, and
for social navigation of shared virtual worlds by physically distant collaborators. It is hoped that the present
paper will encourage the pursuit of these possibilities for
future research.

7. Acknowledgement
For work on prototypes, we thank K. Moijson, D.
Steeman, W. Frost and R. Kroll. A. Lund gave implementation advice, and M. Chignell and S. Zhai commented on
drafts of this paper.

8. References
[I] S. K. Card, G. G. Robertson, and J. D. Mackinlay, “The
Information Visualizer, an information workspace,” in
Proceedings of CHI ’91, ACM, pp. 181-188.
[2] R. P. Darken and J. L. Sibert, “Wayfinding strategies and
behaviors in large virtual worlds,” in Proceedings of CHI
’96, ACM, pp. 142-149.
[3] N. G. Vinson, “Design guidelines for landmarks to support
navigation in virtual environments,” in Proceedings of CHI
‘99, ACM, pp. 278-285.
[4] J. A. Waterworth, “A pattern of islands: exploring public
information space in a private vehicle,” in Multimedia, Hypermedia and Virtual Reality: Models, Systems, and Applications, P. Brusilovsky, P. Kommers, and N. Streitz, Eds.
Berlin: Springer, 1996.

[5] M. Chalmers, “Using a landscape metaphor to represent a
corpus of documents,” in Proceedings of COSIT ‘93,

Springer, pp. 377-390.

220

