How Presentation Graphs Communicate
A.S.C. Ehrenberg
South Bank University
Email: ehrenba@sbu.ac.uk
the presenter does not or cannot actually
articulate what his or her graph is saying, that
will be the message: ‘‘I have data, not
information.”
Presentation graphs are not, we think, for
puzzle-solving: “to help people answer
questions about quantitative data” rzzJ. Instead,
presentation graphs can make an alreadyknown message graphic (i.e. explicit,
expressive, vivid). This is to an audience who
would usually see the exhibit only for a few
seconds.

Abstract
Graphs can show up simple qualitative
patterns well, but not numbers or quantities.
To communicate, a graph must have an
explicit and verbalized story-line.

1. Introduction
Section 1 of the paper argues that to convey
a message, a graph has to have an explicit
storyline. To be remembered, that storyline
has also to be verbalized.
These two
requirements are seldom discussed in the
literature, let alone widely practiced.

I

”-

I ,.

_.

l

I

l

-

Figure 2. “McBelding certainly has a gift
for making cold statistics come to life.”
Q The New Yorker, 1911

Figure 1. No story-line
For the onlooker to see what the graph is
saying, its message needs to be
0 Simple
0 Explicit
Verbalized
The message has to be “obvious at a glance”
- at least once one has been told what it
actually is. Otherwise onlookers have each to
work out the message all themselves, which is
what the presenter should already have done.
To remember any such message, it has also
to be stated in words or “verbalized.” That
seems to fix it in our memory, which is
predominantly semantic, i.e. relating to the
meaning of things expressed in language.
Figure 1 earlier had no manifest message,
other than “Here’s some data which I don’t
understand. Maybe you can.” Figure 3
however illustrates that it could have a

Section 2 emphasizes that a graph can
convey a simple qualitative relationship
supremely well: “It’s a curve, not a straight
line.” But graphics seldom convey detailed
quantities or numbers in a memorable way, if
at all.
Section 3 notes briefly how presenters’
familiarity with their own material often makes
them grossly overestimate what anyone new to
it (i.e. the typical audience) can get out of their
charts.

2. An Explicit Storyline To Remember
When a graph has no storyline, the data
should probably not be shown at all. What is
the point of presenting a graph to others if it is
not saying anything? Simply to display data
pictorially seldom communicates anything. If
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

206

message: “One line goes up; all the others go
down.”
-cI

1....

i

0

IO

20

30

X

Figure 4. No story-line
Figure 3. “One line goes up; all the others
go down”

Anyone who is used to the idea of a curve
can perceive the shape of the x-y relationship.
But can they then remember it - simply as a
picture - two minutes, days, or months later,
and after also being exposed to other graphs?
Without looking back.
Almost certainly not. What purely visual
graphs from the past can we now recall? Few,
if any.
But such recall is again much helped it,
seems, if the message has been articulated or
“verbalized”, e.g. by being explicitly told “It’s
a curve” in the text, and/or in the caption,
and/or by the voice-over:

Having had this storyline pointed out and
also verbalized (“One line goes up”), we can
perceive it better on the graph in the first place
and also remember it better later. Indeed, we
can now see it when we look back at the
previously obscure Figure 1 (It’s obvious:
“One line goes up”).
Constructing graphs without a message is
however popular since it calls for almost no
effort. All the readings can be put on the chart
(e.g. by a graphic designer or computer
program) without having to select, analyze,
summarize, or understand the data in any way.
There need be no brain-strain.
Similarly for the readers. They can just look
at the chart with no intellectual effort
(compared with reading print for example lzOl). Yet they will feel that they have done
their job - they have looked at all the data,
every single point or line.
It seems essential to express a visual image
also in words. This is so even with a simple
graphs, like Figure 4.

YI

300

0

IO

20

30 X

Figure 5. “An upward-sloping curve”
Verbalizing a graph’s storyline aids
repetitive learning and allows wider memory
associations to form.
The process might go something like this:
FIRST we glance at Figure 5 and form an
impression of what it is saying.
NEXT we take in the written summary: “An
upward-sloping curve.”
THEN we look back at the graph and check:
“Ah yes, it is an upward-sloping curve”
(and perhaps say it under our breath).

207

All this can be very quick - a second or two.
But by then we have gone over the basic
information (“A curve, upward-sloping”) three
or four times, and in varied, non-boring ways.
This repetition can be often enough (or
technically perhaps long enough) for the
message to have entered our long-term
memory.
Any attempt to recall the x-y relationship a
week or year later can then be aided by the
association of the visual and verbal cues in our
mind: ‘There was a graph . . . Ah yes! It was
an upward-sloping curve. . .”, followed by
some remembrance, image, or impression of
the actual picture itself. Such recall would
hardly occur, we think, just with the words on
their own, or with the wordless Figure 4 on its
own.
Looking at pictures in an art gallery, we all
tend to crane forward to read the attribution,
often for almost as long as we look at the
picture (Madonna with Child, by Vermicelli,
1496-1531). We seem to do so because the
verbal message allows us to remember the
picture better next day (or at least to remember
seeing the picture: “There was a picture. Ah
yes, Madonna with Child. I remember. She
was in blue.”)

own, or a silent McBelding waving his hands
in Figure 2, would probably help little. “In the
case of visually presented items, registration in
this memory store will occur only if the subject
sub-vocally articulates the material (like saying
it under one’s breath) to leave a more durable
phonological memory trace” ‘31.
To store information in our Long Term
Memory (LTM), we use repetition or rehearsal
(like the earlier “FIRST”, “NEXT”,“THEN’
steps for the upward-sloping curve of Figure
5). In this we have also to use our short-term
memory. But STM is fragile. It is wiped out
with by interruptions such as exposure to more
than about seven chunks of data [271, or our own
thoughts [32’, or eye-movements “I.
To read the scale-numbers on the left-hand
axis of Figure 4, we would have moved our
eyes away from the points on the curve over on
the right and so will have forgotten where they
were. The further eye-movement in looking
back again at the curve on the right can then
make us forget the scale-numbers on the left.
And so on. A key to good graphic design is
therefore how far the related elements of a
display are easy to take in without undue eyemovements. (This is bad news for T ~ f t e ’ ~ ~ ’ ~ ’ ’ ,
and for most graphic designers).

Semantic versus Visual Memories
Even a clear-cut visual pattern like in Figure
4 has to be described in words if we are to be
able to recall it later. If the message is
verbalized, it can be associated with other
verbalized (semantic) memories. In contrast,
purely visual memories - the shape in Figure 4
say - seem to form few mental links with other
such visual shapes or the like. Even “natural
visualizers” (who do exist) do not seem good at
purely visual memory tasks [‘I.
Instead,
virtually everyone’s recall of visual
information is helped if this has also been
conceptualized.
[ ‘ I ’ demonstrated this for remembering the
positions of pieces on a chessboard. When
people were shown 20 or so haphazardly
arranged chessmen for a few seconds, both
chess experts and duffers could hardly recall
afterwards which pieces had been where.
But when shown 20 pieces from an actual
game, the chess experts could recall their
locations almost without error (the duffers still
could not). The experts could perceive how
the 20 pieces had got to where they were.
They then used this semantic association to
recall later where the pieces actually had been
when they had seen the board.
Putting the message into actual words
appears to matter most. The bold line on its

Association as a Memory-Crutch
Once a key feature of a graph is settled in
our LTM, we can use this knowledge to
perceive and remember secondary features of
the graph.
For example, having absorbed that it is a
curve in Figure 5, we can note that it is
concave upwards; its final slope steep, and the
various observed points are all close to the
curve (a “good fit”). We can fairly easily
perceive these further details just visually,
without their being explicitly verbalized
(especially if we have experience in looking at
graphics). But these extra details seem to
become even easier to perceive, and much
more memorable, if they are also briefly put
into words (as has just been done, i.e. upwardsloping, concave-upwards, steep, “good fit”,
etc.).
The verbalized message can be quite limited
yet still “work” as a lead-in to the picture. For
Figure 3, “One line goes up” did not actually
say which line that was. The words on their
own were too succinct. But the graph together
with the verbal message lets us cope with the
extra detail just visually (which line it is, etc.).
And we can take in that extra visual data
without its having to be spelled out verbally.
The verbalized message need therefore not be

208

comprehensive, but just be a simplified and
succinct way into the visual display.

Table 1. The data in Figure 5

Recognition versus Recall
Recognition is often confused with Recall.
If we look back at one of the earlier charts in
this paper (even much later), we usually know
that we have seen that chart before: we
“recognize” it. “Once seen, never forgotten.”
But without looking back we can probably
remember little of the detailed information
(unless it had been verbalized). Recognition
does not amount to Recall. McBelding’s
Figure 2 is highly memorable as a mere
picture. But what can we remember, without
looking back? How many men were there?
How many smoked a cigar? How many lines
were on the chart? Our memories (unaided
recall) largely to fails us.
Recall is usually better the simpler and less
cluttered the input. Only a simple succinct
verbalizable and rehearseable message is likely
to be recalled in the first instance (e.g. “One
line went up”). In contrast, visual recognition
is usually better the more detailed the specific
input, as in recognizing human faces or
McBelding’s picture.

7

13

19

15

22

27

28

One can nonetheless work out numerically
that it is a curve. But the task would be longwinded and fairly sophisticated, compared with
simply looking at Figure 5 (e.g. one can work
out the y/x ratios and note their 10-fold
increase, which signifies “curve”). What is
more, assessing the shape of the y/x
relationship would be virtually impossible with
Table 2, where the readings have not been
ordered by size (see also ‘I6’).

Table 2. The Table 1 data in alphabetical
order
ICode/A B C D
E
F G H I
Y.‘

50 320

x.’

15

28

10 150 380

7 22

29

30 260 130
13

27

19

3. Quantitative Detail
Whether graphics communicate successfully depends on whether the information is
qualitative or quantitative. A graph can excel
at communicating a simple qualitative feature,
such as a shape (“a curve”) or an order of magnitude (BIG or small). But graphs seldom
successfully communicate detailed quantities
or numbers.

3.1 Charts versus tables
Figure 5 made instantly self-evident (i.e.
highly “graphic”) how the x-y relationship is a
curve rather than a straight line.
In contrast, the shape of the relationship is
not self-evident from the y and x numbers
themselves. as set out in Table 1.

400

200

1086

1986

1990

1992

Year

Figure 6. A Bar-Chart
But it is not easy to remember the numbers
in Figure6 because the chart does not give

209

(of Doll & Hill and lung cancer fame) however
thought that Figure 8 meant little or nothing to
him (as indeed it does to me or, I imagine, to
virtually anyone else - what is the message, in
words?). But under the circumstances of a
Vote of Thanks to the President, Bradford Hill
was not allowed to be critical. He nonetheless
managed to be so by blaming himself: he said
that he was one of those people who often
become “foolishly confused when confronted
with data in the form of diagrams.”
Yet Bradford Hill was not foolish, only
courageous - he admitted that he did not
understand.
In response to Pearson’s ‘%et us now look
at the plot of the data. What do we first note?’
Bradford Hill replied: “I am myself so made
that I first note some crosses and some black
spots and I find great difficulty in going
beyond that.”
Pearson had thought that his graph would
communicate. But he had ignored the fact - as
do most analysts and presenters - that unlike
his audience and all the rest of us, he already
knew what his graph would be saying before he
drew it.

them.
How much did the number of
unemployed go up? Did the proportion of
female unemployed stay the same? What was
this proportion?
Figure7 shows the numbers. They are
much easier to read off and to interpret. But
the chart has really just become a somewhat
badly laid-out table (especially if there were
more segments in each column, as in a socalled Nielsen chart illustrated by the 1992
column).

600

400

200

1986

1988

1990

1992

Year

Figure 7. The Bar-Chart with numbers
Graphic experts have long debated whether
or not pie-charts are better than bar-charts (e.g.
‘23/331 ). This has always remained inconclusive
because the experts did not seem to realize that
neither form of graphic communicates any of
the detailed numerical information at all well,
especially not compared with a wellconstructed or “graphic” table (e.g. ‘15’161).

5. Discussion
Many graphs do not communicate at all.
Once one looks away there is almost no
digested information to remember. People
mostly agree with this once the point has been
made.
Nonetheless. the failure of most
statistical
presentation
graphics
to
communicate is seldom discussed in the
literature. Certainly there is no systematic
evidence to the contrary, i.e. that most graphs
do successfully communicate meaningful
information where the onlooker can readily say
“This is what that graph said.”
William Buckley has quoted an unnamed
professor: “No proposition is so simple that it
can’t be rendered unintelligible by putting it on
a graph”. This paper has sought to qualify that
judgement marginally: “Almost no proposition.. .”.
The arguments put forward in this paper are
working-hypotheses for more effective
presentation graphs. In summary they say:
1. A graph needs to have an explicit and
simple visual storyline or message if it is
to communicate. If it has no storyline, that
is what should be said: “Here’s a graph. I
can’t tell what it’s saying. Perhaps you
can.” The better alternative then is not to
show the graph at all.

4. Familiarity
A danger with any presentation graph is that
its presenter is already familiar with it. Unlike
the audience, he usually has had plenty of time
to look at it and already knows what variables
were plotted, the axes and the symbols, and
even the storyline (if any). This point was well
made 40 years ago in the President’s address to
the Royal Statistical Society [”I. Pearson
showed Figure 8 and expected it to
communicate.
s, s, 5 s,

..

. +
+.

,:

t

.

:+

Figure 8. Pearson’s “errors of sampling and
chemical analysis”
In moving the formal Vote of Thanks as
previous President, Sir Austin Bradford Hill

210

Graphs can excel in conveying qualitative
information - e.g. a shape, or an order of
magnitude.
3. But the graph’s visual message needs then
also to be expressed in words. People
seem to recall a verbalized concept far
better than a purely visual image. The
communication task here is to remember
or recall what the graph said - e.g. “One
line goes up” - not just to recognize that
one has seen the graph before.
Only a few words should however be
needed. These should relate easily to the
visual.
The combined impact and
memorability of a picture with words can
then be unbeatable, as in a good cartoon.
4. To convey any detailed quantities, the
actual numbers would need to be shown
on the graph. But even that seldom works
- little that is memorable appears usually
to be conveyed.
Instead, the numbers are better given in
a well laid-out table, not as a jumbled bar-,
line- or pie-chart. (One cannot easily add,
average, multiply, or in any other way
analyze and summarize the dots, lines, and
bars on a graph.)

2.

Bibliography
For general discussions of graphs see 9’ lo, l8,
13,71. But a recent 3,000-word “How to” note
on graphs for the Royal Statistical Society
gave not a single graphic illustration.
Among texts, l3l1 remains something of a
cookbook though with more Don’ts than Do’s.
61 and especially ‘34*351 are rather idiosyncratic, as noted in the overviews by [*11 and [*I.
More recently, 1381 contains some helpful admonitions. But he showed two hundred graphs
none of which appeared to convey a memorable message. 1221gave many Dos and Don’ts,
with helpful insights. But his “Dos” do not
explicitly aim to convey known quantitative
story-lines. Nor do they seem to succeed.
Few communication tests of graphics have
been reported. Those that have been are
mostly puzzle-solving - they test how quickly
or accurately people can interpret a graph
which is new to them, rather than whether the
analyst or teacher has in fact managed to pass
on what he, the analyst, already knew. Yet
communicating known knowledge would seem
the essence of using graphs to present information.
Note: This presentation is a condensed version of earlier invited papers “4’171. I am indebted to many helpful comments by Pat
Costigan-Eaves, Katherine Tyler, Patricia
Wright and especially Helen Bloom.

Visual displays can often also help to focus
attention in an audio presentation. On the
written page they can also provide eye-relief.
But we must beware of talking down to our
audience (“The Chairman needs pictures!”).
The audience may not know much about our
technicalities, but they are probably better
people than we are, otherwise they would be
doing the presentation.
They want
information, not just entertainment.
As we said in the main text, the big danger
with graphs is that they are both easy to
construct and easy to look at. All the readings
are there without having had to select, analyze,
summarize or understand them in any way.
Hence there need be no brain-strain.
What we need instead is to communicate
digested information, not raw data. We should
never simply present “the readings” as such,
but only a storyline, i.e. conclusions or interpretations of the data, with some of the data to
provide support or even “proof.” Otherwise
“the reader may as well look at a blank sheet of
paper”, as the inventor of modern statistical
graphics already said almost 200 years ago 1301.

[ 11 A.D. Baddeley, The Psychology of Memory, New York: Basic Books, 1976.

[21 ___ , Your Memory: A User’s Guide.
London and New York: Penguin Books,
1982a.
131 ___ , “Reading and Working Memory.”
BPS Bulletin, 1982b, 35,414-417.
[4] F.C. Bartlett, Remembering. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1932.
[5]J. Bertin, Graphics and Graphic Information Processing, New York: Walter De
Gruyter, 1981.
[6] J.M. Chambers, Cleveland, W.S., Kleiner,
B., and Tukey, P.A. Graphical Methods for
Data Analysis. Belmont: Wadsworth, 1983.
[7] W.S. Cleveland. “A Model for Graphical
Perception.” Murray Hill, NJ: AT&T Bell
Laboratories. 1990.
[SI P. Costigan-Eaves, “The History and Development of ‘How to’ Manuals in the Development of Statistical Graphics.” Annual Convention of the National Computer Graphics
Association, Anaheim, May 1986.

211

[9] D.R. Cox, “Some Remarks on the Role in
Statistics of Graphical Methods.” Applied
Statistics, 1978,27,4-9.
, “Graphical Models in Statistics:
[lo]A Review.” Marion Zalem Lecture: Harvard
School of Public Health, 1998.
[ 111A.D. de Groot, “Perception and Memory
versus Thought: Some Old Ideas and Recent
Findings.” In: Problem Solving (B. Kleinmutz, ed.), New York: Wiley, 1966.
[ 121G. De Sanctis, “Computer Graphics as
Decision Aids: Directions for Research.” Decision Sciences, 1984, 15,463-487.
[ 131D.W. Dickson, De Sanctis, G., and
McBridge, D.J.,. “Understanding the Effectiveness of Computer Graphics for Decision
Support: A Cumulative Experimental Approach.” Communications of the ACM, 1986,
29,40-47.
[ 141A.S.C. Ehrenberg, “What We Can and
Can’t Get from Graphs, and Why,” Annual
Conferences of the American Statistical Association, Detroit, and the National Computer
Graphics Association, Anaheim, 1981, 1984.
-w
-[
,A Primer in Data Reduction, New
York and Chichester: John Wiley, (1982 repr.
1994).
[161---.
, “Making Data User-Friendly.’’
South Bank University: The R&D Initiative,
Marketing Learnings 2. 1998.
1[71, “What W Can and Can’t Get from
Graphs, and Why?’ Journal of Targeting,
Measurements and Analysis in Marketing,
1999, 8, 113-134.
[ 181S.E. Fienberg, “Graphical Methods in
Statistics.” American Statistician, 1979, 33,
165-178.
[ 191B. Ives, “Graphical User Interfaces for
Business Information Systems.” MIS Quarterly
Special Issue, 1982, 15-47.
[20] D. Kahneman, Attention and Effort.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
[21] S.M. Kosslyn, “Graphics and Human Information Processing: A Review of Five
Books.” J. American Statistical Association,
1985,80,444-512.
[ 2 2 1, The
~ elements of Graph Design.
New York: Freeman, 1994.
[23] W.H. Kruskal, “Criteria for Judging Statistical Graphics.” Utilitas Mathematica.
1982,21B, 283-310.
~
4, “Visions1of Maps and
~ Graphs.”
Proceedings of the International Symposium of
Computer-Assisted Cartography, 27-36.
[25] M. Macdonald-Ross, “How Numbers are
Shown.” Audio-visual Communications Review, 1977,25,359-409.

[26] A. McIntosh, A. and Wheble, B., “The
Myth of Fragmentation”, Admap, 1997, 379,
26-29.
[27] G.A. Miller, “The Magical Number
Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits of our
Capacity for Processing Information.” Psychological Review, 1956,63, 81-97.
[28] F.R. Oliver, “How to Present Information
in Graphs and Diagrams”, London: The Royal
Statistical Society, 1998.
[29] E.S. Pearson, “Some Aspects of the Geometry of Statistics.” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society A , 1956, 119, 125-149.
[30] W. Playfair, An Inquiry in the Permanent
Causes of the Decline and Fall of Powerful and
Wealthy Nations. London, 1805.
[311C.F. Schmid, Statistical Graphics. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1983.
[32] H. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1963.
[33] I. Spence, “Visual Psychophysics of Simple Graphical Elements.” J. of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,1990, 16,683-692.
[34] E.G. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Cheshire, Conn: Graphic
Press, 1982.
[351___ , Visual Explanations. Cheshire,
CO“: Graphics Press, 1997.
[36] H. Wainer, “How to Display Data Badly.”
The American Statistician, 1984, 38, 137-147.
[37] C. Wykes, and Chapman, M., Plain Figures. London: HMSO, 1997 (2ndEdition).
[38] G. Zalatny, Say I t With Charts. Chicago:
Irwin, 1996 (3rdEdition).

212

