A Functional Analysis of the Role of Visualisation in Architectural Conceptual
Design
J. Mcfadzean’,
The Open University, Department of Design & Innovation, Milton Keynes. MK7 6AA UK.
Abstract
The view that visual reasoning in design is facilitated by
external visualisation, specifically sketching, is based on
both anecdotal evidence and empirical observations. The
purpose of the current research is to investigate the
relationship between visual reasoning, via sketches and
the development of the early conceptual stages of the
design process. Thus, the paper focuses on an analysis of
visualising in conceptual design problem solving. The
application of a new taxonomy throws light on experts’
use of external visualisations. The results indicate that
there are ‘shifts in focus’ with regards to the functional
use of visualisations in architectural conceptual design .

1. Introduction
Design has traditionally been viewed as the drawing
of objects that are then built or manufactured. There has
traditionally been two distinct ways in which to describe
the process of designing. The first perceives it essentially
as a rational, logical, sequential process intended to solve
problems. Thus, for the term “design process” we can also
read “problem-solving process”. The problem solving
approach means looking at design as a search process, in
which the scope of the steps taken towards a solution is
limited, for example by the information processing
capacity of the designer ‘11[41. The second way to consider
design is to perceive it as a process of reflection in action
”’],
where each design problem is unique. The approach is
one that emphasises the designers ‘reflective conversation
with the situation’.

Whether one views designing as a reflective
conversation with the attributes of the problem space or as
a logical sequential search process, research has shown
that design problem solving is a process that can be
accentuated through the use of external representations.
Research evidence from; design sciencer51r6”71“21[’8’,
design education and cognitive science[81r’01‘11111311241
suggests that sketching is a fundamental activity within the
design process. Therefore, mapping designers’ use of
external visualisations’ to their cognitive processing of
design information would seem to be essential for the
understanding of design problem solving. It is a process
that needs to be examined in greater detail.
A starting point for current research discussed in this
paper was research conducted by Verstijnen[26’. She
showed that in an experimental shape recognition task,
which compared experts and novice use of sketches, only
experts were able to use visualizations to their advantage.
Thus, one may ask what domain specific procedures are
used by expert architects when visualizing a design
problem space? The research sets out to establish the
functional attributes of external visualisations and the
analysis of the results reflect this perspective. It could be
argued that a functional model of external visualisations in
conceptual design may not provide the means by which to
assess how sketches facilitate problem solving. However,
a functional model of the acquisition of domain-specific
knowledge should enable us to understand why designers
need to visualise in architectural problem solving, which
is the focus of this paper.
This paper emphasises the importance of external
visualisations. A new taxonomy, built on architectural
domain-speci$c procedures, has been developed. The
taxonomy deals with The Retrospective Analysis of the
Designers Cognitive Processes (RADCOP), with specific
reference to the function of their visualisations. The

1

Current address: ESRC Centre for Research in Development,
Instruction and Training, (CREDIT) School of Psychology, University
of Nottingham.

*

165
0-7695-0743-3/00$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

The term visualization is defined as the visual representation of
information.

validity of the taxonomy has been tested using 5 encoders
and it has been applied to the verbalisations of 5 experts
architects .

conceptualise an architectural design problem space.
Ullman, Wood and Craig"" and L a w ~ o n " ~also
' suggest
that designers, in general, are know for not being able to
think without making marks on paper. Ale~ander'~'
goes
some way to explain the designers need to sketch. He
noted that in some instances conflicting requirements can
be calculated in ones head. However, as design problems
reach levels of complexity, the complexity of the problem
will defeat the designer unless a simple way of writing it
down is found that enables the problem-space to be
broken it into smaller problems. A reoccurring theme in
the literature is the proposition that visualisations may act
as external memory aids, facilitating the processing of the
acquisition of new information r141,121and at the same time
the process of visualising may facilitate the designer in the
perception of different structures, suggesting a rerepresentation of the problem space[221. Lastly, Ullman,
Wood and Craig [251 proposed that this manipulation of
information in a designer's head can only be studied
through an analysis of his or her representation of these
features as written text, words, drawing or gestures.

Purcell and Gero"" identified five qualitative themes
from the literature on design sketching. One of these
themes embodied the notion that sketches bring about a
'focus shift' and that these shifts are desirable because they
aid the processing of conceptual design knowledge, in
new and novel ways. Research conducted by Suwa and
Tversky'"' analysed designers' attention and their shift in
focus when dealing with tokens or the attributes of the
design task. The current research has focused on
establishing the extent to which the interrelationships
between different types of knowledge associated with
external visualizations strategies (i.e reasoning, resolution,
emergence) changed over the period of the design task
and whether qualitative themes could be elicited from the
data. Thus, the current research can be differentiated from
prior research because the granularity of the analysis is at
the level of identifying the problem-solving strategies,
rather than at the token, attribute (specific domain specific
knowledge) level of analysis. The current research assess
the data in terms of how external visualisations are used
over the whole design task, the strategies that are
involved, rather than the content of the information
contained within each focus shift.

2.

Describing

Visualisation

in

3. Previous Methods of Analysis
Analysis of the design process, according to Dorst and
D i j k h ~ i s ' ~can
] be classified into two categories: the
process-oriented approach and the context-orientated
approach. The first approach is based on the informationprocessing paradigm. It describes design in terms of
problem states, operators, plans, goals and strategies 13'.
The second approach is more descriptive in nature, tries to
reveal the content of the designers' thoughts in terms of
what they attend to, and the information they retrieve from
memory. Suwa et a1 [231 consider the second approach to
be the most appropriate when analysing how designers
cognitively interact with their external visualisations.
However, the approach is one which has until recently has
been limited by the lack of taxonomies to describe the
contents of the designers thoughts and visualisations.

Design

Problem Solving
The design process begins with the identification and
analysis of a problem or need and proceeds through a
structured sequence of formulating, evaluating and
solution finding. It is a process in which information is
researched and ideas explored and evaluated, until the
optimum solution to the problem or need is devised.
Process models of the design have traditionally
considered conceptual designing in the early phrases of
the design process, where information is researched and
ideas are explored. At this stage designers rely on external
representations: sketches, schematic diagrams and notes.
Lawson"'] has described how sketches, as external
visualisations, are not always for others in the community,
rather they are also used as a form of visual reasoning.
Thus, the designer may not be concerned with the
production of a drawing that explains itself or the drawing
of an object that is totally resolved. Rather, sketching is
used as a working tool that aids the designers'
manipulation of the constraints of the design problem.
Wiggins and S c h ~ n ' ~and
' ~ Akin['1[21,emphasise this point
when they describe the need to sketch in order to

Suwa et a1
recently developed a taxonomy for
examining the contents of the designers cognitive process
based on Suwa and T v e r s k y ' ~ [ ~ content-orientated
~'
taxonomy. A taxonomy which was itself based on
Gold~chmidt's['~'proposition that design reasoning is
characterised by the designers oscillation between two
modes of thought: 'seeing as' which deals with figural
arrangements and 'seeing that' which refers to non-figural
issues that need to be resolved. Thus, the major
dichotomy in Suwa et a1 [221 classification was between
visual and non-visual information. Four categories of
'actions' were derived physical and perceptual, which
relates to visual information, functional and conceptual,

166

which relates to non-visual information. The categories
were sub-categorised into numerous sub-categories.
The problems with Suwa's [231 taxonomy are two fold.
Firstly, the coding of the protocol the content and the
processing of information is inextricably linked. The
taxonomy is half way between, describing the content of
the design protocols in terms of the 'what' designers draw
(i.e. the rectangle for the parking), and describing how the
designer processes the information. Secondly, and more
importantly, the reliability of the coding for both Suwa et
a1 [''I and Suwa and Tversky's [241 has not as yet tested,
either by using alternative encoders or by conducting
more than one protocol study, using the taxonomy.
Like Suwa and Tversky's [24J9 Do and Gross [6J, the
authors (McFadzean et al) have previously suggested that
designers sketching activity can be mapped to their
cognitive processing of design information. The current
research can be differentiated from prior research, for
although it investigates the content of the visualization it
focuses on the function of sketches in architectural design.
This paper discusses the results of applying a new
taxonomy of architectural design knowledge, to five
expert architectural designers. It examines the how the
approach has been used to construct a high level
functional analysis of external visualisation in conceptual
design, so that the designers evolution of the conceptual
design problem space can be traced.
Understanding complex aspects of design cognition, in
more than an anecdotal way, requires rigorous methods of
analysis. It has been suggested [I7' that in order to
investigate the use of external visualisations in design
there is a need for more reliable methods for data capture,
visualisation and interpretation. The authors have
developed a computational method for capturing
sketching activity and a method for visualising and
analysing designers sketching behaviour. The method is
referred to as Computational Sketch Analysis [1913'201. It
has been used, not only to analyse the production methods
by which external visualisations are created, but also to
capture designers' retrospective reports of their sketching
activity. Thus the computational method has been used in
conjunction with an analysis of the verbal protocols. This
paper uses the data collected from the CSA experiments
and asks the question, why do expert architectural
designers sketch? The focus of the paper is specifically on
the analysis of the function of external visualisations in
architectural conceptually problem solving.

5. A Laboratory Experiment and Data
collection
5.1 Task and Subjects

The experimental set-up replicated a conventional
sketching environment with additional facilities for data
capture. An A3 graphics tablet with plain or tracing paper
overlay plus a lead pencil allows the designer to sketch
normally.
There are two forms of data capture:
1. The Data Capture program collects and time-stamps
the graphical data generated during a design session.
2. Video recorders capture the context of the design
actions and verbalisations of the designers.
Six CSA experiments were undertaken. Only
participants (Dl,D2,D3,D5,D6) who were architects with
between 2 and 20 years of professional experience were
considered relevant to the study. As D4 was an engineer
their data was not analysed. The experiments were all
identical, lasting about one hour and consisted of two
tasks: a design task and a retrospective report task. The
design task asked the participants to design a smoker's
lodge (an outdoor shelter for smokers) on a University
campus. Participants were given a design brief, after
which they were taken to a site that could potentially
house the lodge. On returning they were asked to produce
conceptual designs. The task was recorded using the 'Data
Collector'. Following the design task, the designers
reviewed their sketching activity using the Sketch
Analyser and they were asked to report on what they were
thinking when they were generating the visualisations "O'

6 Method of Analysis
6.1 Transferring Data into Protocol transcripts

The raw data was transferred into five protocol
transcripts. The transcripts were segmented by pauses
greater than 2 seconds. A pause greater than 2 seconds
indicates that the successive statement probably provides
information on a new perceived item. According to this
method the protocols contained 103, 70, 33, 110, 70
segments for designers 1 to 5 respectively.
6.2 Identifying Design Suppositions

The research presented in this paper uses qualitative
and quantitative approaches to analyse expert designers,
complex interacting design thoughts in relation to their
production methods for creating external visualisations.
The data was inductive in nature. The coding systems
used for the analysis of the verbal protocols emerged from

167

the data but was informed by the literature. [71'121'13'[21'. It
was based on the idea of that the dialogue regarding the
function of sketches could be coded. The functions are
termed 'Design Suppositions'. A Design Supposition was
defined as a group of words that made up a unit of sense
or meaning, usually separated from the next Design
Supposition by the end of an utterance. The transcripts of
the designer's retrospective reports were divided into
separate 'Design Suppositions'.

A detailed discussion and analysis of Design
Suppositions is discussed by McFadzean, Cross and
Johnson"6'. Nine Design Suppositions define the
classification-encoding
" schema:
1. External memory aid: The designer discusses how
memory for other design problems, concepts and objects
with similar constraints to those of the present problem
are recorded in order to later act as stimuli.
2. Emergence: The designer reports sketches are used to
develop new ideas and aid in the emergence of new
visual forms
3. Constraints: The designer discusses how sketches are
used to figuring out how to arrange the available
variables of the design problem, space such that the
requirements of the domain are fulfilled.
4. Abstraction of the Design Problem: Designers' have the
cognitive ability to deal with the ambiguity of the
problem space whilst they are able to comprehend the
importance of resolving the ambiguity in such a way that
the design problem space evolves towards a solution.
From this assumption we created a problem definition
category that describes the designers reasoning about the
nature of the evolving design problem space as:
a.
An aspect of the design problem is ambiguous
b.
Only part of the design problem is resolved.
An aspect of the design problem is never resolved
C.
d.
Questions are used to rationalise the design problem.
e.
The design problem is consider at global level
f.
The design problem is consider at a local level
g.
The design proposal is abandoned
h.
The designer considers that a mistake has been made
with regards to the design problem
5. Reasoning: Sketching provides the means to produce
and explore visual representations of ideas. The design
problem evolves when designers' reason and explore the
design problem space using attributes relevant to the
design problem space such as, dimensions, spatial
layout, shape, structural properties and materials,
6. Problem defining/ Resolving: Problem resolution is a
generic category that deals with the designers' decisions
to accept, reject, suspend or refine attributes of the
architectural design. The decision regarding an attribute
does not necessarily have to be permanent.

7. Reflection: refers to the recording of the outcome of the
designers' reflections on past and future explorations, on
the use of mental imagery.
8. External Representations: refers to the designer's
discussion of how the sketches are constructed. For
example, redrawing a previously drawn visual element,
drawing over existing graphical marks
9. External visualisation Problems: The designer indicates
that there is a problem drawing or visualising the object
in 2 or 3 dimensions or that there is a problem in
drawing from memory.
An Example of a 'Design Supposition' is the use of
sketches as an External Memory Aid. The classificationencoding schema suggests the following instance of such
an event:
a. Exemplars are recalled from memory and either
written or drawn so that they are stored as an external
memory
b. The designer writes down a possible problem in order
to deal with it later
c. The designer draws in order to aid recollection from
memory.
d. The designer writes in order to visualise and record a
concept.
e. The designer writes as a thought occurs.
6.3 Reliability of Taxonomy and Coding
Two questions were asked in order to verify the
validity of the classification-encoding schema:
1. Can a predefined set of Design Suppositions account
for the majority of the cognitive systems used in
architectural problem solving?
2 . Can Design Suppositions be applied consistently to a
designer's retrospective report of their conceptual
design activity?
Five individuals, referred to as encoders, read the first
designers (D 1) transcript to identify coding categories of
Design Suppositions and to develop optional definitions
for each one. The transcripts and the emerging coding
categories were re-read until the researchers felt that they
had exhausted the raw data. Agreement between the
encoders coding of the Design Suppositions was
determined using Kendall's coefficient of concordance.

The results of the statistical analysis of the data
showed that the assessment of the participant's
retrospective reports, in terms of the Design Suppositions
classification-encoding schema, allows a rigorous means
by which to encode architectural design verbal protocols.
6.4 Data Tabulation

Upon completion of the coding the frequencies of the
different Design Suppositions were tabulated for each

168

designer, for the purposes of further comparison. Table.1
shows the tabulation of the data for design task.
Classes of Design Suppositions
Designer 1
Designer2
Designer
Designer5
Designer6

1
36
12

2
48
21

3
29
13
17

4
106
43
18

5
140
69
40

6
24
25
27

7
10
24
6

8
40
11

9
22
4

38
26

30
12

42
40

65
43

139
84

13
13

10
12

18
10

1
4

Table.1 Frequency counts for the classes of Design
Supposition,for the entire design task
This paper will discuss the results of the analysis firstly in
terms of the similarity of the individual designers, with
regards to the retrospective reporting of the Design
Suppositions. It will then interpret the findings in terms of
a functional cognitive mapping.

7. Results of the Protocol Analysis
In accordance with the research question 'Why do
designers need to visualise during conceptual design',
the research measured the correlation between the
designers' in terms of their use of the Design
Suppositions. Kendall's coefficient of concordance was
computed [211, in order to establish whether the expert
architects exhibited any overall similarity in their use of
the Design Suppositions over the design task. The
frequency counts for the Design Suppositions (Table. 1)
where ranked separately for each designer, from 1 to 9, in
order of the largest first (Table 2)

to their patterns of reasoning, then the sum would be
approximately equal. Thus, the degree of agreement
amongst the designers is reflected by the degree of
variance amongst the sum of the ranks. Siegel [''I states
that W, the coefficient of concordance, is a function of
that degree of variance. For the data shown in Table 2,
the rank mean is 25. S=ZZOO.5, W =0.7343. AS the
number of classes of Design SUppOSitiOnS (N> iS larger
than 7 the significance of the observed value of W can be
determined using the formula K (N-1) W.
The results show that when W=0.7343, there are 5
designers and 9 ranked classes x2 equates to 29.37.
Referencing the critical values of Chi Square (Siegel
1956, Appendix Table C) we find that x2=29.37 (df=8)
has a probability of occurrence under H,, of p<O.OOl.
Thus, it can be concluded with considerable assurance
that the similarity between the five designers is higher
than would be expected by chance. The results indicate
that during the conceptual design task the expert designers
used visualisations for similar purposes.

In order to validate this inference and to establish the
purpose (function) of visualisations at periodic intervals in
the design task a macro-analysis of the data was
conducted. This macro-analysis was quantitative in nature
and it was used as a springboard for a qualitative analysis
of the individual differences between designers.
7.1 The Shifting focus of Design Suppositions as a function

of Time
The data, for each designer, were divided into
quartiles. The frequencies of the different Design
Suppositions were tabulated and ranked for each designer.
Kendall's coefficient of concordance was applied to each
quartile. In ascending order the value of W for each
quartile are as follows W=0.79,
=31.6, p<O.OOl.
=24.8, p<O.Ol. W=0.48,
=19.2, p<0.05
W=0.62,
W=0.78, x2 =31.2,p<0.001
The results show that in each quartile of the design task
the expert designers essentially placed a similar amount of
emphasis on the same classes of Design Suppositions.
Two key questions arose out of the results. First, were the
interrelationships of the classes of Design Supposition
such that they were always ranked in the same way
throughout the design task? Secondly, to what extent was
there any disparity between the designers, in terms of their
reporting of the different classes of Design Suppositions?

Classes of Design Suppositions
Designer1

1

2

3

4

5

3

6

2

5
1

6
7

7

8

9

9

4

8

Designer2

6

5

7

2

1

3

4

8

9

Designer 3

6.5

6.5

4

3

1

2

5

8

9

Designer5

4

5

3

2

1

7

8

6

9

Designer6

4

5.5

3

2

1

5.5

7

8

9

Sum

25.5

26

23

11

5

24

33

34

44

xz

Table 2 Ranks assigned to the classes of Design
Supposition, for the entire design task

169

x2

'x

attributes of the problem space. The nature of the shift is
highlighted by the lines in the figure 3. The lines illustrate
the relationship between the designers' retrospective
verbalisations of the resolution of an attribute of the
problem space, and the development of the design task.
For all the designers there was a positive increase in the
ranked position of Design Supposition class 6 as the task
time increased. Therefore it may be concluded that as the
design problem space evolves sketching is used
increasingly to aid problem defining resolution of
attributes of the design problem space.

that they were always ranked in the same way throughout
the conceptual design task?
Class 5 (reasoning and exploration) and class 9
(external visualisation) where largely constant across the
design task. The rankings for Class 2 (emergence), class 3
(constraints), 4 (level of abstraction) and class 8
(construction of representation) did not deviate by more
than 10. On the other hand, class 1 (external memory aid),
class 6 (resolution) and class 7 (reflection) all showed
shifts in focus as the design task evolved through time.
Quartile
1

Sum of the Classes of Design Suppositions
2
3
4
5 6
7
8

9

1

18

20

18.5

14

7

37.5

32.5

34

2

28.5

29

21

10.5

5

32

32.5

28.5

38

3

29.5

26

25.5

15

5

28.5

27.5

30

38

4

34

29.5

26

11

9

11

40

25.5

39

43.5

Table 2 Ranks assigned to the classes of Design
Supposition, for the entire design task
7.2.1 The use of sketches as an External Memory Aid.

-.

An analysis of the designers' discussion of Design
Supposition class 1 (external memory aid) showed that,
for four designers, the ranking decreased as the
conceptual design task progressed. Indicating that as the
design task progressed there was a shift of focus away
from using visualizations being used as an external
memory aid.

0

7.3 Inter-relationshipsof Design Suppositions

The research asked are Design Supposition classes 1
(external memory aid) and 6 (Resolution of an attribute of
the problem space) inversely related to one another?

0
0

In response to the second question, Design Supposition
classes 1 and 6 were compared against each other. Figures
4-8 show, for each designer, the data for the use of
sketches as an external memory aid and their use of
sketches to aid problem resolution. The results showed,
that for the designers who exhibited a shift in focus away
from the use of sketches as memory aids, the shift
coincided with an increased use of sketches to resolve
specific attributes of the design. The results indicate that
for four of the five designers the classes 1 and 6 seem to
be inversely related to one another.

I

5

7.2.2 The Use of Visualisations to aid Problem
Defining / Resolution. All the designers exhibited a shift
in focus with regards to the resolution of specific

170

Designer 1: comparison of the use of DS1
(Memory Aid) and DS 6 Resolution of the design

Designer 6: comparison of the use of DS1
(Memory Aid) and DS 6 Resolution of the desim
-.- ..-..- -....-.-, -,-_I
-.-,
.
.
1
I
1
.

-I

Quartiles of the Design Task

Quartiles of the Design Task
Designer 2: comparison of the use of DSl
(Memory Aid) and DS 6 Resolution of the design

Figure 4-8. Analysis of the designers' use of Design
Supposition class 1 and Design Supposition class 6

I

8. Conclusions

/'

The paper has development a classification-coding
schema in order to deal with the relationship between the
concepts of the sketch, as an external visualisation, and
the protocols that describe the purpose of the
visualisations. The taxonomy has been validated by a set
of encoders and used to examine five expert architects'
use of visualisations. The approach allows a rigorous and
consistent analysis of architectural design activity and the
use of visualisations in the early stages of conceptual
designing. The research has demonstrated that there are
'shifts in focus' with regards to the designers the use of
visualisation to aid the resolution of the design problem
space.
The identification of the shifts in focus, in terms
of the functional use of visualisations, has implications
for future Computer Aided Design tools for early
conceptual design. Computational tools proposing to
facilitate conceptual design must support the reasoning
process facilitated by current methods of visualisation.
The results suggest the most successful approach will be
one that concurs with the notion of the 'right tool at the
right time', a notion first suggested by Ellen Do"'

j
i

Quartiles of the Design Task
Designer 3: comparison of the use of DSI
(Memory Aid) and DS 6 Resolution of the design
I
P

\

'.

1
.

r
I

Quartiles of the Design Task

I

Designer 5 : comparison of the use of DS1
(Memory Aid) and DS 6 Resolution of the design
9,

References
Akin, 0.:1993, Architects reasoning with structures and
functions. Environment and Planning B-planning and
Design 20(3), pp.273-294.
[2] Akin, 0. and Lin, C.:1996, Design Protocol Data and Novel
Design Decisions, in Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst,
k.(eds), Analysing Design Activity , John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
Chichester,pp. 35-63
Quartiles of the Design Task

171

Representation and Interpretation'98, Liverpool, Foresight
Centre, Springer Verlag.
[ 18]McFadzean, J., Cross, N. and Johnson, J.: 1999, Drawing
and the Soliloquizing of Design Supposition. proceedings of
The 4th Design Thinking Research Symposium, MIT Press.

[3] Alexander, C.: 1964, Notes on the synthesis offormOxford
University Press, New York
[4] Chan, C :1990, Cognitive Processes in architectural design
problem solving. Design Studies l l ( 2 ) 61-79.
[5] Cross, N., Christiaans, H. and Dorst, K.(ed.):1996,
Analysing Design Activity, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
Chichester.

[19] McFadzean, J. Cross, N., Johnson, J.:1999, An Analysis of
Architectural Visual Reasoning in Conceptual Sketching via
Computational Sketch Analysis (CSA), proceedings of

[6] Do, E. and Gross, M.:1996, Drawing as a Means to Design
Reasoning, Visual Representation, Reasoning and
Interaction in Design Workshop notes, proceedings of
Artificial Intelligence in Design'96, Stanford University.

Intemational Conference on Information Visualisation,
London, IEEE Computer Society
[20]Mcfadzean, J.: 1999, Computational Sketch Analyser
(CSA): Extending the Boundaries of Knowledge in CAD.
proceedings of 17th Intemational Conference on education
in
Computer
Aided
Architectural
Design
europe,(eCAADe'99).
[21]Purcell, Gero, J.: 1998, Drawing and the Design Process,
Design Studies(l9) 4 pp 389-431
[22]Siegel, S.:1956, Nonparametric Statistics for the
behavioural scientists, Mcgraw-Hill Book CO,New York

[7] Do, E.:1995, WhatS in a diagram that a computer should
understand? proceedings of The Global design Studio,
CAAD Futures, National University of Singapore.
[8] Do, E.:1998, The Right Tool at the Right Time:
Investigation of Freehand Drawing as an Interface to
Knowledge Bused Design Tools, unpublished Ph.D, College

of Architecture, Colorado, Georgia Institute of Technology..
[9] Dorst, Kees, Dijkuis, j.:1995 Comparing paradigms for
describing design activity, Design Studies (16) 2, pp261274.

[22]Suwa, M., Gero, J. S. and Purcell, T. A.:1998a, The roles of
sketches in early design, proceedings of the 20th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society .

[IO]Ericsson, K. A. and H. A. Simon.:1993, Protocol Analysis:
verbal reports as data, A Bradford book.

[23]Suwa, M., Purcell, T. and Gero, J.: 1998b, Macroscopic
Analysis of Design Processes based on a scheme for coding
designers' cognitive actions, Design Studies, 19(4), pp.455483.

[ I IIFinke, R. A.,Ward, T. and Smith.:1996, Creative
Cognition: Theory, Research and applications, MIT Press.
[ 12]Fish, J.:1996, How sketches work., unpublished Ph.D.,

[24]Suwa, M. and Tversky, B.:1997, What do architects and
students perceive in their design sketches? A protocol
analysis. Design studies 18(4), pp.385 - 403.

Loughborough University of Technology.
[ 13]Goldschmidt, G.: 1991, The dialects of Sketching, Creativiry
of Research Journal 4(2), pp.123-143.
[14]Larkin, Simon, H.:1987, Why a diagram is (sometimes)
worth a thousand words. Cognitive Science 11 pp65-100
[15]Lawson, B.: 1990, How designers think: The design process
demystified, Butterworth Architecture, London

[25]Ullman, D.G., Wood,S. and Craig,D.:1990, The Importance
of Drawing in the Mechanical Design Process, Computer &
Graphics 14(2), pp. 263-274.
[26]Verstijnen, I.M.: 1997, Sketches of Creative Discoveries: A
psychological Inquiry into the role of Imagery and
Sketching in creative Discovery Thesis Technische
Universiteit Delft.

[16]Mazijoglou, M., Scrivener, S. and Clark S.:1996,
Representing Design Workshop Activity. .in Cross, N.,
Christiaans, H. and Dorst, k.(eds), Analysing Design
Activity, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, pp. 389-415

[27]Wiggins, G. and Schon, D.A.:1992, Kinds of Seeing and
their Function in Designing, Design Studies 13(2), pp.135156.

[ 17]McFadzean, J: 1998, Computational Support for Conceptual

Sketching: An Analysis and Interpretation of the Graphical
Notation of Visual Representations, proceedings of Visual

172

