Integrated Computer Graphics Learning System in Virtual Environment Case Study of BCzier, BSpline and NURBS Algorithms
Wen-Clm Song, SM-Chmg Ou, Song-Rong Shiau
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Central University, Taiwan
songchen(Ws10.hinet.net
the paper, the user can design and learning sculpture
curves and surfaces on personal computer in an
interactive way. The graphics system has friendly
interface in operating procession.
The graphics system implementation is mainly based
on the function of OpenGL. The system can be showed
2D and 3D graphics. The learning system environment
is browser and VR-browser. The user pre -drawing the
curves or surfaces via assign these points in graphics
area, and the user can drag the control point of the
curves or surfaces to modify the graphics in real-time.
User can convert the browser graphics to a VRML file
to realizing on the VR browser.
The results of this study attempting to develop an
integrate graphics learning reaktime system. Drawing
the reakime complex curves and surfaces in the
network browse is a new technology nowadays. The
abstract of the paper only appear some important feature.
We have detailed descript in full paper.

Abstract
The Web is a popular platform for training educators
and learners in educational systems. We find several
Webbased training systems that are developed by
enterprises that ty to train teachers andstudents to use
Web technologies in educational settings.
The rapid growth of the Internet and computer
technology in recent years has sparked a demand for
easily accessible and affordable learning solutions in
corporate ofices, classrooms, and homes. Traditional
learning models being challenged by the fast-paced,
real-time environments available today.
The purpose of this paper is to apply systems design
principles to the design of Webdased training systems
f o r teachers and learners. Several issues will be
addressed in this paper such as the development of an
Integrated Learning Graphics System (ILGS) for a
better learning environment.
In this paper, we attempted to develop a web-based
learning system of computer graphics by Bizier,
B-spline and NURBS algorithms. The purpose of the
research was to increase the effect of Computer-Aided
Design (CAD) in network. The other advantages is that
network browser is the common platform in internet and
intranet, the graphics system can be portable cross
different operating system, as like windows 95,linux. In
fact, the graphics system was an attempt to be shared
the resource each other.

2. The Bkier, B-spline and NURBS
algorithms.
(1) BCzier curves:
The Btzier curve use polynomials for their
coordinate functions, the power basis and Bezier forms
are mathematically equivalent;
An nth-degree Bezier curve is defined by
n

Keywords: Distance Learning,Virtual Reality,
Web-Based, NURBS.

i=O

The basis (blending) function, {Bi,n(u)}, are the
classical nthdegree Bernstein polynomials given by

1.Introduction

Bj,n(U)= n

As the Internet has improved in the kist ten years,
beer, webbased graphics learning has become very
important in Internet. In recent year, the distance
learning by Internet has been established and developed
in the Computer-Assisted Instruction (CAI) system. In

i

n-i

u (1 - U

Ywi

The geometric coefficients of this form, {Pi},are
called control points. Notice that the definition, equation
1, requires that U E [0,1].

33
0-7695-0743-3/00$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

n!

(2) BCzier surfaces:

A ptkdegree NURI3S curve is defined by
"

Non-rational Bezier surfaces are obtained by taking a
bi-directional net of control points and products of the
univariate Bemstein polynomials.
n

m

s ( u , v ) = c ~ B , , , ( u ) ~ j , , ( v ) p0l ,5j u , v l l (3)
id j = O

The basis function Bi,n(u) and Bj,m(v).

Where the {Pi} are the control points
(forming a control polygon), the {Wi} are the
weights, and the (Ni,p(u)}are the ptkdegree
Bspline basis hctions defined on the
nonperiodlc (and non-unif'orm) knot vector.

(3) B-spline curves:
A pth-degree B-spline curve is defined by

(uk

Ni,p

C(u)=

a5u I b

(4)

r

i=O

Where the {Pi} are the control point, and the
{Ni,p(u)}are the pth-degree B-spline basis
hnctions(equation 5) defined on the non-periodic (and
non-uniform)knot vector (m+l knots).Unless stated
otherwise, we assume that a=O and b=l.

1 if

uic:u<u,+I

(6) NURBS surfaces:
A NURBS surface of degree p in the U direction and
degree q in the v direction is a bivariate vectowalued
piecewise rational hnction of the form

(6)

+
P+l

1

+
P +I
./
(13)

0 otherwise
The polygon formed by the {Pi} is called the control
polygon.

,...,um-p-l,b,...,b

,,..., ~,,,-~-,,b
,...,b

2 zN8P ( u ) N J . ~ ( v b ~ . J (14)
~~~,
22

qU,.)=
'=O

r=O

(7)

Olu,v<l

J=o

J=o

N ,p(U)N

,.q(v)Wt.,

The {PU}fiom a bi-directional control net ,the {W ,,}
are the weights ,and the {N,,p(u)}and {N,,q(v)} are the
non-rational Bspline basis functions defined on the
knot vectors

(4) B-spline surfaces:
A B-spline surface is obtained by taking a
bkdirectional net of control point ,twoknot vectors ,and
the products of the univariate B-spline h c t i o n s .

With
Where the r and s as like the equation 1 1.

3. The structure of the graphics learning
system:
(1) System operating process and interface:
U has kl knots, andV has s+l.

r=n+p+l

and s = m + q + l

(11)

(5) NURBS curves:

34

Virtual Reality (VR) is a powerful new way of using
computers and will go along way to eliminating the
traditional separation between user and machine. Many
varied definitions of Virtual Reality (VR) exist but all
imply the same meaning. For a definition of VR to be
accurate it should include the terms, three dimensional,
computer generated and interactive. Therefore Virtual
Reality may be stated as a computer-generated
simulation of a three dimensional environment, in
which the user can interact with both the view and
contents of the virtual environment. Virtual Reality
originated in the early 1960’s.Sutherland showed that a
person with the aid of a light pen could interact with a
computer via a display surface. Later he developed the
first algorithms to remove “hidden lines” in 3-D
drawings, which are now essential to ascertain a true
realistic picture of a 3-D object.
Presently there are VR applications in the fields of
education, entertainment, engineering and even the
medical profession, to name but a few. In the 197O’s,
Hollywood started to realizable the power of VR in the
film industry due to its potential to create extraordinary
visual scenarios. Films such as ‘Star Wars’, followed by
‘Terminator’ and ‘Jurassic Park‘ are just some of the films
that benefited immensely from VR and computer
graphics in general Fig we 3 illustrates the wide range
of disciplines in which VR is being used. Lack of
imagination by the virtual world designer is the only
thing that can hold back this technology

1

A

I

Figure 1. System operating process and interface.

(2) Graphics algorithms:

I :

II

Figure 3. Virtual Reality Discipline segments.

5. VR as a Training Tool
Figure 2. System graphics algorithms.

Virtual Reality training can dramatically reduce the
cost of delivering training by decreasing learning time

4. Virtual Reality

35

for student and instructors. The need for expensive and
dedicated training equipment in the form of actual labs,
or extra equipment for training equipment is reduced.
The benefits of using VR over standard multimedia
applications is shown in figure 4. Standard multimedia
training involves leamers visually but with the aid of
using VR, the user may also interact and is not just an
observer. VR can bring the equipment and actual
working conditions to the user for unlimited access in
any location. Figure 3 corresponds to the advantage that
this organizatbn accredits VR as a training tool as
opposed to more conventional classroom and lab
training methods. The time spent teaching the subject
can be seen to significantly using VR as a training
technique.

6.2 Drawing B-spline curves:
(1) Select control point and degree value

VRTrainingReduces Learninglimes

(2) Drawing

Classroom

VR Multimedia

I

Figure 4. VR as a training tool as opposed to
Classroom techniques (RTI)
The benefits of using VR as a training tool are:
Reduces training time.
Enables practice under hazardous conditions.
Save money by using similar models for
training.
Provides unlimited access to expensive
unavailable equipment.
Eliminates traveling expense to training
centers.
Down time of expensive machinery is reduced.
Enables leamers to be immersed over a wide
geographical area.

(3) Local modify curves (drag the 12'h control point)

6.Illustration
6.1 The Integrated graphics Learning real-time
system:

6.3 Drawing NURBS surfaces:
(1) Drawing a revolution NURBS surfaces

36

(3) M o d i curve by drag 12‘h control point
(2) A real-time m o d i

(4) A real-time be changed in 3D environment

6.4 Covert the curves and surfaces into VRML
type fie
(1) Drawing NURBS curve in browser

7. Conclusion
This paper describes a new technology and establish
a real-time graphics learning system. In summary the
system offers the following advantage:

(2) Covert NURBS curve into VRML in 3D viewer
1.Integrate graphics Learning real-time system
2.The resources be shared in network.
3.Establish a computer network assisted learning

37

system.
4. Explore and compare these algorithms of the
sculpture curves and surfaces.
5.Integrate VRML with web-based learning system
and realize on the 3D VR environment.

[6] Middleton, T., & Boman, D. (1994) “SimonSays Using
speech to peform tasks in virtual environments.Presented at
the second annual conference on Virtual Reality and Persons
with Disabilities. San Francisco.
‘I:

[7] Rickel, J., & Johnson, W.L., Integrating Pedagogical
Capabilitiesin a VirtualEnvironmentAgent, in Proceedings of
the First Intemational Conference on Autonomous Agents,
February 1997.

8. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
their invaluable and constructive comments that help to
improve this paper. This research is working by the
CAD laboratory under Department of Electrical
Engineering National Central University, Taiwan.

[8] Ainge D. J., “Upperprimary students constructing and
exploring three dimensional shapes: a comparison of virtual
reality with card nets”, J. Educational Computing Research,
14(4), 345-369 (1996)

[9] Hannah M. J., Hall C., Land S., and Hill J., “Learning
in Open-Ended Environments: Assumptions, Method, and
Implication?’, Educational Technology,48 (October 1994)

9. References
[ 11 Les Piegl. & Wayne Tiller. (1997).7%eNURBS Book.
Springer

[IO] Pantelidis V. S., ‘Virtual Reality in the Classroom”,
Educational Technology, 23 (April 1993)

[ 2 ] Gerald Farin (1996). Curves and Suvfaces for CAGD a
practical guide. ACADEMIC PRESS.

[ 111 E. Soloway, S . Jackson, J. Klein, et al. Learning Theory
in Practice: Case Studies of LearnerCentered h i g n . In
Proceedings of Computer-Human Interaction ‘96, pages
189-196, New York, 1996. ACM Press.

131 GERALD FARIN (1999) NURBS fLom Projective
Geometry to Practical Use.

[ 121 K. E. Steiner and T. G. Moher. A Comparison of Verbal
Interaction in Literal and Virtual Shared Learning
Environments . In Proceedings of ACM CHI’94, vol 2 Interactive
posters,
pages
97-98,
1994.

141 Christine Youngblut. (1998)Educational Uses of Virtual
Reality Technology. Institute for Defense Analyses.
[ 5 ] Manetta and R. Blade in ”Glossavy of Virtual Reality
Terminology” in the International Journal of Virtual.

38

