Management through Vision
-a

case study towards requirements of BizViz-

Basti aan Schonhage
Vrije Universiteit,
Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science
De Boelelaan 1081,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
bastiaan 0cs.vu.nl

Anton Eliens
Vrije Universiteit,
Dep. of Mathematics and Computer Science
De Boelelaan 1081,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
eliens 0cs. vu.n 1

ASZ Research & Development
P.O. Box 8300,
1005 CA Amsterdam, The Netherlands

CWI
P.O. Box 94079,
1090 GB Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract

in possible futures however, simulation is necessary. Simulation is a means to evaluate so called wlznt-if situations. To
increase the effectiveness of the visualization system, we
decided to present both information sources, i.e. database
and simulation, using the same visualizations. This allows
managers to deploy the same views on past, present and future.

Biz Vi: (Biisitiess Visualizatioti) is a rapidly growirig pheiri the t-e-ecilr?iof visun1i:atiori aiid itlforrriatioti visua1i:atiori. The riiniti goal of Bi:Viz is to support inanagers iri their daily work of utiderstariditig forces withiti
Dusiriess processes arid rmkitig decisioris to cotitid these
forces. The case study preseriterl iti this paper illitstrates the
nrlrled i d u e of visua1i;ation at N social security itistitutiori
(Gnk) iri the Netherlarids. The prototype built, iritegrates
both databases atid sitiiulatiori as i t lforniatioii sources. This
\I:CIJ~ riinririgers cari study the past arid presetit as well as e.rperitnetit with possible fictiire situations.
The iritetirlecl cotitributiori of this paper- is twofold First,
it presetits lion*visiializatiori c m (siiccesjiilly) be applied
iri prmtice. It illustrates the added value of BizViz iri the
social security dorrirriri. As a secorid coritributiori. the paper
derives atid discusses requireitleiits that play uti itiiportatit
role iri Iisuri1i:atioti applicatiori developmetit iriterided,for
decision makitig support.
tiorrietioti

2 Managing Business Processes in the Social
Security Domain
In The Netherlands, if people are unable to work. there
are various benefits they can apply for. The government
does not handle the applications for benefits themselves, but
gave this job to the so called Social Security Institutions. If
someone has a job but becomes unable to work he or she can
apply for a wellfare benefit. The Gak is the largest social
security institution in the Netherlands that processes these
applications.

Problem The subject of this paper concerns the deployment of simulation and visualization to support business
managers in planning and controlling the processing of benefit applications. To strengthen their position on the market,
the Gak company wants to improve the efficiency of their
production process without a losing quality. The delivered
products (in this case products are benefit applications) are
qualitatively good but the production process from the client
arriving at the registration desk to deliverance (approval or
disapproval of the application) takes too long. The norm
production time for an application is in most of the cases
13 weeks, but due to unknown problems this norm is often

1 Introduction
Visualization is tlze use of cornputer-supported, irzteractive, visual repr-eseritatiorzsof data to atnplib cogriitiori [I].
By visualizing the collected data stored in management information system databases, managers can get an overview
of the past. They can employ this to search for possible
trends in the production process. In addition, the current
situation can easily be presented when the databases are upto-date. To allow for experimentation with control measures

0-7695-0743-3/00$10.00 02000 IEEE

387

exceeded. Obviously, the Gak company wants to find the
production bottlenecks and their causes.

where each bar represents a single week in the production
process. This means that the first bar of each histogram reHects applications in their first week of production, the second bar represents products in their second week, etcetera.
The last bar summarizes all products that are more than
16 weeks in production and therefore seriously exceed the
norm of 13 weeks.
In addition to the overall norm of 13 weeks to deal with
an application, internal norms exist that indicate when an
application should be in a particular stage of the total process. The histograms belonging to the stages reveal the
number and status of applications currently in progress. To
emphasize whether products are late or on schedule, we
deploy colors for both the bars and the background of the
histograms. Blue represents applications that are ahead of
schedule. Green means on schedule, whereas purple is behind schedule. Red applications are even worse, because
they are not only behind schedule but they are even late for
meeting the total production norms of 13 weeks.
It is interesting to notice what managers can derive from
this visualization and how they might apply it to solve their
problems. First of all, the percentages show that stages 158
and 159 are two possible bottlenecks with a timeliness of
respectively 54% and 5 1% while the other percentages exceed 80%. (Because the first stage contains no applications
in the example of Figure 1, the timeliness is O%.) Other indications of possible problems are the red peaks at the end
of the two rightmost histograms. These show that a relatively high percentage of applications is far too late at those
stages of the process.
The choice for traditional histograms and bar charts instead of more complex visualization forms was made because we decided to create an easily accessible visualization
system. Ease of use and simplicity were important design
requirements because the managers are unfamiliar with visualization and explicitly requested us to keep things simple. In related work, we see a similar quest for straightforwardness: traditional bar charts work well for comparisons
and are well understood, including by business people [5].
As an extension, however, we have investigated the effects
of more complex 3D visualizations in [4].

Goals The reason to build a visualization-based management information system is that we believe that this has
some advantages not found in other techniques. Visualization provides users with a quick and effective overview of
the material available. In short, the goals of this project
comprise solving the current management problems and
creating a more effective and efficient information system
providing decision-makers with better information.

3 Visualizing Past and Present
To illustrate and validate our ideas about visualizing
business information, we have built a prototype visualization system based on the DIVAsoftware architecture [3].
The system was built in two phases. First, we concentrated
on the current problems of the managers to indicate the bottlenecks in the business process. In this phase, we iteratively
designed the visualizations which are shown in this section.
In the second phase of the project, which is described in
the next section, we created a simulation of the business
process and used the previously designed visualizations to
display the results.
The visualizations can be divided into quantity visualizations and capacity visualizations. Quality visualizations
provide insight into the number and status of applications
(usually called products) in the process. Capacity visualizations, an the other hand, represent to what extend the
capacity, i.e. people, is employed.

3.1 Quantity Visualizations
The visualization of the throughput of a specific product
type (in this case the application for a disability benefit) is
given in Figure 1. The visualization consists of two integrated parts, the business process structure and the throughput histograms. The connected circles represent the structure of the process, i.e. the phases an application has to pass
through. A new application enters the process on the left
and moves through stages from left to right. Each application is being processed during the depicted phases, such as
intake and medical examination. The percentages inside the
circles reflect the amount of applications currently in that
particular production phase that is ahead or on schedule. A
higher percentage means a better timeliness of that stage in
the process.
The histograms offer insight into the quantity and age of
applications currently being processed. For example, the
enlarged histogram belonging to the middle phase (stage
158) in the process represents all products in stage 158 at
that moment. The x-axis of the histogram is a timeline

3.2 Capacity Visualizations
Whereas quantity visualizations concern the production
or processing of applications, capacity visualizations are intended to represent to what extent the current capacity is
used (or has been used). The visualizations do not contain
quantitative information but percentages. Capacity visualizations are about people, the resources of this business process.
An example of a capacity visualization is shown in the
left part of Figure 2. It visualizes the load on the employees

388

Wiiuatlsatte stand: Locatie: Strootn:

1f

Producttype:

hter op schema

Figure 1. Throughput of a specific product type (AWOOS)
in the upcoming week. Each bar of the histogram represents
a different type of employee. The red line represents the
100% capacity that is available for next week. If bars are
higher than this 100%-line, the pile of work is larger than
the available capacity.
The colors of the bar represent the status of the work that
is waiting to be processed. Red (bottom of each bar) represents applications that are already late, green (middle) is
exactly on time whereas blue (top of bar) represents products that are ahead of schedule. In an ideal situation the
100%-line runs through the blue area, just above the green
part, implying that all late and on schedule applications are
processed during next week. In the case of Figure 2 however, the labor experts, represented by the leftmost column
(AD), can only get rid of a small fraction of the late applications. The same problem occurs at the third (CB) and rightmost (VA) column. Summarizing, the visualization clearly
demonstrates bottlenecks at the AD, CB and VA employee
types, whereas the other types have a large overcapacity.

we already visualize the results until that point. Additionally, users can interactively manipulate the settings and parameters of the simulation which are immediately reflected
in the results of the simulation and, consequently, in the presented visualizations.

Trend Visualization and Interaction Although the visualizations inherited from the representations of the
databases are valuable to visualize the simulation, a new
visualization has been added to better display the effect
of interventions. Trend visualizations give a whole year
overview of an application type or employee type.
For example, the right hand side of Figure 2 contains a
capacity visualization of a specific employee type over the
past simulated year. Each bar represents the work of a particular week compared to the available capacity (again the
line indicates a 100% capacity). The colors of the different parts in the bars represent the capacity that is used to
work on late (red) products or on applications that are behind schedule (orange), on schedule (green) and ahead of
schedule (blue).
The simulation started with an empty process in week 0.
While the weeks advance, we can see that the number of
applications pile up because the capacity of the employees
is far too small. In week 25, the controller of the simulation increases the number of employees working on this
stage in the process. Immediately, the height of the bar
has decreased, because the amount of work is not so large

4 Visualizing the Future
Now that we can identify bottlenecks, a means of evaluating the effects of interventions is needed. To achieve this,
simulation is needed. In our approach, we tried to shorten
the loop of making a model, run the simulation and analyze
the results. We achieved this by integrating simulation, interaction and visualization. While the simulation is running,

389

Figure 2. Left: capacity throughput visualizations show the AD, CB and VA bottleneck
visualization illustrates the effect of an intervention.

- right: trend

Benefits The lack of information about the time that applications are already in a certain phase of the process appears to be an important omission in the current information supply. However, the missing information can be derived from the available data sources and is available in the
visualizations of the current throughput of specific producttypes. This extra piece of information was considered to be
very useful in understanding delays in the process.
The participants of the evaluation were very positive
about the usage of visualization to present the information. Without exception, they considered themselves visually oriented and had no problems with understanding the
offered visualizations. Those present at the evaluation sessions agreed that the visualizations offered a better insight
in current and past data. Additionally, they thought that it is
easier to draw conclusions based on the visualizations than
based on the currently used information system.

any more compared to the available capacity represented by
the 100%-line. Additionally, we can notice a descending
trend in the next weeks, indicating that the capacity is large
enough to work away the backlog.
While the visualization only shows a single simulation
run, it clearly illustrates the power of integrating simulation
and visualization with user interaction. Based on experience gained by visualizing the static data in the database and
their knowledge of the business process, managers can experiment with all kinds of interventions in the business process. In addition to single actions, the effects and efficiency
of combined interventions can be evaluated and compared
with complementary approaches. The set of available visualizations allows the experimenting manager to view the
effects of interventions from different perspectives.

5 Evaluation of Concepts and Prototype
Shortcomings A problem with the concept of visualizing
process data is the fact that the quality of the visualizations
is highly dependent on the quality of the underlying data
source. Visualization adheres to the slogan: garbage-in,
garbuge-out. This might cause a risk when managers solely
rely on the visual representations to base decisions on.
Two often requested features were an annotation facility and further drill-down. Annotation would be useful to
evaluate the effects of taken measures at a later time. Additionally, it would help when somebody could read other
people's opinions about certain phenomena in the data. Especially operational managers often requested the ability to
drill-down further on the data. The current implementation
stops at the functionary-type level, but could be extended
to represent data at the individual level since the necessary
data is already available in the data sources. Whether this is

To evaluate the maturity of our visualizations and the usability of the developed prototype, we arranged two evaluation sessions at Gak offices in Rotterdam and Nijmegen.
People who participated in the sessions are domain experts
working at Gak Netherlands in the area of welfare benefits.
The sessions started with a presentation about business visualization and an explanation of the prototype. After this,
the participants had about 2 hours to work with the system.
During this time, they were given some exercises to search
for bottlenecks, compare the results of different products
and investigate the capacity usage of the employees. Additionally, they were asked to fill in a questionnaire to provide
us with feedback about the effectiveness of the visualizations and the usefulness and usability of the tool. At the end
of the session, we presented the simulation extension.

390

wise thing to do, however, remains to be seen.

Simulation In general, the participants of the evaluation
reacted very positively towards the possibility to simulate
decisions in the business process. However, the current intervention option (changing the number of available employees of a certain type) seems to be too limited. Other
options such as setting priorities or skipping particular applications must be added to make the simulation extension
useful in practice.

6 Discussion and Issues Raised
The motivation to perform a series of case studies at
ASZ/Gak NL, was to illustrate and prove the added value
of business visualization to support decision making. In addition, performing a BizViz case-study in a real-world situation will lead to a better understanding of requirements
and features that play a role in visualization application development.

Multiple information sources In this case study we have
used a single database and a simulation as the data providers
of the visualizations. This raises the issue that in general visualizations get their data from different information
sources. These sources can be similar, such as in the case of
two databases. They can, however, also exhibit a different
type of behavior and contain different types of information.
Multiple visualizations The case study described here
clearly demonstrates that a single visualization is not sufficient to meet all information needs required by its users.
For example, we included visualizations of quantity and capacity, historic and current data.
Iterative approach to create effective visualization Although not covered in the discussion of the case study given
here, we experienced that creating straight-forward, effective visualizations cannot be done out of nothing. We discovered a close resemblance to engineering software for a
client who does not really know what he or she wants. An
approach taken to tackle that problem in software engineering is an iterative approach with a lot of end user interaction, e.g. in RapidApplication Development [2]. In the case
studies performed at ASZ/Gak this turned out to be a good
choice for visualization development too.

information can, however, easily be derived and presented
to the user.

7 3D Visualization
To experiment with more esoteric visualizations, we
have also built three-dimensional representations to visualize business processes. Although more information is contained in a single 3D visualization, such as a combination of
3D process graph and 3D histograms (Figure 3), we did not
introduce them at Gak Netherlands at that time. The main
reason is that the added value of presenting more information at a single glance does not make up for the increased
complexity of 3D visualizations. We wanted to keep the visualizations as simple as possible during the managers’ first
encounter with interactive visualizations. More information
about the 3D visualization and the discussion of 2D versus
3D can be found in [4].

8 Summary and Conclusion
This paper presented a case study done at Gak Netherlands to illustrate the usage of simulation and visualization
to control business processes in the domain of social security. Evaluation showed that visualization could indeed aid
in better understanding of the available information. Consequently, visualization leads to more informed decisions.
The usefulness of the current prototype could be increased
further by allowing quick access to up-to-date data, extending the intervention evaluation possibilities and by adding
support for collaboration.
As a conclusion, we state that interactive simulations and
visualizations are a powerful means to control business processes. Especially, an integrated solution combining the advantages of retrospection and experimentation, allows decision makers to discover trends in the past, monitor the
current situation and predict possible futures.

9 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ard van der Scheer and Edwin
Treur for their participation in this work.

References
Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman. Readings in Information Visualization: using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.

Derivation of new information Information that appears
to be crucial for good decision making is not always directly
available from the data sources. For example, information
about how long applications are already stuck at a particular stage is not directly saved in the source databases. The

James Martin.
Rapid Application Development.
MacMillan, 1991.

39 1

Figure 3. A three-dimensional variant presents more information at the price of increased complexity.

[3] S.P.C. Schonhage and A. Eliens. A flexible architecture for user-adaptable visualization. In David S . Ebert
and Charles K. Nicholas, editors, Workshop on New
Paradigms in Information Visualization and Manipulation '97, Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, I O - 14 November 1997, Las Vegas, USA.
ACM Press, 1997.
[4] S.P.C. Schonhage, A. Eliens, and Alex van Ballegooij.
3D Gadgets for Business Process Visualization: a case
study. In Proceedings of Web3DNRML2000 - lnternational Conference on the Virtual Reality Modeling Language and Web3D technologies, pages 131-138, 174,
2000.

[5] Ping Zhang. Visualizing Production Planning Data.
IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications, 16(5):7-10,
1996.

392

