Searching for the perfect match: A comparison of free sorting results for images
by human subjects and by Latent Semantic Analysis techniques
Katy Bomer
Indiana University
School of Library and Information Science
10th Street & Jordan Avenue, Main Library 019
Bloomington, IN. 47405 USA
E-mail: katy@indiana.edu
Abstract
Information visualization can improve the access and
manipulation of digital data if it conforms to human
expectations, and supports the particular interface, task,
data, and user. Detailed usability studies are required to
prove this assumption. This paper reports a usability study
of the data analysis algorithm applied in the LVis - Digital
Library Visualizer that spatially visualizes search results
derived from user queries of digital library collections. In
particular, it presents a comparison of free sorting results
f o r image data done by 20 human subjects and the data
analysis result derived via Latent Semantic Analysis from
the textual image descriptions. The results of the study
suggest that people, i f asked to categorize with no
constraints, will use features that are often derivable from
textual metadata. Human clustering strategies and
resulting demands f o r image browsing systems are
discussed and future work is outlined.

1. Introduction
Emerging digital libraries provide users with access to
massive amounts of diverse types of digital information,
increasing the need for more usable and efficient tools to
extract and manage information. Digital libraries today,
store not only textual but also image, audio, or even video
data increasing the demands for powerful retrieval methods
for multimedia databases.
Current image retrieval engines, for example IBM's
Query By Image Content system, retrieve images based on
visual image content properties such as color percentages,
color layout, and textures occurring in the images. Often,
content based queries are combined with text and keyword
predicates. Some systems, for example AT&T's Shoebox,
provide an audio annotation capability whereby users can
speak about images. These audio annotations are
automatically transcribed to text and are used during image
retrieval. The closer the textual image descriptions match
the features used by human subjects to retrieve images the
higher the quality of the resulting retrieval result.

Oftentimes, retrieval engines return endless lists of rankordered
matching
documents
or
images.
The
preorganization of search results into categories of
documents with similar content based on research on
human clustering strategies seems to be a promising way to
manage this information flood.
There exists a considerable body of research that aims at
processing, analyzing, and visualizing large amounts of
diverse online data to support people explore and navigate
intuitively in a semantically organized information space
(White & McCain, 1998; Small, 1999; Chen, 1999; Bomer,
SPIE 2000). However, there are very few studies that show
how far the mathematically derived visualizations resemble
the organization of images by their human users.
In psychology, the acquisition of painting style (as a basis
for sorting) was studied by different researchers. In Hartley
and Homa's (1981) studies, S s initially classified I8
impressionist paintings, according to artist, into categories
of 3-9 examples, followed by a transfer test given
immediately or after a 2-wk delay. A measure of conceptual
structure, derived from the multidimensionally scaled
space, was found to be significantly correlated with transfer
performance.
Sebrechts et al. (1999) conducted a usability study of
their system NIRVE -- a tool that supports the visualization
of search results. They reported that Ss overall liked the
organizational aspects, including clustering of documents
and the relational arrangements of clusters.
Chen and Dumais (2000) implemented an interface that
organizes web search results into a hierarchical category
structure using Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers.
Usability tests revealed its qualitative (subject confidence
and preference) and quantitative (task completion time etc.)
superiority over a conventional search interface that
arranges webpages in a ranked list. Future research will
examine the degree of match between human categories
and categories derived via SVM and the best presentation
of search results in their category contexts among others.
The LVis - Digital Library Visualizer visually organizes
image retrieval results semantically based on features
derived from the textual descriptions via Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA) as described in section 4.3. This paper

192
0-7695-0743-3100
$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

'

reports an usability study conducted to compare the results
of a free sorting task for image data done by 20 Ss and the
LSA result to spatially layout images for browsing'. The
paper starts with a description of the image data set used,
describes the free sorting task conducted, and how its result
compares with the LSA output. Finally, we discuss the
cluster strategies applied by human subjects and Ss
preferences for the organization and presentations of image
search results to facilitate browsing. The paper concludes
with an outlook.

2. Image dataset
The LVis - Digital Library Visualizer (Bomer et al, 2000)
aims to provide a visual 2-D and 3-D interface to the Dido
Image Bank. Dido, a digital library at the Indiana
University Department of the History of Art, stores about
9,500 digitized images from the Fine Arts Slide Library
collection of over 320,000 images. It permits convenient
access and use of images for teaching and research
purposes
via
a
web
interface
at

httv://www.dlib.indiana.edu/collections/dido/.
Images in Dido are stored together with a thumbnail
representation of the image and a textual description:

During the test, each S had to freely sort one smaller
(Bosch or African) and one larger China data set in a way
such that similar images are placed close to each other. Ss
had to press the "Start" button to start sorting (writing out
the start time) and a "Done" button (writing out the end
time as well as the final s y positions of all images). After
each sorting task Ss got a printout of their sorting result and
have been asked to circle and label the categories they came
up with.
Figure 1 shows the "African" data set as sorted and
labeled by one of the subjects. Image 6 is picked and its
title "Bami1eke.Cameroon.Maskin theform of an Elephant"
is shown. Without the title this particular image is hard to
identify as a mask.
After the two sorting tasks were completed, Ss had to
describe the categorization criteria they used, their
preferred image organization scheme, problems they had,
etc.
Ss have been asked to achieve a non-overlapping layout
of images that shows the image numbers placed to the left
of each image. However, Ss were instructed to sort the
images in anv wav that they feel is appropriate for the
image set, to come up with anv number of categories, and
to use any kind of labels.

BOSCH, HIERONYMOUS,
Garden of Earthly Delights,
Center.Ful1 View, after 1500,
o/p 220x195 cm, Madrid, Prado.2823,
Saskia.llff-l06a.l/10/88, FS.PTG.NTH

For the purposes of this test, four image data sets were
retrieved from the Dido image data bank using the
keywords "Bosch", "African", and two Chinese data sets
"CHINA.PTG.5DYN OR CHINA.FTG.6DYN" as well as
"CHINA.PTG.TANG". The sets contained 12, 17, 31, and
32 images respectively see Table 1. The data sets were
chosen because of their variety of full and detailed views
(Bosch), different art forms (masks, sculptures,
photographs, paintings in African), and painting styles in
CHINA.PTG) that encourage very different ways of
sorting.

3. Free sorting task
In order to compare human image sorting results and data
analysis result derived via LSA, subject have been ask to
freely sort image data sets of image thumbnail presentations
(approximately 40 x 35 mm) that were displayed randomly
via a Java Applet on a desktop 19" monitor. Using the
mouse Ss could pick, drag, and place images. Whenever an
image is picked then its title is displayed above the image.
Data sets have been presented such that order and sequence
effects of task presentations are avoided.

Figure 1: Sorted "African" Data Set
Twenty Indiana University, Bloomington graduate
students with various backgrounds including Information
Science (70%), Telecommunications (15%), Music Theory
(5%), computer science (5%), and Library Science (5%)
participated in the experiment.
Exactly 40% of the Ss were male, 60% female.
Participants' ages were recorded using ranges: 50% of the
Ss were between the ages of 18 and 29, 45% between 30
and 39, and 5% between 40 and 49. 85% reported that they

'

Of course, the closer the textual image descriptions match the
features used by human subjects to retrieve and categorize images
the higher the quality of the resulting organization of the retrieval
result.

193

spent more than 5 hours per week on the Web and 65%
spent more than 15 hours per week on the computer. Figure
2 shows the self-ratings of Ss knowledge in art, computers,
data bases, and digital libraries is shown on a scale of 1=
naive, ..., 5=expert. 85% of the subjects are right-handed
and 15% left-handed. There are 65% native English
speaker, 15% Chinese, and 20% Korean. 75% of the SS
touch type.

number and kind of categories formed or preferred by
human subjects.

4.1. Number of categories and images per category
Based on the circled and labeled printouts of the sorting
results, the average number of categories formed and the
average number of images in each category were
determined for all four data sets. The results are displayed
in Table 1.

U
computers

0 data bases

0 digital libraries

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 2: Knowledge Levels of Subjects

I

In the pre-test questionnaire Ss were asked if they prefer
visual or textual information when they search the Web.
65% of the Ss wrote that they prefer visual information
because it is 'easier to understand', 'aesthetically appealing',
'keeps me interested', 'more meaningful', 'gives direct
information', 'entertaining', 'easy to identify', 'more
intuitive', 'text based is quickly fatiguing'. 25% of the Ss
stated that they use text and visual info and that they switch
to text if images take too much time to load. Only 10% of
the Ss stated that they prefer text because it is 'more direct'.

Data set
Bosch
Number of images 12
in data set
Average number 4.1
of categories
I
Number of images 12.8
in category

I

DYN

African TANG
17
31

I

4.3

I

7

13.8

14.29

I

I

32

I

6.75

I 5.42

I

I

Table 1: Data Sets Used and Results
A larger number of images seems to cause the formation
of more clusters that contain more images. However, the
small number of data sets used does not allow
generalizations.
There have been noticeable differences between the time
spent sorting by different subjects. It took some Ss almost
twice as long to sort a particular image set. Follow-up
experiments show that the Ss knowledge level of art
influences the Ss sorting behavior as well as task
completion times (see section Future Work).

4.2. MDS over subject data

4

A Multidimensional Scaling Analysis was performed to
detect underlying dimensions in the Ss sorting data.

Black and White

Full Views

1

Details

Figure 3: Sorted and Labeled "Bosch" Data Set
Figure 3 shows the sorted "Bosch" data set as sorted by one
of the subjects. Again, the derived categories are labeled.

Figure 4: MDS Result for "Bosch"
Based on Ss grouping of images into categories, an image
by image similarity matrix was derived in which each cell
indicates how often the images (row) has been grouped in
the same category with another image (column).

4. Results
The acquired data have been analyzed to derive
information about the quality of the match between human
free sorting results and LSA output as well as about the

194

-0,6

Figure 5: MDS Result for "African"

-0,4

-0,2

0

02

0 84

Figure 7: LSA Result for "African"
Figure 4 and 5 show the resulting MDS results for the
"African" and "Bosch" data set. Each dot represents an
image that is labeled by its number. Please have a look at
Figure 1 and 3 to see the corresponding thumbnail images.

4.3. LSA over textual image descriptions
Latent Semantic Analysis was performed over the textual
descriptions of the images in the four data sets. LSA is a
corpus-statistic method for inducing and representing
aspects of the meaning of words and passages (Berry,
Dumais & OBrien, 1995; Landauer, Foltz & Laham, 1998).
Starting point of the analysis is a term-by-document matrix
in which each cell indicates the frequency in which each
term (rows) occurs in each document (columns).

'J
-

-1

-0,8

-0,6

-0,4

-0,2

I

0

0 82

Figure 6: LSA Result for "Bosch"
LSA extends the vector space model by modeling termdocument relationships using a reduced approximation for
the column and row space computed by the singular value
decomposition of the term by document matrix.
For the purposes of the comparison we derived a textualimage-description-by-image matrix for each of the four
data sets.

The SVDPACK by Michael Berry was used for the
singular value decomposition. The rank-2 approximations
for the row space of the textual-image-description by image
matrix have been plotted for the "African" and "Bosch"
data set in Figure 6 and 7.

4.4. Comparison
Although the plots for the MDS and LSA result look very
different, a closer look reveals many similarities.
Comparing Figure 4 and 6 , one can see that MDS and
LSA results place images no. 10 and 11 close to each other
and in a larger distance to the rest of the images showing
Hironymous Bosch's "Garden of Earthly Delights" in full
view (images 0, 1, 4, 8, 9) or detailed view (images 2, 3, 5,
67).
As for the African data set shown in Figure 5 and 7,
masks (images 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 15) are placed
close to one another. Images 0, 3, 4, and 13 show outside
scenery and are placed in spatial proximity in both
diagrams. Remaining images such as the "Ornament
Bracelet" (image l), a "Throwing Knife" (image 13), or the
"Horse and Rider" statue (image 16) have been grouped by
Ss with very different other images and do not share many
text commonalities.
The two Chinese data sets show a similar resemblance
for subject and LSA data.
Images number 10 and 11 which show "Michelangelo's
Plan f o r completion of St. Peter's Vatican Plans (Affer
F e r r a u i ) " , cause a so called extension effect (Tversky,
1977). That is, images 0 ... 9 of Bosch's Garden ofEarthly
Delights become even more similar because of their
dissimilarity to images 10 and 11. Their commonly shared
features such as image color and image content2 are not
shared by 10 and 11. These features therefore acquire
"diagnostic value" and increase the similarity of images 0 ..

These features are frequently used by non-expert users to
sort images, see below.

195

modified Boltzmann algorithm (Alexander et al, 1995) to
spatially lay out semantic similarity networks for
interactive exploration.

9 and thus reduce the distance between the corresponding
dots in the plot.
In g e n e d , the MDS results reflect that S s did spread
images out in space - such that they don't overlap and all
images are visible. LSA places images according to their
similarity and pays no attention to the size of images.

5. Conclusions
The results of the study suggest that people, if asked to
categorize with no constraints, will use features that are
often derivable from textual image descriptions.
In addition to this, the comparison gives some
preliminary but encouraging results for the usage of LSA
for data analysis. Clearly, LSA can only be applied to
image libraries with good textual descriptions or metadata.
Probably, certain image types, such as modem art, would
be poorly categorized due to tendencies of representations
not to relate very closely to peoples conception of the
image. Annotation systems such as AT&T's Shoebox may
provide a way to effortlessly generate extensive, contentbased image descriptions that improve the quality of
retrieval and categorization.
Last but not least the results comprise practical guidelines
for selecting an appropriate number of images and of
categories for display as well as for the preference of image
organization schemes.

The analysis of the Post-Test-Questionnaire provided
several qualitative insights into S s sorting strategies and
preferen8:es.
The answers for the question "Which general
categorization criteria did you use?" as well as their
frequencies (left hand side) are given below.

frequency
12

used organization scheme
what images depict, content,
subject matter, depicted objects,
topic image pattern, activities
(background) color
by their name, author, text label
what things are made of, materials
purpose objects were made for
image clarity
image size

Subjects answered the question "How would you like
images to be organized tofacilitate your browsing? " with

frequency
13
6
9
4

1
1
1

6. Future Work
Currently conducted usability tests with art experts and
larger data sets show that the knowledge level in art
significantly influences sorting behavior. Expert Ss
typically sorted by painter and in rare cases by image
content. They never sorted by color. A detailed comparison
is under preparation.
Another line of usability studies compares sorting results
using a 2-D desktop interface and a functionally equivalent
3-D immersive CAVE environment.

preferred organization scheme
image content
place of creation
creator
time
color
style
appearance

One subject suggested to organize images by four rated
criteria: time (e.g. early impressionist), place (e.g., French),
content (e.g., landscape) and author (e.g., Monet).

7. Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the students for participating in this
study. Robert Goldstone has been a valuable discussion
partner in the design and analysis of this study. The
SVDPACK by Michael Berry was used for computing the
singular value decomposition of large sparse matrices. I
would like to give special tanks to Eileen Fry from Indiana
University for her insightful comments on this research as
well as ongoing discussions concerning the Dido Database.
Thanks go to the anonymous reviewers for valuable
recommendations on how to improve this paper. The
research is supported by a High Performance Network
Applications grant of Indiana University. Collaborators in
this project are Andrew Dillon and Margaret Dolinsky.

Asked "Have there been too many or too f e w images on
the screen?", 14 Ss reported that there were too many
images on the screen, 3 reported too few, and 3 found it ok.
The question "Did you have any problems to manipulate
the images? Ifso,which?" was answered as follows:

frequency
4

3
2
1
1

problem
selection of particular image especially
when piled up
image size too small
no or identical text
overlapping of images
hard to see text

8. References
Alexander, Garcia, and Alder (1995) Simulation of the
Consistent Boltzmann Equation for Hard Spheres and Its

This supports the design decision for our final browser
interface - it will provide a way to enlarge images and to
see their full text description. The final interface uses a

196

Extension to Dense Gases, Lecture Notes in Physics, Springer
Verlag.

Hartley, J. & Homa, D. (1981) Abstraction of stylistic concepts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Leaming andMemory, Vol7(1): 33-46.

Benv. M. et al. (1993)
. , SVDPACKC (Version 1.0) User‘s
Guide, Univ. of Tennessee Tech. Report CS93-194, (Revised
October
1996).
See
also
httD://www.netlib.ordsvdvacWindex.html.
< I

Beny, M, Dumais, S.T. & O’Brien, G.W. (1995) Using linear
algebra for intelligent information retrieval. SIAM: Review, 37(4),
573-595.

QBIdTM)

a

Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998) Introduction
to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25,259-284.
Shoebox
by
AT&T
Laboratories
htta://www.uk.research.att.com/dart/shoebox/

Bomer, K. (2000) Visible Threads: A smart VR interface to
digital libraries. Proceedings of IST/SPIE’s 12th Annual
Intemational Symposium: Electronic Imaging 2000, Visual Data
Exploration and Analysis, San Jose, CA., pp 228-237,
htb://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-katv/SPIEOO/

Cambridge

Sebrechts, M., Vasilakis, J., Miller, M., Cugini, J. and
Laskowski, S. (1999) Visualization of Search Results: A
Comparative Evaluation of Text, 2D, and 3D Interfaces, In the
Proceedings of the 22nd Intemational Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 3-10, M. Hearst, F.
Gey, and R. Tong (eds), Berkeley, Califomia.

Bomer, K. (in press) Extracting and visualizing semantic
structures in retrieval results for browsing. ACM Digital Libraries,
San
Antonio,
Texas,
June
2-7,
2000.

Small, H. (1999) Visualizing science by citation mapping,
Journal of the American Sociew for Information Science.
50(9):799-813.

httD://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-katv/D100/

Bomer, K., Dolinsky, M. & Dillon, A. (in press) LVis -Digital
Library Visualizer. Information Visualization (IV2000). London,
UK, July 19-21,2000. httu://ella.slis.indiana.edu/-katvl1V-LVis/

The Indiana University Department of the History of Art Dido
Image Bank, httD://www.dlib.indiana.edu/ collections/dido/

Chen C. (1999) Visualizing semantic spaces and author cocitation networks in digital libraries, Information Processing and
Management 35,401-420.

Tversky, A. (1 977) Features of similarity. Psychological
Review. Vol 84(4):327-352.
White, H. D. and McCain, K. W. (1998) Visualizing a
Discipline: An Author Co-Citation Analysis of Information
Science, 1972-1995, Journal of the American Society for
Information Science. 49(4):327-355.

Chen, H. And Dumais, S. (2000) Bringing order to the Web:
categorizing search

-- IBMs Query By Image Content

hM,://wwwabic.almaden.ibm.com/

Proceedings of the

2000 Conference, pp 145-152.

197

