COLLABORATIVE VISWAL DATA NAVIGATION ON THE WEB
Professor Mikael Jern
ITN, Linkoping University, Sweden and Advanced Visual Systems, Denmark
E-mail: mikael@avs.dk,mik.ie@itn.liu.se
This paper will show you how to deliver
interactive visual data navigation in an electronic
document through the Web based on Microsoft’s
ActiveWCOM industry standard. How you
develop and deploy solutions that provide rich
data analysis and 3D visualization capabilities.
How you can deploy electronic documents with
richer visual user interfaces. The proposed
solution is called “SmartDoc”, where an analytical
event comes to life in the document. This may be
the starting point for new visual solutions to
problems that have proved very difficult to
communicate.

ABSTRACT
2D and 3D visualization technologies developed
for the Web are taking the world by storm.
Companies now see the Internethtranet and the
Web as key mechanisms for distributing
information internally and among their customers.
With the evolution of standard Web-based
visualization components, the opportunity to
provide interactive electronic documents has
become practicable. The author of a scientific,
engineering or business analysis, can distribute
electronic documents with embedded interactive
3D visualization viewers to colleagues.

THE EVOLUTION OF 3D INFORMATION
VISUALIZATION
Searching for key information, exploring and
analysing of data, and finally presenting,
understanding and communicating the result are a
complex process. Information Visualization
(InNiz) has been an active research topic for some
years. InfViz focuses on visualizing abstract and
non-physical data. The challenge here is designing
a useful visual representation. Since our senses
develop thousands years in physical world, we
explore and understand reality in physical terms.
Size, shape, position, colour, dimension, motion
and other attributes are the signs of reality, which
carry its information most efficiently. 3D graphics
offers controversial opportunity for InfViz.
Anybody, who participates in a demonstration of a
true 3D InfViz session of multivariate data,
immediately sees its potential. Yet, while many
pilot applications have been developed, 3D InNihas yet to achieve mass deployment. What have
been the obstructions to this evolution?

The quickest way to move from data to insights to
action is to make the data analysis a shared
experience. Visual data navigators embedded in
electronic documents can act as a key enabler of
geographically distributed teams, allowing team
members to analyse, communicate and share
information as though they are collocated.
Economic globalisation and competition drive the
formation of geographically distributed teams that
span different sites within the same company and
sometimes cross-corporate boundaries.
The objective of our EC project CONTENTS, is to
develop high-level customisable components for
visual data navigation of multivariate data. These
visual data navigators are developed from a true
“atomic” component infrastructure with a small
footprint suitable for the Web. Of particular
relevance to CONTENTS is that the user interface
interaction will be more centred on human needs
and capabilities. The overall goal is to make end
users more effective in their information or
communication tasks by reducing learning times,
speeding performance, lowering error rates,
facilitating retention and increasing subjective
satisfaction. The development of our visual data
navigators is based on the “atomic” component
architecture and framework from Advanced Visual
System’s OpenViz.

The cost of developing advanced 3D InfViz
applications has been deterrent to mass
deployment. While some ad hoc visualization
techniques can be used to visualize
multidimensional data, the best results usually
come from customising the visual presentatior
based on information content and meaning. T
268

in the 3D sphere graph, the potential for
understanding it grows exponentially and
particular when combined with 2D views. As we
become more analytically oriented and begin to
think multi-dimensionally, these 3D techniques
will become a necessary tool to deal with massive
amounts of complex abstract data.

Web-based industry standard component evolution
described in this paper will dramatically reduce
development time from months to days.
Another obstacle could be that proponents of 3D
Infviz have had difficulty quantifying its benefits.
The "return on information" is very valuable, but
hard to quantify up front, which leads us also to
issues with the socialisation of 3D Infviz. The
early adopters of 3D Infviz technology have been
innovators. 3D Infviz pioneers are people working
on difficult, complex, abstract large data problems,
as opposed to daily processing problems. Many
successful deployment of this technique in
industry are regarded as a competitive strength and
therefore confidential, which makes it difficult to
assimilate 3D Infviz into the information
technology mainstream.

I

SMARTDOC
The quickest way to move from data to insights to
action is to make the data analysis a shared
experience. The 3D sphere visualization is a good
example analysing how various car model
attributes such as mpg, horsepower, weight,
acceleration, number of cylinders etc, correlate to
each other. The 3D spheres reveals, for example,
that Japanese cars use less petrol (MPG) than
American cars. Is this due to number of cylinders
or weight? How is the acceleration of a car model
related to its weight etc? The colleagues that you
involve in this analysis will want to ask their own
questions of the data. They'll want to start with the
same perspectives that sparked the questions, then
apply their own expertise and experience to the
analysis by branching off into their own
exploration of the data. The fastest way to derive
insights from your analysis is to create an intuitive
map to saved views of the data, and then make this
discovery available to colleagues. You'll want to
create a system that can capture the insights so
they can be shared with the people who can take
action on them.
8

-.
-.

Electronic documents full of text and images lend
themselves well to Web technologies, but not all
documents are useful when viewed as static text
and imagery only. Authors, who wish to share
their results and insights from a visual analysis in
an electronic document through the Web,
encounter special problems. Much of the value of
sharing an insight and analysis from some
spreadsheet data lies in allowing other users to
interact with it and analyse the result to their own
needs. For example, you create a Microsoft Word
document describing some results from a
laboratory analysis. Consider that it would be
possible to embed not only the text but also the
actual visual analysis and the underlying numeric
data of your discovery. In other words, publishing
a Word text document on Web is only half the
story. The other half is enabling others to interact

Figure 1: Visualization of abstract data (InjViz).
Spreadsheets have helped us organize our
information into two-dimensional matrices of rows
and columns. 3D Infviz provides a new way of
viewing multiple dimensions in the same display.
One way is to map the abstract data to a virtual
object such as a 3D sphere graph. Five columns in
an Excel spreadsheet are mapped onto X, Y, Z,
Size and Colour (see figure 1). Effective users of
this Infviz technique, however, must be analytical
and multidimensional thinkers. While it seems
intuitive for analytical thinkers to assess data by
multiple dimensions not everyone thinks that way.
When information is organized dimensionally as

269

with the published result and garner information
that’s meaningful to them, not just to the
publisher. SmartDoc will deliver an interactive
experience in an electronic document on the Web.
A spreadsheet or database report come to life in
the document.

exceptions in the display and dive into the details
behind them. This overcomes the problem of large
data sets by allowing you to focus in on the exact
data that will answer your questions. The image to
the right shows a typical navigation feature;
correlation between two sets of data that identifies
how they relate to the each other, which makes
relationships more apparent.

VISUAL DATA NAVIGATION IN
SMARTDOC
The fundamental purpose of any visualization is to
communicate information to users. Visualization
sits at the interface between what machines are
good at (data information) and what people are
good at (Knowledge, Experience). The overall
objective of visual communication that takes place
in all phases of a SmartDoc process is to provide
decreased “time-to-enlightenment”.

The visual data navigation techniques described in
this paper are being developed within the scope of
the EC project CONTENTS and are based on
Advanced Visual Systems’ OpenViz, a state-ofthe-art 2D and 3D visualisation component
framework. The goal is to develop integrated 2D
and 3D advanced interactive data visualisation and
navigation techniques that can be used as
standalone applications or in a collaborative
environment on the Web. Visualization is
developed from a true “atomic” component
infrastructure with a small footprint suitable for
the Web and can be customised to any level of
expertise. A client-side application component
“3D Viewer” for the local graphics rendering is
available.

Today’s desktops are visually challenged.
Tremendous potential exists to increase the types
of representations of, and interactions with, data.
Conventional data-exploration tools fall short of
this goal. Standard 2D business graphics tools
such as Excel graphs are limited to 2D graphics
and are not adequate for multivariate dataset.
Furthermore, the two-way graph interactivity
required for analytical operations such as drilldown and slice-and-dice on multivariate data is
not available in most graphing tools designed for
data presentation. 3D scientific visualization is too
complex for most users. What are required are
visual tools that can explore and analyse very
large, complex multi-dimensional dataset both
locally and communicated over the Web.

BUILDING A SMARTDOC
The SmartDoc visual data navigation components
allow the author to embed not only the content
(text), but also the entire visual data navigation
scenario in any Word document. Upon receipt of
the SmartDoc, the recipients can immediately
share the author’s insight and zoom-in on specific
results that affect their activities. Clients and
colleagues can rearrange multivariate data to
uncover patterns and trends that may go unnoticed
in lengthy paper reports. Easy-to-learn and use ad
hoc analysis tool, SmartDoc, empower users to
answer questions and find conclusions on their
own. The person viewing the report has full access
to any discovery (insight), data navigation tools
and underlying data. The “discovery” is described
in one or several snapshots (“bookmarks”) also
embedded in the report. These snapshot are a copy
of the control’s state at the time when the snapshot
was taken and allow the user to further interact
from the state when the visualization was snapped.

Answering the call is a realm of data exploration
tools, which we have named Visual Data
Navigation. There are three important roles for the
visual data navigators in the SmartDoc:
1.
2.
3.

Explore (What-if, 3D interaction, drilldown, VUI, multiple views)
Understanding Complexity (Visual tools
integrated with analysis process, filter)
Communicate (electronic document,
Perception, Web enabled)

The visual data navigation scenario focuses on
user interface interaction and is more centred on
human needs and capabilities. In a visual data
navigation process, you can click on the

You can visualize multivariate data and derive a
deeper understanding of compound properties

270

“bookmark” with the Snapshot Manager. When
the document is saved, the Snapshots and data will
be stored as part of the document (SmartDoc).
When the next user opens the document, it will
start the 3D interactive visualization process based
on the author’s bookmarks. The visualization will
revert to exactly the same status as defined by the
author. The recipients can then immediately
share the author’s insight about data.

through data correlation and multiple display
methods of the same data source. You can filter
unwanted values using range sliders to expose
areas of greatest importance. Isolating data of
interest clears the view even further and provides
close-ups of the results.
The data is normally be embedded in the
document, but you can also retrieve the data from
a local file or from a central data warehouse. The
Excel file must then be in exact same location as it
was whcn you retrieved the data. The SmartDoc
concept, however, is based on embedding the data
inside the document.

APPLICATION COMPONENT
DEVELOPMENT WITH ATOMIC
COMPONENTS
Component-based software development is now
firmly established as the next
I h i a I S cinbeddctl ‘1s .in aiiay
generation in software engineering.
Components are an essential
ingredient in achieving rapid
development cycles as well as
providing substantial increases in
Siii‘ii t DoL visu,ili/ntion componciit
reliability and reusability.
Component definition standards are
now available that enable
developers to access and
Text piovides [lie Lontcnl
immediately integrate a wide variety
of “off the shelf’ functionality.
Developers can incorporate virtually
any existing component, provided
that it has been built to support these
defined standards.

Our objective within the scope of the SmartDoc
project is to validate the atomic component
architecture. We believe that using lower-level
atomic components for developing application
components will provide better scalability and
more customisable data navigator components that
can be used in real world applications. Atomic
COTS components from different vendors (or
developed when necessary) are used in assembling
functional and application components. Rich sets
of component resources with fine grain control
will precise match to user requirements and any
corporate product identity. For the scope of the
SinartDoc project, three different types of
component layers have been identified on their
degree of compliance with the totality of the COM
specifications:

SNAPSHOT MANAGER
When preparing thc document, the author can set
“bookmarks” or snapshots that highlight data
views of particular interest to different recipients.
Colleagues can use these descriptive bookmarks to
quickly locate key information by simply selecting
the SmartDoc view they need. The Snapshot
Manager remembers and records the status of a
data navigation experience. The author has
selected suitable data dimensions, display
properties, filtered data with the slide rangers
focusing on the data-of-interest and finally
highlighted the “discovery” from a certain angle
(viewing properties) and can now save this status

27 1

Step2: Select and download data navigator
components from a central portal component
repository. Download OpenVi
already installed.

Atomic level components are low-level, highperformance and typically underlying data
structure bound components that constitute the
core of application components. (Bar or line
graph, axis, colour scale, glyph). The atomic
components can have many properties, but no user
interface to set values.
Functional level components are the middle tier
components that are constituted by the
combination of one or more atomic components.
These components are typically implementing the
general functionality of high-profile software. The
“3D glyph” data navigator component is an
example of a functional component. These
components have many properties but no user
interface to set values.
Application level components are the components
that are constituted by the combination of one or
more atomic and functional components. These
components are actually “customer ready”
applications including user controls and do
typically implement one or more of the
functionality required by the end user. This is the
case, for example, of a complete “Visual Data
Navigation” application component used in
SmartDoc.
Component-based development will invariably
result in more robust and flexible application
software. Testing and bug fixing will only cover a
limited functionality of a component. This means
that once this process is completed, it can be used
in any number of projects will perform without
breaking down. Testing and bug fixing for the
application to be deployed can then be much less
extensive.

Step3: Embed one or
several selected data
navigation components in
the active Word document.
Write text (content) describing
the analysis.
Step4: Open the Data Navigat
and visualize interactivily the data inside the
document. View, zoom, select attributes, pick data
and isolate data within certain ranges by filters
until the author has discovered pattern or trend in
his data. Save Snapshots (bookmarks) at each level
of discovery.

Steps: The
author is now
ready to create the
final SmartDoc
document. Text
(content), Final
Image (selected
view of data),
Statusfile for the
snapshot or
“bookmarks” (all
selected data and visualization attributes are
saved), Visualization components (pointers), Data
(embedded as an “array”). When preparing the
document, the author can set “bookmarks”
(snapshots) that highlight data views of particular
interest to different recipients. Colleagues and
clients can use these descriptive bookmarks to
quickly locate key information by simply selecting
the report view they need. Recipients also have the
flexibility to create their own bookmarks for at-aglance reference and comparison.

AVS has developed a framework and
infrastructure for developing high-level
application visualisation components based on
atomic components and supporting both
COWActiveX and JavaBeans component
architecture called “Openviz”.

Step6: After the author completes his report, he
sends it to both internal and external constituents
who have access to the Viewer. He posts the
document to the organization’s Web site. Now,
internal managers and marketing researchers etc
can interact with the document on the
organization’s Intranet while external clients can
work with the document via Internet.

A SMARTDOC SCENARIO
Stepl: Create the
Spreadsheet data. Select
and transform raw data
into data tables.

272

Step7: Recipients retrieve the SmartDoc document
from the Web site. The visualization components
and OpenViz Viewer are downloaded to the client
machine (if not already available locally).

users to answer questions and find conclusions on
their own.

Our goal in the CONTENTS project is to develop
high-level components for visual data navigation
of multivariate data to be use in SmartDoc. These
Steps: Recipients can now dig into results and get
data navigators are developed from a true
more value by creating new meaning and
“atomic” component infrastructure with a small
understanding in the results.
footprint suitable for the Web. Another goal is
- Start the analysis from a “bookmark”
to design visual user interfaces that match our
- View the analysis behind the report
human perceptual and social abilities. We
- Interact with the results and digest
believe that improved VU1 designs can
- Discover new meanings of data, trends and correlation
dramatically increase effectiveness for users
- Recipients are more active than with just text reports
who range from novices to experts and who
- Promote collaborate research
are in diverse cultures with varying
- Generate a new SmartDoc report
educational backgrounds. We shall also
increasingly focus on human-human
interaction (SmartDoc), not just human-computer
Users can also include the Data Navigator
interaction.
components in a Microsoft PowerPoint
presentation and then answer ad hoc questions in
Important features required from visualization
the audience by data navigation inside
tools in a data navigation process:
Powerpoint.

CONCLUSION
The Web is well on its way to becoming the most
interesting form of media the world has yet seen
and will become one of the standard ways we
interpret our world. 3D data visualization
technologies developed for the Web are taking
industry by storm. Companies now see
Intranethternet as key mechanisms for
distributing information internally and among their
customers. With the evolution of standard Webbased visualization components, the opportunity to
provide interactive electronic documents has
become practicable. The author of a scientific,
engineering or business analysis, can distribute
electronic documents with embedded 3D data
navigators to colleagues.

1. Full integration with the data warehouse or
spreadsheet process by which data is brought
together
2. Web-based “atomic” component architecture
(COM/ActiveX or Java) as building blocks
3. Dynamic graphics that users can interact with
in real time
4. Rich set of component resources with granular
control of details
5. Platfondrendering library independence
6. V U - Tight integration between data and
visualization objects supporting “drill-down’’
and “data-correlation” features
7. Customisable and user friendly solutions
instead of inaccessible “black boxes”
8. Presentation graphics with axes, legends,
annotation and high-resolution hard copy
9. Based on “scene tree” hierarchical graphics
structure

This paper has demonstrated how to deliver an
interactive experience in an electronic document
on the Web based on the “SmartDoc” concept with
integrated visual data navigation components.
Upon receipt of a SmartDoc, the recipients can
immediately share the author’s insight and zoomin on specific results that affect their activities.
Clients and colleagues can rearrange multivariate
data to uncover patterns and trends that may go
unnoticed in lengthy paper reports. Easy-to-learn
and use ad hoc analysis tool, SmartDoc, empower

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper was partly supported by the European
in the ESPRIT Project CONTENTS
(EP 29732).

273

