Haptic Representation of the Atom
Erica Harvey, Ph.D
Assoc. Professor of Chemistry
Fairmont State College
ehawey @mail.fscwv.edu

Chaim Gingold
Research Assistant
West Virginia Virtual Environments Laboratory
gingold @ csee. wvu.edu

Abstract
Three-dimensional functions that represent atomic
orbitals are traditionally difJicultfor chemistry students to
conceptualize. Large sections of undergraduate physical
chemistry texts are devoted to breaking apart and
simplifiing electron density functions so they can be
visually represented. Traditional methodologies include
skins (isosugaces and enclosures of certain probabilities),
three-dimensional projections (color, contours, slices) and
two-dimensional graphs. Preliminary work with the
Phantom 3d haptic interface suggests that haptics are an
important addition to the chemist's tool set f o r
representing atomic orbitals. With the Phantom, users
simply move through real three-dimensional space and
perceive the electron density as the force on the Phantom's
pen.
In our work, the force is proportional to the probability
density function for the electron at any point, given by the
square of the wavefunction describing a particular atomic
orbital ( y 2 ( r , 8,4)). Nodes are f e l t as regions of zero
force, increasing ~2 values are felt as increasing
resistance, and maxima are communicated by haptic
"clicks."
Previous application of the Phantom to chemistry by
Wanger utilized haptics for molecular docking feedback
[I]. The present work tackles the altogether dijjerent
problem of haptically visualizing the probability density
functions of individual atomic orbitals. Feedback from
chemistry students is positive and interest in continued
development of the work is high among chemistry
faculty.

highlighted by the inclusion of various representations for
the functions even in introductory chemistry texts.
Unfortunately, the functions that represent atomic orbitals
are complicated and difficult to visualize with traditional
methods. The oversimplification required to introduce
atomic orbitals at the introductory level is followed by
hours of work in the third-year undergraduate physical
chemistry course, much of it directed at simply
understanding the relationship between the functions and
their traditional graphical representations.
Solution of the Schrodinger equation for the hydrogen
atom produces a family of electron wavefunctions denoted
by y(r, 0, I$). Multiplying a wavefunction by its complex
conjugate produces a real function whose value at any
point in space represents the probability density for
finding an electron at that point. This real function,
known casually as y2, is an atomic orbital. Atomic
orbital functions generate three-dimensional probability
density fields that describe where an electron is likely to
be found. Alternatively, the three-dimensional probability
density field can be said to determine the shape of a
particular orbital. For one-electron atoms, the shape of the
atom itself is controlled by the shape of the orbital in
which the electron is located.
Each atomic orbital is characterized by a unique set of
three quantum numbers, n, 1 and ml, that determines its
particular mathematical form. Atomic orbitals with 1=0
are known as "s" orbitals. When n=l, the function is the
1s orbital; n=2 produces the 2s orbital, and so on. The
mathematical functions that correspond to s orbitals
consist of a constant, multiplied by a polynomial in r (of
degree n- l), multiplied by an exponential decay in r. The
1s and 2s atomic orbital functions, shown below, have
spherically symmetric shapes because the functions have
no dependence on 0 or I$.

1. Background & Problem
Atomic orbitals are three-dimensional mathematical
functions used by chemists to describe the locations of
electrons in atoms. Understanding the distribution of
electron density in atoms is critical for the development of
major concepts in chemistry including the structure of the
periodic table, the formation of bonds between atoms,
molecular geometry and chemical reactivity. The central
importance of atomic orbitals to the study of chemistry is

0-7695-0743-3100$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

232

2. Traditional Representations

y2-2s(r, 8,@)= [N2*(2 - Zr/ao)*e(-Zr/2ao)]2

In the equations above, NI and N2 are constants, Z is
the (integral) number of protons in the nucleus of the
atom and a. is a constant (52.9 picometers) that provides
a convenient unit for atomic dimensions.
Atomic orbital functions take the general form shown
below, where the radial and angular variables are separable.
0

2

4

6

8

10

-I

.o,

.IQ

a0

Values of I>O add angular dependence to the types of
functions shown above for'the 1s and 2s orbitals, and lead
to orbitals with dumbbell (l=l), cloverleaf (1=2) or even
more complex shapes. The complexity of the radial
dependence of the function also increases for orbitals with
higher quantum numbers. Difficulty in conceptualizing
the functions increases correspondingly.
The major challenge in representing atomic orbital
functions arises because each location in 3-dimensional
space has an associated value of y2. If three dimensions
are used to locate a point in space, a fourth dimension is
needed to communicate the value of y2. Traditional
representations of orbital shapes are based on attempts to
reduce the dimensionality of the y2 functions, and
physical interpretations of the apparent shapes vary with
the method of representation.
Introductory chemistry students presented with
traditional images of atomic orbitals typically remain
unaware of the limited nature of the representations. These
students often develop firm misconceptions that slow the
process of understanding the representations later in the
curriculum. Furthermore, when this topic is covered in
junior-level physical chemistry, the chemically-relevant
understanding of orbitals too often gets lost in the maze of
subtly different representations used to attempt to convey
the shapes.

Figure l a . Radial dependence of 2s
atomic orbital

16

Ii

0

P.

I

I

a

4
1
-

I

I

6

8

10

-14

a0

Figure 1b. Radial dependence of 2s
atomic orbital
Common orbital representation methods involve
plotting the radial and angular dependencies separately. A
full understanding of the orbital shapes then requires the
viewer to synthesize the information from the two types
of plots. In Figures l a and lb, the value of the electron
probability density function for the 2s orbital is plotted on
the vertical axis as a function of distance from the
nucleus. Figure l a clearly shows the general decay of
electron density from a finite value at the nucleus to very
small values at 10*ao. Figure l b is the same plot,
rescaled with a smaller maximum for the vertical axis in
order to highlight the radial node at Zrla, = 2 and the local
maximum in electron density at approximately Zr/ao = 4.

233

Figure 4. Surface plot for 2s orbital

Figure 2. Angular dependence for 2s
orbital

In Figure 4, the value of y 2 for a 2s orbital is
represented by the height on the z-axis, while the x and y
dimensions are real spatial dimensions. The nucleus of the
atom is located at the center of the xy plane. This figure
illustrates electron density features for a slice of the orbital
in the x-y plane. A subtle feature is the presence of a
radially symmetric bump of electron density at the base of
the cone, corresponding to the local maximum shown in
Figure 1. A disadvantage of this representation is that
many slices are needed to construct a full mental picture of
the orbital.
The most complete and conceptually accurate
representations of atomic orbitals involve the use of color
or dot frequency to denote a fourth dimension in a 3d plot.
The average electron density in small volume elements is
calculated and then represented by color or number of dots.
This type of representation is most effective when the
image can be rotated. The major drawback is that internal
details about electron density are obscured by the outer
parts of the image. A navigable three dimensional
representation is needed, one which would allow the
viewer to fly through the orbital. We achieve this goal by
using haptic force to represent a fourth dimension.

Figure 3. Angular dependence for I=1
orbital

In Figure 2 the radial dependence is ignored and the
value of Y2(0,c$) for an s orbital is represented as the
apparent distance from the origin. Figure 3 shows the
same type of plot for an orbital with 1=1. While these
representations clearly show the angular dependence of the
functions, no information about radial features (such as
radial nodes) is communicated. The plots look similar to
quite different plots in which all three dimensions
represent spatial coordinates and the orbital shape is
shown by an isosurface, or skin of constant qr2. The
similarity in appearance provides a continual source of
confusion for students. Both types of plots also reinforce
the incorrect idea that orbitals have a definite outline or
edge.

234

3. A Haptic Approach

at Zr/ao=2. After the node comes a local maximum, felt as
a dense region of higher probability. On either side of the
maximum the user is pushed in opposite directions, which
makes the maximum feel like a haptic click. After the
click at the local maximum, the probability density decays
to imperceptible values.
With the aid of haptics, the conceptually difficult task
of mentally integrating two or more images to create a
complete representation of the orbital is replaced by a
concrete, complete, and conceptually accurate physical
experience. The potential ramifications for teaching are
significant, and a group of physical chemistry faculty to
whom the concept was introduced last fall were very
interested in the possibility of demonstration and
dissemination of the technology [3].
Introductory and advanced chemistry students from
Fairmont State College tested the haptic Is and 2s orbitals
during the spring of 2000. Students at all levels were able
to understand the haptic representation, and were
enthusiastic about the possibility of experiencing more
complex orbitals. Students suggested the development of a
clearer visual explanation of the spatial relationship
between the orbital and the pen. Apparently, novices are
not expert at understanding haptic feedback without visual
back-up. User testing indicated that it would also be easier
for novice users to feel important features if the Phantom
could produce greater forces.

Sensable Technology's Phantom allows the user to
move a pen, connected to a mechanical arm, within a 3d
workspace on the user's desk. The computer is capable of
applying forces to the pen, making full duplex haptic
communication between the computer and user possible

PI.
The software we developed directly maps the 3-space of
the atom into the 3-space of the Phantom's workspace.
The electron probability density function drives the force
exerted on the user. The user, by moving the Phantom's
pen around the workspace, probes different points in the
atomic orbital. The Phantom responds by continuously
updating the forces acting on the user with the output
from the y2 function, creating a tangible electron
probability density field. On the computer screen, a twodimensional projection of a three-dimensional electron
density isosurface provides the user with an additional
point of reference for understanding the location of the
probe in relation to the nucleus.
The magnitude of the force vector is calculated by
scaling the output of the y function at the location of the
probe. The gradient of the probability function governs
the direction in which the pen is pushed.
So far, we have modeled the spherically symmetric 1s
and 2s atomic orbitals. Because the haptic device
communicates only a limited range of forces, it was
necessary to zoom in on the interesting parts of each
orbital to make interesting features haptically appreciable.

5. Future Plans
Future plans include creating haptic models of more
complex orbitals and atoms, as well as making the onscreen projection stereo, to give the user better visual
backup on location of the probe in relation to the atom.
Advancements in haptic technology should allow us to
render a larger part of the two dimensional space of the
radius versus probability graph, since the range of force
available for feedback governs the scaling of probability to
force.

4. Results
This simulation puts the user into the shoes of an
electron trying to move through a 1s or 2s orbital that is
already occupied by an electron. Since electrons are
negatively charged, they repel each other. The user, acting
as a "test electron," experiences the electron probability
density as a force to be pushed against. In both s orbitals,
the region near the nucleus is hard, indicating a high
electron probability density at the center. One quickly
realizes that s electrons have substantial probability of
being near the nucleus, which is physically correct.
Moving out in any direction from the center of the 1s
orbital, the force on the pen decreases exponentially.
When feeling the decay of the force with increasing radius,
it is easy to understand the idea that the "edge" of an
orbital is an arbitrary, empirically-determined limit.
Moving out from the hard central kernel for the 2s
orbital, one experiences the same overall fading electron
density and then encounters a spherical region of zero
force, after which the force begins to increase again. This
sphere of zero force corresponds to the node in the orbital,

6. Bibliography
[l] Wanger, Len. "Haptically Enhanced Molecular Modeling:
A Case Study." Proceedings of the Third PHANTOM Users
Group Workshop, AI Lab Technical Report No. 1643, MIT:

1998.
[2] Sensable Technologies. http://www.sensable.com.

[3] Harvey, Erica. "Haptic Representation of the Atom."
Developer's meeting, National Science Foundation funded
group, Physical Chemistry On-Line, Monmouth, NJ, August,
1999.

235

