Axial Representation for Modelling 3D Shapes
K C Hui
Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong.
e-mail: kchui@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

tissues, and skin for constructing an animal model
[ 12,13,14]. This approach allows realistic simulation of
skin deformation around joins and is thus particularly
suitable for modelling vertebrate that are articulated
figures. In the modelling of animals such as fishes and
snakes, not much published work can be found in the
literature. Tu and Terzopoulos [ 151 modelled the artificial
fishes with polygon meshes. Their work focused on
modelling the physics, locomotion, perception, and
behavior of fishes. In this paper, a different approach
based on the axial deformation of objects is adopted for
modelling fishes.

Abstract
This paper presents a technique for representing
animal models in terms of a set of axial curves. An object
o r an animal model is defined as the union of a set of
different parts. Each part of the object is represented in an
axial space dejhed by an axial curve-pair - a primary
curve and an orientation curve. A hierarchy of axial
curve-pairs defines the relative positions and orientations
of different parts of the object. The shape of the object can
be mod$ed by adjusting the axial curve-pairs. Adjusting
the axial curve-pairs according to some motion constraints
produces different postures of an animal model. This
technique is particularly suitable for modelling animals
such as fishes and snakes.

2. Objects in Axial Space
Defining 2D figures relative to an axial curve was
introduced by Burtnyk N, Wein M [6]. In their method,
pixels of an image is defined relative to a user specified
skeleton curve. A change in the skeleton curve changes
the positions of the pixels and hence the shape of the
figure. Coquillart [16] used the same approach for the
axial deformation of 3D objects. In this method, an object
represented with polygon meshes is deformed by adjusting
the shape of an axial curve. In this paper, a similar
approach is adopted. An axial curve is used for defining
objects that are attached to the axial curve.
Consider a point P and an axial curve C(u) in space
(Figure 1). Assume P, is the normal projection of P on
C(u) so that P, = C(t), Q = P - P,, and Q C’(t) = 0, then

1. Introduction
Although various techniques have been developed for
modelling complex objects such as automobiles, aircraft,
and buildings, these techniques may not be directly applied
for modelling non-rigid objects, in particular, animals and
human figures. The problem becomes more complicated
when an animation of the animals or a morphing between
two different animal models is required. There has been a
great amount of work in the motion control of legged
animal and human figures [I-51. In the modelling of
human and animal figures, the skeleton-based techniques
have been proposed [6,7].
A layered approach was
introduced by Chadwick [8] to animate a rigid skeleton
based model using freeform deformation techniques [9].
Stalpers and Van Overveld [lo] employed a polygonized
skeleton model for deforming a geometric model. Walter
and Foumier [ I l l modelled the growth of an animal by
enclosing different parts of the animal model in a set of
interrelated cylinders. A different approach is to use the
anatomy based methods which uses a hierarchy of bones,

0-7695-0743-3100
$10.000 2000 IEEE

where [L,(t), L,(t), L,(t)] is a local coordinate frame at
Ut).
Denoting

401

U

= Q 0 L,(t), v = Q

0

L,(t), and w = Q 0 L,(t),

smooth transition between two given local coordinate
frames. In this paper, the direction curve approach [ 191 is
adopted. An orientation curve C,(s) is used to define the
orientation of the local coordinate frame as shown in
Figure 2.

then

P = C(t) + uL,(t)

+ vL,(t) + wL,(t)

(2)

Since L, and C’(t) are parallel, hence w = 0 and

P = C(t) + uL,(t) + vL,(t)

(3)

P can thus be specified with the coordinates { t,

The point P, is the projection of P, onto C,(s) such that
C,’(s) = 0, and the coordinate frame at P is
given by

v, w}
in the axial space defined by C(t) and the local coordinate
frame of [L,(t), Ly(t>,L,(t)l.
U,

(P, - P,)

2.1 The Local Coordinate Frame of a Curve
A common technique for specifying the local
coordinate frame of a curve is to use the Frenet Frame [ 171
of a curve. The Frenet Frame of a curve is a coordinate
frame defined in terms of the tangent, normal and binormal
vectors to the curve so that

An axial space can thus be defined with the axial curve
The pair of curves
C(t) and C,(t) is here after referred to as an axial curvepair. Since the distance between C(t) and C,(t) is not
significance in the determination of the local coordinate
frame, IC,(t) - C(t)l is assumed to be less than a user
defined value, i.e. &(t) - C(t)l c k. In this case, C,(t) can
be constructed as an offset of C(t), and C,(t) must lie
within a circular tube with radius k as shown in Figure 3.
C(t) and the orientation curve C,(t).

One problem with Frenet Frame is that C’(t) may
vanish so that L,(t) is not defined. Besides, the local
coordinate frame is completely defined by the curve C(t)
so that there is no user control on the orientation of the
frame which may not be desirable. Klok [18] proposed a
rotation-minimizing frame defined with the functions
T(t) = C’(t)/lC’(t)l,
F’(t) = -(C’(t) F(t))C’(t)/lC’(t)r,
G’(t) = -(C’(t) G(t))C’(t)/lC’(t)r
Given F(0) and G(O), these equations minimizes the
rotation of the frame along the curve C(t). Since only one
local coordinate frame can be defined, this technique and
the Frenet Frame approach cannot be used for obtaining a

402

3. The Axial Representation

each control point of the orientation curve lies at the
required offset distance from the axial curve i.e.

As discussed in the previous section, a point P can be
defined in an axial space S(C, C,) defined by an axial
curve C(t) and the orientation curve C,(t). A B-spline
surface can thus be defined in the axial space of S(C, C,)
by expressing the control points of the surface in terms of
t, U, v, w using Equation (2). In order to model complex
objects with interconnected components (For example, the
tail and fins of a fish are attached to the body of a fish), a
component represented in its own axial space can be
attached to another component. This is attained by
attaching the axial and orientation curves of the component
to the axial curve-pairs of the other component at a
reference location. Assuming B-spline curves are used for
the axial and orientation curves, each of the control points
P is defined as ( U , v, w, tr.f} so that P = C(t,,) + uLx(t,,) +
vLy(trrf) + wL,(t,,), where t,, is the parameter of the
reference point at which the curve is attached to the
reference axial curve. The relative position at which an
axial curve is attached to its reference curve is thus fixed
while the shape of curves can be adjusted. This hierarchy
of axial curves forms the skeleton of an axially defined
object.

qiNi,k(t) so that q, = p, + d, where d is the

CD(t) =
i=O

offset displacement. The number of control points for the
axial and the orientation curves are thus the same. Both
the axial and the orientation curves can then be adjusted to
the required shape as discussed below.

4.2 Adjusting Axial Curves
Adjusting the control points of the axial curve will
affect C(t) in Equation 2. Since the local coordinate frame
in Equation 2 depends on the position of C,(t) relative to
C(t), undesirable effect may be obtained if C,(t) is not
adjusted in accordance.

n

Denote c(t) =

piNi, k(t) ,

i=O

n

CD(t) =

qlN,,k(t) , and p, is moved to p’, with the
r=O

vector v,, i.e. p’, = p, + v,, then C,(t) is adjusted such that
n

C,*(t) = cq’w,

4 Manipulating Axial Curve-Pairs

k(t), where q’, = q, + v,. This ensures

r=O

that IC,*(t)
One advantage of modelling animals using axial
representation is its ability in simulating motions of the
animals. Different postures of an animal can be modelled
simply by adjusting the axial and orientation curves. Since
B-splines are used for the axial and orientation curves, the
objects (curves and surfaces) attached to the axial curve
can be bended, stretched by adjusting the control points of
the axial curve. Objects can also be twisted around the
axial curve by adjusting the control points of the
orientation curve.

- C(t)l =

IC,(t> - C(t)l.

4.3 Adjusting Orientation Curve
Similar to the axial curve, the orientation curve is
adjusted by modifying control points of the orientation
curve. Since the orientation curve lies within a circular
tube around the axial curve, control points of the
orientation curve are also confined such that the distance
from a control point to the axial curve is fixed.
As shown in Figure 4, Q is the projection of a control
point P of C,(t) onto C(t). Denote P* as the modified
position of P, and C,*(t) as the modified orientation curve.
If IC,(t) - C(t)l k and P* is adjusted by rotating P about
the tangent vector C’(t) at Q, i.e. IP* - QI = IP - QI , then
k. This ensures that the modified
IC,*(t) - C(t)(
orientation curve lies within the same circular tube of
radius k defined by C,(t) and C(t).

4.1 Construction of Axial Curve-Pair
Assuming the axial curve is constructed as a B-spline
n

c(t) = xpiNi,k(t), and the orientation curve is an
i=O

offset of the axial curve, then C,(t) can be constructed by
offsetting the control points of C(t) in a direction normal to
C(t) [20, 211. A simple approach is to construct an axial
curve lying on a straight line. The direction curve can then
be constructed by creating a copy of the axial curve so that

403

p* \

5. Implementation and results
An experimental system was developed on a PC using
the OpenGL as the graphics engine. The system accepts
NURBS curves and surfaces in DXF format. Tools are
provided for converting the curves into axial and
orientation curves, Surfaces can be attached to the axial
and orientation curves to form an axial representation of
the object. Different axial and orientation curves can be
assembled to form the skeleton of a complex object.
Figure 5 shows a dolphin constructed using the
experimental system. The axial curve can be adjusted by
moving the control points of the curve. The orientation
curve will be adjusted in accordance automatically. The
deformed dolphin model generated with the modified axial
curve-pair is shown in Figure 6. The orientation curve is
twisted around the axial curve by specifying the angle
through which a control point rotates about the axial curve
(Figure 7a). Figure 7c shows the deformation of the
dolphin by adjusting the orientation curve as shown in
Figure 7b.

404

pairs. This technique is particularly suitable for modeling
animals with flexible body parts. Different postures of the
animal models can be defined by adjusting the axial curvepairs associated with different parts of the models.

Acknowledgements
This research is partially supported by a CUHK Direct
Grant Ref. No. 205023 1.

Reference

1. J.U. Korein and N.I. Badler, “Techniques for
generating the goal-directed motion of articulated
Computer
Graphics
and
structures”, IEEE
Applications, Vol. 2, No. 9, 1982, pp. 71-81,
2. M. Girard and A.A. Maciejewski, “Computational
modeling for the computer animation of legged
figures”, SIGGRAPH’85 Conference Proceedings,
Vol. 19, 1985, pp.263-270.
3. M. Girard, “Interactive design of 3d computeranimated legged animal motion”, IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, Vol. 7, No. 6, 1987, pp.
39-5 1,
4. M. Moore and J. Wilhelms, “Collision detection and
response for computer animation”, SIGGRAPH ’88
Conference Proceedings, Vol. 22, No. 4, 1988, pp.
289-298.
5 . R. Boulic and D. Thalmann, “Combined direct and
inverse kinematic control for articulated figure motion
editing”, Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 21, 1992,
pp. 189-202.
6. N. Burtnyk and M. Wein, “Interactive skeleton
techniques for enchancing motion dynamics in key
frame animation“, CACM, October 1976, pp.546-569.
7 . D. Zeltzer, “Motor Control Techniques for Figure
Animation”, IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, Vol. 2, No. 11, 1982, pp. 53-59,
8. J.F. Chadwick, D.R. Haumann and R. Parent,
“Layered Construction for Deformable Animated
Characters”, Computer Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH
89), Vol. 23, 1989, pp. 243-252.
9. T.W. Sederberg and S.R. Parry, “Free-form
deformation of solid geometric models“, ACM
Computer Graphics, Vol. 20, 1986, pp. 151-160.
10. M.G.J.R. Stapers and C.W.A.M. van Overveld,
“Deforming Geometric Models Based on a Polygonal
Skeleton Mesh”, ACM Journal of Graphics Tools,

6, Conclusions
An axial representation of objects is proposed in which
the curves and surfaces constituting an object is
represented in the axial space of the object. The axial
space of an object is defined with an axial curve-pair. An
axial curve-pair composes of an axial curve and a
orientation curve. The axial curve defines the position of
the local coordinate frame whereas the orientation curve
defines the orientation of the local coordinate frame.
The orientation curve is constrained to lie within a
circular tube of which axis is the axial curve. Using
NURBS curves for the axial curve-pairs, the orientation of
the local coordinate frame can be controlled by rotating the
control points of the orientation curve around the axial
curve. Surfaces defined in the axial space of a hierarchy of
axial curve-pairs constitute a complex object of which
shape can be easily modified by adjusting the axial curve-

405

Vol. 2, NO. 3, 1997, pp. 1-14.

11. M. Walter and A. Fournier, ”Growing and Animating
Polygonal Models of Animals”, Eurographics ‘97, Vol.
16, NO. 3, 1997, pp. C151-(21.58.
12. F. Scheepers, R.F. Parent, W.F. Carlson and S.F. May,
“Anatomy-Based Modelling of the Human
Musculature”, Proc. SIGGRAPH 97, 1997, pp. 163172.
13. J. Wilhelms, “Animals with Anatomy”, IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, Vol. 17, No. 3,
1997, pp. 22-30.
14. J. Wilhelms and A.V. Gelder, “Anatomically based
modeling”, Proc. SIGGRAPH 97, 1997, pp. 173-180.
15. X. Tu, and D. Terzopoulos, “Artificial fishes: Physics,
locomotion, perception, behavior”, Proc. SIGGRAPH
94, 1994, pp. 43-50.
16. F. Lazarus, S. Coquillart, and P. Jancene, “Axial
deformations: an intuitive deformation technique”,
Computer-Aided Design, Vol. 26, No. 8, 1994,
pp.607-613.
17. I.D. Faux and M.J. Pratt, Computational Geometry for
Design and Manufacturing, Wiley, 1979.
18. F. Klok, “Two moving coordinate frames for
sweeping along a 3D trajectory”, Computer-Aided
Geometric Design, Vol. 3, 1986, pp. 217-229.
19. M.F. Mortenson, Geomteric Modeling, Wiley, New
York, 1985.
20. S. Coquillart, “Computing Offsets of B-spline
Curves”, Computer-Aided Design, Vol. 19, No. 6,
1987, pp.305-309.
2 1. G. Elber, I.K. Lee and M.S. Kim, “Comparing Offset
Curve Approximation Methods”, IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, May-June 1997, pp.62-7 1.

406

