A Classification of Multi-sensory Metaphors for Understanding
Abstract Data in a Virtual Environment
Keith V. Nesbitt
University of Newcastle, Australia
knesbitt @cs.newcastle.edu.au
Abstract
With the advent of Virtual Environment technology it is
now possible to construct new styles of user interfaces
that provide multi-sensory interactions. For example,
inregaces can be designedwhich utilise 3 0 visual spaces
and also provide auditory and haptic feedback. Many
information spaces are multivariate, large and abstract
in nature. It has been a goal of Virtual Environments to
“widen the human to computer bandwidth ’’ and so assist
in the interpretation of these spaces by providing models
that map different attributes of data to different senses.
While this approach has the potential to assist in
understanding these large information spaces what is
unclear is how to choose the best metaphors or models to
define these mappings between the abstract information
and the human sensory channels. This paper takes a look
at some issues involved in choosing such multi-sensory
metaphors, provides a classification of interactions and
examines their application to the task of technical
analysis of stock market data.

1. Introduction
Virtual Environment (VE) systems provide a possible
next step change in user interface technology by
implementing a multi-sensory style of user interface.
This style of interface also has the potential of satisfylng
one of the primary goals of VE technology. That is, to
significantly increase the communication bandwidth
between human and computer.
This paper outlines the issues which must be
considered when designing multi-sensory interfaces for
interpreting abstract data sets. It provides a classification
for metaphors that define mappings between properties of
the abstract data and the human sensory channels.
Finally these classifications are described in relation to
the specific application domain of technical analysis of
stock market data.

2. Modeling in a Multi-sensory Environment
Current Virtual Environment technology can support
robust interaction with three dimensional visual, auditory
and haptic force-feedback displays. Such displays have a
broad application area and cover training, education,
remote operations, virtual prototyping, collaborative
work, entertainment and data exploration. It is the area
of data exploration that this work focuses on. That is,
where the user’s high level task is to find meaningful
patterns or relationships in data. The focus may be to
find specific patterns or to just generally understanding
the data better or to gain insight or new knowledge.
The data sets being explored will be characterised as
abstract, multivariate and large. Data used for stock
market trading, software analysis, marketing information
and medical diagnostics are examples of such data. This
work describes generic classifications of multi-sensory
models that support intuitive interpretation of abstract
data and use this as an analysis tool.
A “metaphor” is defined as “a figure of speech in
which a word or phrase is applied to an object or action
that it does not literally denote in order to imply a
resemblance” [l]. In the context of data it can be
considered a model or mapping between the abstract
application domain, that is the domain to be controlled or
understood and a domain which is well understood,
namely the real world.
The role of metaphors in the user interface are defined
by Hutchins [2] to occur at different levels. I deal
primarily with ‘Mode of Interaction’ and ’Domain’ level
metaphors. Here the key focus is how to model the data
to provide structure and how this structure should
support interaction modes that are intuitive and allow for
efficient interpretation of the abstract, multivariate data.
This raises difficult issues:
It may be appropriate to represent complex abstract
data by a complex abstract model. Will learning effect
user performance with the model? Learning can
significantly enhance efficiency as has been shown, for
example, in discerning auditory patterns [3].

493
U- /b95-0743-3/00
$10.00 0 2000 EEE

It may not be possible to design a consistent
interaction metaphor. In this case is it possible to ‘mix
metaphors’ or use different metaphors for interaction on
the different senses. Will this still provide an intuitive
interpretation environment?
Will metaphors be highly specific and rely on some
fundamental knowledge of the application domain, thus
only being intuitive to users experienced with the
application domain and task?
In a multi-sensory display the choice of metaphor
must consider the physiological, perceptual and cognitive
aspects of each sense and also the issues of sensory
interaction. Physiology helps in understanding the
capabilities and performance of each sense, the possible
bandwidth. For example, what is the range of colours
that a user can see, or what kquency of sounds can be
heard? Numerous perceptual issues arise, for example,
the same colour appears different against a different
colour background [4]. For sound it may be difficult to
distinguish frequencies that are similar [5] and this
ability may also be depend on the musical training of the
listener. When presenting a haptic surface, a low
frequency force display will create an impression of
objects with soft surfaces [6]. Cognition issues are
important when designing a display to facilitate
understanding, or to help in a particular task such as
recognising patterns. For example, how efficient is the
haptic sense for recalling and identifylng complex
patterns when compared to the visual or auditory sense?
The problems of sensory interaction can also lead to
further perceptual and cognition problems. It has been
shown that in some circumstances, presenting
information to both the visual and auditory sense may be
less effective that a single sense [7]. Using sound in
conjunction with haptics can alter the perceived stiffness
of a surface [8]. Changing the visual representation of the
object can alter the perceived haptic stiffness of a spring
[9]. There are also different ways to use the senses in
combination. Presenting the same information to
different sense has been described as ‘cooperative
rendering’[ IO]. An alternative approach, ‘complementary
rendering’ presents different information to the senses
[lo]. This work concentrates on finding data
representations that can be displayed by complementary
rendering.

Spatial
I

Metaphor Cluster
Sight I Sound

I Temporal I

I

I

I Touch

I

Table 1. Classification of metaphors
1. ‘Spatial Metaphors’ relate to scale, location and

structure. Spatial metaphors can carry quantitative
information. Relationships can be ‘described by
position on a map or a two or three-dimensional grid.
Data placed in proximity can be visually assessed in
compare and contrast activities. Structures such as tree
graphs or data maps can carry broader overview
information that is important to the user. Both touch
and sound also provide useful cues for object position
in space. Spatial metaphors are appropriate for all
senses and concern the way pictures, sounds and
forces are organised in space.
2. ’Temporal Metaphors’ are concerned with how data
changes with time. It includes concepts of movement,
animation, rhythms and cycles. Interaction in a virtual
environment, as in the real world, presents information
that can change with time. These changes can cany
information. Temporal metaphors will also be applied
to all senses and concern how we perceive changes to
pictures, sounds and forces over time.
3. ‘Sight Metaphors’ use direct mappings from
information to the attributes of sight. These include
colour, light, shape, and surface texture [14]. The use
of a colour scale is an example of a common mapping
used to represent data values [13]. Icons are an
example of how abstract shapes can be used to convey
information using intuitive symbols.
4. ‘Sound Metaphors’ deal with direct mappings of
typical sound properties such as pitch, amplitude,
timbre and also more musical qualities such as rhythm
and melody. Auditory metaphors are less common,
however good examples exist in the real world. The
Geiger counter uses sound to display radiation levels
and is a well understood auditory metaphor [ 111.
5. ‘Touch Metaphors’ relate to tactile properties such as
force, inertia and vibration. It is possible to assess
object properties such as weight and density by the
inertia that needs to be overcome when moving an
object. Other object properties such as the hardness
and surface texture can also be used to encode
information.

3. Classification of Multi-sensory Metaphors
I consider five broad clusters of metaphors (Table 1).
The first two clusters contain spatial and temporal
metaphors that are applicable to all senses. The other
three clusters are metaphors from sight, sound and force
specific to the visual, auditory and haptic sense.

494

problem however, is to decide the appropriate number of
time periods to average across. Taking the difference in
closing price between periods is the basis of another set
of indicators. They provide an indication of the relative
movement of price and are known as momentum
indicators. Like moving averages they can be derived for
a range of different time steps.

This classification provides a useful analysis tool to
consider the range of possible interactions for any
specific domain. Next, an example of such analysis is
provided in the field of technical analysis. These more
concrete examples also serve to illustrate the
characteristics of each of the metaphor clusters.

4. Multi-sensory Technical Analysis
price

‘Technical Analysis’ is defined as “the study of
behaviour of market participants, as reflected in price,
volume and open interest for a financial market, in order
to identify stages in the development of price trends”[l2].
This field of study has grown out of Dow Theory and
studies patterns in the data itself in an attempt to
understand the balance of supply and demand.

\\each bar represents
the price range
far a single period
[ea.1 day)
Date

apgning
prlce

4.1 Spatial Metaphors for Visual Display

Figure 1. A traditional daily bar chart.
Technical Analysis is sometimes called ‘charting’ and
as suggested often involves inspection of charts showing
price on the vertical axis and time on the horizontal.
Price for a single time period is typically shown as a
vertical line, or bar, which is drawn from the minimum
price to the maximum price for the period. It is
augmented with ticks showing opening and closing price.
A time period may represent any period of time from
very short periods of he order of minutes up to a day,
week, month or longer of trading (Figure 1).
Charting techniques rely on the well-understood
concept of a two-dimensional abstract space to present
relationships. Price is used for the vertical axis and time
is represented along the horizontal. Choosing time as one
axis creates a time series of the data and each data bar
can be compared to another in some temporal ordering.
Other simple rules and relationships within this space are
also understood. The height of the bar represents the
variation of price for the period. The price from one
period to the next can be compared by the placement of
the bar along the vertical axis. Larger structural patterns
can also be found such as the upward progression of
consecutive bars which represents an up trend in prices.
Many other patterns have been identified which
characterise turning points of such trends and are useful
for the trader to identify [12].
These charts may also be augmented by a volume
histogram that shows the volume of trades for each
period at the base of the chart. A number of derived
indicators are also used to assist in analysis. These
include a curve showing the moving average of closing
price for consecutive periods. Moving averages help filter
out short term fluctuations in price and provide
information about longer-term trends (Figure 2). One

I

_,,

-G-

r

A

.) I-.=

i-,

6

. .I

<

“.

Figure 2. Daily bar chart with two moving averages.
It is possible to extend these spatial metaphors to
three dimensions. An obvious example is to extend
traditional bar charts to three dimensions by mapping
volume of trade to this extra dimension (Figure 3.) More
complicated spatial structures are also possible. A surface
of moving averages was constructed and overlaid on a
traditional bar chart. This surface is constructed so that
each edge represents the average of closing price for
thirty consecutive periods. As the surface moves towards
the bar chart the number of days is reduced, from 30 to
29, to 28 and so on until a 1 day moving average is
placed adjacent to the bar chart (Figure 4). This surface
allows a wide range of moving averages to be considered
in interpretation.

4.2 Temporal Metaphors for Visual Display
Presenting a sequence of visual images as animation is
a useful technique for understanding complex processes
such as motion or dynamic systems that evolve. It is
natural to think of a virtual world as having a time

495

component with the world's state being updated at each
time step. While it is critical to maintain a minimum lag
between user modification of the world and the display of
this state change it is also possible to slow down time or
speed it up to create more abstract temporal interactions.
Watching how data changes can provide useful
information. Flicker for example may be a useful way to
represent temporal changes to data.
In technical analysis it is important to consider
multiple time frames when analysing trends. Currently
this is achieved by studying multiple charts where the
bars represent different periods of time. Longer period
charts tend to' remove shorter-term fluctuations in price.
An alternative is to keep the period constant and use
animation to step through time. This can create an
impression of overall price movements but also maintains
the detail of smaller fluctuations.
Volume of trades for an instrument can provide
important confirmation of patterns seen in its price. An
alternative to the traditional method of augmenting a bar
chart with the volume histogram is to display a simple
bar chart but map the rate of flicker to the volume of
trade. A high volume of trade results in a bar with a fast
rate of flicker, a slow flicker equates to a lower volume of
trades.

4.3 Sight Metaphors for Visual Display
There have been a number of techniques use to map
numbers to the visual cues [14,15]. Shape and colour are
two attributes of vision frequently used. Geometry can
also be used to encode data with representations ranging
form real world objects to abstract icons. More complex
properties of objects such as reflectivity, transparency,
and surface textures can also be used to provide
information.
In scientific visualisations colour is frequently used to
represent numbers using a colour scale. The hue,
saturation and value of a colour can all be varied to
encode information. Use of colour on traditional bar
charts is a simple way to augment traditional charts with
information. Volume for example can be displayed as a
'heat map', with red indicating large volumes and blue
for smaller volumes.

4.4 Spatial Metaphors for Auditory Display.
In the real world the auditory sense is used to perceive
sound from all direction and we have the ability to
perceive the location of the sound source. Displaying a
sound at an exact location however is dependent on
individual physical characteristics or the ear size and
shape. While it is possible to use individual parameters in
the function to display a sound at a precise location, this
does not tend to be reliable, especially for detecting the
vertical position of a sound [15].
Another quality of listening is the ability to focus on a
single sound in a noisy environment, such as a specific
voice in a room of conversations. This has been called
the 'cocktail-party' effect [ l I]. It is possible to surround
the user in a 3D space with multiple sonifications. These
sounds could represent the price actions from multiple
instruments, located for example at points on a sphere of
noise, with the user at the center. The trader is often
interested in monitoring multiple instruments and may be
looking for 'alarm' conditions. An alarm may typically

Figure 3. A bar chart augmented with volume and
displayed on the 'Holobench' at GMD 1161.

" .

information with a temporal quality. For example using
rhythm to monitor data. A change in rhythm can act as

dikensional model of cock prices.

496

resistance levels and down to detect various levels of
support. The force required to move through a level is
indicative of the strength of each level.

an alarm. This may also be effective where it is desirable
for review of data spread across time. Speeding up the
sound may reduce time required to monitor the full data
set and still detect ‘alarm’ conditions.
Human auditory perception is very sensitive to
changes that occur to sound over time and is well suited
to discriminating between regular and irregular events
[ 5 ] . This makes a sound display ideal for fast-changing
or transient events that could be expected, for example,
when monitoring prices for intra-day trading. The noise
of the ticker tape is an example of sound being used to
monitor market activity and to alarm an increase to
trading.

4.8 Temporal Metaphors for Haptic Display
All force feedback has a temporal quality in that
forces are perceived from rapid display of force
information. Typically a rate of about one thousand times
a second is required to display surfaces that do not appear
unnaturally soft and pliable. As with pictures and sound
it is also possible to use this repaid refresh rate to display
information that changes rapidly with time. In particular
it is possible to display force models of vibration and
fields of attraction and repulsion.
During trading it is useful to keep track of the bids
and offers being made for a financial instrument. For
example, buyers make a bid to buy a number of shares at
some price. Sellers make offers to sell a number of shares
at some price. Where bids match offers a transaction is
made. This system is by its nature a very dynamic system
where bids and offers are constantly changing over time.
It is possible to think of this system as a field of repulsive
and attractive forces that is trying to move the price to
some point of equilibrium. Each bid for example can be a
force of attraction and each offer a force of repulsion.
The user can interactively position the cursor at a price
point of interest such as the original purchase price and
feel the forces that are currently acting to drag prices up
or down from this point. This field can be expected to
change constantly as bids and offers are made.
The frequency of trades can be used as a measure of
the volatility of the market. It is possible to map this
directly to vibration on the force feedback display. For
example, a high frequency vibration could be indicative
of high trading volume and a low frequency of low
volumes.

4.6 Sound Metaphors for Auditory Display
Visual display of object properties is usually the
preferred method where compare and contrast is required
between numerous data points or spatial positioning
carries critical information. However displaying object
properties using sound attributes can provide a useful
adjunct to visual information in situations where the
visual field is crowded and it is not necessary to compare
and contrast these properties between objects. Properties
may be displayed as timbre, pitch or amplitude scales.
For example a high amplitude or pitch may be used to
display high prices with lower values represented by low
amplitude or pitch. Similarly a visual model of price
could be augmented with volume information displayed
by pitch or amplitude.

4.7 Spatial Metaphors for Haptic Display
Adding force feedback to virtual environments
provides enhanced object location in 3-D space. This is
provided by the ability to feel surfaces co-located with 3D images. It is also possible to display structural
information that need not be visible but is useful during
interactive interpretation of data.
A suggested use of force feedback is to represent
boundaries or limits in the data. It is possible to program
surfaces in the space that the user can feel as a barrier.
The user can then apply some force to break through this
surface. The amount of force required can be a measure
of the strength of the barrier. In a model of price data
these surfaces may represent support or resistance levels.
Some prices are made significant because rising price
tends to halt at a level that it is difficult to break above,
that is a level of resistance. Other levels may form at
which falling prices find difficulty breaking below. These
are known as levels of support. A typical bar chart can be
augmented with a force model. The user may position the
stylus on a price bar and then move it up to feel for

4.9 Force Metaphors for Haptic Display
It is possible to map the parameters of force displays
directly to data attributes. Changing the frequency and
amplitude of forces can vary vibration. Data can also be
modeled as objects that contain surface properties such as
rigidity, inertia and texture.
Prices for an instrument typically are either in a
period of trending or a period of stasis known as a
trading range. This suggests modeling price movements
as inertia. The range of price and the volume indicate the
ease of price movement. It is possible to map this inertia
to an object in the price field. The user attempting to
move an object representing price would perceive a heavy
or difficult to move object when price is in a static range.

497

This same object would be felt as something light and
require much less force to move when price is more
dynamic.
A typical bar chart could be augmented with force
display so that the surface of the price bars are felt as
either soft or hard. The measure of 'hardness' could be
indicative of volume traded. For example, price bars
which are hard and narrow in price range would be
indicative of large volumes of trading occurring over a
very narrow price band and suggest accumulation or
distribution of stock occurring. A softer bar of the same
size would indicate thin trading and would not be
considered as significant.

[6] M.A. Srinivasan, and C . Basdogan, "Haptics in
Virtual Environments: Taxonomy, Research Status, and
Challenges", Computer & Graphics, V01.21, No. 4, 1997,
pp. 393-404.
[7] J. Tzelgov, R. Srebro, A. Henik, and A. Kushelevsky,
"Radiation detection by ear and by eye", Human Factors
29(1), 1987, pp. 87-98.

[SI D.E. DiFranco, G.L. Beauregard, G and M.A.
Srinivasan, "The Effects of Auditory Cues on the Haptic
Perception of Stiffness in Virtual Environments",
Proceedings of the ASME Dynamic Systems and Control
Division, DSC-Vol61, 1997, pp. 17-22.

5. Conclusion
I have outlined a classification for multi-sensory
metaphors and described examples from the field of
technical analysis. Analysing the data and domain tasks
under each metaphor category is a useful way to design
interaction models.
During the next stage of work these interactions
described will be evaluated with a group of expert users.
This will help measure the effectiveness of metaphors
from each category and devise guidelines for using these
different classes of metaphor. Given an abstract data
domain, and the need to design an intuitive multi-sensory
display, the classification would first guide analysis of
the data. The second step would be to apply the
guidelines so the most appropriate mappings from
abstract data attributes to real world models are chosen.

[9] M.A. Srinivasan, G.L. Beauregard, and D.L. Brock,
"The impact of visual information on haptic perception of
stiffness in virtual environments", Proceedings of the
ASME Dynamics Systems and Control Division, 1996,
pp. 555-569.

6. References

[ 121 "Technical Analysis: Course Notes from Securities
Institute of Australia", Technical Analysis (El 14), 1999.
h ttp://www.securities.edu.au

[ 101 L.Y Pao, and D.A. Lawrence, "Synergistic Visual /
Haptic
Computer
Interfaces",
Proceedings
JapardUSENetnam Workshop on Research and
Education in Systems, Computation and Control
Engineering, 1998, pp. 155-162.

[ 111 S. Barrass, "Auditory Information Design", Ph.D.
Thesis,
Australian
National
University,
h ttp: //vis wiz. nmd.de/- barassJth esidin dex.html .

[I] G.A. Wilkes, and W.A. Krebs (eds.), "The Collins
Concise Dictionary of the English Language", William
Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. Australia, 1997.

[13] E. Tufte, "The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information", Graphics Press, Cheshire, Connecticut,
1983.

[2] E. Hutchins, "Metaphors for Interface Design", in
Taylor, M.M., Neel, F. and Bouwhuis, D.G. (eds.) The
Structure of Multimodal Dialogue, 1989.

[14] P.R. Keller, and M.M Keller, "Visual Cues", IEEE
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, California, 1993.

[3] J.H. Howard, and J.A. Ballas, (1982) "Acquisition of
acoustic pattern catergories by examplar observation",
Organisational Behaviour and Human Decision Process
30 (2), 1982, pp. 157-173.

[15] N.I. Durlach, and A.S. Mavor, "Virtual Reality.
Scientific and Technological Challenges", National
Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1996.
[16] Intemet web site: Institute for Media Communication,
GMD, German National Research Center for Information
Technology. httdlviswiz. and&

[4] J. Itten, "The Elements of Color", Van Nostrand

Reinhold Company, New York, 1970.

[5] G. Kramer, et al. "Sonification Report: Status of the
Field and Research Agenda", International Conference
of Auditory Display 1997, 1997.

498

