Creating Abstract Digital Paintings with Painting Camera Technique
Scott Meadows and Ergun Akleman *
Visualization Laboratory
Department of Architecture
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas 77843-3137 USA

Abstract

In computer graphics, although there has been an increasing interest in artistic (or non-photorealistic) approaches, only a few abstract rendering approaches, such as
Karl Simms’ “Artificial Evaluation”, have been developed
to create abstract paintings.
We present a simple and intuitive abstract rendering approach for creating abstract paintings. Figure 1 shows an
abstract painting created using our approach. Our abstract

We present a simple and intuitive rendering technique to
create abstract paintings. This technique allows the users
to render a given animated scene with multiple cameras,
using a method inspired by concepts used by cubist andfuturist abstract painters. In our method, the number of cameras is unlimited and the camera parameters are continuous functions. We define the camera parameters as parametric functions that are described by images, which we
call camera-control-images. The spatial distribution color
in these camera-control-images determines the camera parameters such as position and orientation.
For the creation of abstractpaintings, we have developed
two artistic techniques. In the first technique, artists incrementally paint a complicated camera-control-image for a
given 3 0 scene. The second technique is the opposite of the
jrst. In this technique, for a given camera-control-image
artists incrementally built a 3 0 scene to create an interesting abstract painting. The second technique is helpful when
using existing images such as photographs and paintings.

1 Motivation
The 20th century has seen a large number of abstract
art movements such as Cubism , Futurism, Surrealism,
Dadaism Cercle et Carre and Abstraction-Creating Suprematism and artists such as Picasso, Braque, Leger, Delauney, Duchamp, Dali, Max Ernst, Kupka, Klee, Kandisky,
Mondrian, Malevich, Marinetti, Boccioni, Russolo, Marey,
Balla, Severini and Carra. The most important common
theme among these art movements is that they view painting
in a way similar to music: an abstract entity to be enjoyed
by using one of our senses.

Figure 1. An abstract image created by painting camera technique.
rendering approach is inspired by the abstract art movements we mentioned above. We observed that several of
these movements especially cubism and futurism can be
best grasped by viewing abstract painters as high dimensional beings. These high dimensional painters can simultaneously view any animated 3D scene from every possible
time, from all points of view, using any conceivable camera

‘phone:
+(409) 845-3465 fax:
+(409) 845-4491 email:
scott@viz.tamu.edu, ergun@viz.tamu.edu. Supported in part by the
Texas A&M, Scholarly & Creative Activities Program.

0-7695-0743-3100
$10.000 2000 IEEE

250

type. Since theses abstract painters have this supernatural
ability, they can choose to paint at each point of the canvas what they see from any specific choice of time, point
of view and camera. It is possible to represent this painting process as a parametric function from the canvas space
to the space of camera parameters including position and
time. We call this parametric function the camera function.

that are used for representing camera functions camerucontrol-images. In a camera-control-image, the values of
red, green, and blue color channels provide information
about camera parameters.
The number of camera-control-images to be used depends on the number of camera parameters. To simplify the
painting camera process we have considered only the position of the camera. Based on this choice, we only need one
camera-control-image to describe camera parameters (the
position of a camera requires only 3 real numbers) as shown
in Figure 2.

Camera Control mano

n1

Figure 2. Rectangular prism that defines the
camera position in 3D.

2 Previous Work
Figure 3.
images.

Artistic rendering, or as it is commonly known as nonphotorealistic rendering, has been becoming an increasingly important subfield of computer graphics. Most nonphotorealistic rendering approaches try to formalize the effects of material such as pen and ink drawing [13, 111, watercolor [l], and digital engraving [8, 9, 101 or mimicking
artistic effects such as impressionist [3, 71, fur, grass and
trees [4].
Approaches to doing purely abstract painting have not
been fully explored with only a few exceptions such as Karl
Simms’ pioneering work on artificially evaluated images

Examples of

camera-control-

Wl.
Our work can be classified between these two approaches. Our concept is based on the cubist paradigm of
rendering scenes by using more than one distinct camera.
Our approach differentiates from the cubist approach in that
1) we can use an unlimited number of cameras, and 2 ) the
parameters of our cameras can be continuous.

Figure 4. Abstract paintings created by using
camera-control-imagesin Figures 3.

3 Methodology
In order to implement such an abstract rendering approach in a simple and intuitive way, we describe camera
functions by using sets of images, since painters are comfortable in dealing with images. These images are used as a
control net for tensor product B-splines. We call the images

To render the abstract images, we use a simple ray-tracer.
Again for the purpose of simplicity, the 3D scenes used in
this paper include only texture mapped spheres and planes.
Figures 3 and 4 illustrate some effects that can be
achieved by camera painting. The top-left black image in
Figure 3 describes a constant camera position at v o . There-

25 1

these techniques, it is extremely easy to create interesting
abstract paintings. We have included several abstract paintings created by using these techniques.

fore, the corresponding top-left image in Figure 4 is a classical ray-traced image. The top-right image in Figure 3 shows
how to add a new camera position by painting a solid blue
color. Since blue moves the camera in the n 2 direction, the
new camera is at the position of ‘UO + cnz. The effect can
be clearly seen in the top-right image of Figure 4. Warping
effects can be created by using a ramp map such as the one
that is shown in the bottom-left image of Figure 3. This
circular ramp image warps the objects around the center
creating toroidal looking shapes as shown in the bottomleft image of Figure 4. The bottom-right image of Figure 3
shows the effect of low-pass filtering. A low-pass filter, by
smoothing the edges, creates a boundary region that transitions from one camera position to the other. This smooth
transition creates the interesting painted look shown in the
bottom-right image of Figure 4.
For the creation of abstract paintings, we have developed
two artistic techniques. In the first technique, artists incrementally paint a complicated camera-control-image for a
given 3D scene. We used a paint program to create a series of images that document the steps involved in creating
a set of abstract paintings for a given 3D scene. Each of
these steps was run through the renderer in order to make
decisions on how the painting should progress. The Figures 5 , 6. 7 and 8 show two abstract paintings created by
this method. We used the same 3D scene to create these
images.
The second technique is the opposite of the first. In this
technique. for a given camera-control-image we incrementally built a 3D scene to create an interesting abstract painting. ‘The second technique is helpful when using existing
images such as photographs and paintings. Existing images such as photographs and paintings that have a lot of
texture and detail are especially useful for creating interesting abstract paintings. For such photographs, instead of
changing the camera-control-image, it is better to change
3D scene. In order to control the resulting abstract image
for a given photograph, we start with a simple 3D scene and
update the scene until achieving a satisfactory result. The
Figures 9, 10, I 1 and 12 show abstract paintings created
by this method by using different 3D scenes for the same
camera-control-image.

4

References
[ 11 J. C. Curtis, S. E. Anderson, J. E. Seins, K. W. Fleisher

and D. H. Salesin “Computer Generated Watercolor”,
Computer Graphics, 4 (1997) 421-430.
[2] J. L. Ferrier and Y. L. Pichon, Editors, Art of the 20th
Century: The History of Art Year by Yearfrom 1900 to
1999, (Chene-Hachette, ISBN: 284.277221.0,1999).
[3] P. Haeberli, “Paint by Numbers: Abstract Image Representation in Computer Graphics”, Computer Graphics, 4 (1999) 417-423.
[4] M. A. Kowalski, L. Markosian, J. D. Northrup, L.
Bourdev, R. Barzel, L. S. Holden and J. F. Hughes “Art
Based Rendering of Fur, Grass and Trees”, Computer
Graphics, 4 (1990) 207-214.

[5] F. T. Marinetti “Futurist Manifesto”, Le Figaro,
(February 20 1909).
[6] K. Malevich “From Cubism and Futurism to Suprematism”, Petrograd Manifesto, (19 15).
[7] B. J. Meier “Painterly Rendering for Animation”,
Computer Graphics, 4 (1996) 477-484.
[8] V. Ostromoukhov, “Digital Facial Engraving”, Computer Graphics, 4 (1999) 417-423.
[9] V. Ostromoukhov and R. D. Hersch, “Multi-Color
and Artistic Dithering”, Computer Graphics, 4 (1999)
425-432.
[lo] V. Ostromoukhov and R. D. Hersch, “Artistic Dithering”, Computer Graphics, 4 (1995) 219-228.
[ l I] M. P. Salisbury, W. T. Wong, J. F. Hughes and D. H.
Salesin “Orientable Textures for Image-Based Pen and
Ink Ilustration”, Computer Graphics, 4 (1997) 401406.

Conclusion

121 K. Sims “Artificial Evaluation for Computer Graphics”, Computer Graphics, 4 (1991) 319-328.

We presented a simple and intuitive abstract rendering
approach to create abstract paintings. This approach allows
painters to create abstract paintings by using a set of images. Implementation of the camera painting is also simple.
Any ray-tracer can easily be expanded to include the camera painting. Camera painting can even be implemented as
an homework in an undergraduate graphics class.
We have developed two artistic techniques. By using

131 G. Winkenbach and D. H. Salesin “Rendering Parametric Surfaces in Pen and Ink”, Computer Graphics,
4 (1996) 469-476.

252

Figure 5. Camera Painting: an example of abstract paintings that are created by painting
camera-control-images.

Figure 7. Waves: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by painting camera.
control-images.

Figure 6. Splash: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by painting cameracontrol-images.

Figure 8. Butterflies: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by painting cameracontrol-images.

25 3

Figure 9. Ripples: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by building 3D
scenes.

Figure 11. Ripples 3: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by building 3D
scenes.

Figure 10. Ripples 2: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by building 3D
scenes.

Figure 12. Ripples 4: an example of abstract
paintings that are created by building 3D
scenes.

254

