The Iceberg Metaphor to Support the Knowledge Crystallization Cycle
Miriam Lux
Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics
Rundeturmst~6,0-64283 Darmstadt
Miriam.Lux@igd.jhg.de

interaction with information separate solutions have been
developed. In [ 11 a very good collection of papers which
includes approaches for each task can be found.
To carry on these ideas we introduce the iceberg metaphor as a concept to support every step of the knowledge
crystallization cycle. Thus, with one single method all
tasks for the formation of knowledge can be performed.
Hence any user is able to analyze any information in an
intuitive and effective way.

Abstract
Information visualization is focused on abstract nonnumerical data. To support any user to explore this
information the knowledge crystallization cycle was
dejined. We have developed the iceberg metaphor which
can be used to support the user in every single step of this
knowledge crystallization cycle. The iceberg can be jilled
with almost any kind of abstract information. Then the
iceberg metaphor can be used to perform a classification
as well as a jiltering of the information. Using this
metaphor f o r visualization is very simple but effective
because the graphical presentation correspondents to the
information-inherent structure. Additionally, with the
developed iceberg browser all interactions concerning the
knowledge crystallization are controllable. Thus, we have
found a very simple but effective way to support the user in
the formation of knowledge with one single metaphor:

2. Knowledge crystallization
Information visualization is focused on abstract nonnumerical data with often non-obvious dimensions. The
sources of this information are very different, as are the
users who wants to explore this data. For the user to be
able to discover knowledge in such a great amount of data,
one has to support him so he can perform his personal
analysis task.
A detailed presentation of the question of discovering
knowledge related to the problems concerning abstract
data is offered in [I]. The knowledge crystallization task
Card et al. developed describes the process of obtaining
knowledge with a predefined goal. The course of obtaining knowledge that is described there makes it clear that
the way to the goal plays an important role and can be significantly assisted by information visualization. But even
if the exploration of data is not aimed at a particular goal,
the user should be aided in obtaining knowledge.
We have slightly modified the knowledge crystallization cycle [5] as shown in the following figure (see Fig. I).
At first data has to be analyzed and classified in order to
obtain information from it. A detailed discussion can be
found in [3]. The relevant data for obtaining information
has to be filtered out of the huge amount of data. Then the

1. Introduction
Information visualization deals with abstract information structures and relationships. This special class of data
has no natural and obvious physical representation, so that
intuitively comprehensible visual metaphors have to be
developed. A second problem in information visualization
is the widespread area of applications. This implies that a
diverse user community and their different levels of background and analysis purposes have to be considered.
Several approaches exist to support any user to explore
this information. In [I] the knowledge crystallization
cycle was defined which describes the necessary steps for
the formation of knowledge. For these steps, i.e. for the
classification [3] and filtering, for the presentation and

283
0-7695-0743-3100
$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

gained information has to be mapped to visual structures.
While the user is interacting with the resulting presentation
of the information, the formation of knowledge begins. One
important fact in this cycle is that the user has the possibility to interact with every single step of this knowledge crystallization process.

information
Obvious

4

Figure 2. The iceberg metaphor
We have already used the iceberg metaphor to perform a
classification of abstract information [3]. However, the
classification is the basic prerequisite of the knowledge
crystallization cycle, why not use this base for the whole
cycle? After classifying the information with the iceberg
metaphor, the inherent information structure gained can be
used to perform the filtering. These results display also a
possibility to graphically present the information. This
method is very simple but effective because the visualization then corresponds exactly to the information structure.
At least, the interactions can be performed through the iceberg metaphor, to steer the single steps of the knowledge
crystallization cycle. The all-around availability of the iceberg metaphor can be seen in the following (see Fig. 3).

(
-)
=++
information
information
presentation of
information

Figure 1. Knowledge crystallization for abstract
data
In previous work we already presented the concept of
the iceberg metaphor [2]. With this metaphor we classified
abstract data in the area of information visualization. Now
we have extended the iceberg metaphor concept to be used
in every step of the knowledge crystallization task. With
this extension we have found a very simple but effective
way to support the user by the formation of knowledge
with one single metaphor.
In the following we will briefly summarize the iceberg
metaphor itself and then introduce its usability in each single step of the knowledge crystallization process.

...-..-...--.-.
iceberg metaphor

Figure 3. Availability of the iceberg metaphor
In the following we will first discuss the various types of
information that can be contained in the iceberg and then
adapt the iceberg to the classification, filtering, presentation
and interaction tasks.

3. The iceberg metaphor
Abstract information is mostly hard to understand
because no natural equivalent is given. Thus, this kind of
information can be described as an iceberg. From an iceberg one may see ten percent whereas the remaining ninety
percent are lying under the surface of the water. Everyone
can see the number on the top, the obvious information.
However, the important information to understand this
number is invisible (see Fig. 2 ) .

4. Data contained in the iceberg
The idea of structuring abstract information in a small
obvious part and a great amount of hidden content can be
applied to most of the data from the information visualization area, like WWW information, document information
and economic information.

4.1. Numerical values
For a better understanding we explain the iceberg metaphor using the example of financial information. This is a

284

representative example of data within the information
visualization context. Financial information can be characterized with the following attributes [2]: large amount,
multi-dimensional and abstract nature, complex information structure, hidden information.
The financial data are one-dimensional but the information behind these figures is multi-dimensional. Financial information consists of the following parts: an
underlying formula to calculate this value, a country or a
company, a timescale, relations and dependencies to other
values, and further information structures (see Fig. 4).

the value of the consumption. The iceberg described will
be suitable for an expert because he knows the procedure
and necessary variables to estimate the economic situation. Whereas a layman will start with the consumption
itself, a piece of information obvious to him (e.g. heard in
the news), but he has no idea of the meaning of this value
’consumption’. So for his purpose it is better to fill the
iceberg in the opposite way. Then he can learn that consumption is a variable of the formula to calculate the
GNP, etc.
Thus, be careful when filling the iceberg metaphor as a
means to describe your data and your analysis aims.

5. Application of the iceberg metaphor

geogmphicmntext

relations & dependenciw

In the following we will’introduce the usability of the
iceberg metaphor in each single step of the knowledge
crystallization process, and adapt it to the classification,
filtering, presentation and interaction tasks.

5.1. The iceberg for classification

Figure 4. Iceberg for an economic value

The classification of information is the structuring or
ordering it into meaningful contexts or content-dependent
groups. For this task the iceberg metaphor can be used.
Starting with one variable, it can be sub-divided according
to temporal (time of measurement or actual time of analysis) or geographical contexts or contexts depending on the
analysis aims. Staying with the example of economic
information, for a particular economic value the classification shown in Figure 4 can be used. For geographic
information, the iceberg in Figure 5 shows an exemplary
classification.
We have already mentioned that the user’s view on the
data plays an important role when filling the iceberg with
information. This also applies to the classification of the
information.
With the combination of the iceberg metaphor and the
user’s view on the data, the information space can be
divided into more levels than the iceberg shows above the
surface of the water. The user’s view on the iceberg gives
new perspectives of the data. Therefore we have developed the level of datu concept [3] in which eight different
layers in information space are determined. These levels
of data correspond to one classification.

This general information structure can be applied to
most kinds of financial information.

4.2. Further information
This iceberg structure is found in nearly any kind of
abstract information, e.g. in geographical data, hierarchical information structures, timescale, etc.
The way the iceberg is filled strongly depends on the
user. Every user has its own background knowledge and
different analysis aims. A frequently used research object
is for example the amount of Internet connections around
the world. For this task the iceberg metaphor can be filled
as in Fig. 5, starting from the top view of the world like
continents and going into further details of the geography
up to a particular city.

eco

federal state
city

mi data

GNP
consumption

5.2. Iceberg filtering

Figure 5. Data icebergs
Another example is the analysis of the economic situation of a country (see Fig. 5). Therefore we start with the
national economy (NC), proceed via the economic cycle
information (EC) and the gross national product (GNP) to

After classifying the information, it can be filtered with
exactly the iceberg metaphor used for this classification.
According to the analysis aims of the user, the different
levels of the iceberg are very useful for reducing the

285

metaphor to represent his data. If the data space is classified in further detail, more than one iceberg browser can be
used (see Fig. 8).

amount of information down to the interesting items (see
Fig. 6). For example for a lay audience the highest level
will be sufficient. In the case of an expert who will 'dive'
into the depth of the iceberg, more information is necessary.

\
/

information A

\

numerical value X

Figure 8. Selecting and assigning iceberg levels

I , - - , - , A

Figure 6. Iceberg filtering

In the case of economic information, e.g. share prices,
we suggest one browser for the information of the geographic context level, i.e. an iceberg model of the companies, and one for the share prices themselves.
Furthermore, while displaying an iceberg for each interesting economic value, relations can be easily defined and
investigated. For example in the analysis of a national
economy, the relations of the individual components of the
GNP to the GNP itself play an important role. For this case
the iceberg of the GNP is duplicated so that every component can be regarded in any relationship to the other components.
A further important factor is time. Only a dynamic analysis of economic values leads to significant results.
Another iceberg can be filled with time values to assign a
timestamp to the variable being of interest.
Furthermore the iceberg browser can work as a graphical user interface to determine the classification and filtering of information. Therefore, the features of the iceberg
browser have to be extended with possibilities to edit the
entities of the iceberg content.
This interaction instrument already supports the comprehension of the data and simplifies the analysis of the
data essentially.

5.3. Presentation with the iceberg
The icebergs used for classification and/or filtering display as well a possibility to graphically present the information. This method is very simple but effective because
the visualization correspondents exactly to the information
structure. In such a visualization the hierarchy and classification of the information are easily perceptible. Also relations and dependencies are intuitively comprehensible.
Naturally, also additional graphical primitives can be used
within such a visualization, like arrows etc. (see Fig. 7).

.....-...-.

1 - 1 .

.............
Figure 7. Presentation of relations
In the figure above, exemplarily three iceberg variables
are given. Relations between the individual parts of an iceberg are displayed with arrows. In this example, a cycle of
relations is given. Thus, A depends on C, but A also influences C (indirectly via B).

6. Conclusion
We have developed the iceberg metaphor as a method to
describe the properties of abstract information. This metaphor can be used to support the user in every single step of
the knowledge crystallization cycle. The iceberg can be
filled with almost any kind of abstract information which
consists of an obvious part and a great amount of hidden
information structures. The iceberg metaphor can then be
used to perform a classificationof the information.
With the resulting iceberg, filtering is also possible for
reducing the amount of information down to the interesting
items. Using the iceberg metaphor for visualization is a
very powerful instrument because the graphical presenta-

5.4. The iceberg browser
The iceberg metaphor can also be used to perform interactions. Therefore we have developed the iceberg browser
[ 5 ] .It displays the data according to their classificationfollowing the iceberg metaphor. Therewith the interactions in
the data space are visually perceptible, and the user can
browse through the different levels of data in an intuitive
way. For each level of data the user can choose the visual

286

tion corresponds to the information-inherent structure. At
least with the developed iceberg browser all interactions
conceming the knowledge crystallization are controllable.
Thus, we have found a very simple but effective way to
support the user in the formation of knowledge with one
single metaphor.
Future work will be to implement the iceberg metaphor
in our system for visualization of economic information,
to prove its usefulness. Furthermore we will adapt the iceberg metaphor to other kinds of abstract information.

8. References
Card, S.K., Shneiderman, B.: Eick, S.: Readings in Information Visualization - Using Vision to Think, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 1999.
Lux, M.: Visualization of financial information, Proceedings of fhe Workshop on New Paradigms on Information
Visualization and Manipulation (NPIV’97), 1997.
Lux, M.: Level of data - a concept for knowledge discovery
in information spaces, Proceedings of the International
Conference on Information Visualization, London, 1998.
Lux, M; Stuckert, R.: Mueller, S.: PROSECO - A framework for providing services for economic data, Proceedings of WSCG’OO,pp. 20-27.
Lux, M.: How E-Commerce can benefit from visualization,
will appear in Proceedings of WECWIS’OO.

7. Acknowledgments
Special thanks go to M. Unbescheiden for stimulating discussion. Additionally, we would like to thank B. Mueller
for proof reading this paper.

287

