Information Visualisation in Aid of Construction Project Cash Flow Management

Dr. Farzad Khosrowshahi, Faculty of the Built Environment, South Bank University, London,
UK, khosrof@sbu.ac.uk
(Flanagana and Norman (1983), Skitmore (1988) and
Gunner and Betts (1990)).
There high number of variables which need to be
considered and evaluated, individually and in relation
to other variables, makes such preparations a highly
complicated task. Subsequently a degree of
conservatism has emerged towards negotiation. Instead
a number of standard forms of contract has developed.
However, the reality is that construction is similar to
any other business and there should be no barrier to an
open negotiation over all variables relating to the
project, between all parties. What are required are the
right tools to prepare the parties for an effective
negotiation.
This paper complements and concludes the works
previously presented: while the earlier works proposed
a visual approach to the analysis and forecast of project
cash flow, the current paper offers a visual aid for the
contractor to optimise his benefits throughout the
negotiation. Further, given the fact that the parties may
pursue different priorities, the possibility of a win-win
solution is also envisaged.
The paper demonstrates the use of the visual
analysis of the impact of three influential variables,
namely, ‘first payment interval’, ‘delay payment to sub
contractors’ and ‘profit margin’.

Abstract
Any negotiation involves consideration of several
variables which act independently and collectively to
determine the configuration of alternative outcomes.
The numerical analysis of alternative options can be a
tedious and lengthy exercise, thus inhibiting the
negotiator from making informed decisions and indeed
achieving the optimum benefit. Construction Project
financial management is an example where all related
variables are up for negotiation between the main
parities: the client, contractor and sub-contractors.
This paper builds on the works previously
introduced at IV conferences where the potential of the
visual approach to the analysis of growth patterns was
illustrated and the respective mathematical expressions
were introduced. The current paper collates these
works into a conclusive visual method for
instantaneous analysis of several variables that are
influential in configuring construction project finance,
thus preparing the contractor for informed negotiation
with other parties.

Keywords: Growth Curves, Visualisation, Cash Flow,
Construction, Negotiation.

1. Introduction

2. Construction Project Cash Flow

Project evaluation form financial perspective is a
critical factor in determining the overall performance of
a project. This fact has long been recognised (Ashley
and Teicholz, (1977)). But the excessive rate of
liquidation, particularly during the 1980s suggests lack
of due attention to this concept. This is partly explained
by the general poor performance of forecasting models

Like all cash flows, construction project cash flow
consist of the timely aggregate of the cash coming in
(income flow) and cash leaving (expenditure flow) the
Project. An example of project expenditure flow and
income flow is given in Figure 1.

2.1. Expenditure Flow

583
0-7695-0743-3/00
$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

T

Cumulative cost

ExDenditure

I

or other unexpected events), the figures are based on
previously agreed rates. For longer projects (normally
longer than a year) figures will be subjected to an
adjustment for fluctuating prices due to inflation.

4

2.3. Decision Parameters
Project cash flow is configured by many variables.
These include the following;
Profit mark up: This is the margin that the
contractor adds to his costs in order to secure a profit at
the end of the project. Compare with other industries, in
construction industry this margin is normally small.
(Egan 1998). The influence of profit margin on project
cash flow is rather self explanatory.

Time
r

Retention: in construction industry it is customary
that a certain percentage of payments to the contractor
is withheld until the end of the project, at which time
half of the total retention is released and the remaining
half is released after a ‘defect liability period’. In the
UK, the regular values for the retention and defect
liability period are 5% and 6 months respectively.
Given the usual low profit margin, the impact of
retention on project cash flow is significant. In some
cases the project does not reach the self-funding stage
until the end of defect liability period.

Figure 1. Project Income & Expenditure Flow
From the contractor’s perspective, the cash-out
(expenditure flow) consists mainly of the cost of labour,
material, plant 8z machinery, sub-contractors, and office
and site overheads. The configuration of the
expenditure flow follows the behaviour of growth
patterns and assumes a typical ‘S’ curve shape (after the
familiar Sigmoid curves) (Stone (1980)). It has been
demonstrated that the financial behaviour of
construction projects is somewhat reflected in the shape
of their expenditure profiles (Khosrowshahi (1998)).
There are several methods whereby contractors’
expenditure flow can be estimated or forecasted Harris
and Harris and McCaffer (1995). These consist mainly
of activity-based estimating or mathematically-based
forecasting approaches. One of the mathematical
models offered for this purpose has been proposed by
the author (Khosrowshahi 1999). This model forms the
basis of forecasting contractors’ expenditure flow which
is used in this paper.

First payment interval: The usual method of
payment by the client to the contractor is to assess the
volume of the work done on a monthly basis and issue a
payment accordingly, It normally takes another two
weeks before the payment is actually received. This
time lag between the payments and receipts has a
profound effect on project cash flow. This is
particularly true about the first payment, as for the
subsequent payments the aforementioned two weeks
delay overlaps over the next monthly period. In other
words, it takes six weeks before the first payment is
received by the contractor, but the subsequent payments
are received after four weeks.

2.2. Income Flow
As far as Cash-in is concerned, there are several
methods by which payments by the client are made to
the contractor. However, by far, the most popular
method consists of monthly payments that are based on
the evaluation of the work carried out during the month,
as agreed by the quantity surveyors of the contractor
and the client. Unless there are variations (to the design

Payments to sub contractors and suppliers: Just as
clients make their payments with a delay, contractors
too attempt to defer payments to suppliers and sub
contractors, in order to improve their cash flow. This
delay can be applied to a part or whole of the payment.

5 84

the positive periods the excess cash can be invested or
simply deposited in the bank gaining interest. The
simplest way to take these into account is to consider
the opportunity cost of borrowing funds and depositing
funds for negative and negative cash flow periods
respectively. Therefore, the periodic rates for charging
and gaining interests play a role in shaping project cash
flow profile.

Cash injection or withdrawal: There can be many
reasons for injecting or withdrawing cash to and from
the project. If the project produces excess cash at early
stages then this cash can be utilised elsewhere to
support other projects or an investment. Alternatively, a
project in need of cash will require cash injection.
While this variable changes the configuration of the
cash flow, it does and should not form part of project
cash flow, thus it will not be considered.

Abnormal events (distortions): The data suggest
that the flow of production is often distorted by the
introduction of abnormal events such as poor
communication, access problems, weather condition,
etc. These disturbances on the flow of production
reflect on the flow of expenditure in form of a
distortion. The variables of a distortion, the method of
their measurement, the method of their simulation
(using the distortion module) and the corresponding
mathematical expression has already been discussed by
Khosrowshahi (1999).

Front-end loading: Often interchangeably used
with ‘over-measurement’, front-end loading is a
common practice in construction projects. In order to
improve their cash flow, at early stages, the contractor
over-measures the volume of the work carried out and
bills the client accordingly. While the total project
value remains unaffected (as per contract), the
contractor attempts to cash-in a larger part of the
project sum as early as possible. Off course, the
quantity surveyor representing the client needs to be
convinced as he too assesses the measurement.
Therefore, front-end loading means loading the
measurement at one end realising that adjustments are
required to be made at the other end to compensate the
overhnder measurement. As it is customary to make
adjustments for fluctuating prices (due to inflation and
changing prices) (NEDO, 1969), sometimes (e.g. during
high inflation period) it is more beneficial to under
estimate the early works and defer the receipts to a later
point in future. This may yield higher returns for the
contractor when prices are adjusted for inflation.

3. Forecasting Model
As noted earlier, there are several variables which
can be used as the basis for any negotiation. Above,
some of these variables were introduced. In order to
engage in a negotiation, the impact of these variables on
project cash flow should be ascertained. However, a
prerequisite for this objective is to produce a forecast of
the likely pattern of expenditure, from which, the likely
pattern of income and thus the cash flow can also be
generated. There are a number of methods and models
that produce an estimate or forecast of project
expenditure. These include Berny and Howes (1982),
Kenley and Wislson (1986) and Kaka and Price,
(1993), For the purpose of this work the model which
has been generated and previously introduced by the
author is being used Khosrowshahi (1998 and 1999).
The model was developed on the basis that the
expenditure profile of construction projects can be
analysed in terms its shape (Khosrowshahi (1996)).
Accordingly, the shape was defined in terms of a
number of variables, referred to as the shape variables.
Some of these variables were considered as being
general, as they applied to all profiles of construction
expenditure flow. Other variables where named specific
because their value alters for each project. These
variables are the position of the main peak on the time

Starting date: The starting date of the project has a
multitude of effects on project cash flow. For instance,
the impact of the Christmas break on project production
rate and, hence project cash flow, is closely tied with
project starting date. The same is true about the
influence of the inclement weather on project cash flow.
The importance of the project starting date extends to
the organisation’s corporate cash flow, as the later is
largely determined by the state of cash flows for
company’s projects each of which may be at a different
stage.
Interest charges and interest gains: During the life
of the project, its cash flow may switch between
positive to negative several times. During the negative
periods, the required cash may be secured from
company reserves or other sources may be used. During

585

and cost axis, the slopes of the curve at the beginning
and end of the project, the intensity of expenditure from
the beginning to the peak point and the properties of
distortion, which cause distortion on the expenditure
profile and generate additional minor peaks and
troughs. Therefore, an expenditure profile of a
particular project can be forecasted once the value of its
shape variables are identified.
The conversion of these variables into a profile
requires the appropriate mathematical expression. The
details of the expression are given by Khosrowshahi
(1999). Accordingly, three separate expressions
(modules), all driven from the first principal, are
superimposed to convert the variables into a profile.
These modules are the control module, consist of a
three-parameter exponential, Kurtosis module (4”
degree polynomial); and Distortion module (4* degree
polynomial). These modules collectively produce the
overall project expenditure pattern. The parameters of
the model are interpreted in terms of the characteristics
associated with the shape of project expenditure profile
- the shape variables. Also, data have been analysed in
order to develop statistical models which facilitate the
estimation of the shape variables related to any given
project definition.
The advantages of the proposed model are inherent
in its ability to generate a forecast early, quickly,
cheaply and offering users to exploit their experience
and knowledge to improve and refine the forecast.

trade-off for another. Nonetheless, in both win-win and
compromising situations all parties attempt to optimise
the outcome in their favour.
In the light of the above, it is imperative for all
parties to engage the negotiation with as much
knowledge and information about the outcome of
various alternative scenarios. This would prepare them
to offer calculated incentives to other parties in order to
secure their objectives and have prior knowledge of the
impact of alternative offers, from other parties, on their
objectives.
Furthermore, it is generally recognised that in any
negotiation the knowledge of the boundary levels (the
level beyond which a party, including self, refuses to
negotiate) would yield significant advantages. While it
is difficult to identify the boundary level of other
parties, the contractor can evaluate their own boundary
level prior to the negotiation.
In construction projects the calculation and
evaluation of all possibilities is an impractical
undertaking. Even after all numerical calculations and
analysis the digestion of a large combination of
possibilities and their exploitation in a challenging, if
not hostile, negotiating environment proves to be a
highly complicated task. To this end, a visual approach
to the digestion and analysis of these variables is
offered in this paper.
Figure 2, shows a typical construction project cash
flow, sometimes referred to as the ‘saw-tooth’ curve.
The latter reflects the shape of the diagram which
assumes a saw-tooth form because the expenditure
takes place continuously before a sudden discrete
payment is made by the client. Due to the delay
between the payments and receipts, and variables such
as retention and interest payments, a typical cash flow
remains in the negative zone for most of project
duration. Indeed, this is one of the major contributor to
the failures of construction companies, when they lack
the necessary finance to fund the project. This is
especially true for situations where the company has a
number of projects running parallel hence, particularly
at certain points in time the cash demand is beyond the
contractor’s resources or capabilities. The situation is
further exacerbated when the payment due from the
client is not received when it should have. Therefore,
the contractor’s contingency plan should cater for the
‘maximum cash flow’ (the lowest curve on the cash
flow diagram).

4. Visual Aid for Negotiation
Negotiation is about compromises: while a win-win
situation is the most desired solution, compromises are
often inevitable and depending on the given situation
the parties would submit to different levels of
compromise. On the other hand, in negotiating
situations where there are more than one variable
involved, different parties may have different priorities,
thus, a win-win solution may not be a farfetched
outcome. This is particularly true about construction
projects where there are many variables which can form
part of the negotiation. In other words, the priorities of
different parties may indeed complement rather than
contradict each other. In these situations, the parties
should realise the exact nature of the agreement,
whereas, in compromising situations it must be made
clear, to parties, what factor is being compromised as a

586

In conjunction with the first payment interval, the
contractor can consider delaying a proportion of his
payment to sub-contractors and supplier by up to two
months. Figure 4 shows how this variable influences the
configuration of the cash flow. Again, a boarder level

Figure 2. Net, real and maximum cash flows
The cash flow in Figure 2, is static, one which
suggests what will happen in the future. The contractor
may find this cash flow undesirable and attempt to
improve it through negotiation with other parties (the
client, sub-contractors and suppliers). As noted earlier,
the first payment interval has an impact on project cash
flow. Therefore, the contractor can undertake a visual
evaluation of the impact of varying first payment
interval on project cash flow. This is shown in Figure 3.
Since each graph is drawn in turn with a desired delay,
the least acceptable (boarder level) first payment

Figure 4, Cash flow alternatives for varying
payment delay to suppliers
(least acceptable proportion to be delayed) can be
evaluated prior to engagement in the negotiation.
Realising that any negotiation requires a trade-off,
the contractor may consider reducing his profit margin
as an incentive to the client. Figure 5 shows the result
of varying profit margin from 0% to 15%, for first
payment interval at 10 days and with 50% of payments
to sub-contractors and suppliers delayed by 2 months.
Once more, the least acceptable profit margin can
be identified for least acceptable values for other
variables which have been considered. It is evident that
in the above example even the least acceptable values
(boarder levels) and zero profit margin produce a
profitable project with a healthy cash flow.

5. Conclusion
This paper reiterated the importance of cash flow
management for construction projects. While it is
important to generate the forecast of project cash flow,
it is equally important to optimise the benefits from the
project through negotiations with other parties involved

-

587

Flanagan, R. and Norman, G., (1983) The accuracy and
monitoring of quantity surveyors' price forecasting for
building work, Construction Management and
Economics, vol 1, no 2, E&FN Spon Ltd, UK.
Gunner, J. and Betts, M. (1990), Price forecasting
performance by design team consultants in the Pacific
Rim, CIB W-55/65 Symposium, Value in Building
Economics and Construction Management, vol 3 ,
Australia.
Harris, F. and McCaffer, R., (1995) Modern
Construction Management, fourth ed., Cambridge.
Blackwell Science, UK.
Kaka, A.P., and Price, A.D.F., (1993) Modeling
Standard Time And Cost Commitment Curves For
Contractors' Cash Flow Forecasting, Construction
Management and Economics, 11, 271-283, E&FN
Spon Ltd, UK.
Kaka, A P., and Khosrowshahi, F., (1996) Effects Of
Different Procurement Routes On Contractors' Cash
Flow, Engineering, Construction and Architectural
Management, 3, 133-145, UK.
Kenley R. and Wilson, I. D., (1986) A Construction
Project Cash Flow Model - An Idiographic Approach,
Construction Management and Economics, 4 , 2 13-232,
E&FN Spon Ltd, UK.
Khosrowshahi, F., (1996) Value profile analysis of
construction
projects,
Journal
of
Financial
Management of Property and Construction, vol 1, no 1,
55 - 77, UK.
Khosrowshahi, F., (1998), A visual approach to the analysis
of curve profile: a case in construction industry, Proceedings
of Intemational Conference on Information Visualisation,
IV'98, IEEE, 321-326.
Khosrowshahi, F., (1999), The mathematics of Shapegeometry to the analysis of curve profile, Proceedings of
International Conference on Information Visualisation, IV'90,
IEEE, 56-61.
NED0 National Economic Development Office ( 1969),
Formula methods of price adjustment on building
contracts.
Skitmore, M. (1988) Factors affecting the accuracy of
engineers' estimates, Cost Engineering, vol 30, no 10,
AACE, USA.
Stone, R. (1980), Sigmoids, Bulletin of Applied Statistics,
7(1),pp.59- 119.

Figure 5, Cash flow alternatives for varying
profit margin
in the process: the client, the sub-contractors and
suppliers. To this end, there are several variables that
can form the basis of the negotiation. However, the
impact of these variables can not be assessed unless the
likely cash flow profile of the project is generated.
The mathematically-based forecasting model which
was introduced in the previous two papers was used to
develop the forecast of project cash flow. This prepared
the ground-work for project variables to be used as the
basis of negotiation.
The graphical-visual approach to the examination
of the impact of a number of influential variables, on
project cash flow, enabled a rapid and cheap evaluation
of 100s of possible solutions from which the boarder
levels were identified. This experimentation is
undertaken prior to engagement in the negotiation. The
graphical-visual approach overcomes the impracticality
of the numerical approach to the calculation, evaluation
and exploitation of a large number of possible
scenarios.

6. References
Ashley, D. B., and Teicholz, P. M., (1977) "PreEstimate Cash Flow Analysis", Journal of Constr. Div,
ASCE, 102 (3), 369-379, USA.
Berny, J. and Howes, R. (1982) Project management
control using real time budgeting and forecasting,
Construction Papers no 2.
Egan, Sir J., (1998) Rethinking Construction, DETR,
UK

588

