BibRelEx: Exploring Bibliographic Databases by Visualization of Annotated
Content-Based Relations
Anne Bruggemann-Klein
Technische Universitat Munchen, Germany
brueggem 0informatik.tu-muenchen .de

Rolf Klein
FernUniversitat Hagen, Germany
rolf.klein 0fernuni-hagen.de

Britta Landgraf
FernUniversitat Hagen, Germany
bri tta.landgfaf 0femuni-hagen.de

Abstract

work has been injuenced by a given publication A? .The
result set for this query could be visualized by a graph whose
nodes represent the documents that directly or indirectly cite
document A, and whose edges express the citation relation
resulting in an at-a-glance picture of A’s sphere of influence.
Under the citation relation, documents are arranged by
fields of knowledge, independently of their language and of
the words that happen to occur in titles or keywords. Thus,
two substantial problems that are common with classical
retrieval methods, are avoided: the selection of suitable
search words and the consideration of the context.
There exist a number of specialized solutions for particular aspects of visualization, knowledge management, and
collaboration. With our project, BibRelEx, we are for the
first time integrating most of these techniques. With BibRelEx, content-based relations between documents such as
cites, succeeds, generalizes, improves can be visualized, and
be used, for a more efficient exploration. In addition, we encourage users to attach their own annotations to documents
or to pairs of related documents. Such annotations may be
either private or public. The aggregation of public annotations contributed by expert users represents insight into the
area that exceeds the knowledge that is represented in the
documents themselves. This approach will now be detailed.
When searching for information, the advice of human
experts in the respective area is valuable. For example,
an expert can point to the few best publications in an area
without providing an exhaustive list of less valuable material. Since human experts are not always around, it is
highly desirable that such expert knowledge be integrated
into the database. We suggest to enrich the database by public annotations contributed by expert users, that can be
attached to documents or to relations between documents.
The relations annotated may be formal, e.g. cites, or more
generally content-based, so that it would be hard to automatically extract them from the documents. Additionally,

Traditional searching and browsing functions for bibliographic databases no longer enable researchers to deal
eflciently with the rapidly growing number of scient@cpublications. Our project BibRelEx aggregates expert ktiowledge on a body of scientiJic literature and makes it available
to researchers who wish to explore the literature. We take a
two-pronged approach: First, we collect expert annotations
on publications and their semantic relationships to other
publications. Second, we let researchers explore this semantically enriched body of literature and knowledge through
visualizations. Hence, we enable researchers to track relevant documents based on their colleagues’ expertise. We
are testing our approach with a bibliographic database in a
computational geometry.

1. Introduction
It is well-known how difficult it is to find relevant literature using only the conventional retrieval methods. Often
one needs a survey article to get quick access to a certain
area, or to discover the seminal publications in some area.
Here content-based relations between documents such as
the citation relation are helpful. For example, one can detect
survey articles by the fact that they cite many papers in a
given area, whereas fundamental contributions are cited by
many. Also, thematically related documents can easily be
determined with the help of the citation relation. Namely,
they can be identified by the fact that they have similar citations.
The answers to queries concerning content-based relations could, in principle, be output in textual form as lists.
However, the following query demonstrates the value of
a graphical visualization of relationships. What further

19
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

by the number of common citations the papers list from the
Science Citation Index.
StarWalker [4] provides a combination of 3-dimensional
visualization of an abstract information space with a multiuser chat environement. One of its possible applications
is the author co-citation analysis. The main focuses of the
StarWalker project are on the automatically extraction of the
semantic structures from fixed collection of documents using
generalised similarity analysis and on the social interaction
in the virtual environment.
There are some similarities between these research efforts
and ours, e.g. we are using the citation network for navigation and employ similar visualization techniques. However,
there are also some notable differences. Most importantly,
we are aggregating knowledge that cannot be automatically
extracted from the documents. And we offer users the possibility to enlarge the database and to create their own view
of the information space.

expert users can incorporate new content-based relations in
form of annotated links between documents.
Not only does BibRelEx provide means for entering public annotations; our system also allows all users actively
working in a scientific area to customize their information
spaces by adding their own views as private information.
This could be achieved, for example, by entering additional
publications into the database, which are frequently referred
to by the user, or by subjective annotations like the following.
0

0

The citation of document Y in document X is relevant.
Document X contains a particularly good representation of technique B.

In order to test our ideas in a real application, we are
building BibRelEx on top of the bibliographic database geombib which is desribed in section 3. The restriction to this
particular field enables us to enter-in addition to the citation relation-some content-based relations based on expert
knowledge. Although our focus in this project is on a particular bibliographic database in a specific field, BibRelEx
is developed in such a way that it can easily be applied to
other fields of knowledge and other databases, or to digital
libraries.

3. The Bibliographic Database Geombib
Before we present the design of BibRelEx, a brief description of the bibliographic database geombib [6]that we
are currently using is in order. At the time our project started,
geombib contained about 8700 bibliographic references in
the area of computational geometry. It references magazine
articles, conference contributions, and technical reports. All
entries are in BibTeX format; this is one of the reasons why
geombib became so popular, because this format help users
create their own bibliographies in LaTgdocuments.
Geombib is being maintained by B. Jones of the University of Saskatchewan, and it is updated by a community
effort, in the following way. Typically, users download the
whole database which consists of a single file. To a copy of
this local version, they can now add new entries of recent
publications, or correct incomplete or erroneous entries. After four months, the resulting file is compared against the
original one, and the differences are submitted to the administrator. From the data submitted, a new release is compiled
and distributed one month later.
This approach works surprisingly well, thanks to the effort of many researchers who do not even hesitate entering
whole proceedings volumes. As a result, the database covers most of the existing publications in this field, technical
reports and workshop proceedings included.

2. Related Work
Following up the references contained in a scientific document has always been an essential part of systematic study.
It is not surprising that several systems or projects exist that
aim to support some of the features built into BibRelEx.
Well known is the Science Citation Index (SCI) [9],which
serves frequently as basis of bibliometric studies. IS1 developed the visual interface SCI-MAP to navigate citation
networks for small databases extracted from the SCI [7].
Some web-based systems like the Hypertext Bibliography Project [lo] and the Universal Citation Database [3]
employ hypertext links to establish citations. A number of
projects concem automatic citation indexing, for instance
CiteSeer [l] and the Open Journal Project [SI. BibRelEx
differs from these project in that our focus is not on the
creation of the indexes but in the effective use of citation
indices in literature search. In addition, we are exploiting
more flexible content-based relations that result by aggregation of expert knowledge.
VxInsight of Sandia [5] enables a global overview based
on literature references. It represents fields of knowledge as
landscapes, over which the user can fly using virtual reality
techniques. The deeper one flies, the more sub-areas become
visible. On the lowest level the titles of the journal articles
are represented. A mapping algorithm clusters documents

4. BibRelEx
4.1. Bibconsist and BibManage
In order to exploit content-based relations among documents for navigation, the relations themselves must be

20

present in the database. Geombib already provides, for
each database entry, optional fields named cites, precedes,
succeeds and annote, but less than ten percent of them have
so far been filled in.
Therefore, we started our project by entering the citations contained in the proceedings of the large conferences
(SoCG, CCCG etc.). While most of the papers published in
the proceedings were already represented in geombib, much
of the cited work was not; together, about 1500 new entries
were generated and about 4850 links filled in.
When inserting new data records we encountered a problem. In geombib each entry is identified by a unique key,
which is generated according to fixed rules from the author’s
names, the initial characters of the significant words in the
title, and the year of appearance. Upon insertion into geombib, duplicate keys are detected automatically. However, it
is not uncommon that data-entry errors result in duplicate
database records that give rise to different keys. This happens, for example, if the authors’ names have been entered
in different order, so that the keys generated by geombib differ. Also, misspelling the paper’s title can result in different
keys.
In order to detect such duplicates, we have developed the
tool BibConsist [13]. It checks if the corresponding fields
of two entries have similar contents. D. Knuth’s soundex
code [ 113 is used for measuring the phonetic similarity of
words. Using Bibconsist we were able to detect many
duplicates in geombib.
Bibconsist can be used twice in the update cycle of geombib. First, at merging time, the administrator can use it to
detect duplicates in all updates suggested by the users and
to guarantee the consistency of the new geombib release.
Second, while creating and formatting entries, Bibconsist
can be used to prevent users from entering faulty records.
In the four-months period between two geombib releases
the user typically maintains a local version of the database
that contains all recent updates suggested by the user. In addition, many users are maintaining their own bibliographic
databases containing the data of such publications that are
interesting to them, and likely to be cited in their own work,
but do not necessarily belong to the area of computational
geometry (for example, a textbook on topology from which
but one theorem is quoted).
In order to keep these different databases consistent, we
are currently developing the tool BibManage for maintaining
public and private local versions of the database under periodic updates. Each time a new release of geombib appears
this tool checks if it contains all updates suggested by the
user. In case an update was suggested but has not been performed by the administrator, the users can choose whether
to submit their suggestions again or to insert a corresponding entry into their personal bibliographies. BibManage
also checks if some documents contained in the personal

bibliography do now appear in geombib, due to some other
user’s request; such entries are then removed. Furthermore,
the tool guarantees transparency between updates, in that
all local databases are treated like a single one. Internally,
however, the personal bibliography and the update database
have priority over the current geombib version. New update suggestions to be submitted to the administrator are
automatically created by BibManage.
In addition, a user interface for editing existing records
and entering new records, annotations and relations into
either database is provided.
Altogether BibManage supports the update process of
geombib in the following three situations:
0

merging a new geombib version;
support of the user in working with geombib and personal bibliographic databases;

0

automatic creation of the file containing the updating
suggestions.

Figure 1 shows the use of Bibconsist and BibManage in the
updating cycle of geombib.

4.2. Visualization
As was pointed out in the introduction, visualizing the
content-based relations among documents is a key issue in
our approach. We have examined a number of visualization
systems, in order to find a system suitable for BibRelEx.
Such a system should enable a three-dimensional representation of relation networks, and offer comfortable navigation
methods. Moreover, it should be possible for the user to select nodes and edges by mouse-clicks, thus displaying, in a
text window, further information like the full bibliographic
entry or annotations attached to the object.
Well-suited layout algorithms for our purposes are forcedirected algorithms such as the spring embedder [12, 141.
This algorithm is based on the simulation of a mechanical
process. Nodes carry mutually repulsive charges, and edges
are modeled by springs that strive to contract. Initially, all
nodes are placed randomly. Then a series of iterations are
performed in which the nodes move in space conditioned
by the forces until a minimum energy state of the system
is reached. This state corresponds to a proper layout. In
the resulting graph highly connected nodes are placed close
to each other. Applied to citation networks this means that
cluster of nodes represent documents that have similar references. Thus the user can easily detect which documents
are related by content.
In its original form, the spring embedder algorithm gives
good results only for small sized graphs. With large graphs,
heuristic methods must be employed in order to achieve
an acceptable run-time behavior. One achieves good results

21

BibManage

~ibCoiisist

I

I
I

local copies
with updates

local

copies

diff

local

tiles

copies

/I---------

\

/n

=
f

/-

...

‘
I
Figure 1. Update cycle of geombib

4.3. Future work

with the GEM3D-Algorithmus [2], which uses an additional
“virtual temperature” for the adjustment of nodes.

In parallel to our ongoing implementation work we extend the database in such a way that a critical mass of information is available, making the use of BibRelEx worthwhile
to the geometry community. Due to our previous efforts,
there are at present about 13,000 references available in geombib, surely enough to test the system under a real load.
To provide additional content-based relations based on expert knowledge we will sift the available literature in the
areas of Voronoi diagrams and on-line algorithms, put these
publications in relation to each other, and annotate them.
To obtain better means of navigation we will test the following approach: to convert the layout produced by LEDA
into a VRML file and then to use a VRML Viewer freely
available, e.g. VRwave. Since we want to combine the visualization with classical retrieval methods we must check
whether this method provides a sufficiently dynamic layout.
Another interesting question is how to maintain the
database content over time. We feel that this task should
no longer be left to volunteers. Rather, we suggest that the
authors themselves submit, along with their papers, a proposal for an annotated geombib entry to a conference or to a
journal. The referees could, without additional effort, check
whether the proposed entry is correct and complete, and forward it to the database manager. This approach, which has
also been suggested by Cameron [3], is also in the authors’
best interest.

The visualization system should also be able to cooperate
easily with BibManage, in order to combine the classical
retrieval methods offered by BibManage with the visual
study of the information space.
Unfortunately, it seems that no system exists at present
that completely fulfills our request. Therefore, we are using the LEDA library for implementing a large part of the
functionality described above. LEDA provides basic data
structures for graphs, numerous geometrical algorithms and
components for the creation of a user interface. In addition, LEDA is extendable. Figure 2 has been produced with
LEDA; it shows part of the citation net that is contained in
geombib at present. Represented are those documents that
contain the word “Voronoi” in their titles. Only such documents are considered which refer again to other documents.
In the figure one can easily detect “cd-vdbcd-85”as a central
work.
As of today, LEDA offers some support for threedimensional graph representation. A three-dimensional
spring embedder is available, however it is rather slow for
our purposes. Only a reduced set of navigation methods is
offered. Therefore we started to extend the representation
of diagrams. For example, we incorporated a faster layout
algorithm, the above mentioned GEM3D.
Moreover we added a hierarchical view arranged over
time to show the evolution of a field of knowledge or the
influence of a document.

22

t

i-eeding,

,.

Ed-vdbcd-85

+hlst-ltavs-55

o d e s : 51

edqes: 54

undo: 7010

-10.96

-20.0

Figure 2. Representationof a citation net

References

ligent Information Systems, Integrating ArtiJicial Intelligence and Database Technologies, 11(3):259-285, 1998.
http://www.cs.sandia.gov/projects/VxInsight/VxPaper.
html.

[ I ] K. Bollacker, S. Lawrence, and C. L. Giles. Citeseer: An

autonomous Web agent for automatic retrieval and identification of interesting publications. In K. P. Sycara and
M. Wooldridge, editors, Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Autonomous Agents, pages 116-123,
New York, 1998. ACM Press.

[6] J. Erickson, B. Jones, and0. Schwarzkopf. More information
about the database. http://www.cs.duke.edu/wjeffe/
compgeom/geombib/geombib-1.html.
[7] E. Garfield. Citation indexes for retrieval and research evaluation. Presentation (Unpublished), at the G7 Consensus
Conference on Theory and Practice of Research Assessment,
1996.

[2] I. BruB and A. Frick. Fast interactive 3-D graph visualization.
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Graph
Drawing (GD’95). Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1027, pages 99-1 10, 1995.
[3] R. Cameron. A universal citation database as a catalyst for
reform in scholarly communication. First Monday, 2(4),
1997. http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue2-4/cameron/
index.html.

[SI S.Hitchcock,L.Carr, W. Hall,S.Harris,S.Probets, D.Evans,
and D. Brailsford. Linking electronicjournals: Lessons from
the open journal project. D-Lib Magazine, Dec. 1998.
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/december98/12hitchcock.html.

[9] Institute for Scientific Information. Science Citation Index.
http://www.isinet.com/products/citation.

[4] C. Chen. Visualising semantic spaces and author co-citation
networks in digital libraries. Information Processing & Management, 35(3):401420, 1999.
[5] G. S . Davidson, B. Hendrickson, D. Johnson, C. E. Meyers, and B. N. Wylie. Knowledge mining with VxInsight: Discovery through interaction. Journal of Intel-

[lo] D. Jones. The Hypertext Bibliography Project, 1995.
http://theory.Ics.mit.edu/-dmjoneslhbp.

[ll] D. Knuth. The Art of Computer Programming, volume 3:
Sorting and Searching. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachussetts, 1973.

23

[I21 A. Kumar and R. H. Fowler. A spring modelling algorithm
to position nodes of an undirected graph in three dimensions.

Technical report, Department of Computer Science, University of Texas, 1994.
[13] B. Landgraf.

Bibconsist: A program to check BibTeX files for inconsistencies, 1997. http://wwwpi6.fernunihagen.de/ForschunglBibRelEx/BibConsist.htmL

[14] S . Sim.

Automatic graph drawing algorithms, 1996.

http://www.db.toronto.edu/ simsuz/papers/grafdraw.ps.gz.

24

