3D virtual warehouse on the WEB
Michel Buffa (buffa@i3s.uniceSfr),Jean-Claude Lafon (jcl@essi.fr)
Laboratoire 13S, 06903 Sophia-Antipolis cedex, France

Abstract
In the emerging field of E-Commerce we show the
great potential interest to create 30 virtual shopping centers. The study of a specific application: the creation of an
electric household applicants warehouse enables us to
highlight the possibilities of the VRML2.0 language to
model, visualize and to do interactive walking inside the
warehouse. Key features of VRML 2.0 are underlined and
new extensions are proposed in order to achieve a better
realistic and *human-like>) behavior inside the virtual
warehouse.

1. Introduction
3D Object manipulation within Web Browsers is now
available to a large audience as the two main products
(Netscape and Intemet Explorer) includes the VRML 2.0
visualization plug-in by default.
One potential application of great interest is the creation of <<virtualshopping centers* in the field of E-Commerce. This is a very promising field for 3D graphics
development for the next years as it is forecast in the
recent article on the business of computer graphics [ 13.
Many Web sites are already devoted to E-commerce (amazon is perhaps the best known) and they have some graphical illustrations of their products.
For instance, in a Web Site devoted to electric households applicants (electric cooker, refrigerator, oven, dishwasher, washing machine.. .), the customer can select a
product according some criterions: first the type, the
dimensions, the price ... Then the site displays the different products as pictures. Technical informations are also
available. Then it is possible to do purchases orders. There
is no 3D representations and manipulation of the different
objects but some kind of animations are displayed, in fact
with a sequence of pictures of the same object.
Some web sites are devoted to very specific business
to business applications. For instance in the web site
Manegerie (www.manegerie.com) you can rent or buy sec-

ond - hand rides (kids or adults rides). This is an interesting application of E-business on the WEB as the real
exposition of such huge objects is costly and difficult to
organize. You can find rides such as: Auto-Scooter, shakers, ranger, Giant Wheel, rollers coasters, break dance ...
you can rent or buy second - hand rides (kids or adults
rides). This is an interesting application of E-business on
the WEB as the real exposition of such huge objects is
costly and difficult to organize. Each ride is displayed with
a picture and technical details but there is no 3D representation.
Only very few E-commerce web sites already use
some 3D representations of objects. In the site Computerland (www.computerland.co.iw) it is possible to visit virtual shopping center of replacement parts of computers,
made in VRML: interactive walking inside the shopping
center is possible. Each kind of product is represented by
only one 3D object, whose selection enable the display of
an html page with the list of all objects of this kind with
their prices. In the site Machine shop (www.acu-rite.com/
products/applications/vrmV)an Interactive walking is possible inside a virtual warehouse made in VRML. The starting room gives access to other rooms containing different
kinds of machines (For instance vertical knee mill, planer
mill and horizontal boring mill in the milling room). As in
the previous site, by selecting one machine, you can display an html description of the technical and commercial
informations on this particular machine.. This page
includes a VRML bloc which enable to visualize the
machine under different angles and also to select the specific informations on the product. The HTML page gives
also informations on the machine and some pictures.

To sum up
There exists already some commercial web sites with
3D representations of objects in VRML, but only as illustrative purposes. All the possibilities of VRML are not
used and it seems interesting to study this problem in a
more global approach.

479
0-7695-0743-3100
$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

2. Interests in a 3D virtual shopping center

expensive. Money can be saved up as merchandises don’t
necessarily have to be stored.

Here we describe some potential interests of the realization of a 3D virtual shopping center on the web.

A better audience

2.1. For the customer
Time is money
Many people, especially among ccactive people>>
(potentially the more interesting customers), often complained not to have time to do shopping: time lost in traffic
congestion to go to shopping center, nervous exhaustion in
noisy and overcrowded warehouse. In opposite, with a virtual shopping center on the WEB you can do your orders
in a more relax surroundings, and very quickly.

A virtual shop can have immediately a national or
worldwide audience. A specialized shop on old music
instruments for instance can reach all the musicians of the
world. You are not restricted to the population living near
your shop.

Better accessibility for the customers
They can visit your shopping center at any time at day.
They can also have personal answer to their questions by a
ccon -line>>service.

Daily opened warehouses

Better knowledge of your customers

Many people also complained about the opening hours
of supermarkets: they are opened when they are working,
closed when they leave their office and are free to do some
purchases. No such problems with a virtual warehouse!

A database of your customers can be maintained
(email address, consumer profile, private informations).
With these informations, it is cheap to program in advance
some marketing events and to automatically send them
advertising on a specific promotion on a product.

More informations on the products
Very often, it is difficult (or impossible) to obtain accurate technical informations on the products exposed in a
warehouse: no vendor free to answer your questions or
you get a very general answer. In a virtual shopping center,
you can have access to any kind of technical or economical informations on the product. It is even it possible to
exchange informations among the purchasers via a chat
group for instance.

Best view of the product
At first, this seems a bit paradoxical, but it is now easier to manipulate and even to look at an object on the Web
rather than in a show room! This is possible with a realistic rendering of the 3D model of the object. You can look
at a car model at any distance and position and angle of
view - this is impossible in a show room. You can also
open the doors, take position inside the car. You can
choose different colors and experiment with these colors.

2.2. For the trader
Less money to spent
To create and manage a virtual supermarket for
instance is less costly than to build a real building: instead
of a year of construction, your virtual store can be build in
some days or weeks. The maintenance also will be less

A flexible shopping center
A new design is possible to take into account some
specific occasions: Halloween, Christmas...

3. Design of a 3D warehouse
3.1. The 3D warehouse
It must look like a real warehouse with several floors
(each one being dedicated to some specific family of products), several rooms in each floor, different exposition
shelves in each rooms: in fact this is a tree organization
that facilitates the interactive walking inside the warehouse and the search of a given product (as in real warehouse). The visitor can also directly go to a specific
location by selecting for instance a room, or by giving the
name of the product.
To model such a 3D warehouse in VRML 2.0 is rather
straightforward (it is also possible to use a modeler such as
Cosmoworld to do it). For books on VRML see [2], [3]
and [4].
The main difficulty is to judiciously use the LOD
nodes in order to achieve good performances. This is the
main problem when one wants to display huge buildings
or landscapes with VRML [SI.
Another problem encountered in this application, is to
allow attractive 3D walking inside the building. It is possible to define a guided tour for instance or to offer the
choice between different predefined paths so that (at least

480

,

the first time) the visitor can see the most important parts
of the warehouse. With the VRML browser it is also possible to do an interactive walking with a great freedom (with
a tool to show the position of the personal avatar inside the
warehouse - for instance by the display of the 2D plan of
the floor with an indication of the position of the avatar).

achieve a rather good realistic appearance of the world
(see Figure 2)

Refrigara teu rs

Cons4lateurs

Figure 1. Predefined viewpoints in each of the
virtual shop areas
In order to facilitate the walk inside the shop, we can
set predefined viewpoints in each part of the virtual shop.
This can be easily done in VRML with the Viewpoint
node, which is one of the most powerful nodes. The position and orientation fields set the location of a camera (the
viewpoint) and the direction the camera is looking. The
fieldOfView field defines the angle of vision and in fact
simulates the lens of a camera. In Figure 1 we show a floor
map of a shop with some predefined viewpoints. The top
picture of Figure 2 shows the corresponding 3D view.
To obtain a more realistic view of the different rooms,
you can apply colors andor textures on the geometric
model with the material, texture and texture transform
fields of the Appearance node of an object (in our application, we use textures scarcely in order to achieve good performances). By adding some light sources (mostly
directional lights as point lights or spot lights must be used
sparingly not to alter the performance) it is possible to

Figure 2. Realistic appearance using light
sources

3.2. The customer
After a free visit of the 3D shopping center, the visitor
must enter some personal informations in order to do some
purchases: his name, his Email, his address.
In order to simulate a real warehouse (with people
inside it), he can also create his own ccavatar,,.

481

In VRML, there always exists an embodiment of the
user in the 3D world, known as an avatar. By default, the
avatar is a cylinder of 0.25 meter radius and 1.6 meters tall
with the eyes (the current view of the world) near the top.
It is possible to change the size of avatars using the avatarsize field and to modify the speed of the customer walk
with the speed field.
The collision detection and terrain following properties enable an avatar not to walk through walls and to be
on the ground (unfortunately these properties are not
implemented in the same way in the different VRML
browsers).
We propose to extend this notion of avatar: with the
help of a menu, the user can give a name to his avatar, a
sex and a physical appearance (hair colors, face,
clothes.. .) by choosing among some predefined features
(as for instance in Active Worlds site: www.activeworlds.com). The idea is to enable the customer to see
other customers visiting the same part of the warehouse at

the same moment with the possibility to <<meet>>
another
customer, by clicking on the icon of another avatar (avatars are represented by small icons most of the time for
performance reasons).
This seems to be a promising way for human users to
participate and interact with a virtual warehouse and a lot
of researches are done now in this field (see [6] and [7]).
Some commercial applications already exist. For instance
Peopleshop from Boston Dynamics (www.bdi.com) can
simulate a smart crowd in a shop, with intelligent characters. Each person in the Peopleshop library has its own
skeleton, appearance and behavioral attributes.
A d h a t group>>or <<discussiongroup>>(as in the well
known ICQ site : www.icq.com) must also be defined in
order to allow customers to talk together and to exchange
informations on the products, for instance. One proposed
solution uses a frame under the 3D visualization of the
shop devoted to this chat group, as illustrated by Figure 3.

Figure 3. Example of a chat group associated with a vrml rendered virtual shop

3.3. Selection and manipulation of a product
When the visitor is interested by a specific product on
a shelve, he has the possibility to made some interactive

manipulations on it: for instance to open the door of a
refrigerator, to open a drawer ... All these manipulations
can be done in V R m 2.0 using the Sensor nodes and the
interpolation nodes.

482

When the mouse is on an object, some specific informations are displayed:
the type,
the price,
* the delay of delivery., .
If the customer is interested, he can also ask for more
technical informations which will be displayed on the
screen or even request a ccvirtual vendor, (with the possibility to send an email or even to call by phone a real vendor)

The customer is also given a ccvirtual caddie,, in whom
he can carry all the objects that he chose to buy. The total
price of the content of the caddie is displayed under the
icon of this caddie.
At any moment, by a simple mouse click on the caddie, he can display the list of all the products he is carrying, as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Display of the caddy content

The overall architecture is best described by Figure 5.

3.4. Application’s architecture
This application uses a 3-tiers architecture, a classical
one in dynamic web sites:

request

client

On the client side: we need an Internet navigator
(Netscape Navigator or Internet Explorer for
instance) with a VRML browser (CosmoPlayer is
perhaps the best known).
On the server side: we need an HTTP server and a
relational database (Oracle is a good candidate).
The http server receives the client requests and
sends these requests to the programs that manipulate the database.

483

http server

-

scripts

3.5. Non realistic warehouses
This previous 3D warehouse model is rather similar to
a real warehouse, but it is also possible to model non realistic 3D buildings (we are in a wirtual world))!). This can
be done for different reasons:
To facilitate the walk-through of the visitor inside
the building [8]: for instance, if you are visiting the
shop from Figure 1 and Figure 2, after entering
room1 you cannot enter directly into room2 or
room4. In a VRML 3D model, it is possible to give
the same hexagonal shape to each room with ctvirtual doors>>opening in the other rooms -even if
these rooms are not physically adjacent. This
approach facilitates the walking inside the building,
remember we are in a virtual shop.
To conceive more attractive or original web sites
(with the aim to attract more visitors).
For instance, inside a ccclassicab building, you can
design a specific area for children (with plenty of toys) to
give them the feeling to be in a wonderful, magic world
(with fairies, sorceresses, strange animals ...).

to study the behavior of an ordinary user in such a 3D shop
model in which the existing navigation tools are not perhaps very easy to use.

Figure 7. An attractive design

Acknowledgments
Thanks to all the students that have contributed to this
project, especially EAlmeida, B. Blanc, E. Bui, G
Cazenave, D. Colonna, G. Fauvelle, C.Laborde, J. Laporte
and N.Lipari.

References
C. Machover, The business of Computer Graphics , IEEE

Computer Graphics and Applications, January/February
2000, pp. 44-45.
J. Wemecke, The VRML 2.0 Handbook, Addison-Wesley,
reading, Mass., 1996.
R.Carey, GBell, The Annotated VRML 2.0 Reference Marlual, Addison-Wesley, Mass., 1997.
A.Ames, D.Nadeau, J.Moreland, The VRML 2.0 Sourcebook, John Wiley&Sons, New York, 1996.
M. Reddy, Y. Leclerc, L. Iverson, N. Bletter. TerraVisionIl:
Visualizing Massive Terrain databases in VRML. IEEE
Computer graphics and Applications, March/April 1999,
pp. 30-38.
B.M Blumberg, T.A Galyean. Multilevel direction of Autoriomous creatures for Real-time Virtual Environment. In proceedings of SIGRAPHYS, 1995, pp. 47-54,
R. Boulic, P. Becheiraz, L. Emering, D. Thalmann. Integra-

Figure 6. An original design for a virtual shop
entrance
The entrance of your shop can be the mouth of a giant
clown who sticks out his red tongue (the red carpet) to
allow you to enter the virtual building, as shown in Figure
6. The interest with virtual worlds is that there is no limit
to the imagination: Figure 7 shows a very modern design
for a stair. The difficulty (for a commercial application) is
to predict the effect and the interest on the consumers.

4. Conclusion
In the promising field of E-business, we have shown
the possibilities of the use of 3D model of a warehouse. A
lot of work remains to be done in order to achieve reasonable performance on the web for large scale virtual environment with a large number of participants (see [9], [lo])
and also to provide the user with an attractive way to visit
a shop and to buy goods in it. One important point is also

tion of Motion Control techniques for Virtual human and
avatar real-time Animation. In Proc. VRST'97, 1997, ACM

Press, PP 111-118.
B.Chan, H.M.Tse, W.Wang. Design of a Walkthrough System for Indoor Environments from Floor Plans, Proceedings 1VP8, 1998, pp 50- 57.
E. Jxty, T.Turletti. Issues in Designing a Communication
Architecture for Large-Scale Virtual Environments , Lectures Notes in Computer Science, Proceedings of the 1''
International Workshop on Networked Group Communication, Nov. 99, Pisa, Italy, pp 54-7 1
[lo] A. Yengar, J. Challenger,-D.Dias, P. Dantzig. High-Performance Web Site Design Techniques, Intemet Computing,
MarCh-April2000, pp 17-26.

484

