Development of a virtual heritage model to enable a comparison of active
navigation with passive observation
Richard Laing, Stephen Scott, Anna Conniff, Tony Craig and Carlos Galan Diaz,
The Scott Sutherland School, The Robert Gordon University, UK
Abstract
In the context of urban redesign and public
participation, this research project is investigating
whether active exploration of a desktop virtual model of
an urban environment leads to better understanding and
perception than passive observation of a walkthrough of
that same model. The results from the experimental study
will potentially have implications for how architects and
planners present their design ideas to clients and the
public in the future. This paper also provides an
overview of a methodology used to design, programme
and enable a fully interactive virtual model of an existing
built environment using the Unreal Runtime engine. The
method emerged from a study of heritage values within
the built environment, which included an assessment of
the heritage values associated with the tradition of
timber grass-roofed buildings and narrow passageways
that make up the old town centre of Torshavn known as
Tinganes.
Keywords--- virtual architecture, games engine,
heritage, navigation.

1. Introduction
Dynamic walkthroughs of computer models of
proposed buildings and environments are becoming a
more common method for architects and planners
presenting their design ideas to clients and the public.
Animations can allow designers to present their concepts
in both an impressive and accessible manner, yet the
viewer has no control over what is being seen and is
merely a passive observer of the designer’s presentation.
The research reported in this paper is investigating
whether permitting people to actively explore a modelled
environment, as it is presented in a desktop situation,
enhances understanding and perception of an
environment when compared with passive observation of
a walkthrough.
Traditionally, architects and urban designers have
presented design ideas to clients using static
representations such as scale plans and sketches.
Construction plans, although accurate in terms of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

geometry and structure, rarely give the non-expert
viewer a ‘feel’ for what the space will be like when it is
finished. It is commonly acknowledged that people often
have trouble understanding architects’ plans, which can
lead to discontentment with the end result [1]. As an
alternative or additional method of presentation, sketches
are often favoured by designers as a method to present
ideas through a more fluid medium, and are believed to
promote feedback and discussion through their
‘unfinished’ appearance [2].
While plans and sketches are still the most common
means of presentation between architect and client, there
has been a significant a growth in the area of dynamic
3D modelling. Today’s student architects are taught
Computer-Aided Architectural Design (CAAD) as a
matter of course, and a plethora of new tools is emerging
to make it ever easier and quicker to both sketch and
finalise a design using computers. As a result, dynamic
walkthroughs of 3D models have gradually become more
common, enabling viewers to visually experience as yet
un-built environments. However, walkthroughs generally
do not offer the viewer the opportunity to pause and
explore a part of the model of particular interest to them.
Currently available technologies developed for
entertainment markets (mainly gaming) have a built-in
provision for ‘real-time’ navigation of virtual space, by
multiple users, with no need for designers or other
experts to guide people through the space. This provision
of a greater interactivity with spatial and other
information suggests a valuable alternative mechanism
for conveying design information to ‘non-experts’. The
ability to present design ideas in this format also
increases the potential number of people that could
actively participate in public consultations on urban
design and redesign issues.
Although not a new process, engaging the public in
forms of participatory democracy has become
increasingly common in recent years. Indeed, in the UK
it is now seen as a cornerstone of good governance, with
public sector decision-making based avowedly on
meeting the expressed preferences of individuals and
stakeholder groups. Public influence on the planning
process is one of the basic pillars of participatory
democracy, given that, in theory, ‘individuals and their

institutions cannot be considered in isolation from one
another’ [3].
In this context of increasing public participation, we
proposed to undertake an exploratory study investigating
the potential for utilising computer modelling
technologies as an integral part of the public consultation
process. In particular, the study will investigate whether
the ability to actively explore a computer model of the
built environment makes a qualitative difference to the
perception of that environment, when compared with
passive observation of a walkthrough of that same
model.

‘layout’. The modern village buildings have developed a
sense of increasing importance towards the outermost
points, with an overall increase in building height,
although use of materials is largely constant throughout.
It was felt to be of cultural importance that an assessment
and record of such buildings is realised to ensure the site
is preserved for the future, and it was felt that the
development of an interactive model would help to
promote collaborative discussion, debate and greater
levels of public participation in the future.

3. Modelling
2. Method and study area

3.1 Overview

The key aim of the research was to establish whether
active exploration of a virtual model is superior to
passive observation in terms of enhancing perception and
understanding of an environment. Studies undertaken as
part of the research have therefore investigated the extent
to which the ability to navigate a desktop virtual
cityscape can significantly affect the evaluation and
understanding of information contained within that
environment, compared with passive observation of a
pre-recorded walkthrough of that same cityscape.
The virtual cityscape was modelled using the
common architectural modelling packages AutoCad®
and 3D Studio®, and then transferred to the Unreal
Runtime® editor. This follows previous work by the
team, which explored the potential for introducing
greater interactivity within public consultations using IT
generated visualisations [4,5].
The Unreal Runtime® modelling package is geared
towards real time navigation, visual and aural realism, is
free for educational purposes, and can be run on
relatively low specification computers. Using a package
such as this enabled the research to maximise the realism
of the model, using appropriate texturing and lighting
and, in the case of active exploration of the model, has
prevented ‘unnatural’ behaviour such as walking through
walls and other solid objects. Two alternative versions of
the cityscape were created, with clear and identifiable
differences.
In order to make efficient use of existing resources,
the research has used a headland at Torshavn, the capital
city of the Faroe Islands, as the main case study area. An
interactive model of the space was available to the study
[5] and as such, the modelling work for this study could
be directed towards alterations on the model in parts, and
population of the open spaces with people, plants, trees
and street furnishings. An in-depth architectural analysis
of the case study area was undertaken previously by
Hoydal [6]. The headland area, Tinganes, is designated
as a conservation area, and provides an important insight
into the manner in which vernacular building designers
(including occupants) responded to their prevailing
environment. The overall narrowness and undulating
topography of the headland at Tinganes has dictated that
the buildings take an almost organic approach to village

Recent developments in computer based virtual
reality have meant that the development and use of
virtual environments has become possible using
affordable computer systems. The implications of this for
fields including planning, architecture and surveying are
clear, in that it has become possible to visually
communicate information pertaining to the design,
materials, construction and ‘meta’ data associated with
structures, both built and imagined. When considering
the built heritage, it is clear that technical possibilities
exist for the recording and display of built heritage, with
particular regard to the overall built form. Furthermore,
as the capacity of computer models to contain complex
data increases, there may also be the opportunity to
integrate such structural or geometric models with
cultural or other qualitative information. Coupled with
the increasing ability of such models to allow for the
navigation of and interaction with virtual objects, there
may be an opportunity to encourage communication,
discussion and debate regarding the value and meaning
of built heritage.
The idea of using computer models to store and
potentially process information relating to the built
heritage is one which has been tested and developed by
others. For example, the development of a virtual model
containing information on the historic built environment
within Sheffield, England, allowed users to access
information relating to specific sites [7]. Furthermore,
the ability to interrogate data through an internet site
meant that many potential accessibility issues were
overcome, with the need to visit a particular location
rendered unnecessary. The study undertaken [7] took as
its starting point a need for the city model to facilitate
‘user-centred search and retrieval’. The research team
utilised historical maps, and associated information
concerned the history of major public buildings, to define
the contents and scope of the geometrical data sets. The
main advance of that project, though, was related to the
ability to search for data within the model, as opposed to
advances in visual quality or in the ability to virtually
navigate a space. The research described in this paper
aimed to ensure that important visual and textural data
pertaining to the buildings themselves was not lost in the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

desire to produce a navigable and manageable study
scenario.

3.2 Data recording

site plan (at least 1:1250) is obtained as well as a detailed
photographic study of the site. It is also useful if basic
measurements are physically recorded when visiting the
site so they can be referenced back to the site plan to
ensure best accuracy.

The main aim of the visualisation undertaken for this
study was to provide a fully navigable model of the case
study area. Rather than concentrating on providing a
fully photo-realistic model (although this was achieved),
the intention was rather to provide a virtual space within
which users, occupants, planners and other interested
parties might be able to discuss issues and debate
proposals. Clearly, ‘traditional’ approaches to the
presentation of design ideas within the built environment
would be insufficient to meet this aim.
Recording the area of Tinganes included a measured
survey of the site layout and buildings of significant
heritage value. An extensive photographic record of key
areas at the site was completed, and an on-site log of
important built heritage information was compiled
(including such items as building type, construction
methods and building materials used).
Using the material collated, a three-dimensional
computer model of the area was produced using a
process involving CAD and 3D Studio, followed by
further work using the Unreal Runtime engine.

When photographing the site it is important to bear
in mind that the photographs will be used as reference
material as well as the basis for the majority of textures
used within the virtual environment. In the case were
buildings are to be photographed it is preferred that each
facade is captured looking straight on to ensure minimal
distortion of the image. However where this is not
possible, due perhaps to immovable obstructions or
limited space, image editing software can be used to
adjust the perspective of images captured at an angle.

3.3 Modelling process

Modelling site buildings

The technical process followed when producing a
series of detailed 3D models, constructed within
architectural modelling packages, for use in immersive
and interactive ‘gaming’ environments, can be
summarized as follows.

Once a record of building dimensions has been
taken, modelling of the buildings in three-dimensions
can begin. In the case study example, all the initial
geometry was created in AutoCAD using a combination
of solid and surface modelling techniques. It was felt
that the simpler shaped building elements would be best
modelled using solid modelling and the more
geometrically complex elements, such as roof coverings
to dormer windows, be modelled by surface modelling.

x
x
x
x
x

Site investigation.
Modeling site buildings.
Texturing.
Importing objects to Unreal editor.
Constructing the real-time environment.

Figure 1: perspective corrected site photograph

It would be essential in most cases to ensure that the
sizing and texturing of models is preserved within the
games engine, so that questions of perception, interaction
and distance can be addressed in a realistic manner. It is
also similarly important to ensure that work involved in
the original modelling process do not require to be
duplicated simply because the package itself has
changed. Therefore, the process of integrating 3DS
models within the games interactive environment was
structured to ensure that information regarding sizing and
textures, in particular, could be effectively transferred
between platforms.

Site investigation
Before modelling of the site can begin it is important
that specific information is gathered relating to the layout
and aesthetics of the site to be studied. This information
can take various forms but it is usual that a detailed scale

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2: AutoCAD model of a case study building
Once the building envelope is complete (as shown in
Figure 2) it is saved as a DWG file or equivalent ready to
be imported into a texturing program. In this case the
model was imported into 3D Studio Max 6 (3DS), a

high-end modelling/texturing package. 3DS was used to
edit the geometry into the correct format, add textures
and applying the correct texture mapping. 3DS is also
fully compatible with the DWG file format, which is
important as the layering system set up in the AutoCAD
drawing will be maintained when imported into 3DS and
subsequently saved as a .max file.

Texturing
As textures are used to display a lot of the realism
within the virtual environment it is important that those
textures are prepared correctly and are of the best
possible quality. In cases were the virtual environment is
trying to reproduce existing real environments then
digital photographs are used to represent the correct
aesthetic texture of any given object. For example, figure
3 shows a texture to be used to represent a slated roof.

be in the TGA or TARGA image file format. The
software also requires that all textures be sized so that
the vertical and horizontal numbers of pixels of the
image are to the power of 2 (e.g. 16, 32, 64, 128, 256
pixels). In VR software engines, where environments are
displayed to the user in real-time rather than as prerendered movies, achievable frame rates become very
important to ensure that movement within the
environment is as realistic and as smooth as possible.
For example, to ensure a realistic frame rate, PAL
television broadcasts are usually at 24 frames per second.
The model of Tinganes, then, was optimised to display
only the information that was needed. In other words 3D
Studio Max is useful as it enables the modeller to remove
certain faces from the 3D objects that will not be visible
with the virtual environment (i.e. faces created
underneath the walls of the building). Such optimisation
of the geometry is only required on objects which have
been created using solid modelling techniques, as surface
modelling only produces 3d faces which will be seen by
the camera.
Once all textures for a given model had been
produced and saved in the correct format, they could be
applied to the corresponding faces of the geometrical
model. Once applied, each texture image was aligned
and scaled within 3DS, and this process repeated until all
faces of each building model had been textured.

Importing objects to Unreal editor
Figure 3: example of a .jpg roof covering texture
Once textures have been rectified to remove any
element of ‘keystoning’, a perspective effect caused by
photographing building facades from ground level, the
next stage is to prepare each texture in the format that the
games engine can understand.

UnrealEngine2 Runtime is freely available for noncommercial and educational purposes. It was selected
over other available technology due to the fact it has
been specifically produced to create interactive
walkthroughs and simulations rather than focused solely
on game environment creation. The editor is also able to
import fully texture models from 3DS without the need
for any editing once within the engine environment.
As each building model was completed in 3DS, they
were then individually exported as an ASCII files, before
being imported within the Runtime editor as a static
mesh.

Constructing the real time environment

Figure 4: building model once imported into
3DStudio Max and textured
In this study, a freeware games ‘engine’ called
UnrealEngine2 Runtime was used. Although fully
compatible with models exported from 3D Studio Max,
the Runtime software does require that all textures used

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

In 3DS and most other similar CAD based systems,
objects are introduced into a 3D space that has no mass
or solid objects when first created. In the Runtime editor
the 3D space begins as a solid mass, within which areas
have to be ‘subtracted’ in order that space for models and
movement is created. Therefore, before any of the
building models can be inserted, an area large enough to
contain the entire site had to be subtracted from the
initial 3D mass.
The next stage is to create an ‘atmosphere’ within
the created volume to imitate the sky within a real
outside scene. This was done by projecting animated sky
textures onto the inside walls of the subtracted volume.

Figure 5: Still taken from editing screen within
Unreal editor, including various 3DS models
By using this inbuilt feature of the Runtime editor an
impression is given that the textured sky is an infinite
distance away from the scene. A terrain map and contour
data was then used to model the topography of the land
and then textured with aerial photographs to improve
realism and help to position site objects. In the case of
the Torshavn example, an undulating surface was created
to represent the ground level, upon which each of the
building models could be placed.
Figures 6 and 7, respectively, show examples of a
photograph of the actual area at Torshavn, and a still
image taken from the navigable model.

Figure 7: Still taken from the navigable model of
Tinganes (reverse angle to photograph)
Further details of the Faroes heritage study can be
accessed via www.rgu.ac.uk/sss.

4. Experimental design

Figure 6: Photograph showing the Tinganes area
of Torshavn (for comparison with fig 7)

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The research has employed a between-groups
design, where participants were divided into two main
groups, one where the participants viewed two predefined walkthroughs of the townscape model (passive
observation) and the other where participants navigated
two different versions of the model (active exploration).
Subjects were required to view the virtual environment
on a desktop monitor, and those subjects asked to
navigate the model did so using keyboard and mouse
navigation. Movement was confined to a ‘walking’ mode
i.e. there was no option to ‘fly’ through the model, or to
move at anything other than a walking speed.
Subjects in the passive observation condition viewed
two walkthroughs generated using the runtime model.
The walkthroughs differed in terms of alternative street
design/signage, building colours and textures etc. and,
following the viewing, subjects were asked to indicate
which of the two models they preferred, and then answer
a number of open and closed ended questions relating to
their perceptions and understanding of the environment.
Following familiarisation with the navigation
controls, subjects in the active exploration condition
were able to actively navigate the two alternative models.
In order to maintain a level of similarity between this and
the passive condition, subjects were given a ‘task’ that
required them to follow a certain route and end up at the
same place as the passive walkthrough ends. However,

subjects in this condition were also free to explore the
model as they wished. The route they took, and direction
in which they look, were logged and video-recorded.
Subjects were asked to answer the same questions as for
the passive observation condition.
In each condition the study utilised a think aloud
protocol, where subjects were asked to describe their
thoughts,
actions
and
impressions
as
they
observed/explored
the
model.
Following
the
observation/exploration the study included clarifying
questions based on subjects’ comments/actions during
the observation/exploration. This technique has been
used successfully in previous investigations of people’s
navigation of virtual cities and spaces [8,9].
Subjective commentaries recorded during the
observation were transcribed and analysed in the context
of the actions/part of walkthrough being undertaken at
the time (which will have been video-recorded). This
helped the research to draw conclusions about which
aspects of the models are effective or confusing,
particularly with regard to the active or passive
experimental condition.

assessed [11, for example]. When considering the
development of a navigable virtual environment, and
particularly one which constitutes part of the built
heritage, it is arguably essential that the range of data
which might contribute towards heritage value be
incorporated, or at least considered.
This paper has described a research project, the
results of are potentially of importance within
architecture, planning and urban development. As new
technologies emerge for presenting design ideas, it will
be essential that the implications for helping people
develop an understanding of the implications for them
and others are properly understood.

Acknowledgements
The research reported in this paper was funded by
the Economic and Social Research Council, and by
Aberdeen City Council through the Torshavn Fund.

References
6. Findings and recommendations
While the research is still continuing, there are a
number of salient points and conclusions emerging from
the study. In practical terms, the issue of motion sickness
(in both passive and active modes) is important. This
appears to be associated with field of view, which is fully
controllable within the editor and engine. A 90 degree
field of view was used in this study, as it appeared to
provide a suitable balance between giving a reasonable
expectation that participants would be able to ‘see’ a
suitable range of data, against the need to avoid
unrealistic wide angle effects.
A second issue relates to the subject of familiarity.
The research used a case study site in the Faroe Islands
specifically so there could be some degree of certainty
that respondents would be personally unfamiliar with the
spaces. Although this then provides some likelihood that
user preferences will not be based on experience of the
real environment, there is an added cognitive burden, as
participants had to quickly become familiar with an
otherwise alien environment. Future work will aim to
replicate parts of the research using models of spaces
which the subjects will have experienced in the real
world.
A longer term aim of the visualisation work is to
provide a practical base to further develop the manner in
which conservation theory can be taught using emerging
communication technologies. This may require the
embedding of established notions of heritage value [10]
within models, and also carry a further need to develop
models which allow for both navigation and
interrogation of data held within.
A growing number of studies have been completed
in recent years which have attempted to define methods
whereby such heritage value can be understood and

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[1]

Appleyard, D. (1976). Understanding Professional
Media - Issues, Theory, and a Research Agenda. In I.
Altman & J. F. Wohlwill (Eds.), Human Behaviour and
Environment - Advances in Theory and Research,
Volume 2 (pp. 43-88). New York: Plenum Press.
[2] Schumann, J., Strothotte, T., Raab, A., & Laser, S.
(1996). Assessing the effect of nonphotorealistic
rendered images in CAD. Proceedings of CHI 96, 35-41.
[3] Pateman, C. (1970). Participation and Democratic
Theory. London: CambridgeUniversity Press, page 42.
[4] Laing, R., Davies, A., Hargreaves, A. and S. Scott
(2004) The Application of 3D Modelling Techniques in
Built Environment Evaluation, Studies in Regional and
Urban Planning, 10, 119-127.
[5] Laing, R. and S. Scott (2004) Using games technology
to create geometrically accurate virtual built
environments, poster presentation to IV04, abstract in
Proceedings of 8th
International Conference on
Information Visualisation, London, July.
[6] Hoydal, G. (1995) Tinganes, arkitektur DK, 328-341.
[7] Peng, C., Chang, D., Blundell Jones, P. and Lawson, B.
(2002) Exploring urban history and space online: design
of the virtual Sheffield application, Design Studies, 23,
437-453
[8] Murray, C. D., Bowers, J. M., West, A. J., Pettifer, S., &
Gibson, S. (2000). Navigation, wayfinding, and place
experience within a virtual city. Presence, 9 (5), 435447.
[9] Sayers, H. (2004). Desktop virtual environments: a study
of navigation and age. Interacting with Computers, 16,
939-956.
[10] Carter, R.W. and R. Bramley (2002) Defining heritage
values and significance for improved resource
management: an application to Australian tourism,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 8, 3, 175-199.
[11] Ipekoglu, B. (2006) An architectural evaluation method
for conservation of traditional dwellings, Building and
Environment, 41, 386-394.

