Visual Data Mining of Application Services Data
Ronald Knoetze, Charmain Cilliers, Janet Wesson
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems
Nelson Mandela Metopolitan University, Port Elizabeth
{Charmain.Cilliers, Janet.Wesson@nmmu.ac.za}
Abstract
Many network monitoring tools do not provide
sufficiently in-depth and useful reports on network usage,
particularly in the domain of application services data.
Application services form an integral part of
organizational networks. The optimization of the
performance of these networks is only possible if the
networks are effectively monitored. Techniques that
identify patterns of network usage can assist in the
successful monitoring of network performance. The focus
of this paper is on the development of a visual data
mining prototype, called NetPatterns, which facilitates the
effective visualization of network performance data.

1. Introduction
Computer networks are essential in the day-to-day
running of organisations such as educational institutions.
These networks support various application services that
provide users with a means to perform their daily tasks. If
these networks are not properly maintained, problems
could occur that negatively affect productivity.
One way to prevent this breakdown in critical
application service performance is through the use of a
network monitoring solution, such as PacketShaper [11].
This network monitoring solution allows network
administrators to view the traffic on the network by
means of graphs and reports.
The biggest shortcoming of tools such as
PacketShaper is that they fail to diagnose a problem
occurring on the network. Data mining systems can be
used as a means to assist network managers in addressing
the shortcomings of current network monitoring tools. To
assist in comprehending the results of data mining
algorithms, data mining systems have evolved to include
visualisation techniques to display the results of the
algorithms in a more understandable format [15].
Combined with the results of the algorithms, these
visualisations can assist network administrators with
diagnosing and predicting problems on networks.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

General purpose data mining systems have limitations
when considering visualisation techniques that are
appropriate to specific problem domains, like networks.
This paper discusses the development and user
evaluation of a visual data mining prototype, called
NetPatterns, that satisfies the requirements of visualising
problems that occur on a network. An analysis of
application services network metrics collected by network
monitoring tools was used to select data mining
algorithms and visualisation techniques incorporated into
the prototype.

2. Data Analysis
The Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University
(NMMU) has an extensive network infrastructure
supporting various LAN-based application services that
are distributed across the campus. PacketShaper is a
network monitoring tool that is installed on the NMMU
network to passively collect network traffic data and store
the information in log files for further inspection.
Data analysis of the 54 different network metrics
collected by PacketShaper identifies four categories of
network attributes relating to the performance and
reliability of a network [2], namely Delay, Throughput,
Response Time and Utilization. All network metrics
collected by PacketShaper are numerical data.

3. Data Mining Algorithms
Data mining is commonly defined as extracting
hidden information that can be used for prediction from
large amounts of data. The main objective is to identify
valid, novel and understandable patterns for existing data.
The choice of data mining algorithms implemented
depends largely on the type of data that is to be analysed.
Data mining algorithms can be categorised as being
either supervised or unsupervised learning. Supervised
learning is used in the prediction of values, while
unsupervised learning attempts to find relationships
within the data [10]. Data mining algorithms are further
categorised into three categories, namely classification

(supervised), clustering (unsupervised), and association
(unsupervised).

3.1. Classification
Classification attempts to predict the value of a
network metric using other available network metrics
[12]. The algorithm initially creates a model to describe a
pre-determined set of data classes, and thereafter uses the
model for classification. The accuracy of the model is
estimated, and based on this accuracy the model can be
considered acceptable to classify future data. Once the
model has been created, any new data can be compared to
the model and predictions can then be made.
The classification algorithm identified as the most
appropriate for network metric data is the decision tree
algorithm, since decision trees are well suited to
numerical data.

3.2. Association
Association rule mining establishes interesting
associations within large sets of network metrics [10].
The association algorithm identified as the most
appropriate for network metric data collected by
PacketShaper is the correlation algorithm [8].
Application of the correlation algorithm results in a
correlation coefficient that is used to calculate the
gradient of a line on a graph indicating a positive or
negative correlation between the different network
attributes. Once the correlation coefficient is determined,
the results are interpreted according to Guildford’s
guidelines [6].

and scrolling assists the user in gaining further insight
into the results [13].
The choice of visualisation technique depends on the
type of output produced by the selected data mining
algorithms on the data collected [8]. For each of the
algorithms identified for implementation, the output of the
algorithm was carefully analysed and a suitable
visualisation technique selected.

4.1. Decision Tree Visualisation Technique
The most common visual representation of decision
trees is the 2D tree [1]. A decision tree is a flow chart like
classification model in the form of a tree. Each internal
node represents a test on a specific network metric, each
branch represents the outcome of the test and the leaf
nodes represent classes or class distributions.
Barlow and Neville’s [1] research showed that
organisation charts were easier to interpret and allowed
the user to understand the results of the algorithm easier.
Organisation charts can grow very large, but if the
number of network metrics in the decision tree is limited
to a small number, then an organisation chart is the most
appropriate visualisation technique to use. An
organisation chart with n network metrics does not exceed
n-1 levels [7].

3.3. Clustering
Clustering is the process of grouping objects that are
similar to one another based on certain criteria [14]. The
most appropriate clustering algorithm identified for
network metrics is the K-means algorithm. The K-means
algorithm identifies initial cluster medians per network
metric and each cluster median is assigned a cluster
number. A distance function is used to calculate the
distance between the initial cluster medians and all other
log file entries for a particular network metric. The log
file entries for the network metric are then assigned to the
nearest cluster. This process continues recursively until no
more changes between the clusters occur.

Figure 1. Organiksation Chart for Classification
Figure 1 illustrates an example of an organisation
chart used to illustrate the results of the decision tree
algorithm applied to the Delay network attribute.

4.2. Correlation Visualisation Technique

4. Visual Data Mining
Data mining results are difficult to interpret [7] and
can be improved with the use of information visualisation
(IV). Combining data mining with visualisation
techniques can help the user by assisting the user’s
perception of data mining results. The use of data
manipulation techniques such as pan, zoom, drill-down

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The most popular approach to viewing correlation is
the use of scatterplots due to the visualisation of the
relationship between two or more metrics. The log file
entries for a network metric are plotted on a graph to
indicate all the related network activities that occur. A
line is drawn through these points, with the gradient of the
line determined by the correlation coefficient. The line

indicates whether there is a positive or negative
correlation between the relevant metrics.

4.3. K-Means Visualisation Technique
Bubble charts are an effective way of visualising the
results of clustering [3]. A bubble chart is a form of
scatterplot with variable size symbols. Each bubble
represents a reference data point and the number of a
particular network metric log file entries that fall in that
group. Bubble charts have two features that differentiate
them from normal scatterplots, namely that users can
view outliers easily and the charts highlight gaps in the
occurrence of the bubbles [3].
Bubble charts make use of three values, the median
of the cluster and the count of the log file entries in the
cluster. Figure 2 illustrates the results of the K-Means
algorithm being performed on the network metrics,
Network Delay Avg and Server Delay Avg. The use of
colour helps the user distinguish between the different
clusters and the size of the bubble is an indication of the
number of log file entries that fall within each cluster.

Figure 2. Bubble Chart for Clustering

5. Design of NetPatterns
The user interface (UI) design of NetPatterns
incorporates several coordinated views for the same data
set using three different data mining algorithms. The UI
design process focused on producing low-fidelity designs
of the UI for evaluation by the users. The evaluation
technique made use of conceptual model extraction [4],
which involves asking the user to explain elements on the
screen and provide feedback regarding these screen
elements. This iterative process refined the design of the
UI based on the feedback received from the users.
The UI design incorporates four different
visualisation techniques. Three of these visualisation
techniques (organisation chart, bubble chart and
scatterplot) are directly associated with a related data
mining algorithm (Section 4). The fourth visualisation
technique is required to provide an overall view of the
network. This visualisation technique allows the user to

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

select a specific LAN and drill-down to view the results
of the data mining algorithms on the network performance
data collected for the LAN.
The UI was designed to enable the user to view the
results of the data mining algorithms and to interact with
them. The Network Overview is illustrated in Figure 3.
The interface is divided into two main views, a graphical
view (left pane) and a filtering view (right pane). The
placement of these views remains fixed during data
analysis and exploration. Most of the screen space is
occupied by the graphical view as this is the user’s focal
point. The graphical view is used to assist the user in
understanding the results while the filtering view allows
the user to filter the data that is being viewed.
Filtering can be performed on the data to allow users
to select different time periods, network attributes and
corresponding network metrics. Depending on which data
mining algorithm is selected, the graphical and filtering
views are updated accordingly.

5.1. Network Overview
When the user initially opens the graphical UI, a network
overview of the entire NMMU network is presented
(Figure 3). A star visualisation technique is used to
provide an overview of the network. The initial view
displays a network overview based on the Delay network
attribute with colour denoting the various levels of delay
for each LAN of the network. Each node represents a
LAN on the NMMU network with the LAN’s delay value.
The user can easily identify which LAN is experiencing
problems and will be able to drill down to investigate a
specific LAN by clicking on the particular node.
The filtering view allows the user to modify the view
displayed. The user is able to select between the four
network attributes, namely Delay, Response Time,
Throughput and Utilisation and is also able to select a
new time period to view. Once these changes have been
made, the graphical view is updated and the user will be
able to view the changes and interact further with the UI.

5.2. Detailed Views
Once the user has selected a LAN from Figure 3, a
detailed view of the data mining results for the selected
LAN is presented. This view consists of a coordinated
graphical view and a filtering view. When the user makes
any changes in the filtering view, the graphical view is
updated accordingly. The filtering view is also specific to
the data mining algorithm selected and adapts to the type
of algorithm being applied. The structure of the detailed
view is similar for each of the three algorithms, namely
Threshold Analysis (classification), Metric Clustering
(clustering) and Metric Correlation (association).
Figure 4 shows the coordinated view for Metric
Correlation. The tab panes are used to allow the user to
view the results of the different data mining
algorithms.For each visualisation, various interaction

operations are supported. These interactions include
zooming, panning and rotating the visualisations to allow
the user to view the results from different angles in an

attempt to understand the results of the data mining
algorithms better. Details-on-demand are also available
by means of tooltips.

Figure 3. Network Overview of NetPatterns

Figure 4. UI design of NetPatterns

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

6. Implementation of NetPatterns
The implementation of NetPatterns included the
creation of a data warehouse, the implementation of the
selected data mining algorithms and the implementation
of the UI and interaction techniques. The data warehouse
that stored the application services data collected by
PacketShaper was developed in Oracle 10g. Java was
used to implement slightly modified variations of the
three data mining algorithms which were based on
existing algorithm implementations (Section 3). The
development of the UI was completed using C# and the
three visualisation techniques were created using a
combination of two charting libraries, namely Nevron
Chart and FlowChart.NET Pro.
The implementation of the visualisation techniques
closely followed the proposed designs (Section 5). The
Network Overview implemented is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 6 illustrates the implemented visualisation
technique for Threshold Analysis in NetPatterns.
During user testing, slight modifications to the UI
were required. Once the scatterplot was created, user
feedback revealed that the purpose of the line was not

clear. As a result, textual data was included at the bottom
of the visualisation to complement the visualisation
technique, indicating what type of correlation occurred
between the network attributes. This textual data was
based on the correlation coefficient, which was mapped
onto Guildford’s guidelines.

7. Evaluation of NetPatterns
A user evaluation was conducted to demonstrate the
usefulness of NetPatterns. The usefulness of NetPatterns
was determined as the combination of perceived ease of
use and the perceived usefulness of NetPatterns. There
are no current benchmarks for evaluating the
effectiveness of the visualisations and visual data mining
tools [5]. Research by Margescu et al. [9] produced a
framework for evaluating visual data mining tools. The
concept of quality of use was identified as the extent
with which a data mining tool satisfies the users’ needs,
including the features and characteristics of the tool.
Quality of use consists of quality of interaction, quality
of visualisation, and quality of information.

Figure 5. Network Overview in NetPatterns

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 6. Threshold Analysis in NetPatterns
To evaluate these characteristics, user testing was
conducted to enable users to evaluate certain aspects of
NetPatterns and provide feedback. A task list and posttest questionnaire were compiled to address the three
quality characteristics, namely effectiveness, satisfaction
and usefulness using log files collected by PacketShaper
in excess of 130000 entries .
Eight participants were selected to participate in the
evaluation of NetPatterns. These participants were
required to match the intended target population, namely
network managers. Of the 8 participants selected, 7 were
male network managers, and 87.5% had experience in at
least one network monitoring tool.
The participants were required to complete predefined tasks using the four interfaces implemented
(Section 6). These tasks required the participants to
interact with NetPatterns and answer specific questions
directly related to the presented visualisations.
Based on the results of the user evaluation, the
participants could effectively complete their tasks (above
80% completion rate) except for Metric Correlation
where some participants struggled to interpret the
presented results of the correlation algorithm.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The post-test questionnaire provided results for
satisfaction. The rating system of the questionnaire used
a five-point Likert scale. All ratings provided by the
participants were 4 or higher. These results indicate that
the participants were highly satisfied with NetPatterns.
To obtain a more definitive view of potential
usefulness of NetPatterns, the participants were asked in
the questionnaire if they would use NetPatterns in their
daily tasks in future. Without exception, all the
participants confirmed the potential usefulness of
NetPatterns to support the functions of a network
manager.

8. Conclusions
Many network monitoring tools lack sufficient indepth and useful reports on network usage. This
limitation was the rationale for the development of a
visual data mining prototype, called NetPatterns, for
application services data.
The development of NetPatterns demonstrated the
effectiveness of the classification, clustering and
association data mining algorithms in the domain of
application services data. The results of the usability

evaluation clearly show that the visual data mining
techniques were useful and effective tools for
visualisaing network performance data.

[6]

Acknowledgements

[7]

We would like to thank the Telkom Centre of
Excellence programme and the Department of Computer
Science and Information Systems at the Nelson Mandela
Metropolitan University for making this research
possible.

[8]

[9]

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

Barlow, T. and Neville, P. (2001): A Comparison of 2D
Visualization of Hierarchies. In Proceedings IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization 2001
(INFOVIS’01). pp 131-138.October 22-23, 2003
Barnford, P. (2003): Network Performance Measurement
and Analysis. www.cs.wisc.edu/~pb/640/perform.ppt
Binkley, D. and Harman, M. (2004): Analysis and
Visualization of Predicate Dependence on Formal
Paremeters and Global Variables. IEEE Transactions of
Software Engineering 30(11), November 2004.
Greenburg, S. (2004): Evaluating Interfaces with Users
Grinstein, G.G., Hoffman, P., Laskowski, S.J. and
Pickett, R.M. (2001): Benchmark Development for the
Evaluation of Visualization for Data Mining. In
Information Visualization in Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery. pp 129-176. San Francisco, USA,
Morgan Kaufmann

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

Hall, B. (2004): Estimating Correlation Coefficients:
Scatterplot
Examples.
http://bobhall.tamu.edu/epsy435/Topics/CorrelationInter
pretation.html
Han, J. and Kamber, M (2001): Data Mining: Concept
and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann.
Knoetze, R. (2006): The Mining and Visualisation of
Application Services Data, Masters Dissertation,
Department of Computer Science and Information
Systems, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University,
South Africa.
Margescu, D., Rajanen, M. and Back, B. (2004):
Evaluating the Quality of Use of Visual Data Mining
Tools. In Proceedings 11th European Conference on IT
Evaluation, Amsterdam, Netherlands. pp 239-250
Oracle (2002): Oracle 9i Data Mining – Concepts
Packeteer
(2005):
PacketShaper.
http://www.packeteer.com/.
Sasisekharan, R., Seshadri, V. and Weiss, S.M. (1996):
Data Mining and Forecasting in Large-Scale
Telecommunication Networks. IEEE Intelligent Systems
11(1):pp 37-43
Shneiderman, B. (1996): The Eyes Have It: A Task by
Data Type Taxonomy for Information Visualisation.
Proc IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, pp 336343.
Thearling, K. (2002): An Overview of Data Mining
Techniques.
www.thearling.com/text/dmtechniques/dmtechniques.ht
m
Thearling, K., Becker, B., Decoste, D., Mawby, B.,
Pilote, M. and Sommerfield, D. (2001): Information
Visualization in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.
First Edn, Morgan Kaufman

