Dynamic Visualization and Navigation of Semantic Virtual Environments
Katja Einsfeld, S. Agne, M. Deller, A. Ebert, B. Klein, C. Reuschling
Technical University Kaiserslautern, German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
einsfeld,ebert @informatik.uni-kl.de, agne,deller,klein,reuschling @dfki.uni-kl.de
Abstract
Although Information Visualization claims to provide
the means to induce mental models of any kind of data,
the visualization of semantic information is still an open
ﬁeld of research. Existing approaches either concentrate
on the visualization of documents without additional metadata or produce unintuitive expert graphics. This paper
seeks to ﬁll this gap by presenting a semantic information
visualization system with a dynamic 3D interface and intuitive metaphors. The application called DocuWorld visualizes documents, document meta-data, and semantic relations between documents. The general visualization and
navigation metaphor called Thought Wizard Metaphor allows user- and context-sensitive adaption of visualization
modes and visualization environments.

1 Introduction
The evolution of new information organization strategies like semantic webs and ontologies in the research ﬁeld
of artiﬁcial intelligence requires new adequate visualization techniques. Information items will be supplemented
with meta-data and related in several ways to other information items. Queries will not only search of text but
also for semantic information and even knowledge. Conventional document or ﬁle system viewers like the Windows Explorer or KDE’s Konqueror and the 20-year-old
2D desktop metaphor can hardly fullﬁl these new needs
without becoming overcrowded and unintuitive. Thus new
user interfaces have to be created to cope with the changing
needs.
Information visualization techniques, together with the
ability to generate realistic real-time, interactive applications can be leveraged to create a new generation of document explorers. An application environment that resembles real environments is used more intuitively by persons
without any prior computer knowledge. The users perceive
more information about the documents, such as their size,
location, and relation to other documents, visually using
their natural capabilities to remember spatial layout and to
navigate in 3D environments, which moreover frees cognitive capacities by shifting part of the information-ﬁnding
load to the visual system. It is hoped that this leads to

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

a more efﬁcient combination of human and computer capabilities: the computer has the ability to quickly search
through documents, compute similarities, calculate and
render document layouts, and provide other tools not available in paper document archives, while humans can visually perceive irregularities and intuitively interact with 3D
environments. Last but not least, a well-designed virtualreality-like graphical document explorer is more fun to the
average user than a conventional one and thus more motivating.

2 State of the Art
Aduna’s AutoFocus [1] helps searching different kinds
of documents. The results are shown in text as well as
a organic looking 2D cluster map. The term queries are
represented by a color. The clusters are laid out depending on the number of connections and the number of contained documents. The color of the clusters is a mixture
of the colors of connected search terms. Unfortunately
color-mixtures are not perceived preattentively and therefore some time is needed to understand this informationintensive layout.
Card et al. [2] present a hierarchical workspace called
Web Forager to organize documents with different degrees
of interest at different distances to the user. One drawback
of this system, however, is that the user gets (apart from
the possibility of one search query) no computer assistance
in organizing the documents in space as well as in mental
categories.
Robertson et al. [5] developed Task Gallery, a 3D window manager, that can be regarded as a simple conversion
of the conventional 2D metaphors to 3D. The 3D space
is used to attach tasks to the walls and to switch between
different tasks by moving them on a platform. The user’s
movements and the only advantage of this approach over
the 2D windows metaphor is possibility to quickly relocate
tasks using spacial memory.
The Tactile 3D [7] system, a commercial 3D user interface for the exploration and organization of documents.
The ﬁle system tree structure is visualized in 3D space using semitransparent spheres that represent folders and that
contain documents and other folders. Some attributes of

documents are visualized by different shapes and textures.
Objects within a container can be sorted forming 3D conﬁgurations like a double helix, pyramid, or cylinder.
While AutoFocus intuitively visualizes similarities in
two dimensions, the other three systems make use of the
third dimension, although their functionality is comparable to conventional document explorers. The DocuWorld
visualization presented in the following ﬁnally combines
both future trends - semantic information and 3D user interfaces.

clusion depth clue (documents occlude parts of the walls).
Binocular disparity is provided when stereo output devices
are available. Texture on the walls, the lighting conditions,
and fog further enhance 3D viewing. Moreover, the user
can make use of the motion parallax depth clue, that is also
very strong according to Ware’s ﬁndings, by rotating the
document space or by using the Shake Metaphor: A small
predeﬁned and repeated rotation around x-axis helps the
user to concentrate more on the structure than on triggering helpful rotations.

3 The Concepts of DocuWorld

3.3 The Thought Wizard Metaphor

3.1

Intuitive 3D user interfaces with immediate visual feedback and semantic information require new ﬂexible interaction and information navigation metaphors. When considering the organization of documents in 3D space, the locomotion metaphor (user moves through 3D environment)
“library”, where the user moves through rows of bookcases, might seem a natural solution at ﬁrst. There are,
however, some valid arguments for the use of a theater
metaphor (user stays at ﬁxed point):
The library metaphor would only work if each document had a static position in 3D space that could be remembered and relocated by the user with the help of her
or his spacial memory. Useful information spaces should,
however, allow the user to interact with the information
and the visualization should react dynamically to the users
requests and needs, which is hard to realize with a static
library metaphor. The concept of dynamically reorganizing document collections could be implemented with variations of the theater metaphor.
According to the characterizing differences between locomotion and theater metaphors, locomotion metaphors
are “egocentric” and theater metaphors “docucentric”. In
the context of a document collection application the user’s
position is less important or even of no particular meaning. Therefore, the information load needed for understanding and suitably changing the user’s position can be
used for the more important analysis of document positions, content, and relations between documents. Consequently, “docucentric” theater metaphors should be preferred over “egocentric” locomotion metaphors.
Theater metaphors also have the advantage that users
with no experience in navigating in virtual 3D environments and, in complex environments, also expert users are
not in danger of getting lost in 3D space.
When we try to imagine how a document collection
would be treated in order to ﬁnd a special piece of information or to reveal previously unknown facts in some hundred
years, we rather think of a person sitting comfortably in
his or her chair, concentrating on nothing than the knowledge work to be done, and pointing on documents or tools
which automatically brings several documents in reach and

Semantic Information of DocuWorld

The information space visualized in DocuWorld can be
any set of documents that can by indexed and queried
by DynaQ. DynaQ stands for Dynamic Queries and is a
framework for indexing and searching documents and document meta-data. The index includes all available meta informations and existing semantic informations according
to the documents. The framework is built upon Apache
Lucene [3] and thus provides the user with the possibilities
of boolean queries, range queries, wildcard queries, phonetic queries, and document similarity queries.
The dynamic query approach is a ﬂexible paradigm to
present data to the user. This is done in a way that she
can manipulate the query according to several criteria and
directly see the inﬂuences on the result. In order to be
able to make use of this immediate feedback and detailson-demand mantra, the user interface and thus the visualization also has to be dynamic. DocuWorld is not only dynamic but also completely animated (natural slow-in/slowout behavior of masses) to be able to track changes in the
visualization caused by changed queries and to enforce the
immersive effect of 3D environments. Moreover, the user
can change between various visualization modes depending on her preferences and the current task.

3.2

Immersive 3D Visualizations

There are controversial ﬁndings on the usefulness of 3D
visualization in Information Visualization (e.g.[6], [8], [9])
which allow few conclusions except the fact that there is
still uncertainty about how to make good use of 3Dness.
Nevertheless, Ware’s results[8] prove that building a mental model of general graph structures is improved by the
factor 3 (stereo vision and motion parallax) compared to
2D visualization. The studies also show that 3D visualization can make use of the spacial memory and that user
enjoyment that is generally better for 3D than for 2D visualizations which can lead to more efﬁcient long term use.
In order to make good use of 3Dness DocuWorld seeks
to combine as many depth clues as possible: A 3D room is
used as a border of reference (foremost parts of the room
at focal distance) for the human eye. Thus, the user is provided with the strong perspective depth clue and the oc-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

removes others, than of a person walking along corridors
to fetch the needed document.
The global visualization and navigation metaphor that
was chosen with regard to these considerations is a variation of the theater metaphor and will be called the Thought
Wizard Metaphor in the following. When using this
metaphor, the user (i.e. the viewpoint) stays where she or
he is and the visualization elements are dynamically moved
around with respect to the current user need. Apart from
restricting the viewpoint to a static point of reference, this
allows the use of multiple creative dynamic visualizations:
Small scene elements like document representations can
be moved around in the viewing volume and create various 3D structures, decoration or global structure elements
like walls can change their appearance, and all visualization elements can be moved out of the ﬁeld of view, probably revealing other elements behind them. The mental
model that should develop in the user’s mind when interacting with a application implementing the thought wizard metaphor might be close to that of being an old wise
woman using magic tricks to get all the information she
needs, directing multiple documents simultaneously to a
speciﬁed 3D location without effort, and having the power
and cleverness to do all necessary knowledge work by
comfortably sitting behind her desk and using gestures and
magic words.

3.4

Structure on Demand

The term “details on demand” is commonly used in the
context of semantic zoom and interactive focus and context
views. In these systems, the user starts with an overview
visualization and demands more details of special visualization items. In trying to ﬁnd a good compromise in the
trade-off between the number of information items being
displayed and the perceivability of the structure, the “details on demand” concept was transferred to the “structure on demand” concept. The idea of this concept is to
ﬁnd a context- and user-sensitive solution to the information structure trade-off by allowing the user to call up and
remove certain structure elements depending on the current task and user speciﬁc preferences. E.g. the main
DocuWorld structure, the walls, can be removed to reveal
the area behind it in which 3D structures for user-speciﬁc
placement of documents are located, and called again when
the walls are needed to perceive the 3D structure of the
main document visualization more easily.

3.5

Ghost Documents

DocuWorld allows computed semantic structures as
well as documents organized by users. This leads to the
problem of how to treat user-placed documents: on the one
hand, the mental model of the document representation is
that of an object with an identity that can be located at only
one place at a time; on the other hand, documents placed

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

at user-speciﬁed locations are of special interest to the user
and it might be helpful to see their position in a computed
semantic structure as well, but displaying one document at
different locations would contradict the idea of document
identity.
The solution implemented in DocuWorld is that of ghost
documents: “real” documents are located only in computer
organized areas. Whenever the user decides to store a document at a speciﬁc place, a “ghost” of this document is
automatically created which is moved from the original
document to the selected storing place, while the original
document stays where it was. Figure 2 shows a computed
document structure in the background. Ghost documents,
in contrast to real documents, have no 3D shape, but only
a ﬂat, slightly transparent surface which makes them look
immaterial and ghost-like. It is possible to visually indicate the document the ghost stands for with a special gesture that triggers the rendering of a semitransparent blue
box around the corresponding real document.

3.6 Tactical Zoom
In conventional 3D visualizations with perspective projection the operation of scaling and the operation of moving the viewpoint along the z-axis are isomorphic operations, which means that moving the viewpoint has the same
result as a particular scaling operation. This is, however,
only true for 2.5D visualizations: As soon as stereo viewing is enabled, a scaled down object in the front can be distinguished from an object moved to the back due to binocular disparity that is more or less obvious depending on the
quality of the 3D output device. Nevertheless, the (nearly)
isomorphism between scaling and translating in z-direction
makes it possible to use one operation instead of the other
or to combine both operations in order to create new creative visualization- or interaction tools. E.g., Mine et al.[4]
used automatic scaling for their scaled world grab: Instead
of moving the object to the user’s hand or the user to the
object, the world containing the object is scaled until the
user can reach the object.
For the purposes of DocuWorld it was decided to experiment with z-axis translation and scaling in a different approach: Abolishing the natural connection between translation and scaling might allow to use the scale factor as an
additional visualization dimension. The idea, that is called
Tactical Zoom, is to use z-axis translation simply and intuitively to organize documents in 3D space and to use the
scale or zoom operation not as a substitute for z-axis translation, but for other, tactical purposes. Following this idea,
the physical size of documents would not be ﬁxed, but opportunistically resized depending on the visualization situation, thus making more efﬁcient use of 3D space. If, for
example, the documents in the bookcase need to have a
particular size to all ﬁt into the bookcase, and another doc-

ument size would be more appropriate for organizing the
documents in 3D space, they could simply be resized. Of
cause, this can lead to conﬂicting depth clues. Nevertheless, it is not important to the success of the application to
understand at what distance the documents in PlaneMode
are compared to the one in reading mode or the ones in OrganicMode or bookcase. It is only essential to perceive the
spacial relationships and distances between documents in
one mode.

4 Information Visualization in DocuWorld
4.1

Data Visualized in DocuWorld

The DocuWorld application starts with a visualization
of all documents in the state of being stored in the form of
books standing at a bookcase in the back of the room. The
user can preselect documents of this collection by typing
a search query in the gray search query panel. The search
panel is invoked by a gesture, which moves it to the bottom of the screen with the gray search ﬁeld on the left side.
The preselected documents can be thought of as belonging
to a higher semantic zoom level than those in the bookcase
and should therefore be displayed with more detail. These
documents are moved out of the bookcase, rotated so that
their textured front page faces the user, and ﬂown to their
place in the start conﬁguration of the PlaneMode. While
the preselection search query has to be typed in the left
search query panel, additional search queries typed in the
color-coded right search query panels can be used for more
detailed requests.

Figure 1: Documents in PlaneMode
Figure 1 shows documents in PlaneMode. The Results
of the color-coded search queries are visualized by small
score bars in front of the documents and, moreover, documents which match more search queries are moved closer
to the user than others, bringing the most relevant documents to the front and thus to the focus of the user.
Important (e.g. often used) documents show an ani-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

mated pulsing behavior and thus instantly catch the user’s
eye. The color of the document representation is used to
represent the document category and the frontpage is a
thumbnail of the ﬁrst page. The thickness of the book indicates of how many pages the document consists. The
yellowness of the documents encodes a scalar value like
date (yellowing pages). When the mouse pointer is moved
over a document, a label with the ﬁle name of the document is displayed directly in front of the document and a
preview texture of the ﬁrst page is displayed in the upper
right corner of the screen. There is also the possibility to
mark documents with red crosses in order to deﬁne useror task-speciﬁc interests and not to lose sight of them when
they move to different places in different modes. To get a
closer view of single documents, they can be moved to the
front (the reading position). DocuWorld allows the user to
save interesting document conﬁgurations and restore them
later.

4.2 Visualization of Search Results
PlaneMode, one possibility to visualize Search Results
has been explained in the previous section. In ClusterMode, a variation of PlaneMode, the most relevant documents are not only moved to the front but also to the center
of the plane (and the focus of the user), which results in a
pyramid-shape.
Another possibility to organize documents depending
on the search results is ClusterMode, as shown in ﬁgure
3. Depending on which of the four color-coded searchqueries match a document, the document moves the cluster
with the colors of these search-queries. E.g., documents
which match the blue and white search-query, but not the
black and brown search query are in the cluster with the
blue-white-label.

Figure 2: ClusterMode
A variation of ClusterMode can be seen in ﬁgure 2: The
clusters are semitransparent rings in which the documents
rotate. (In this ﬁgure the wall structure is being removed,
the document space and thus also the clusters are rotated,

and a different color-pattern has been used.) There are two
different semantics of connecting the clusters to each other:
The ﬁrst is to connect the clusters with only one color with
all clusters that contain that color using struts in this color
(see ﬁgure 2). The second possibility is to connect clusters
that have the same color codes except one additional color
by a strut in this dividing color (see ﬁgure 3). Another feature of ClusterMode is that the user can change between
static mode (the position of the clusters is optimized in order to avoid occlusion) and dynamic mode (The position of
the clusters reorganizes dynamically. When the user clicks
on a cluster this cluster is moved to the focus position.)

4.3

Document Relation Layout

The three document relation types in the general form
of “document is related to document , , . . . , and ”
are visualized in three different ways—one relation visualization for each relation type—which should be seen as
example relation visualizations that could be exchanged or
supplemented with other relations. The semantics of these
relations could be similar date of creation, same author, or
similar buzzwords. Currently, the similarity of content as
returned by DynaQ is used.

Figure 3: Immersive Document Visualization in DocuWorld
Relation Type 1 is intuitively represented by connecting the document under the mouse pointer by curves to
the documents to which it is related (see ﬁgure 3). These
curves might create a mental model like that of thought
ﬂashes moving the user’s attention from the current document to related documents. This mental model is suggested
not only by the way the curves are rendered with shining
particles, but also by the fact that the curves are animated,
starting at the document under the mouse pointer and propagating to the related documents. The advantage of this
way of representing relations is that documents are visually strongly connected by curves which moreover create
an impressive 3D structure. The disadvantage of literally

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

connecting documents is that the thought ﬂashes occlude
the documents behind them, which makes it sometimes
hard to understand which documents the curves are pointing to.
The visualization of Relation Type 2 tries to make up
for this disadvantage: the documents which are related
to the document under the mouse pointer are simply visualized with semitransparent green boxes around them.
Thus, they can be perceived preattentively and do not occlude anything as the boxes are not much larger than the
documents themselves. Also, the box representation can
be used without complications in PlaneMode and in the
bookcase. Compared to Relation 1, the connection of the
document under the mouse pointer and the ones in green
boxes are, however, not as intuitively clear as in the case of
connecting thought ﬂashes. One possible solution to this
dilemma might be to combine the visualization of both Relation Types and their advantages in the visualization of a
single relation type—i.e., to use thought ﬂashes that end at
documents in green boxes.
The visualization and use of Relation Type 3 is different
from the previous ones. When enabled, the user has to trigger the display of the relation by clicking on a document.
This will display the documents the selected document is
related to in the form of ghost documents hovering before
the main document space. The user now has the possibility
to select one of these ghosts by clicking on it, which will
trigger an animation that seems to collapse all of the ghost
documents to the real document the selected ghost stands
for, and to further visually emphasize this document by displaying a semitransparent red box around it in the moment
of collapse.

Figure 4: Navigation of similar documents
Annother provided possibility to navigate similar docu-

ments is the similarity cone as shown in ﬁgure 4. The selected document is in the center and the most similar documents are arranged around and connected to it in a circle.
Documents similar to the ones in the ﬁrst circle are organized in a second circle. The color of the connecting studs
indicates the degree of similarity. As the user moves from
one document to the other, the studs and the placement of
the documents change dynamically.

4.4

Documents at User Deﬁned Locations

The previously described document collection visualization modes are for the artiﬁcially computed organization
of documents. To give the user the possibility to organize
documents according to his or her own organization principles and to remind him or her of previous thoughts, it was
decided to also support user-speciﬁc structures.
DocuWorld provides two different areas for userdeﬁned document placement: the memory-line in front of
all other structure elements and the area behind the environment walls where ghost documents can be placed on
human statues as illustrated in ﬁgure. 2. The memory-line,
which was derived from the idea of a clothesline, allows the
user to hang about twenty important or frequently accessed
documents on it. In the area behind the walls can be placed
more ghost documents that are less frequently accessed.
Thus, DocuWorld provides a hierarchical workspace similar to Card’s [2] WebForager. The choice of human ﬁgures
as a storing place was made because human ﬁgures, small
changes in their appearance, and thus also objects stored
on human bodies are easy to recognize and to remember—
much easier than remembering the location of documents
on a conventional bookcase.

5 Evaluation and Conclusion
In this work a prototype for a dynamic 3D semantic information system was developed. It was explained how the
layout of 3D visualizations should be optimized to make
good use of the available 3D space and the Thought Wizard metaphor was introduced as an efﬁcient and ﬂexible
global visualization and navigation concept that dynamically moves the visualization items to the user instead of
forcing the user to orient him- or herself in a 3D environment. The need for two types of document areas, one for
user-speciﬁc document management and one for automatically computed document organizations, was established.
Compared to the Web Forager approach presented in
section 2 DocuWorld provides the user with a more natural environment, more ﬂexible possibilities to store documents at user deﬁned locations, and the visualization of
document semantics through automatic document organization modes and visually indicated document relations —
a feature not available in the Web Forager approach.
All these aspects, together with the visualization of
the document metadata, search results, and the relations

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

between documents, allow preattentive processing of the
data, easy and intuitive use, immersion in the animated
3D environment, and navigation from one document to the
other by simply using the Thought Wizard tools or displaying document relations.
To move the presented approach from prototype state to
a usable application, additional research and implementation efforts are currently pursued. Future work focuses on
the replacement of keyboard gestures with more natural,
easy-to-remember, and immersive gestures (e.g., innovative interaction with data glove).
Although a lot of work is still necessary, ﬁrst user evaluations already prove that expert knowledge workers as well
as computer beginners are enthusiastic about the possibilities of dynamic 3D user interfaces to semantic information.

6 Acknowledgments
This research is supported by “Stiftung Rheinland-Pfalz
f¨ur Innovation” and the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and is part of the project
@VISOR.

References
[1] Aduna. Autofocus. http://aduna.biz, 2004.
[2] S. Card and G. Robertson. The webbook an the webforager: An information workspace for the world wide
web. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI’96, 1996.
[3] Lucene. Apache lucene. http://lucene.apache.org/.
[4] M. Mine and F. Brooks. Moving objects in space:
Exploiting proprioception in virtual-environment interaction. Computer Graphics, 31(Annual Conference
Series):19–26, 1997.
[5] G. Robertson and M. van Dantzich. The task gallery:
A 3d window manager. In CHI, pages 494–501, 2000.
[6] M. Sebrechts and J. Cugini. Visualization of search
results: A comparative evaluation of text, 2d, and 3d
interfaces. In Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pages 3–10, 1999.
[7] Tactile. Tactile 3d user interface. http://tactile3d.com/,
2005.
[8] C. Ware and G. Franck. Evaluating stereo and motion
cues for visualizing information nets in three dimensions. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 15(2):121–140,
1996.
[9] U. Wiss and D. Carr. An empirical study of task support in 3d information visualizations. In IV, pages
392–399, 1999.

