Daisies on Mars: disseminating scientific information by use of
developmental animation
J. Burnsa, A.Woodcocka, E. Gaurab, R.M. Newmanb, S. Mountb
a

b

The Design Institute, Coventry School of Art and Design, Coventry University ,UK
Cogent Computing Applied Research Centre, Faculty of Engineering and Computing, Coventry University

Abstract
The sciences often find it difficult to present
complex ideas to audiences in ways that are
informative and interesting. This is problematic,
when the public needs to enter into a debate about
new ideas, during conferences when vast amounts of
information on diverse subjects are presented in a
very short time, and in lectures when experts present
fundamental principles to novices. Given our
relatively short attention spans, boredom thresholds
and limited capacity to assimilate new information, it
is essential that the medium is an

effective conveyor of the message, and in itself helps
the receiver to remain alert and focused whilst also
presenting information in a clear and unambiguous
manner. The development of a new area of research,
cogent computing, provided an opportunity to
produce an effective, animation-based information
communication tool, in the form of an application
scenario, to be used for communicating to students,
wider audiences and the design and development
team itself, technical aspects of pervasive
computing.
Keywords: Information visualisation, design

1. Introduction
Pervasive or ubiquitous computing may be
defined as a field of computer science considering
the use of computers, embedded within and
intrinsically part of, larger devices or objects. Future
environments could become saturated with
computing and wireless communication that is
seamlessly integrated with human users through
intuitive user interfaces
The Cogent Computing Applied Research Centre
(CCARC) at Coventry University is interested in
pervasive computing, especially the technologies and
social impact of pervasive computing in sensor
networks, industrial and information design,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

multimedia, visualisation, computer supported
cooperative work and other areas.
Clearly such research is of considerable
importance and will form the next stage of the
Information Technology revolution. However, with
worldwide falling recruitment in computer studies
and difficult concepts to portray to the public if they
are to become stakeholders in development, there is a
pressing need to consider more innovative ways of
presenting scientific breakthroughs and information.
One way of achieving this is through the use of more
effective means of communication.
Dürsteler [1] defines ‘information visualization’
as ‘the process of knowledge internalisation by the
perception of information’ and traces its origins to

38,000 BC in the cave paintings of the Dordogne.
One of the latest forms of information visualization is
animation. This has been used particularly to tell
stories and sequences of events, or to show series of
changes over time.
Bearing in mind these definitions, this paper will
consider the role of animation in teaching and
training, the creation of the Mars Daisy animation
and its usefulness in promoting CCARC and the
underlying concepts of pervasive computing.

2. Animation in education
Education is no longer confined to schools and
universities, it occurs throughout life, either within
industry,
especially
in
knowledge
based
organisations, or through life-long learning.
Audiences and presenters/commissioners of teaching
and training material may be mature and
sophisticated, having been exposed to a rich, varied
and high quality visual culture. They need to
communicate about technical, scientific, conceptual
and managerial information within and between large
scale companies and institutions. This information
may appertain to physical devices and principles
such as the operation of machines, chemical
compounds or drugs; or address concepts such as
safety procedures, aspects of learning and training,
the communication of decision making, marketing
and research processes.
To meet these demands, companies may hand
over responsibility for external advertising and
publicity campaigns to specialist agencies who can
produce material to the necessary quality. However,
internal training and awareness programmes often do
not receive the budget, care or specialist attention
they warrant, even though the employees, delegates,
directors, visitors who attend these sessions are also
immersed in the televisual culture of the wider
community. As such they tend to judge the
informational diet served to them by similar
standards to the programmes seen outside. No matter
how worthy a subject matter may be, if the method of
presentation does not engage and is judged as
substandard by the viewer, then that subject matter
will not be received to its advantage. This applies
equally well to the development of teaching material
which should be developed bearing in mind the
principles of multimedia design for learning [2].
Animations have been found to increase
motivation [3], aid the quality of learning [4],
enhance communication of concepts involving time

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

and motion [5] and the visualisation of "invisible"
dynamic processes that otherwise would need to be
understood through abstract concepts [6].
Researchers have concluded that multimedia
presentation enables people to understand things that
would be very difficult to grasp from words alone.
When both words and pictures support each other,
students construct verbal and pictorial mental models
and build connections between them. In addition to
the capacity of animations and illustrations to portray
information differently, benefits may also be derived
from reductions in cognitive load through the use of
a second cognitive channel [2].

3. Pervasive computing
Pervasive computing pertains to a scenario
where networked, environmentally aware computing
technology can be embedded in any product.
Crucially, the user interface of a pervasive system is
intended to cause the user to feel as if the technology
is aware of and participates in their world, as
opposed to the user having to learn about the
(virtual) world of computer interfaces in order to
achieve their goal. The forecast social impact of this
paradigm shift is immense and to date, awareness,
even amongst computing students is limited.
Although the area has so far benefited from
enormous research efforts, tomorrow's "dream
applications" are commonly designed (and then
presented) using a bottom-up approach from the level
of physical components and computational
algorithms, building up to functional systems.
This is an exciting area. However, much of the
excitement and lifestyle changes which may arise
from the introduction of pervasive computing are
either not shown, or are lost in the bottom up
approach presented. A "top-down" view in the
presentation/dissemination of ideas and concepts
would ease the communication and exchange of ideas
with unmotivated and less technologically aware
audiences. So, rather than look at the minute details
of the operation of cogent sensors, we have
commenced with an animation of a usage scenario,
without looking at the operational details.

4. The scenario
The CCARC have developed a ’dream
application’ [7] relating to space exploration in
which thousands of microsensors (DAISIES) are
deployed on a planet to perform environmental

monitoring and report their findings, via satellites,
back to Earth. The microsensors could offer a more
fault-tolerant method of planetary exploration than
the use of a single highly functional "rover". The
scenario also highlights a number of technical factors
such as the release and deployment of the sensors,
the types and quantity of information that might be
gathered from the network, and the mechanisms
required to transmit that information back to earth.
The development of the scenario has led to the
development of a hardware specification for the
DAISY using contemporary, widely available
hardware. The DAISY can communicate optically,
harvest solar energy, and gather sense data (using
image, atmospheric and soil chemical sensors, a
magnetometer and a seismic detector). The basic
dimensions of the mote hardware inside the DAISY
are 20mm by 7.5mm.

attributes, the illustrations adopted metaphorical and
analogous tropes whilst retaining pictorial similarity
required to keep the visual description of the sensors
within the depiction of the landscape. [8]
The animation has taken over 300 hours to
complete, and is now over 9 minutes in length. The
text and music has been replaced by a voice over and
we are preparing to show the animation in more
public arenas.

6. Aspects of the animation
The animation serves a number of purposes and its
production reflects the changes in the techniques,
systems and procedures available to those wishing to
communicate visually within the recent past. Many of
those tools have now been reduced to a fraction of
their previous cost and yet have become increasingly
sophisticated and flexible.

5. Development of the animation
The animation progressed from a series of
discussions between the co-authors, to the generation
of concept sketches, a narrative, storyboard, key
frames, animated slide, animation with text, to a full
animation with voice-over. Discussion not only
enabled the creation of the animation but also
contributed to the work of the group through the
exchange of ideas at a conceptual level. This
progression is shown in Figures 1 to 4. Concept
sketches produced by Robert Newman were used as a
base for full-colour visualization by two assistant
artists under the direction of John Burns.
Discussions that took place during this process
served two purposes; firstly to make the concept of
the keyframes clearer, and secondly, to provide a
vehicle for CCRG to discuss how the sensors would
work in practice.
A visual style was developed that took into
account the many aspects of the subject, for instance;
- the vastly differing scales of sensors and landscapes
- the relative distance across which communication
must take place; and,
- the necessity for the viewpoint to change smoothly
between all of these whilst allowing the viewer to
visually navigate those spaces in the reading of a
coherent story. Whilst computer-based programs
were used in the creation of the animations, some of
the visual language used looked towards 19th century
European landscape painting in the depiction of
dramatic vistas and unexplored locations.
In order to visually portray their functions and

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 1
Sketch of the release of the DAISIES in orbit

Figure 2
Visualisation of the release of DAISIES
At one end of the scale are computer based
graphics and animation tools that many nonspecialised users have access to; at the other end of
the scale are the visually creative industries who may
use similar, but higher specification, tools and will

employ specialists to use them.

It was proposed at the start of the exercise that the
animation would also form a development tool in
addition to being a communicator to outside parties,
stakeholders etc.

Figure 3
Sketch showing the petals of the DAISY

Figure 5
Optical Sensors and solar energy gathering
‘Petals’ used by the DAISY
Figure 4
The DAISY network
Although not used quite so much in earnest as
facilities within commercial production houses, the
first, non-specialised toolsets sitting within desktop
computers present an considerable and increasing
level of sophistication. The products of the second,
production oriented, ‘high-end’ toolsets must have
maximum effect and are often, at least after a short
research and visualisation stage, delivered to have as
much impact as possible within a necessarily short
viewing time. Client visuals and storyboards allow
some initial interaction between the concerned
parties but from quite early in the project the
emphasis is on driven design with perhaps a
modicum of evolution.
There are times however, when a given scenario
provides an opportunity for the best of both tool set
scenarios to come together; namely the use of
resources that are available but which are not
required to be used constantly together with forays
into ‘higher-end’ resource. The Mars DAISY project
provided such an opportunity.
The relationship between the differing options as
previously described is outlined in order to draw
attention to how the Mars DAISY animation came to
be produced. Members of the Mars DAISY team
operate also within each of the sectors mentioned.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

An important plank in this structure should
include the use of some specialist tools but also soft
and hard wares as available to non-specialists. This is
an important point as it would mean that the
animation would have time to evolve alongside
developments in the design of the sensors themselves
and their methods of deployment and use.
We
aimed to examine whether or not the ready
availability of relatively fast and sophisticated
visualisation tools combined with on-site user
expertise would permit animation to function as an
exploratory device in addition to being a presentation
tool. It is true that within certain product and process
design and development activities there have, for a
number of years, been available computer-based
methods
of
generating
real-time
visual
representations of formulae, molecular structures,
medium flow, procedural analysis, collision detection
and element interaction etc.
Many of these
procedures employ software to compute and display
in graphical and time-based form the interactions
between components, forces and other behaviours as
derived from data input. Such valuable techniques
and procedures tend to rely heavily on computation
of data that is then depicted by procedurally
generated graphics. In recent times these relatively
simple, almost real-time generated graphics have
been supplemented by pre-rendered, pre-animated

and texture-mapped objects as used in gaming
situations.
When such a project reaches the stage at which
graphic artists and animators become more involved
in the representation of the project’s outcomes in
fully detailed, highly resolved and narrative-active
images the larger part of the product development
work will have neared completion. Animated and
still graphics generated from this point onwards
would usually be seen as marketing artefacts perhaps
drawing on, and embellishing, the previous, abovementioned, formative graphical work. Some highly
finished proposal and concept graphics may have
been commissioned at a very early stage but again,
these would most likely not interface with the visuals
as developed within the product design process.
The Mars DAISY project was unique in that the
graphical elements were developed in a visually
creative, narrative based and highly finished manner
alongside the development of many aspects of the
DAISY sensor itself. The involvement of animators
and artists throughout the project rather than solely at
the later presentation and marketing stage allowed
for a dual strand system of development and
visualisation. Benefits as perceived by members of
the product development team in having access to
atmospheric images and animations as the project
developed included attracting interest, funding
recruitment to the team and the prompting of
modifications to design elemnets. One such example
occurred when visualising the satellite pasing over
the planet’s surface as it collected visual, flickering
data from the sensors below. Originally the satellite
was designated a non stationary orbit that would
sweep across the skies gathering in the light pulses
from below. However, when visualised in this
manner the animation prompted discussion amongst
the design team as to the narrow beam width
generated by the DAISY sensors; it became apparent
that the satellite(s) would probably need to sit in a
stationary orbit to allow time for the data to be
collected. Visualisations of dust clouds created by
landing sensors, meteorites and weather generated
discussions as to the working life of sensors over a
period of time. Each of these considerations arose
due to the focus directed on certain aspects of the
project as prompted by the demands of a higher level
of visualisation. Vigorous debate was generated as to
the design of the sensors, the functions and depiction
of their internal components and some of their less
readily visualised activities such as group formation,
boundary delineation and communal duties. Details

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

that may have been sketched in in general terms
within the sensor design team were brought into
focus by the requirements of the visualisation team as
to more detailed descriptions of certain components
than may have needed to be available at that stage
within a traditional ‘bottom-up’ approach.
Conversely, characteristics of debris scatter on
meteorite impact were examined following comments
raised by the design team on seeing developing
animations of such events.
There was opportunity here to note the differing
perceptions of how much detail was required at
varying stages of the project by different sections of
the design and visualisation team. The levels of detail
required to visualise an artefact to a realistic state can
prompt the team to consider aspects of the project
that might have been overlooked or left until later.
On the other hand, given that the production of
animated graphics (even taking into account the
availability of tools to hand) can be a large drain on
artist hours it can often mean that when changes are
required they can be quite time consuming. The
inverse of this is, of course, that such a situation may
well happen anyway but much further down the line
when perhaps a large project has finally been
visualised to high finish for the first time. In such a
situation large amounts of changes may well be
required but within a greatly foreshortened timescale.
The Mars DAISY project, due to its combining of
higher level visualisation/illustration with ongoing
product development allowed for re-thinks to take
place based on the continuous flux of opinion and
information as it passed between the design,
development and visualisation elements of the team.

Figure 6
A virtual representation of the surface as
generated from data gathered by the DAISY
network

Figure 7
An observer within the ‘tele-presence’ room
Further, in their summary role as marketing and
publicity devices, the graphics thus produced had a
pace and style that could echo the evolutionary
nature of their creation. We believe that this method
of working does deserve examination as to how it
may become applicable across a wider range of
scenarios. A highly beneficial spin-off of working in
this manner was the observed sense of common
ownership regarding the products, research,
visualization and presentation across all involved
parties that developed throughout the project’s life
span.

7. Discussion
Once the animations had been produced they were
tested as to their efficacy in a wide range of areas
associated with the project. These included publicity,
funding and educational fields in addition to
recruitment of potential staff and student researchers
into the team. Further, as the animation addressed the
scientific and the aesthetic considerations of two
faculties within the university, the faculty of
Engineering and Computing and the school of Art
and Design, the animation could be shown to groups
of students within each subject area. Students within
the Engineering and Computing faculty who joined
the development team noted their watching of the
animation as an influence in their enthusiasm for
joining the project. Students within the school of Art
and Design employed the underlying story of remote
exploration within their visualisation studies giving
their own slant on the scenario. Perhaps more
critically, students from each school gained an
appreciation of how complementary disciplines could
work alongside each other in the communication of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

scientific concepts both to the wider lay community
and to parties involved in the development of such
projects. Whilst such an appreciation may already be
addressed (in terms of professional practice) relating
to finished products and marketing, the possibilities
within a feedback loop of visualisation and ongoing
development of a product were seen to be interesting
by students from both schools.
Many of the concepts involved in the development
of even the simplest pervasive applications are
difficult to handle. Providing an overview, as in the
Mars DAISY, gives common ground for individuals
to start discussing their own areas of specialisation
and how the system might work as a whole. Clearly
there needs to be some suspension of reality when
interpreting any visualisation which may be
problematic. The way through this, for us, was to
discuss those incidents when the visualisation was
inappropriate or misrepresented important issues.
Feedback from external viewers of the work in
progress was taken into account and prompted
changes in various areas, particularly with regard to
the portrayal of human figures within the animation.
Such debate may provide clarification for the whole
group, or lead to refinement of the visualisation.
If pervasive computing is to be developed then we
have to explain the concepts to students who are not
very confident with traditional technologies. Taking
them through the logics and visualisation of the
application would ease the instructors task, interest
the audience with the animation acting as an anchor
for QA sessions on the technical details.

8. Future work
The Mars DAISY animation is now complete
and will continue to be evaluated formally with
different audiences.
Although we believe we have developed a high
quality, entertaining and informative product, two
challenges remain as to the ongoing use of the
visualisation tool; firstly, to determine the extent to
which ‘animation’ is the most appropriate vehicle for
depicting and discussing different parts of the
scenario. Secondly, viewing the animation is a
passive experience that would appear to be in
contradiction with theories of action learning:
bearing this in mind we aim to explore the use
interactive and performance elements together with
the animation within a broader, informative package.
In conclusion, we believe a more considered,
innovative use of visual and other representations is

clearly relevant to an academic and scientific
community that needs to make its results more
accessible to the public. Such techniques may further
contribute to communication and clarification within
that community itself as work progresses.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by Coventry University.
Special thanks to Zeshan Ahmed, Alex Jevremovic,
Mousumi De, Su Zheng, Jean Michel Raad and Prof.
Clive Richards for their assistance in the animation
project.

References
[1] Dürsteler JC. Information visualisation what is it all
about? Inf@vis. 2002, Accessed 22/2/06 at

http://www.infovis.net/printMag.php?num=100&l
ang=2
[2] Mayer R. Multimedia learning. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 2001

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[3] Rodgers S. An interactive lecture approach to teaching
computer science.
Proceedings of SIGCSE, (1995) pp 278-282.
[4] Stephenson S. The use of small groups in computer
based training: A review of the recent literature.
Computers in Human Behaviour, 10 (1994) pp 243259.
[5] Hays TA. Spatial abilities and the effects of computer
animation on short term and long term comprehension.
Journal of Educational Computer Research, 14 (1996)
pp 139-155.
[6] Huk TA, Steinke M, and Floto C. Helping teachers
developing computer animations for improving
learning in science education. In Proceedings of SITE
(2003) pp 3022-3025.
[7] Newman R, Gaura E, Tabor J, and Mount S. A
realistic dream - a top-down feasibility study for
MEMS
planetary
exploration.
In
NSTI
Nanotechnology Conference and Trade Show
(Nanotech'05), pp. 363-366, Anaheim, California.
[8] Richards CJ 2001 The fundamental design variables
of diagramming
in: Olivier P, Anderson M and Meyer B (eds)
Diagrammatic representation and reasoning
London: Springer-Verlag (pp85—101)
ISBN 185 233 2425

