Schematic Maps as an Alternative to Point Coverages
When Topographic Maps are not Available
Elissavet Pontikakis, Florian Twaroch
Institute for Geoinformation and Cartography, Vienna University of Technology
{pontikakis,twaroch}@geoinfo.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
This paper describes the visualization methods of
point related spatial information used in geo-portals for
tourism and recreation. We examine the issue of
visualization of points of interest when base topographic
maps are not available. We compare the schematic map
approach to point coverages. In our hypothesis, we suggest
that the schematic map approach offers the best
alternatives for assisting the tourist in taking decisions
during the planning phase of an excursion when detailed
topographic map information is not available. We use
algebraic operations to evaluate the visualization
approaches.
Keywords: visualization, points of interest, national
defense, schematic map, cost, weights, metro map
metaphor, tourist portal, GIS, web map services,
military sensitivity

1. Introduction
Web portals are widely used by Internet gurus and
novice alike. We observe a rapid increase in the data
which is available to these portals, specifically to georeferenced data. Google Earth, MapQuest, Map24, Via
Virtual Earth present popular examples. As the data
availability increases, so do the demands of the user. The
Portals represent the gateways to a plethora of sites and
their supported data. In addition, they represent the
emergence of new business ideas. In this paper, we present
the case of a tourist portal and we focus on the issue of
visualization of spatial information in sensitive areas near
borders or military installations. We draw our example
from a tourist portal developed under the eTen EU
program. We address the issues of visualization for
military sensitive areas. Thus we improve the opportunities
of the individual tourist providers of these regions for
exposure. We examine the solutions as answers to
individual questions which are asked by the tourist [1].

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Section 2 of this paper discusses in detail our use case.
The background theory is reviewed in section 3. In section
4, we describe the proposed solutions and in section 5 we
present our conclusions. Section 6 provides an outlook to
future research.

2. Use case and hypothesis
Let us imagine the following case, first for the portal
and then for the potential traveler and user of the portal.

2.1 The tourist portal
A tourist portal provides a gateway to municipalities
and the activities they offer for a tourist. The activities
cover a wide range of recreational tourism such as hiking,
bird watching, water rafting, skiing, etc. Dynamic maps
are displayed through a standardized web mapping
service. The portal manages the display of points of
interest (POIs) and the content associated with each POI
at each municipality. Special focus aims in instituting a
uniform way of managing content for all participating
municipalities.
The above paragraph summarizes the set up of the
GEOCOMPASS portal supported by the E-Ten project of
the European Community. The GEOCOMPASS portal
implements technical solutions on visualization.
In
addition, the project addresses the issue of content
management from the provider’s side and decision making
from the tourist’s perspective.

2.2 Restrictions for consistent performance
The description of GEOCOMPASS as presented here
could fit many other tourist portals. The parameters
emphasized in Figure 1 are derived from the above
description printed in italics. We refer to them as “hidden
concepts”. We suggest that the hidden concepts hinder the
visualization efforts in a portal. In most projects, these
issues are realized much too late and alter the expected

performance. Often, these issues affect one another. In
this paper, we are motivated by the military sensitivity of a
location which also offers tourist attractions. The problem
is the lack of topographic data for civilian use in these
regions. We suggest ways to harmonize the performance
of a portal when an issue like this arises. There are
additional reasons which hinder data and information
availability such as fear for abuse by unwanted groups, and
financial and technical limitations. Google Earth provides
a hot topic for discussion on the area of fearing potential
abuse of its uses [2]. On the other hand, the issues of
financial and technical limitations are known to smaller,
economically depended localities. In these cases, data can
not be acquired at all levels. There is a cost pyramid
associated with the different levels of the GIS data
acquisition [3].
One of the municipalities which participate in the
GEOCOMPASS portal is located in Northern Greece.
Topographic maps issued by the Greek government are
generally restricted by the Greek military and are not
always available [4]. In his search for topographic maps
the user often encounters responses such as “We are
pleased to announce that we have received the 1:250,000
topographic maps” [4]. The soviet military-issue series
often provide an alternative.
Size
Location

Country
Military sensitivity

Scale
Accuracy
Type

Raster
Vector

A tourist portal provides a gateway to small
municipalities and the activities they offer for a
tourist. The activities cover a wide range of recreational
tourism such as hiking, bird watching, water rafting,
skiing, etc. Dynamic maps are displayed through an
open GIS consortium (OGC) based web mapping
service. The portal manages the display of points of

interest (POIs) and the content associated with
each POI at each municipality. Special focus aims in
instituting a uniform way of managing content for all
participating municipalities.

Figure 1. Hidden concepts in portal description
Figure 1 provides an example of the issues faced by
the web mapping designer when dealing with data
availability and compatibility. In our paper we seek
solutions which will provide a chance for such regions to
promote themselves.
We link these solutions to
visualization methods.

2.3 The case of a potential hiker
A casual hiker is going for a Sunday trip. His interest
for a specific hike depends on criteria such as a) the
difficulty and length of the path, b) the estimated time to
the next service facility based on his physical condition, c)
the list of alternatives offered along the way, and d) his
personal taste for the surroundings as seen on pictures and
described in text.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

2.4 Hypothesis
Our hypothesis is that in the areas where topographic
data is not available, schematic map representations
communicate better information in geo-based web portals
than representations that are solely based on georeferenced assembly of points namely point coverages. We
define “information which better communicates” as
information which allows the user to take decisions which
fit his goals. Detailed topographic data is not available in
regions where we encounter legal, military, or financial
impediments.

3. Background theory
Visualization is defined as the formation of mental
visual images and as the act or process of interpreting in
visual terms or of putting into visible form [5].
Visualization is linked to mental image and visual
perception. Edward Tufte suggests that the methods used in
presenting quantitative evidence are directly linked to the
results of the decisions taken based on this evidence [6-8].
Although geo-spatial information does not clearly fall in
the realm of quantitative information, the authors of this
paper share the above position between information
presented and assistance in intended decision. In our
specific context of a web portal for tourists, information
visualization is a tool for communication. We observe that
geo-portals often capture point data and enrich them with
as many attributes as possible. However, more data is not
necessarily better information. A concise and clean design
is attractive. Google provides an example of frugal but
effective design.
In the geo-portal, the relevant
information has to be on the map. This fact on its own,
adds to the complexity and misrepresentation of the
information and contributes to the often observed
compromised performances of web sites with maps. Map
data is expensive and often requires regular maintenance.
A rough cost estimate for the data is that it is an order of
magnitude more costly than the software used to visualize
it and two orders of magnitude than the hardware [3].

3.1 Communication process via portal
Portals express communication processes previously
expressed by real-experienced contacts. Portals too,
employ the basic steps in the communication process
encountered among target groups namely 1) orientation, 2)
building trust in the information, and 3) experiencing the
feedback of their decisions [9]. The differences between
the real-experienced contact and the contact through portal
lay in the “when” and “where” the outcome is observed for
the target group participant [1]. This outcome is observed
for each of the steps of the communication process. This is
of importance for the current research as it imposes
additional limitation to possible technical solutions. For

example, due to delayed feedback time, solutions provided
by low end providers, i.e. the tourists, are considered
inadequate.

3.2 The main questions a tourist portal answers
Tourist information systems should help a tourist to
manage his holidays. There are two main questions
answered by a tourist portal namely “where can I perform
an activity?” and “what types of activities are supported by
a certain area?” [1].
In the literature, three planning phases have been
distinguished: the pre-trip planning, the on-trip and the post
trip phase [10] . Research relates this to the level of detail
involved in each phase [11, 12].
In the pre-trip planning phase consumers like to get a
rough overview to decide where to go. This decision
process is influenced by various factors like the financial,
family, or physical condition of the participants and the
activities carried out in the tourist region. Maps support
the decision process by giving information about the
surroundings of the chosen location.
In the on-trip phase the consumer is “in situ” and often
assisted by a mobile device or an information checkpoint.
Ad-hoc queries need to be answered to support the
consumer’s decision, i.e. “Where is the next restaurant?”.
The demands, in terms of data granularity and up-todateness, are much higher than in the pre-trip planning
phase. Very detailed information is required in real time.
In the post trip phase, users give feedback to the web
portal and share their experiences about the holidays
online. They give a rating of the overall performance and
usability of the tourist information system comparable to
online selling systems.
Maps and visualizations of points of interest used in
pre-trip planning are a useful assistance in this phase. In
the use case of a tourist web portal with maps the focus lies
on the pre-trip planning phase. In the presented region in
Greece, data are not available due to military restrictions.
Our aim is to support the user with alternative visualization
forms to improve the communication process.

4. Proposed Solutions
The previous section has shown that tourists are
involved in an asynchronous communication process with
a web portal. An asynchronous communication process is
observed when the sender and receiver of the information
experience the consequences of each others actions with a
time delay. Considering just the pre-trip planning phase a
user states two spatial questions to the information system:
1) Where am I? and 2) How to get to points of interest?
Golledge proposes a set of questions asked through a
cognitive map such as: “is it there?”, “how can I go
there?”, “what is the shortest way?” etc. [13]. The concept
of cost is thus added to the above two main questions in the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

form of effort. The additional spatial question states: 3)
How much effort does it take to reach a point of interest?
A cognitive map can be described as a mental
representation of an environment. There is an increasing
interest in the cognitive aspects of map representations,
especially schematic maps [14]. A schematic map is a
linear abstraction of a functional network, such as networks
of roads, railways or footpaths. Metro maps are schematic
maps that maintain just line and point features [15].
We consider that there is an algebraic morphism
between the operations described through a cognitive map
and those described through a map on a computer. An
algebraic morphism preserves the structure of objects and
operations in different domains and ranges.
We propose a schematic map solution which
visualizes the connection between POIs. We introduce a
set of algebraic axioms for each of the operations used in
the evaluation of the proposed solution namely the
schematic mapping. We compare this visualization with
the geo-referenced point coverage.
The above questions are connected to algebraic
operations such as “is it there”, “find shortest path”,
“access” etc. Hofer suggests three classes of topographic
map use operations namely, measurements, terrain
interpretation, and navigation [16]. Schematic maps
address the measurement and navigation classes.

4.1 Algebraic Operations
We consider that the POIs are points and the map
extent is a closed region. The axioms describe the relation
of a point and a region or the relations between two or
more points. All points of interest are elements of a tourist
region A. All links L between these points are elements of
the tourist region A. The three questions defined in section
4 namely 1) Where am I? , 2) How to get to points of
interest?, and 3) How much effort does it take to reach a
point of interest? lead to the following five operations:
Operation 1: Is POI1 there?
Operation 2: Is POI1 linked to POI2?
Operation 3: a) Is line segment POI1 POI2 shorter
than line segment POI1 POI3 ?
Operation 3: b) Is traveling line segment POI1 POI2
faster than traveling line segment POI1 POI3 ?
Operation 4: Is POI1 geo-referenced?
Operation 5: Is there freedom to infer for a POI which
does not belong to the set of POIs?
Operation 3 is split in two sub operations that are both
related to cost. Operation 3a is related to cost in distance
while operation 3b is related to cost in time. We consider
that topographic maps contain a subset of the links, while
schematic maps contain a subset of links found in a
topographic map. We use a formal model to validate the
algebras of the operation arguments. In the Appendix of
this paper we attach the executable implementation of the
above algebraic axioms with the use of the functional

programming language Haskell [17]. Extended information
on the Haskell language is found on the web
(www.haskell.org).

4.2. Schematic maps, the “Metro map metaphor”
Mathematically schematic maps are straight planar
line graphs consisting of a set of nodes and edges. They
provide topological information such as “which points are
neighbors to each other”, or “which points lie on the same
sequence”. Figure 2 provides an example of a schematic
map.

A1/B1

B2

B3

B4

A2
A3

4.3. Real path and airline distance

Figure 2: A schematic map
Metro maps are schematic maps. They provide
information with the use of symbols such as “which metro
line connects two stops” or with the use of weights such as
“what is the frequency of the passing metros” or “what is
the estimated travel costs from one location to another”. In
public transportation, given a starting point and a
destination, it is easy for a passenger to determine which
transportation means to use to reach a goal. Recently the
“metro map metaphor” has been used in virtual guided
tours. [18]. The “metro map metaphor” is well known to
people who move in the city and use public transportation.
These are also the potential clients of a web portal that
promotes mountain and countryside tourism.
A1

A4

A6

A1/B1

B2

B3

referenced point coverage. Figure 3 provides a visual
comparison of the two representations.
We hypothesize that metro maps communicate better
in the pre-trip planning phase than available presentations
based on point coverages. Here, cartographic variables
like color, size, shading, patterns, and symbols are
exploited. When a tourist is interested whether he can
carry out a certain activity in the surrounding of his
accommodation, he just “enters a fictional metro” on the
schematic map. He subsequently follows the line until he
detects the symbol for the desired activity. Based on
specific weights he can decide whether the “nearness” of
the activity is satisfactory or not. Hence, schematic maps
are used to provide overview when entering the
information infrastructure by showing what you can
access, from where and with what cost over all specified
routes. This relates to the first and second aspect of
communication through portals where the user orients and
builds thrust in the information.

We define as air-line distance the straight line segment
which connects two points when ignoring all obstacles in
between them. Figure 4 provides an example of a situation
of two POIs located at points A and B on the hillsides of a
region. The figure also depicts the contour lines sketched
on the hillsides. The line segment AB is the air-line
distance while A´B´ is the projection of the air-line
distance on a planar map.

B4

Figure 4: Projected air-line distance vs. real path

A5
A2

A2

A3

A3

point coverage

schematic map

Figure 3: Point coverage vs. schematic map
We would like to take this idea a step further and
transfer the use of the “metro map metaphor” to tourist
maps for mountain and country side. The regions of
interest do not have access to detailed topographic maps,
but have geo-referenced datasets of point of interest (like
churches, museums, restaurants, bars). In a content
management system, the owner at a point of interest can
insert text and photographs of his own location and links to
other points of interest. With the use of the “metro map
metaphor” we try to exploit this additional link
information, instead of providing the user with a geo-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The real path a hiker has to walk is depicted by the
snake-like line in Figure 4. On a point coverage the line
segments inferred by the user are projected air-line
distances. The projected air-line distance is not indicative
to the actual path.

4.4. Costs on a schematic map
Cost is represented by weights on a schematic map.
We encounter cost based on money, time, covered
distance, effort, alternatives, etc. A weight corresponds to
a line segment or to a node on a schematic map. Travel
time between two nodes for example constitutes weight for
a corresponding line segment while possible alternatives
for connections constitute weight for a node. Cost and its
corresponding weights can be defined in connection to the
goal of the route. For example, in an area intended for bird

watching, the weight of a line segment can be linked to the
number of water fountains and bird baths which are found
along the way. We assume here that water baths attract
more birds.

B1
0

B2

B3

1h

1,5h

A1

A2

0

0,5 h

B4
4h

A3
1,5h

Figure 5: Schematic map with time weights
Figure 5 shows a simple schematic map which embeds
the cost in time. The nodes on this map are equally spaced
along a route. This map is often seen in bus stops. Such
maps are generally too condensed to be fully deciphered by
the passenger [11], however, travelers are for the most part
familiar with the general design. On Figure 5, A1 and B1
corresponds to the same point in space.

A1/B1 B2

B3

B4

A2
A3
Figure 6: Schematic map with distance
information
Figure 6 shows a schematic map where the length of
the line segments corresponds proportionally to the
distance of path traveled. In combination, Figure 5 and
Figure 6 can show the difficulty of the path.
Depending on the application cost can be positive or
negative. The way uphill is usually not the same as the
way downhill in terms of costs. Considering the weights,
there is an asymmetry in the path and the cost of the path
from point A to point B is not equal to the cost of the path
from point B to point A (Cost AB  Cost BA). Schematic
maps have the ability to convey such weights and thus cost
information to the user.

4.5 Testing of hypothesis
We use three different visualizations of POIs to test
our hypothesis. a) geo-referenced POIs overlaid on a
topographic map, b) geo-referenced POIs on a point
coverage without support of topographic map, and c) POIs
on a schematic map. We examine the five operations
described in section 4.1 entitled Algebraic operations. We
define that a visualization method communicates better
information if it supports more operations.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

1. Is POI1 there?
2. Is POI1 linked to
POI2?
3a. Is
POI1POI2<POI1POI3 ?
3b. Is POI1POI2 faster
than POI1POI3 ?
4.
Is
POI1
georeferenced?
5. Is there freedom to
infer for a POIn |POIn Ъ

POIs on a
Topographic
map

POIs on a
Point
coverage

POIs on
Schematic
map

9

9

9

9

-

9

9

-

9

9

-

9

9

9

9

9

-

-

{POIs}
Table 1: Summary of testing the hypothesis
Table 1 provides a comparison between the three listed
visualization methods.
The “9” indicates that the
visualization method supports the corresponding operation
while the “-” indicates that there is a potentially negative
aspect associated with the operation within the specific
visualization method. For example, the distance between
points inferred by a geo-referenced point coverage can be
misleading for the user and lead to wrong decisions.
Distances on a geo-referenced point coverage do not reflect
actual distances.
The above table shows that a visualization of georeferenced POIs on a topographic map is the preferred
solution because all defined operations can be carried out.
However, when a topographic map is not available, the
coverage of geo-referenced points on its own
communicates less information than an enhanced
presentation of a schematic map.

4.6 Other aspects
Besides the technical there are legal and economic
aspects to be considered in spatial communication
processes [19]. An example of a legal issue can be dealt
with a disclaimer such as “Location A shows HotelX
located on the boundary between LandY and LandZ. Due
to military restrictions, we can not offer a detailed map of
the surrounding, and location A on this representation is
not geo-referenced. However, location A offers a great
variety of activities and services and links to other
locations”.
An economic issue arises when the community
promoted through the tourist portal is big enough and the
feedback works well. In this case, the owner at a POI who
maintains advanced web presentation generates a new
market force. Additional owners at other POIs will want to
improve their presentations and a new market niche may
open up.

We expect similar marketing effects from using
schematic maps. The schematic maps shall be there to
promote the area. The idea is that the web presentation
shows the most scenic or popular routes. Implementation
of schematic maps by a locality presented through a tourist
portal may also generate a new market force. We propose
that other regions presented through tourist portals which
have detailed topographic maps will also include the
schematic map solution as an alternative.

5. Conclusions
We encounter cases where web mapping in tourist
portals is hindered due to limitations imposed by financial,
technical and national defense reasons. The desired
“topographic base map display” is simply not available.
Thus, the web portal designer faces compatibility issues
when including point spatial data from diverse regions.
Some regions have topographic maps and others do not.
Hotels, information centers, restaurants, huts, etc.
constitute points of interest on the web map of a tourist site
commonly known as POIs.
What is the preferred
visualization solution for POIs in the cases where a
topographic map is not available? We focus on the needs
of a tourist during pre-trip planning phase.
In our paper we examined three visualization methods
namely a) an overlay of the geo-referenced POIs and the
topographic map of the region, b) an assembly of georeferenced POIs namely a point coverage, and c) a
schematic map representation of the POIs which utilizes
the “metro map metaphor”. We examine the three
visualization methods with the use of algebraic operations.
These operations refer to the three main questions included
in the literature, namely 1) Where am I? , 2) How to get to
points of interest?, and 3) How much effort does it take to
reach a point of interest?
We conclude that the schematic map representation for
a tourist portal is the preferred solution when a topographic
map is unavailable. Although a schematic map does not
provide any geo-referenced POIs it maintains the
topological relations among the POIs. In our paper, we
demonstrate that the schematic representation of the POIs
shows the accessibility routes among POIs. It also
indicates the cost which is linked to the specific goal of the
tourist e.g. “Which way is fastest?” or “Which way is the
shortest?” This is achieved with the use of weights.

6. Future Work
We propose that further research be done on the issue
of accessibility. For example, a hotel owner can enter a)
accessibility links to other POIs and b) parameters related
to the generation of the weights for the various types of
cost. A link can be defined if both POIs desire the link or
if only one suggests it. International law of the web should
also be considered. Further map operations have to be

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

identified and linked to the visualization method. Again
algebraic axioms can assist in the refinement of the
operations.
Data acquisition is a sensitive issue and has not been
addressed in this paper. If data is captured by layman we
have to deal with diverse data quality and to some degree
also with data abuse. The data quality varies because
different devices can be used to capture the data, like hand
held GPS, digitized maps and simple rough point
placement on a map. The “service” can be abused by
owners at POIs by placing their facilities in the vicinity of
advantageous locations e.g. hotels close to the beach.
These disadvantages have to be overcome in the near
future. Major impediments are the slowness of the
feedback cycle in portals, which additionally requires a
reasonable number of users. Until feedback is given by the
tourist the reliability of the produced results can not be
checked.
Methods
to
automatically
generate
map
representations based on the “metro map metaphor” are a
topic of future research as well as other cartographic
beautification issues.
In this paper, we conjecture that people living in the
city making holidays on the countryside will readily accept
schematic maps. The reason is their familiarity with this
form of map representation. Empirical research is needed
to determine if schematic maps are accepted by tourists
planning their holidays via the web.

Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the E-Ten project
GEOCOMPASS grant N° C517343.
We thank all
members of the Institute for Geoinformation and
Cartography and the GEOCOMPASS consortium
contributing to our work with their discussions.

Appendix
Executable implementation in Haskell of the algebraic
axioms used in the evaluation of the visualization methods
proposed in this paper.
module GeoVIS where
-- Title: overcoming diversity in visualization
-- Authors: Pontikakis, Twaroch
type Weight = Int
data POI = Point (Maybe (Int,Int))
data Link = NULL |
Link (POI,POI) Weight
data PointRegion = PointRegion [POI] [Link]
data MapType = PointCoverage |
SchematicMap |
TopographicMap
-- Operations for comparing visualization methods
-1. Is POI1 there ?
isPOIthere :: POI -> PointRegion -> Bool

isPOIthere p1 (PointRegion pointlist linklist) =
elem p1 pointlist
-2. Is POI1 linked to POI2
-- a link expresses an accessibility in the real
world.
areLinked::PointRegion->POI->POI->Bool
areLinked (PointRegion pointlist linklist) p1 p2
= (elem link linklist) where
link = Link (p1,p2) w
w = 99
-- weight w is arbitrary and indifferent for this
operation
-3a. Is line segment
POI1POI2 shorter than POI1POI3
isShorter :: Link -> Link -> Bool
isShorter l1 l2 = (distance l1) < (distance l2)
distance::Link->Weight
distance (Link p w) = w
-3b. Is traveling line
segment POI1POI2 faster than POI1POI3
isFaster :: Link -> Link -> Bool
isFaster l1 l2 = (traveltime l1) < (traveltime
l2)
traveltime::Link->Weight
traveltime (Link p w) = w
-4. Is the POI geo-referenced?
isGeoRef::POI->Bool
isGeoRef (Point Nothing) = False
isGeoRef (Point (Just (x,y))) = True
-5. Is there freedom to infer about
a POIn which does not belong to the list of POIs
--freedom :: Region ->
freedomToInfer::MapType->
PointRegion->
POI->POI->Link
freedomToInfer (PointCoverage) r p1 p2 = NULL
freedomToInfer (SchematicMap) r p1 p2 =
if (isPOIthere p1 r) &&
(isPOIthere p2 r) &&
(areLinked r p1 p2)
then
Link (p1,p2) w
else NULL where
w = 99
-- weight w is arbitrary and indifferent for this
operation
freedomToInfer (TopographicMap) r p1 p2 =
Link (p1,p2) w where
W = 99
-- weight w is arbitrary and indifferent for this
operation

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

E. Pontikakis and C. Rottenbacher, "Aspects of portal
processes in the tourism industry," presented at 1st
International Workshop on Web Portal-based Solutions
for Tourism (IWWPST 05), Tampere, Finland, 2005.
K. Hafner and S. Rai, "Google Offers a Bird's-Eye
View, And Some Governments Tremble," in New York
Times, Late Edition - Final ed, 2005, pp. Page 1,
Column 1, 1601 words.
A. Frank, "The Economics of Geographic Information,"
in Geographic Information Systems - Materials for a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

[4]

IEEE

[18]

[19]

Post-Graduate Course - GIS Organization, vol. (3) 6,
Geoinfo Series, A. Frank, Ed., 1995, pp. 745-802.
OMNI Resources, "Omni Resources Map Catalog Greece," 2006.
Merriam-Webster,
Merriam-Webster's
Collegiate
Dictionary, 11 ed: Merriam-Webster, Inc., 2003.
A. M. MacEachren, M. Gahegan, W. Pike, I. Brewer,
G. Cai, E. Lengerich, and F. Hardisty,
"Geovisualization for Knowledge Construction and
Decision Support.," IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, vol. 24, pp. 13-17, 2004.
J. W. Payne, J. R. Bettman, and J. E. Johnson, The
Adaptive Decision Maker: Cambridge University Press,
1993.
E. R. Tufte, Visual Explanations - Images, Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative. Ceshire, Connecticut: Graphics
Press, 1997.
C. Rottenbacher, "Emotional Co-Responce Links,"
presented at CORP 2005 & Geomultimedia05, Vienna,
Austria, 2005.
H. Werthner, "Intelligent Systems in Travel and
Tourism," presented at 18th International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-03,
Acapulco, Mexico, 2003.
E. Pontikakis, "Formalization of Basic Needs of a
Passenger when using Public Transportation," vol. PhD:
Vienna University of Technology, forthcoming.
S. Timpf and A. U. Frank, "Using Hierarchical Spatial
Data Structures for Hierarchical Spatial Reasoning," in
Spatial Information Theory - A Theoretical Basis for
GIS (International Conference COSIT'97), vol. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 1329, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, S. C. Hirtle and A. U. Frank, Eds.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997, pp. 69-83.
R. Golledge, "Cognitive Maps," in Encyclopedia of
Social Measurement, vol. 1: Elsevier, 2005, pp. 329339.
A. Klippel, K.-F. Richter, T. Barkowsky, and C. Freksa,
"The Cognitive Reality of Schematic Maps," in Mapbased Mobile Services - Theories, Methods and
Implementations, L. Meng, A. Zipf, and T.
Reichenbacher, Eds.: Springer; Berlin, 2005, pp. 57-74.
D. Elroi, "GIS and Schematic Maps: A New Symbiotic
Relationship," presented at GIS/LIS '88, San Antonio,
TX, 1988.
B. Hofer and A. U. Frank, "A Human Perspective on
Web Mapping Systems," presented at NETTIES 2005,
St. Pölten, Austria, 2005.
P. Hudak, The Haskell School of Expression: Learning
Functional Programming Through Multimedia.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
E. S. Sandvad, K. Gronbaek, L. Sloth, and J. K.
Knudsen, "A Metro Map Metaphor for Guided Tours
on the Web: the Webvise Guided Tour System,"
presented at 10th International World Wide Web
Conference, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2001.
G. Navratil, Influences of Technology, Law, and
Usability on Data Quality., vol. 30. Vienna: Institute
for Geoinformation and Cartography, Vienna
University of Technology, 2005.

