What is the effect of position for VDT dynamic/static displays on users’ reading
comprehension?
An-Hsiang Wanga, Kwo-Whei Leeb, Yuan-Chang Huc
Institute of Labor Studies, National Chung Cheng University
b
Department of Radiology, Chang-Hua Christian Hospital,
c
Department of Industrial Engineering and Technology management, Da-Yeh University
a

Abstract
The study investigated the effects of position (upper,
below, right-hand, and left-hand side of the screen) for
VDT dynamic display and other factors including speed
(150, 200, 250, and 300 wpm), display type of dynamic
information (leading, flash and RSVP), , and polarity
combination of dynamic/static(black-on-white/black-onwhite,
white-on-black/white-on-black,
black-onwhite/white-on-black, and white-on-black/black-on-white)
on subjects’ comprehension for reading static and dynamic
display information. The result of this research showed
that position and type of dynamic information had no
significant effect on subjects’ comprehension for dynamic
and static information. Polarity combination and speed
also had no significant effect on subjects’ comprehension
for static information; however, the two factors had
significant effects on subjects’ comprehension for dynamic
information. When display speed was set at 200 wpm,
subjects’ comprehension was better than with at speed
settings. When the dynamic/static display was set to be the
same polarity combination (black-on-white/black-onwhite), subjects’ performance was better than other
polarity combinations.
Keywords--- VDT, dynamic display, comprehension.

1. Introduction
Dynamic display is a widely used method to provide
information on web-site. Users usually need to read the
information on dynamic and static displays simultaneously.
Because it is very different to read information on a
dynamic or on a static display, many researches have
discussed the difference between static and dynamic
displays on web-sites. Juola et al. (1995) found that

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

subjects’ reading accuracy on RSVP was significantly
better than on leading display. Koler et al. (1981) proposed
that the readability of static information was better than
that of RSVP. Granaas et al. (1984) also found that
subjects’ comprehension for leading display was
significantly worse than that for static display information.
In the research of Chinese dynamic display, Wang and Kan
(2003) also found the subjects’ comprehension was
significantly different for leading, RSVP, and flash
displays. However, the position of dynamic display did not
take into consideration. If the dynamic display was
designed to present information with static information
simultaneously, the position of the dynamic display may be
in the upper, below, right-hand, and left-hand side of the
static information. Consequently, users need to divide their
attention into the two reading regions. In the study of
Wang et al. (2003), dynamic displays which is upper or
below of the static display are designed to evaluated. When
subjects were asked to handle two tasks at the same time
including reading task for dynamic display and searching
task for static display, they found that subjects did not
perform significantly different comprehension for the static
and dynamic displays when the dynamic display was set in
the upper or below of the static display.
The other factors which have discussed in our previous
papers are speed and polarity combination. Polarity setting
is an important issue for VDT design. Additionally, Wang
and Chen (2000) pointed out that display polarity was a
significant effect on subjects' visual performance for static
information. Wang et al. (2003) found when the
background color of the static information is white which
is the same as leading display; displays resulted in the
highest subjects’ comprehension. In the two reading dualtask study of Wang and Kan (2003), they found subjects
had the best comprehension when the dynamic display
section had the same text/background color-combinations
those of the static display sections, and that their
comprehension was worst when the text/background colors

of the dynamic display section were fully different from
those of the static display section. Speed is an important
factor for dynamic display because of its dynamic
characteristics. The measurement for speed of dynamic
display is “word per minute (wpm)”. Regarding the
research of Chinese dynamic display, Wang and Chen
(2003) found subjects' comprehension for dynamic display
did not show significant difference under 250 or 300 wpm.
In the study of Wang et al. (2003), they also found that
subjects' visual performance for static display and
comprehension for dynamic display were not significantly
different under 250 or 300 wpm. Wang and Kan (2003)
proposed that subjects performed best at the speed of 195
wpm for the leading display and performed best at the
speed of 140 wpm and the worst at the speeds of both 250
wpm and 305 wpm for flash and RSVP displays.

2. Method
2.1. Subjects
In this study, 48 university students participated. All
subjects were right handed and their corrected visual acuity
was 0.8 or better and with normal color vision.

2.2. Apparatus
Standard Pseudo Isochromatic chart was used to test
subjects’ color vision, and Topcon Screenscope SS-3 was
used to test the subjects’ visual acuity. The CIE color
values for LCD were measured by the Minolta CHROMA
METER CS-100. A K7 PC with the INX 19-inch color
TFT-LCD monitor was used to display the experimental
task and the screen resolution is 1024 × 768 pixels.

Four text/background polarity-combinations of static/
dynamic information display were black-on-white/blackon-white,
white-on-black/white-on-black,
black-onwhite/white-on-black, white-on-black/black-on-white. The
color CIE coordinate values (x, y, L cd/m2) for black and
white used in this research were (0.326, 0.335, 140) and
(0.318, 0.334, 1.54). The factors of display type and
position were treated as between subjects’ factors;
nevertheless, the factors of speed and polarity combination
were treated as within subjects’ factors.

2.5 Procedure
The procedure of this study is similar to that of Wang
and Kan (2003). Before the beginning of each subject’s
experiment, two practice passages were run. At the
beginning of the experiment, a warning tone was initiated
to call the subjects’ attention to the “u” at the center of the
screen for each trial. The static and dynamic information
displays were shown on the screen simultaneously after
five seconds. For each trial, subjects were asked to read the
contents of the static and dynamic display during five
minutes. The contents of the dynamic and static displays
were selected randomly from an encyclopedia. Each
paragraph was composed of 140 Chinese characters. The
display is shown as Fig.1.
As the time expired, three multiple-choice
comprehension questions for dynamic display and three
questions for static display were displayed on the screen.
The subjects respond by clicking the mouse to choose
correct answer 1, 2, 3, or 4.

2.3. VDT workstation condition
The monitor was placed on a table 73 cm in height,
and the inclination of the monitor was 105 degrees. The
distance from the tabletop to the screen center was 23 cm,
and a chin-rest restrained the subjects’ head 30 cm above
the table and restrained the distance from the subjects’ eyes
to the screen as 60 cm. The VDT workspace was
illuminated by fluorescent lamps with the illuminace of
300 lx. No glare appeared on the screen.

2.4. Experiment design
This research investigated the effects of speed, display
type, position, and polarity combination of dynamic/static
on subjects’ comprehension for static and dynamic
information in VDT. The speed was divided into four
levels: 150, 200, 250, and 300 wpm. The three dynamic
display types used in this research were leading, RSVP,
and flash. The position of dynamic display are upper,
below, right-hand, and left-hand side of the static display.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Fig.1. The dynamic and static displays in this study

2.6. Data collection and analysis
Two dependent measures collected in this research
were comprehension for dynamic display and for static
display. The comprehension for static and dynamic
displays was calculated by dividing the number of correct
responses to the questions by the total number of questions.

All statistical analyses were performed by using
Statistical Analysis System (SAS) software. An analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the dependent
measures. Duncan’s grouping test is further used to analyze
whether the differences exist among the levels of factors
which were significant.

3. Results

Polarity combination of dynamic/static display had
no significant effect on subjects’ comprehension for static
display; however, it had a significant effect on subjects’
comprehension for dynamic display. This finding was
similar to our previous papers (Wang et al., 2003; Wang
and Kan, 2003). When the dynamic and static displays
were set as the same polarity combination (black-on-white),
subjects’ comprehension for dynamic display was better
than other polarity combinations.

3.1. Comprehension for static display

5. Conclusion
The effect of position for VDT dynamic/static
displays on users’ comprehension for static information is
not significant. All other factors including dynamic
information type, polarity combination, and speed also had
no significant effect on subjects’ comprehension.

3.2. Comprehension for dynamic display
The effect of position for VDT dynamic/static
displays on users’ comprehension for dynamic information
is not significant. Other factors including polarity
combination and speed had significant effects on subjects’
comprehension except type of dynamic information. When
display speed was set at 200 wpm, subjects’
comprehension was better than with other speed settings.
When the dynamic/static display was set to be the same
polarity combination (black-on-white/black-on-white),
subjects’ performance was better than with other polarity
combinations.

The conclusions derived from this study for website
designers are as follows:
1. The position (upper, below, right-hand, and left-hand
side of the screen) for VDT dynamic display may not
affect users’ comprehension.
2. In order to promote the comprehension of users
handling dynamic/static information reading dualtasks, the speed of dynamic display should be set at
near 200 wpm.
3. The same dynamic/static polarity combination (blackon-white/black-on-white) is suggested to be used to
promote users’ comprehension for dynamic display.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by the National
Science Council, Republic of China. (Project No. NSC 932213-E-212-009).

4. Discussion

References

The position of dynamic display also had no
significant effects on comprehension for dynamic and
static displays. The different position of dynamic display
seems not to significantly affect users’ comprehension in
this study. This finding is similar to the leading display
result of Wang et al. (2003). Nevertheless, display type of
dynamic information had no significant effect on subjects’
comprehension for static and dynamic displays. The results
are not similar to the conclusions of Wang and Kan (2003).
The difference existing in the three display types seems not
to significantly affect users’ comprehension in this study.
The possible reason for that may be the effect of taking
position of dynamic display into consideration.
Speed had no significant effect on subjects’
comprehension for static display; however, it had a
significant effect on subjects’ comprehension for dynamic
display. When display speed was set at 200 wpm, subjects’
comprehension was better than at 150 and 200 wpm.
Subjects performed the worst compression when the speed
was set at 300 wpm. The result is also not entirely
consistent with the findings of our previous papers. The
possible reason may also be the consideration for position
of dynamic display.

Granaas, M.M., McKay, T.D., Laham, R.D., Hurt, L.D.,
and Juola, J.F., 1984. Reading moving text on a
CRT screen. Human Factors, 26, 97-104.
Juola, J.F., Tiritoglu, A., and Pleunis, J., 1995. Reading
text presented on a small display. Applied
Ergonomics 26, 227-229.
Koler, P.A., Duchnicdy, R.I., and Ferguson, D.C., 1981.
Eye movement measurement of readability of CRT
displays. Human Factors, 23, 517-527.
Wang, A. H. and Chen, C. H., 2003. Effects of screen type,
Chinese
typography,
text/background
color
combination, speed, and jump length for VDT
leading display on subjects' reading performance.
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 31,
249-261.
Wang, A. H. and Chen, M. T., 2000. Effects of polarity and
luminance contrast on visual performance and VDT
display quality. International Journal of Industrial
Ergonomics, 25, 415-421.
Wang, A. H. Fan, J. J. and Chen, C. H., 2003. Effects of
VDT leading-display design on visual performance
of subjects’ in handling static and dynamic display

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

information dual-tasks. International Journal of
Industrial Ergonomics, 32, 93-104.
Wang, A. H. and Kan, Y. F. 2003. Effects of display type,
speed, and text/background color-combination of
dynamic display on subjects’ comprehension for
dual-task in reading static and dynamic display
information. International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, 23, 133-138.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

