Visualising Collaboration via Email: Finding the Key Players
Onn Azraai Puade, Theodor G Wyeld
ITEE, University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia
{puade@itee.uq.edu.au, twyeld@itee.uq.edu.au}
Abstract
Email is an important form of asynchronous
communication. Visualizing analyses of email
communication patterns during a collaborative activity
help us better understand the nature of collaboration,
and identify the key players. By analysing the contents of
email communication and adding reflective comments on
its perceived importance from the participants of a
collaboration new information can be gleaned not
immediately obvious in its original flat form. This paper
outlines a proof-of-concept prototype collaborative email
visualisation schema. Data from a collaboration case
study is analysed and subsequently employed to
construct a display of the relative impact of both key
players and the types of email used.

1. Introduction
Email as a form of asynchronous communication
allows large communities to exchange information in a
low cost environment. Email often forms the backbone to
research, industry, educational and other collaborations.
In this paper, we report on a new and novel method for
identifying the key players in a collaboration exercise
based on their impact on the group as a whole. It forms
its conclusions based on how the individual players rate
the importance of each other’s emails to the
collaboration. 176 emails were collected over a period of
6 months (197 days). The data from a peak period, over
one week when the main workshop was run, was used in
the proof-of-concept visualization method described
here.
The analysis of this subset of emails reveals the
patterns of interaction that existed within the
collaboration project email archives. From this we can
gain a better understanding of the nature and
characteristic of cooperation and collaboration in
general. More specifically, it is used to identify the key
collaborators.
This paper is organized into four sections. The
following section provides an overview other research in
this field. Then we present our case study including three
specific analyses of the results and their visualisation.
This is followed by a discussion on interpretation of the
results and their visualisation. This paper concludes with
a brief discussion on how email visualisation can assist
future collaborations.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

1.2 Collaboration Visualization
Roschelle and Teasley [14] define collaboration as
“a coordinated, synchronous activity that is the result of
a continued attempt to construct and maintain a shared
conception of a problem.’’ Brna [6] suggests
collaboration can be “seen as a set of possible
interrelationships between participants.” Collaboration in
a virtual team context is the act of working together on a
common task or process [4]. All these definitions rely on
communication enabling technologies. Central to these is
email. Card et al [7] reminds us that computer-supported,
visual representations of abstract data amplifies our
ability to make sense of large collections of data. Visual
representations aid and enable the user to understand the
different kinds and forms of data. The structural
modeling and graphical representation of collaboration
assists in its visualization. Creating an overview plays a
crucial role in getting the user to see the big picture; only
to later focus on what they consider to be an important
part of it. Such an overview [15] of the structural and the
behavioral aspects of collaboration helps define how all
the elements in particular environments interrelate.
Within this, the behavioral actions and interactions can
be seen to evolve over time [5]. We can visualize the
various user roles and their grand purpose to the
collaboration as a whole [12].

1.3 Collaboration Email Visualization
A key factor in any collaboration exercise is the
exchange of email [9, 18]. There are several advantages
to studying email as a measure of collaboration. These
include the social networks formed, its ubiquitous usage,
and high volume. Moreover, within email, its structural
elements (sender and receiver), cumulative structural
characteristics (frequency, reciprocity) and temporal
dimensions (timestamps) are automatically recorded
along with its contents [1]. These can be used to
construct
visualisations
for
displaying
their
interrelationships graphically. For Divitini and
Farshchian [8], email is seen as a key collaboration
medium. They organise the roles of email as those used
to access experts, resolve issues and decisions, provide
awareness to project-related issues and support for
irregular
synchronous
collaboration.
Applying
visualizations and its various techniques to email
archives helps aid information retrieval processes and
make analyses of the trends embedded [10]. Such salient

structures cannot be readily comprehended in their
original text-based flat file forms.
Visualization of communication patterns can thus
help identify collaborative innovation networks – groups
of self-motivated individuals with a common vision
working together on a new idea, via the internet [11].
Analysis of interaction logs (including email) can enable
identification of, among others, key contributors and
important collaborators in organizations. It is within this
frame that the focus of our study is set. Of the many
email visualization studies conducted to-date, Perer et
al’s [13] emerges as pertinent to our study. Perer et al
extract contextual information by visualizing the
temporal rhythms of social relationship in email
archives. Their classification of the different types of
interaction with email collections can be seen in Table 1.
Table 1 Types of interaction with email
collections
Individual

Organizational

Current

Managing an
individual
user’s
current
inbox (A)

Managing
current email
within
an
organization
(B)

Archived

Exploring an
archive of an
individual’s
message (D)

Exploring an
archive of an
organization’s
messages (E)

Social
Managing
current
conversations
within
a
public space
(C)
Exploring an
archive of a
public space
(F)

Our study addresses the category in Cell E. Our
collection of archived messages provided the raw data
for a socio-centric study. With this, we have identified
also the roles individuals adopt and types of interactions
between their social networks.
Table 2 Categorization of email via its contents
functionality
Category
Awareness

Decision making

Accessing expert
Feedback
Resolving issues

Description
Email with contents that make users
aware of issues, by announcement
Email with elements of decision making
on key issues in the collaboration which
determine the outcome of project related
issue, local or global
Enquiry directed to an expert on
technical and administrational issues,
local
Feedback
to
project
related
announcement or enquiry, local or global
Mass enquiry soliciting comment on a
specific issue, global

The socio-centric approach was chosen over the
alternative, egocentric analysis, because, rather then
focusing on a single individual’s emails, our study uses
many message archives to extract patterns representing
an overall social structure. It is hoped our visualization
of the email archives will serve as a tool for self
reflection for its participants to enable and motivate
better collaboration outcomes. Other socially organized

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

visualizations include Viegas et al [16, 17], and Begole
et al [3]. Divitini and Farshchian’s [8] key roles of email
in collaboration was extended to create an expert system
to organize and classify our email collection, within
Perer et al’s [13] typology (see Table 2). It was used as a
control study for later comparison.

2. Case Study
2.1 Setting
The participants in this study came from diverse
backgrounds: facilities manager, project coordinator,
technical assistant, chief executive officer, secretary,
research assistant, external consultant, project leader,
artist, programmer and project manager. They represent
also a wide range of ages 21-51. Their acculturation to
email as a communication tool was assumed. This study
focuses on email visualization of a specific, timeconstrained,
event-driven
collaboration.
The
collaboration involved the organization and running of a
workshop to develop resources for a massive multi-user
game. The workshop ran for three days. The CEO from a
participating organisation and their chief computer
programmer traveled from Canada for the workshop as
part of other business in Australia. 20 individuals from 6
organizations were involved in the activity over 197 days
(i-mmersion Canada, ACID Australia, University of
Queensland, Queensland University of Technology,
Silicon Graphics Inc, Institute of Modern Art Brisbane).
The period chosen for analysis in this study represents
the period just before and after the workshop was run.
There were 24 emails sent by 10 participants over this
period. 11 participants from 3 organizations are
identified in the email collection. The collaboration
involved various activities in different location and
continents. This included the workshop studio, the
research organization, the private company (Canada), the
host university, and private residences.

2.2 Process
The contents of the 24 emails were analyzed. Each
email included embedded prior emails, subject
descriptions, sender, receiver(s), date and message. From
this data, we were able to plot the connection between
the various collaborating participants and the types of
topics discussed, and the temporal sequence. Initial
analysis conducted on this information yielded structural
results. However, what many email analyses and
subsequent information visualizations fail to do is seek
reflective information from their participants to include
in their datasets. To this end, we conducted a survey with
all those participants recorded in the 24 email subset.
This information was then used to construct
visualization schemas that better reflect users’ reasonings
for how the importance of an email is perceived within
such a collaboration exercise. This yielded surprising
results and is finally compared with our initial ‘expert
categorization system’.

terms of a particular participants ‘perceived’ importance
and contribution when rated by all participants.

2.3 Analyses
2.3.1 Network Diagram Analysis
In the first round of analyses, network graphs were
constructed from the collection of emails. Node and link
graphs were generated using Pajek [2], a social network
analysis visualization tool. Undirected graphs were used,
with the typical vertices representing emails and nodes
representing participants. Figure 2a shows how the 11
participants were connected by the 24 emails; and, in
figure 2b, by adding email nodes, we can see which
emails connect participants as individuals or as part of a
group (Sender nodes are connected to email nodes which
are connected to receivers).

2.3.2 Email Content Analysis
Automatic classification by data mining and
information retrieval techniques can be seen in many
research studies which focus on document management
and organization [1, 20, 21]. To demonstrate this we
recast Divitini and Farshchian’s [8] email roles as a
classification system. We used this to categorized our
emails according to their content where: A = Awareness;
D = Decision making; E = Accessing expert; F = Feedback;
and, R = Resolving issues. We found some emails had

multiple categories. This categorization formed the basis
of our expert control system used later to compare with
other systems (see Table 2).
Table 3 Tabulated category and ranking for 24
emails
Email
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

(a)

(b)
Figure 2 (a) People-to-people and (b) People-toemail diagram
From Figure 2a the people-to-people diagram [19],
we can see the three participants (tw, cg and jh) at the
centre of the graph are the most connected. This suggests
they had a more active participation in the overall
collaboration. In Figure 2b, we can see that, by adding
the emails as nodes, a sender-email-receiver pattern
emerges that now includes more participants in the
highly connected category. This diagram suggests there
are more active participants than what is first suggested
by the people-to-people schema. However, as we will see
later, these visualization methods can be misleading in

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Category
A
E, A
A
A
A, F
A, D, R
A, R
F, A, D
A, D
A
E, R
F, A
F, R
A
A
A, F
F
F
A
F
A, F
A
A
A

Aggregated Rating
20
20
16
13
20
20
19
21
18
14
14
12
18
21
17
17
18
23
20
17
20
15
18
24

After categorizing the emails based on this system,
we conducted a survey with the participants identified in
the 24 email collection. Each participant was given a
printed copy of the 24 emails in sequential order. At the
end of each email was a check box survey field. They
were asked to rate each individual email in term of its
importance on a scale of 0 - Not applicable, 1 - Not
important, 2 - Important, and 3 - Very important. A
comment field was included for participants to provide
reasons why they gave the email a particular rating.
When no check box was marked for an email, this was
recorded as ‘0’ or ‘Not applicable’. Some chose not to
give reasons for their rating of an email. The overall
expert category and aggregated participants’ ratings by
email are provided in Table 3.

Table 4 Data by participants, sorted by average
rating
Participants
WM
CB
AK
CG
JH
TW
RH
BL
AB
SS

No of
emails
1
1
1
5
1
5
3
2
1
4

Average
rating
2.4
2.3
2
1.9
1.9
1.84
1.83
1.65
1.6
1.45

No of emails x
Average rating
2.4
2.3
2
9.5
1.9
9.2
5.5
3.3
1.6
5.8

From Table 3, we see that the highest rating (24)
was for an email of type A (Awareness) and the lowest
(12) was for an email of type FA (Feedback Awareness). To gain a better understanding of these
extremes in the context of the overall collaboration, we
need to re-organize the table by number of emails per
participant, type, ratings and average ratings (see Table
4).
From this organisation we can make some
preliminary interpretations of it: if we say that the
average rating represents the ‘loudness’ (L) of a
participant’s message within the collaboration, and
multiply their loudness by the number of emails (N) sent,
we can say this is a measure of their overall ‘impact’ (I)
on the collaboration.
LxN=I
Table 5 Data by email category, sorted by
average rating
Category
A
AF
F
FAD
EA
ADR
AR
AD
FR
ER

No of
emails
10
4
3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Loudness

Impact

1.78
1.725
1.93
2.1
2
2
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.4

17.8
6.9
5.79
2.1
2
2
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.4

Hence, from table 4 we find the highest (average)
rated email (2.4), or ‘loudest’ emailer, was sent by
participant WM, and the lowest (average) rated email
(1.45), or the least ‘loud’ emailer, was sent by participant
SS. What is interesting here is that the loudest emailer
sent only a single email, whereas the least loud emailer
sent many emails. If we now look at these results in
terms of impact we find the loudest emailer has low
impact whereas the least loud emailer has higher impact.
When we compared these interpreted results with table 3
it demonstrates how different representations of
information can tell very different stories. Such as, many

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

less loud emails can have a greater overall impact than a
single louder email.
We can organize the categorization of emails in a
similar manner (see Table 5). From Table 5 we see that,
while there is little ‘loudness’ variation across the
different types of emails, there are clearly more emails of
type ‘awareness’ which, in turn, generate the greatest
impact.
However, in Table 6, which compares participant
impact with type of email, we notice that the participants
with the lowest and highest impact both include the same
type of email (awareness) which is also the loudest.
Hence, it appears it may not be useful to correlate the
type of email with participant impact. Clearly, other
factors are contributing to participants impact beyond
simply the type and number of emails sent. As we will
see in the next section, it is the rating applied to
individual emails by all participants that, when averaged
and multiplied by the number emails they sent,
determines a participant’s overall impact.
Table 6 Impact value and type of emails sent for
each participant
Participants
CG
TW
SS
RH
BL
WM
CB
AK
JH
AB

Impact
9.5
9.2
5.8
5.5
3.3
2.4
2.3
2
1.9
1.6

Type of emails
A, FAD, AF, ADR
EA, AF, AD, A
ER, AF, A
FR, A, F
A
A
F
A
AR
A

2.3.3 Visualizing Collaboration Impact
We can visualize the results of these tabulations. We
chose a system which should allow one to gain an easy
understanding of the various forms of information
contained. For the impact by participant tabulation in
table 4, this includes participants’ roles (bracketed
terms), the number of emails they sent (orange dots),
their average rating or loudness (blue dots) and their
combined rating by number of emails or impact (dashed
circle). The concentric rings this information is arranged
within indicate the four rating scales: 0 - Not applicable,
1 - Not important, 2 - Important, and 3 - Very important
(see Figure 3).
We can similarly visualize the impact by type
tabulation in table 5. It includes, type of email (capital
letters), the number of emails (orange dots), their average
rating or loudness (blue dots) and their combined rating
by number of emails or impact (dashed circle). The
concentric rings this information is arranged within
indicate the four rating scales: 0 - Not applicable, 1 - Not
important, 2 - Important, and 3 - Very important (see
Figure 4).

3. Discussion

Figure 3 The visualization widget showing
individual-oriented data

Figure 4 The visualisation widget with the
expert system categorization data
Both these visualisations help us to gain ‘at a
glance’ a better understanding of the information
contained in the tables whence the data came. For
example, we notice in figure 3 (impact by participant)
the loudest emailer is not necessarily the one with the
greatest impact. Similarly, in figure 4 (impact by type),
we notice that there is little variation in loudness across
all types of emails yet one particular email type
(awareness) has a much greater impact than all others. In
this sense, the graphical visualisation of collaboration via
email assists quick identification of key players and
types of email with the greatest impact in an easily
assimilable form.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

From the three types of analyses discussed in this
paper, we can draw some preliminary conclusions. In the
first analysis, we were able to isolate the connectivity of
participants – to each other and through the emails they
sent and received. This was based on the objective
information available from the emails themselves.
In the second analysis, after conducting a survey
with the participants to add their reflective input to the
dataset in the form of an importance rating for each
email, we were able to expand our connectivity
visualisation to include how important emails, type of
emails, and individual participants, were perceived by all
participants. We could also aggregate and average these
ratings to make comparisons from the various features
captured.
To make a reasonable comparison between these
features, we used Divitini and Farshchian’s [8] roles for
email within Perer’s [13] typology as a control. Of the 5
noted by Divitini and Farshchian [8], 10 subtypes were
identified. We used these to group emails by type and
compare the ratings applied by participants collected in
the survey. We found there was little variation across
types as an average rating. However, when we applied
the average rating to individual participants, we found
more variety. Indeed, the highest rated email was from a
participant who only sent a single email. This raised the
question: “how to define importance?”
As the survey asked participants to rate emails in
terms of their importance, we needed to find a method
for correlating how important a participant’s email was
with how many emails were sent by that participant. We
considered the average rating of importance applied by
all participants to a particular email as a measure of how
‘loudly’ this participant’s message was received. Hence,
how important a participant’s contribution was to the
collaboration was a factor of both how loudly their
emails where received and how many emails they sent. If
we simply multiply their loudness (or average rating per
email) by the number of emails sent, we find a measure
of their ‘impact’ on the overall collaboration. We applied
this concept also to our control system to find the impact
of types of emails.
What we notice from the visualisation of these two
analyses is that there was more variation between
participants in both loudness and impact. While, in the
case of the control system, there was little variation in
loudness between the different types of email, there was
greater variation between impact than that displayed in
the participant impact.
From this, as a system for tracking collaboration, we
can say: predefined roles, such as project leader,
manager, coordinator, and so on, do not necessarily
generate the greatest impact on a collaborative project
over time. However, the traditional purpose of these
roles – to make announcements on progress, meetings,
and queries – is supported by the ‘by-type’ visualisation.

[7]

4. Conclusion
We started out by trying to find the key players in a
collaboration by analysing a subset of emails from a
larger collection. What we found was that there is more
variation between how the importance of participant’s
emails is perceived compared to the importance of the
types of email sent. However, emails of type ‘awareness’
clearly have a greater impact on the collaboration
because of their dominant use. On the other hand, the
traditional purveyors of announcements – managers,
leaders, coordinators, and so on – were not identified as
having the greatest participant impact. Hence, we can
conclude that despite being a team effort, this
collaboration relied to a large degree on the activities of
the research assistant – an often overlooked role.
Furthermore the importance of providing both an expert
system analysis of email roles and feedback from the
participants in a collaboration exercise is crucial to a
comprehensive understanding of the importance and
impact of contributors. This is demonstrated by our two
visualisation schemas.
As a visualisation tool for tracking collaboration
participation, it is envisaged future implementations of
the proof-of-concept prototype described here could be
used to foster greater awareness of individual roles
within a dynamic collaboration over time. This would
involve incremental updates on email importance as they
are received, entered into the visualisation tool for others
to see. The nature of the visualisation schema developed
here is also scalable – more participants can be added by
simply including more sectors. In time, this could be
useful also in gauging other forms of collaboration
research impact.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

M. V. Alstyne and J. Zhang, "EmailNet - A System for
Mining Social Influence and Network Topology in
Communication," 2003.
V. Batagelj and A. Mrvar, "Pajek - Program for Large
Network Analysis," Connections, vol. 21, pp. 47-57,
1998.
J. B. Begole, J. C. Tang, R. B. Smith, and N.
Yankelovich, "Work rhythms: analyzing visualizations
of awareness histories of distributed groups " in
Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA ACM Press, 2002 pp. 334-343
R. P. Biuk-Aghai, "Visualization of Web-Based
Workspace Structures " in Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Web Information Systems
Engineering (WISE'00)-Volume 1 - Volume 1 IEEE
Computer Society, 2000 pp. 302
R. P. Biuk-Aghai, "Visualizing Structural and
Behavioural Aspects of Virtual Collaboration " in
Proceedings of the 10th IEEE International Workshops
on
Enabling
Technologies:
Infrastructure
for
Collaborative Enterprises IEEE Computer Society, 2001
pp. 279-284
P. Brna, "Models of Collaboration," 2002.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

References
[1]

[8]

IEEE

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman,
Readings in information visualization: using vision to
think. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
1999.
M. Divitini and B. A. Farshchian, "Collaboration and
Coordination through Basic Internet Tools: A Case
Study," presented at World MultiConference SCI/ISA,
Orlando, Florida, 1999.
N. Ducheneaut and V. Belotti, "Email as a habitat: An
exploration of embedded personal information
management," ACM Interactions, vol. 8, pp. 30-38,
2001.
S. Frau, J. C. Roberts, and N. Boukhelifa, "Dynamic
Coordinated Email Visualization," presented at WSCG
2005, Plzen, Czech Republic, 2005.
P. A. Gloor, R. Laubacher, S. B. C. Dynes, and Y. Zhao,
"Visualization
of Communication Patterns
in
Collaborative Innovation Networks - Analysis of Some
W3C Working Groups " in Proceedings of the twelfth
international conference on Information and knowledge
management New Orleans, LA, USA ACM Press, 2003
pp. 56-60
B. Otjacques, M. Noirhomme, and F. Feltz,
"Visualization of Interactions Within a Project: The IVF
Framework," Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
Volume 3675, pp. Pages 61 - 70, 2005.
A. Perer, B. Shneiderman, and D. W. Oard, "Using
Rhythms of Relationships to Understand Email
Archives," Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 2005.
J. Roschelle and S. D. Teasley, “The construction of
shared knowledge in collaborative problem solving,” in
Computer supported collaborative learning Berlin,
Springer, 1995 pp. 69-97
B. Shneiderman, "The eyes have it: a task by data type
taxonomy for information visualizations," presented at
Visual Languages, 1996. Proceedings., IEEE Symposium
on, 1996.
F. B. Viégas and J. Donath, "Social Network
Visualization: Can We Go Beyond the Graph?,"
presented at CSCW'04 Workshop on Social Networks,
Chicago, IL, USA, 2004.
F. B. Viégas, D. Boyd, D. H. Ngunyen, J. Potter, and J.
Donath, "Digital Artifacts for Remembering and
Storytelling: PostHistory and Social Network
Fragments," presented at Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
2004.
S. Whittaker and C. Sidner, "Email overload: exploring
personal information management of email," presented at
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing system, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada, 1996.
R. Xiong, M. A. Smith, and S. M. Drucker,
"Visualizations of Collaborative Information for EndUsers," Microsoft Research 1998.
E. Crawford, J. Kay and E. McCreath, "IEMS - The
Intelligent Email Sorter" in Proceedings of the
Nineteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning Sydney, Australia, Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., 2002 pp. 83-90
E. Giacoletto and K. Aberer, "Automatic Expansion of
Manual Email Classifications Based on Text Analysis" in
2nd International Conference on Ontologies, Databases,
and Applications (ODBASE) Sicily, 2003 pp. 785-802.

