Voromap: A Voronoi-based tool for visual exploration of multi-dimensional data
Roberto Pinho

Maria Cristina Ferreira de Oliveira
Rosane Minghim
Marinho G. Andrade
Instituto de Ciˆencias Matem´aticas e de Computac¸a˜ o - USP
Av. Trabalhador S˜ao-carlense, 400 – Centro
Caixa Postal: 668 - CEP: 13560-970 - S˜ao Carlos – SP – Brazil
{rpinho,cristina, rminghim, marinho}@icmc.usp.br
Abstract

A map of multi-dimensional data is a graphical representation – defined in 2D or 3D space – of a set of data
points that reflects similarity relationships amongst them.
Triangulations of those points can be produced to generate surface meshes on which additional information can be
mapped to visual attributes such as color or height. Such
surfaces may then be used to explore the data set and the
similarities between the different data points. In this paper
we introduce Voromap, an exploration tool that is based on
Voronoi diagrams of the projected data, and compare that
representation with a standard representation that uses triangulations. Voronoi diagrams represent each element in
the data set by the area of a polygon in which every point
within the polygon is closer to its generating point than to
any other point from the data set. A user experiment was
conducted to compare Voronoi maps with equivalent maps
represented by surface triangulations explored with a similar triangulation-based tool.

1. Introduction
Multi-dimensional and ever-growing data sets are widely
available. Visual Data Exploration can help by making
the most of the human ability of making sense of a high
load of data [9].Data maps are often used to explore highdimensional data sets and also to explore data where similarity relations can be defined.
A map of multi-dimensional data is a graphical representation of a set of points which reflects their similarity
relationships. Such a map is usually generated by a dimensional reduction or point placement technique that defines
the point positions on a plane. Triangulations can be produced from the points to generate a surface mesh on which
additional information can be mapped to visual attributes
such as color or height. The resulting surface representation

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

can then be used to explore the data set and the similarities
between data points, with appropriate interaction tools.
Some existing multi-dimensional map solutions show
each data item as single dots or triangulation vertices, with
no associated property. Others use glyphs to represent
items. These representations waste space around the element that could be used to enhance interpretation or to enrich the presentation with added dimensions. Voronoi polygons can provide an alternative that uses screen space effectively for data display and exploration.
In this paper we present Voromap, an exploration tool
that uses Voronoi diagrams as the geometric structure for
presenting projected points. It was built as an alternative
to the Spider Cursor [17], an exploratory tool for data represented as triangulation-based surfaces. Voromap replaces
the original triangulation with a Voronoi diagram. The user
explores the map by moving a standard cursor over its representation.
To compare both tools a user experiment was conducted
using maps of textual document collections. Text data sets
pose an extra challenge for multi-dimensional visualizations, due to their intrinsic complexity and strategic importance. Experimental results point to Voronoi maps as a good
alternative to conventional triangulation-based surface representations.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses related work on Voronoi-based techniques to explore
multi-dimensional data sets. Section 3 describes the general
process of multi-dimensional data exploration by means of
geometric projections. Voromap and the Spider Cursor are
described in Section 4. Section 5 describes the user experiment designed to evaluate Voromap. Section 6 presents the
results obtained with the experiment and a discussion. Finally, Section 7 presents the conclusions and discusses topics for further investigation.

2. Related Work

3. Multi-dimensional data exploration by geometric projection

This Section briefly reviews multi-dimensional data set
exploration solutions for document mapping that apply
Voronoi polygons.
Voronoi Treemaps [4] is an extension of the well-known
Treemap method for visualizing hierarchical data. The approach adopted in Voronoi Treemaps is to enable subdivisions of the viewing area into polygons, in order to avoid
problems with the aspect ratio of the rectangles. Although
non-hierarchical data can be visualized with treemaps, each
dimension is still evident, limiting the number of dimensions that can be effectively handled.
Ross et al. [20] included a Voronoi component in HIVE.
This component employs a Voronoi diagram to cluster elements that have already been positioned on a 2D space
by multi-dimensional scaling. It subsequently uses Voronoi
polygons to denote these clusters in a planar view.
Nocke et al. [19] use a Voronoi tessellation to represent
color coded cluster centroids on a planar geographical map.
The whole map is thus colored according to the value of the
cluster closest to each point.
The InfoSky visual explorer [3] combines a traditional
tree browser and a telescope view of a galaxy to show a
hierarchically organized document corpus grouped by similarity. Collections are bounded by polygons, as usual with
constellations in stellar maps. These polygons are weighted
Voronoi polygons, but documents are shown as stars (dots).
Skupin introduces a cartographic approach to map nongeographical information, deriving 2D visualizations of a
set of conference abstracts [22]. He also uses Voronoi polygons to sub-divide screen space. His work differs from
Voromap in that: (i) it is strictly 2D, (ii) documents are
depicted by points, and (iii) he adopts a different pointplacement procedure. For point-placement he builds a selforganizing map (SOM) [15] to place documents on a grid.
Whenever multiple documents fall onto the same grid cell,
their position inside the grid is randomly determined. This
has some drawbacks: (i) the final placement is highly dependent on the grid chosen for the SOM; (ii) the position
of a group of documents within the same cell would not reflect their relative position, neither their relative position as
related to documents in neighboring cells.
Fabrikant [11, 23] adopts a very similar approach to
Skupin’s, using Voronoi polygons and mapping surface
height as density. However, samples featured on [23]
present stepped, rather unnatural, surfaces. They use Pycnophylactic Interpolation [26] to obtain smoother surfaces,
but the consequence is that boundaries are no longer clearly
depicted. Voromap was proposed as an attempt to address
such problems.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Geometric projection techniques aim at finding “interesting” projections of multi-dimensional data [14]. Extracting structure from a multi-dimensional data set for display
usually requires applying some dimension reduction technique to an initial vector representation. Multi-dimensional
Scaling (MDS), Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and
Single Value Decomposition (SVD) can be used, but their
computational cost is high. They can sometimes be replaced by faster projection techniques such as Fastmap [12])
and Nearest Neighbor Projection (NNP) [24]). These techniques provide an initial point placement that usually requires further processing to improve point positioning and
recover, to some extent, information lost in the projection
process.
Force-directed Placement approaches [6, 18] can avoid,
partially or completely, the extensive calculations required
in dimension reduction techniques. They start with a semirandom point placement and re-adjust point positions based
on attraction by similarity.
Dimension reduction is altogether avoided by a technique that maps every dimension onto the 2D screen space,
as in Parallel Coordinates [13]. This strategy, however, is
limited to the available screen space. If the number of dimensions exceeds the hundreds, as it is the case with text,
some dimension reduction is mandatory. Also, it shows data
attributes as units, rather than data set elements.
In this work, we are concerned with exploring data
mapped originally as points onto 2D space, each point representing an element in the data set. Moreover, we focus on
representations in which proximity between the points, after projection, is meant to imply similarity. This is basically
the goal of most dimension reduction techniques, i.e., keeping distance relationships between elements in the reduced
space as faithful as possible to their distances in the original
space.
The data sets used in the user tests of Voromap are text
collections, a case of multi-dimensional visualization with
intrinsic difficulties related to high dimensionality. Usually
text processing and visualization tasks employ the vector
space model [21]. To reach a satisfactory representation,
texts are submitted to pre-processing (for stemming and
stop words elimination). In the final representation texts
are vectors and terms (or n-grams) are the dimensions (attributes). The coordinates of a text in that space are the
weights of the terms based on their frequencies in each text.
Dimensionality tends to be very high for text document collections, typically, reaching the thousands even for small to
medium data bases.
The vector representation of a text corpus enables building geometric projections similarly to any other multi-

dimensional data set. Cosine distances serve as a similarity measure for that representation. Other similarity relations between texts can be built, for example using the concept of Kolmogorov complexity between character streams,
which allows computing distances among documents in a
single step [25]. Once data items are projected onto a 2D
space, many surface and graph-based visualizations can be
built [3, 8, 11, 23, 1, 7], often using visual attributes such as
height and color to reflect relevant user-defined properties.
For this article, Interactive Document Maps –
IDMAP [16] was chosen as a baseline for displaying
text sets. IDMAP is a set of combined techniques aimed
at building document maps by projection. In the final
projection, texts are points in 2D space that can be connected to build a view of the text set. We compare Voronoi
diagrams (Voromaps) and its corresponding interaction tool
with an existing multi-dimensional data exploration tool
that employs a triangulation view coupled with the Spider
Cursor [17] for interaction.

4. Voromap and the Spider Cursor
IDMAP builds a Delaunay triangulation of the points,
from which a surface model is generated for user exploration that represents projected documents based on their
similarity. Surface color and height can map attributes such
as document relevance, class, citation counts or publishing
year; they can also map levels of similarity between documents and groups of documents, as depicted in Figure 1,
which shows visualizations of newspaper articles.

a)

b)

Figure 1. IDMAP views of a text set. a) Triangulation tool and the Spider Cursor. b)
Voromap tool.
Interaction on IDMAP surface representations is supported by the Spider Cursor application, which shows a
cursor over the surface triangulation as the user moves the
mouse (Figure 1a)). The triangulation edges from the selected document to its neighbors are highlighted, resembling spider legs, a resource that provides spatial navigation [10]. Simultaneously, scalars associated with each
document are displayed with aural (sound) attributes. The
point´s label is shown at the window top (in the figure it
gives the headline of the news piece under the cursor).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Voromap replaces the Delaunay triangulation surface
with Voronoi polygons. Color and height map text properties, similarly to the Delaunay-based surface. The height
of the circumcenter in each Voronoi polygon is set as the average height of the corresponding Delaunay triangle. Spatial navigation is provided by highlighting the cell under the
cursor. Neighboring cells are also highlighted, but with a
lighter color than the selected cell (Figure 1b).
Next we present the user experiment designed to compare both tools for some basic text exploration tasks.

5. User experiment
This Section discusses the motivation for the user experiment and its setup. Results are presented and analyzed in
Section 6.
The user experiment consisted of performing four tasks:
two search tasks, one task where document groups should
be ordered according to the amount of documents in the
group, and a third task where the three most similar documents in the collection should be selected.
To select a data element in the map Delaunay triangulation map using the Spider Cursor, the user must point the
cursor at a triangle vertex or its nearby pixels. Not all pixels assigned to an element by this procedure are necessarily
closest to that vertex than to other vertices in the set. Thus,
while aiming at a particular document, the user might need
to aim at a region bounded by a distance of a few pixels
from each document. In the Voromap application, on the
other hand, the selectable area associated with each document comprises the pixels closest to that document, a property inherent to Voronoi diagrams. This area is precisely the
Voronoi polygon around a document, which is clearly distinguished from the others. Therefore, the perceived targets
is larger than that of a triangle vertex and its neighboring
pixel. Fitt’s laws states that:
Selection T ime = a + blog2 (D/W + 1.0)
where D is the distance to the target´s center, W is the
target´s width, and a and b are constants determined empirically [27]. From that, one hypothesizes that selection
time would be shorter on Voronoi maps than on triangulation maps. This fact motivated the definition of two search
tasks in the user experiment.
We also wanted to verify if, by clearly distinguishing
each document from the others, the Voromap would give
users a better perception of the number of elements contained in a particular, clearly distinguishable, group of elements. The third task was defined to investigate this issue.
The fourth task was included to verify if height perception, which was used to denote inter-element similarity, was
somewhat affected by the use of Voromap, in comparison to
the mapping used in the Delaunay surface.

Table 1. Surface type used for each user
group.
Task
1 – Search
2 – Search
3 – Quantity
4 – Similarity

Group 1
Delaunay
Voronoi
Delaunay
Delaunay

Group 2
Voronoi
Delaunay
Voronoi
Voronoi

Subjects were third and fourth-year computer science
and computer engineering undergraduate students, separated into two groups (1 and 2). Each group performed the
four tasks sequentially using one of the two tools Delaunaybased surfaces or Voromap, as described in Table 1. The
tests were performed in 4 sessions.
The document sets used in these tasks consisted of previously labeled news articles – written in Portuguese, the
native Language of our subjects – obtained from a major newspaper (“Folha de S˜ao Paulo”) and available in the
L´acio-Ref Corpus [2].
IDMAP was used to project the document set and
generate both visualizations (Delaunay-based surfaces and
Voromaps). Fastmap was employed for dimension reduction, and similarity was computed with the cosine distance
over the vector representation of the collection. Custom applications were developed for each task using C++ and the
Visualization Toolkit v. 3.1.2 (see http://www.vtk.org). Figure 1 illustrates both maps, as presented for Task 1.
Color mapping was used to identify articles according to
the newspaper section where they were published. Height
(when present) mapped levels of similarity between elements after projection, calculated by hierarchical clustering of the projected points. Therefore higher elements are
closer to their neighbors than lower ones.
Figure 1 shows the Delaunay-surface-based and
Voronoi-based applications used for Tasks 1 and 2,
respectively. This data set consisted of 1016 articles.
In Task 1, users should first select (by mouse clicking)
any article from the sports news section. Then, they should
find and select any article that contained a particular word
in its title (aprox. 5% of the news in that section contained
that word). Finally, they should find an article with a particular title. This latter article was in the sports section and
included in its title the same specific word searched for in
the previous step. The goal was to evaluate completion time
for several location tasks (first locating group, then theme,
then a specific document).
Task 2 was to repeat Task 1, with the same data set and
goals, but using a different visualization – the one the subject had not used before. We aimed to evaluate the effect on
execution time of having performed the same task with the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

other tool.
Figure 2 shows the Voronoi and Delaunay applications
used on Task 3, in which only flat surfaces were presented.
The user had to rank the four news sections shown according to the amount of documents depicted in each one. For
that s/he should click on any article from each section in
decreasing order of estimated number of articles. This data
set had 180 articles taken from the technology section, 110
from finance, 95 from sports and 25 from the local news
section. The goal of this task was to identify which tool (if
any) presented better results for group size estimation.

Figure 2. Task 3 application.
On left,
voromap. Delaunay based surface on the
right.

Finally, in Task 4 the user should select the 3 most similar documents from a data set of 400 articles, which meant
the three ’highest’ elements on the representation. Figure 3
depicts both user maps for completing Task 4. Here, the
goal was to estimate if height perception (a difficult task
under normal circumstances) was anyhow affected by the
choice of visualization.

Figure 3. Task 4 application.
On left,
voromap. Delaunay based surface on the
right.

All users were unfamiliar with the tools, and most were

Table 2. Task completion times, in seconds.
Delaunay
Voromap
Task
avg.
std.dev.
avg.
std.dev.
1
510.63 422.04 432.37 368.76
2
179.20 213.60 302.00 292.02
3
99.17
54.32
105.06
47.61
4
157.06 113.01 190.84
88.91

also unfamiliar with visualization. They had 5 minutes to
get acquainted with the tool before starting, and had written
instructions for the tasks.

6. Results
This Section presents the results of the user experiment,
providing some discussion and analysis.
Completion times for each task are shown on Table 2.
The average completion time for Task 1 with Voromap
(432s) was slightly lower than those obtained with the Delaunay visualization (510s). However, statistical analysis
did not reject the hypothesis that their distribution is identical (details of the analysis in Subsection 6.1). In fact, further
analysis has shown that completion times of Tasks 3 and 4
were slightly lower with the Delaunay visualization.
Statistical analysis has also shown that there is a significant improvement in time taken to repeat the task when it is
first done using Voronoi first than when using triangulation
first. The reverse, however, is not true.
The initial hypothesis about search effectiveness in
Voromap was not confirmed. We can consider that both visualizations have the same impact on user completion times
for the particular tasks evaluated.
When evaluating which was better for ranking groups
by number of elements, the user experiment shows that
Voromap was better than triangulation (see Table 3), but
not at a statistically significant level, as detailed in Subsection 6.1. This might be explained by the fact that the area
assigned to each element varies on Voromap, which may be
misleading, since area has no meaning in this mapping.
It should be noted that every single subject in the user
experiment was able to identify correctly the groups with
the highest number of elements (180) and the one with the
lowest number of elements (25). Mistakes happened only
when sorting the middle range groups, with 110 and 95 elements. It shows first that the users understood clearly the
task at hand and that, although proximity between elements
is independent of the number of group elements, a large difference in numbers is easily estimated.
Finally, precise height estimation was poor, as expected,
and slightly better with triangulation, though, again, with
no statistical significance. Users rated this a very hard task.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Table 3. Number of correct results for Task 3
Delaunay Voronoi
Correct
18
19
Incorrect
17
11
Correct (%)
51.43%
59.38%

6.1. Statistical analysis procedures
The Wilcoxon rank sum is a useful nonparametric procedure originally proposed by F. Wilcoxon (1945). An equivalent alternative version was independently proposed by H.
Mann and D. Whitney (1947) (see [5]). The Wilcoxon rank
sum tests whether two populations are identical (the null hypothesis is Ho: The two population distributions are identical). The P value is the significance probability that the
populations generating two independent samples, X and Y
are identical. α is the desired level of significance, which
we fixed in 5%. This analysis was used in comparing task
completion times.
To evaluate whether success or failure in accomplishing
Task 3 is independent of the tool employed, we used the
independence Pearson’s test [5] to test independency in a
contingence 2x2 table. The null hypothesis states that occurrence of success and failure is independent of the tool.
The null hypothesis Ho is rejected if the outcome of the
test is superior to the critical chi-square value (χ 2 ), which
is 3.84, with df = 1 and α = 5%. The value observed was
0.42. We do not reject the null hypothesis at a significance
level of α = 5%.

7. Conclusions and future work
Results showed no statistically significant difference
between performance in the tasks evaluated when using
Voronoi or Delaunay maps. Other results are still to be analyzed and further evaluations of other tasks performed.
Two peculiarities of Voronoi-based surfaces deserve further investigation. One of them results from the color assignment employed in Voronoi diagrams. In the triangulation, color is mapped to vertices. Therefore, the color
around a particular item is obtained by interpolating its
color and the ones of its surrounding vertices, causing a
color variation in the map that has no meaning. In many
cases, such as in neighborhood examination, this might induce an erroneous interpretation. Voronoi polygons are uniform in color, avoiding the problem. We plan to confirm that
with proper user evaluations.
Another peculiarity to test is that the Voromap approach
affords visual attributes that are not possible (or meaningful) in triangulations. Examples are (i) area size (if using
weighted Voronoi diagrams); (ii) boundary width and; (iii)
boundary color. These attributes were not evaluated yet.

There are many additional information collected in this
evaluation that are still to be analyzed. For instance, data
identification (rather than absolute) height was captured in
Task 4, but its results remain to be studied.

[13]

Acknowledgements

[14]

This work has been supported by FAPESP Grant
04/09888-5 as well as CNPq Grants 307157/2003-2 and
470272/2004-0 and a Capes Ph.D grant.

[15]
[16]

References
[1] T. Altom, M. Buher, M. Downey, and A. Faiola. Using
3D Landscapes to Navigate File Systems: The MountainView Interface. In IV ’04: Proc. Information Visualisation,
8th Intl. Conf. on (IV’04), pages 645–649, Washington, DC,
USA, 2004. IEEE Computer Society.
[2] S. Aluisio, G. Pinheiro, M. Finger, M. Nunes, and S. Tagnin.
The lacio-web project: overview and issues in brazilian portuguese corpora creation. In Proc. Corpus Linguistics 2003,
volume 16, pages 14–21, Lancaster, UK, 2003.
[3] K. Andrews, W. Kienreich, V. Sabol, J. Becker, G. Droschl,
F. Kappe, M. Granitzer, P. Auer, and K. Tochtermann.
The InfoSky visual explorer: exploiting hierarchical structure and document similarities. Information Visualization,
1(3/4):166–181, 2002.
[4] M. Balzer and O. Deussen. Voronoi treemaps. In Information Visualization. INFOVIS 05. Proc. IEEE Symp. on,
page 7, Oct. 2005.
[5] K. Bhattacharyya, Gouri and R. A. Johnson. Statistical Concepts and Methods. John Wiley & Sons, New York, USA,
1977.
[6] M. Chalmers. A linear iteration time layout algorithm for
visualising high-dimensional data. In VIS ’96: Proc. 7th
Conf. on Visualization ’96, pages 127–ff., Los Alamitos,
CA, USA, 1996. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[7] C. Chen, L. Thomas, J. Cole, and C. Chennawasin. Representing the Semantics of Virtual Spaces. IEEE Multimidia,
pages 54–63, april–june 1999.
[8] G. S. Davidson, B. Hendrickson, D. K. Johnson, C. E.
Meyers, and B. N. Wylie. Knowledge Mining With VxInsight: Discovery Through Interaction. J. Intell. Inf. Syst.,
11(3):259–285, 1998.
[9] M. C. F. de Oliveira and H. Levkowitz. ”from visual data exploration to visual data mining: A survey,”. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 09(3):378–
394, Jul–Sept 2003.
[10] P. Dourish and M. Chalmers. Running Out of Space: Models of Information Navigation. In People and computers IX.
Proc. Human-Computer Interaction – HCI’94, 1994.
[11] S. I. Fabrikant. Visualizing Region and Scale in Information
Spaces. Proc. In The 20th Intl. Cartographic Conf., pages
pp. 2522–2529, Beijing, China, 2001.
[12] C. Faloutsos and K. Lin. Fastmap: A fast algorithm for indexing, datamining and visualization of traditional and multimedia databases. In ACM SIGMOD Proc. Intl Conf. on

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

Manag. of Data, pages 163–174, San Jose-CA, USA, 1995.
ACM Press: New York.
A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale. Parallel coordinates: a tool
for visualizing multi-dimensional geometry. In VIS ’90:
Proc. 1st Conf. on Visualization ’90, pages 361–378, Los
Alamitos, CA, USA, 1990. IEEE Computer Society Press.
D. A. Keim and H.-P. Kriegel. Visualization techniques for
mining large databases: A comparison. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 8(6):923–938, 1996.
T. Kohonen, editor. Self-organizing maps. Springer-Verlag
New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 1997.
A. Lopes, R. Minghim, V. Melo, and F. Paulovich. Mapping
Texts Through Dimensionality Reduction and Visualization
Techniques for Interactive Exploration of Document Collections. In IST/SPIE Symp. on Electronic Imaging - Workshop
on Visualization and Data Analysis, San Jose, CA, 2006.
R. Minghim, H. Levkowitz, L. G. Nonato, L. Watanabe,
V. Salvador, H. Lopes, S. Pesco, and G. Tavares. Spider
cursor: A simple versatile interaction tool for data visualization and exploration. In Proc. GRAPHITE 2005, pages
307–314, Dunedin, New Zeland, 2005. ACM Press.
A. Morrison, G. Ross, and M. Chalmers. A hybrid layout algorithm for sub-quadratic multidimensional scaling. In INFOVIS ’02: Proc. IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization
(InfoVis’02), page 152, Washington, DC, USA, 2002. IEEE
Computer Society.
T. Nocke, H. Schumann, and U. B¨ohm. Methods for the visualization of clustered climate data. Computational Statistics, 19(1):75–94, 2004.
G. Ross, A. Morrison, and M. Chalmers. Coordinating
views for data visualisation and algorithmic profiling. In
CMV ’04: Proc. 2nd Intl. Conf. on Coordinated & Multiple
Views in Exploratory Visualization (CMV’04), pages 3–14,
Washington, DC, USA, 2004. IEEE Computer Society.
G. Salton. Developments in automatic text retrieval. Science, 253:974–980, 1991.
A. Skupin. A Cartographic Approach to Visualizing Conference Abstracts. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
Volume 22, Issue 1:50–58, 2002.
A. Skupin and S. Fabrikant. Spatialization Methods: A
Cartographic Research Agenda for Non-geographic Information Visualization. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, Vol. 30, No .2:pp. 95–115, 2003.
E. Tejada, R. Minghim, and L. G. Nonato. On improved
projection techniques to support visual exploration of multidimensional data sets. Information Visualization, 2(4):218–
231, 2003.
G. P. Telles, R. Minghim, and F. V. Paulovich. Visual Mapping of Text Collections using an Approximation of Kolmogorov Complexity. Tech. Report, Instituto de Ciˆencias
Matem´aticas e de Computac¸a˜ o, University of S˜ao Paulo,
2005.
W. R. Tobler. Smooth Pycnophylactic Interpolation for Geographical Regions. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 367:519–536, Sept 1979.
C. Ware. Information visualization: perception for design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA, 2000.

