Playing with maps
Explore, discover, learn, categorize, model, analyse, explain, present
geographic and non-geographic data
Menno-Jan Kraak
Department of Geo-Information Procesing ITC, the Netherlands
kraak@itc.nl
Abstract
Maps are especially known for their capability to
provide insight in geographic patterns and trends. Maps
do this well because they only present a selection of the
complex reality and visualize it in an abstract way. But
today they have many more roles to play. They should
also be seen as flexible interface to geospatial data, since
they offer interaction with the data behind the visual
representation and additionally maps are instruments
that encourage exploration. As such they are used to
stimulate (visual) thinking about geospatial patterns,
relationships, and trends. The context where maps like
this operate is the world of Geovisualization which can be
described as a loosely bounded domain that addresses the
visual exploration, analysis, synthesis and presentation of
geospatial data by integrating approaches from
disciplines including cartography with those from
scientific visualization, image analysis, information
visualization, exploratory data analysis, visual analytics,
and GIScience. Contact with all those disciplines has
enriched the world of maps but have also stimulated
others to use the map (metaphor) to visualize nongeographic data. The discussion will illustrated the new
and exiting role maps can play to visualize geographic
and non-geographic data in combination with other
visual means

1. Introduction
Maps are familiar to and appreciated by most of us.
They are liked because of their beauty, because they
allow arm-chair travelling, and because they support us in
day to day activities such as going from one place to
another, or help to clarify global events the spreads of the
bird-flu. In these examples the map acts in its function to
present geo-spatial data. They have the capability to
provide insight in geographic patterns and trends. Maps
do this well because they only present a selection of the
complex reality and visualize it in an abstract way. Often
they represent summaries of high-dimensional data, and
are still able to convey a clear message. Imagine a map of
Europe with all its municipalities. This would be a map
with over hundred thousand of geographical units which

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

each will have a value map onto them, for instance related
to population. The map would immediately reveal regions
with high and low population concentrations.
The map is no longer the map as many of us know it.
Although the traditional role of a map to ‘present’ is
recognized and still very valuable as the example above
proves, the map should also be seen as flexible interface
to geospatial data. Maps offer interaction with the data
behind the visual representation and additionally maps are
instruments that encourage exploration. As such they are
used to stimulate (visual) thinking about geospatial
patterns, relationships, and trends. Returning to the
European map users should be able to interact to find
answers to more complex question like what is the
influence of the enlargement of the European Union on
employment in both the old and new states. The query
and the answer might require other graphics next to the
map in an environment of multiple dynamically linked
views. When the amount of (attribute) data to deal with is
too big, ways have to be found to summarize or simplify
the data. One of the options is application of the SelfOrganizing Map (SOM) [1, 2], an artificial neural
network used to map multidimensional data onto a lower
dimensional space, usually a 2D representation space.
When applied as in this example the SOM visualizes
attribute space, and can be used next to the map to assist
the understanding of spatial patterns. SOM’s are mostly
used for the visualization of non-geographic data.
Cartographic techniques can be applied to enhance the
basic SOM output. Next to the SOM other techniques
exist to spatialize non-geographic data using the map as
metaphor [3].
Trends as discussed above have very much been
stimulated by the activities of the Commission on
Visualization and Virtual Environment of International
Cartographic Association (http://kartoweb.itc.nl/icavis/).
They studied the changing and expanding role of maps in
science, decision-making, policy formulation, and society
in general due to the continuing technological and of
resulted from conceptual advances that enable new map
forms used as visual thinking/decision-support tools [4].
The resultant cam be defined as the world of

Geovisualization. The most recent insights and work in
progress related can be found in the book ‘Exploring
Geoinformation’ [5]. Geovisualization can be defined as a
loosely bounded domain that addresses the visual
exploration, analysis, synthesis and presentation of
geospatial data by integrating approaches from disciplines
including cartography with those from scientific
visualization, image analysis, information visualization,
exploratory data analysis, visual analytics, and GIScience.

2. Maps and GiScience
Although geovisualization has many ties with nongeographic disciplines it is very much oriented toward the
GIScience community [6]. In this context one tries to
develop the visual methods and techniques (tools) to
present, analyse, synthesise and explore geospatial data,
but one is also interested it their effect on the problem
solving (efficiency, effectiveness). In the book ‘Exploring
Geovisualuzation’ Gahegan [7] addresses this particular
approach in a chapter titled ‘Beyond tools: visual support
for the entire process of GIScience’.

occur in unusual situations, where one is forced to think
unconventionally.”
Figure 1, based on Gahagan’s ideas, is a simplified
version of the process. It contains the main steps
Exploration, Synthesis, Analysis, Evaluation and
Presentation, however not necessarily in a sequential
order. The role of the map in this process is illustrated by
a simple, but well know map by Charles Minard of
Napoleon’s 1812 campaign into Russia drawn in 1869. It
will stress the argument that if one is able to look at the
data from different perspectives, (for instance via
alternative map views, sometimes in combination with
other graphics such as diagrams, graphs or even
photographs and videos) the nature of the data at hand
will be better appreciated. This argument is supported by
the interactive and dynamic graphics on the World Wide
Web pages (http://www.itc.nl/personal/kraak/1812/) .
Minard’s map shown in Figure 2 is has been previously
described by many authors. Among them, [9] who claims
“it may well be the best statistical graphic ever drawn”.
He explains that the map is “a narrative graphic of time
and space which illustrates how multivariate complexity
can be subtly integrated … so gentle and unobtrusively
that viewers are hardly aware that they are looking into a
world of four or five dimensions”. In several information
visualization textbook the map is used as an example or
explanation as well [10, 11].

.

Figure 1. The steps of the giscience process.
He described the GIScience process and projected the
possible maps and graphics as well as computational
methods on each of the process’ steps. He writes: “To
better support the entire science process, we must provide
mechanisms that can visualize the connections between
the various stages of analysis, and show how concepts
relate to data, how models relate to concepts, and so
forth”. One important approach here is to view geospatial
data sets and their elations in a number of alternative
ways, e.g., using multiple representations without
constraints set by traditional techniques or rules. This
should avoid the trap described by [8] who claim that
“most researchers tend to rely on well-worn procedures
and paradigms...” while they should realize that
“…creative discoveries, in both art and science, often

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure. 2. Charles Minard’s map from 1861 “Carte
figurative des pertes successives en hommes de
l’Armee Française dans la campagne de Russie
1812-1813” or Napolean’s March on Moscow.
The Minard map shows several “variables”. As with any
map there is location. Next to the major paths some minor
paths are distinguished. Linked to the retreat path (the
black, solid band) is a diagram indicating temperature.
Probably Minard was one of the first to publish a linked

view environment with maps. Additionally, the map
shows the size of the army by numbers and by the width
of the advance and retreat bands. Names indicate major
battles and important geographic features. Time is
inherently illustrated in the map as a clear distinction
between the advance (going east) and retreat path (going
west). Only in the temperature diagram, however, are
absolute time values provided .
Let’s see how graphics can help to understand what
happened during Napoleon’s campaign. The following
paragraphs present individual step given in figure 1. It
should be obvious that it is not necessarily or even
required to go through this process sequentially.

3. Explore and discover
The available data consist of statistics and maps derived
from all kind of sources such as official French army
document, diaries of individuals, Russian reports, and
other references. In the figure 3 this is represented by a
few tables. A first basic question will be ‘What is the
nature of the data?’, while elementary sub questions are
are related to ‘What?’, ‘Where?’, and ‘When?’. The
exploration can be guided by Shneidermann’s mantra
[12]: overview first, zoom and filter, details-on-demand.
A parallel coordinate plot can put all variables, such as
number of troops, temperature, battles, deaths, and
wounded in perspective. The geographic locations can be
mapped in relation to time. At such a stage one might
formulate a hypothesis like: ‘Since Napoleon lost the
campaign he probably lost most battles’. This could be
checked via an iconic display, with for instance a happy
smiley for those battles won by Napoleon. Converting the
smiley’s to a Chernoff faces would allow one to add other
variables like number of troops involved, wounded, and
death as well. Surprisingly the map shows most battles
won by Napoleon.

.
Figure 3. Exploration of the available data and the
discovery of interesting patterns.

4. Learn and categorize
The ‘smiley-map’ will immediately raise questions
because since he won most battles one will wonder how
can he have lost the campaign. So there must be other
reasons and the exploration proves to be an iterative
process. One might be interested to view the relation
between the loss of troops and factors such as weather
and terrain, in relation with the duration of the campaign
over time. Minard already added a temperature graph to
the map (see Figure 2), an indication the weather might
have influenced the campaign. However, the freezing
temperature only affects the retreat from Moscow, and as
the three-diagram shows, most losses are accounted for
the advance to Moscow.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

What other events can account for the losses? To get
insight in the progress during the campaign would be
interesting. Did the terrain have a strong influence? What
was the status of the infrastructure? Interactive
visualization tools could reveal interesting patterns [13].
From this one can learn that Napoleon stopped at several
locations and stayed even a whole month in Moscow
before he returned home. Alternatively one could create
time-cartograms, maps that do not show distance related
to the terrain but to time, to better understand the
influence of geography on time. The original map does
not reveal any of these stops and a relation to the terrain,
other then river crossing also remain hidden. Some visual
representations could categorize the predominate

influence of weather and terrain factors for particular
parts of the campaign.

5. Model and analyse
To see the relations between the different data categories
one could create an interactive three-dimensional model
with different layers of information which could react to
different scenarios. A visual analysis can be applied to
answer questions like: ‘While in Moscow did the French
occupy the whole Russian territory west of that town?’
Maps of different snapshot in time can be created and
compared via a visual overlay to see the location of all
troops in time.

Figure 4. Learn about the meaning of found patterns
and categorize the findings for to prepare for
analysis.
Figure 5. Model the data based on scenarios and
apply visual analysis to retrieve answers.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

6. Explain and present
Before the final maps are drawn one should evaluate the
results obtained via the analysis. Different maps and
diagrams could be drawn with uncertainty information
regarding original data as well as the outcome of the
analysis. Examples are graphics of the accuracy of both
locations of the campaign path as well as of the numbers
of troops involved. In a last phase the finding are put in
well design (interactive) maps and diagrams.
.

representations would qualify as well. An example would
be an interactive space-time-cube. The space-time cube
shows the map at the base of the cube and time along the
z-axis. The number of troops can be represented by the
thickness of the path while its colour could indicate
temperature. As such this graphic includes all data found
in Minard’s map. Its additional strength is that time is
more prominently visible because the periods of no
movement are represented by the vertical segments in the
path. In addition the base map can be interactively
positioned along the time-axis to give an accurate
geographic picture at any time during the campaign.

7. References
[1] Koua, E.L. and M.J. Kraak, Alternative visualization
of large geospatial datasets. Cartographic Journal, 2004.
41(3): p. 217-228.
[2] Kohonen, T., Self-Organizing maps. 1995, Berlin:
Spring-Verlag.
[3] Skupin, A. and S.I. Fabrikant, Spatialization methods:
a cartographic research agenda for non-geographic
information visualization. Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 2003. 30(2): p. 99-119.
[4] MacEachren, A.M. and M.J. Kraak, Research
challenges in geovisualization. Cartography and
Geographic Information Systems, 2001. 28(1): p. 3-12.
[5] Dykes, J., A.M. MacEachren, and M.J. Kraak, eds.
Exploring geovisualization. 2005, Elsevier: Amsterdam.
710.
[6] Duckham, M., M. Goodchild, and M. Worboys, eds.
Foundations of geographic information science. 2003,
Taylor & Francis: London.
[7] Gahegan, M., Beyond Tools: Visual Support fot the
Entire
Process
of
GIScience,
in
Exploring
geovisualization, J. Dykes, A.M. MacEachren, and M.J.
Kraak, Editors. 2005, Elsewier: Amsterdam. p. 83-99.

Figure 6. Explain the accuracy of the results via
uncertainty visualization and present the outcome
via well design maps and diagrams.
Minard’s map would of course be one of the first
candidates as a final presentation. However, with the
current geovisualization techniques available other

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[8] Finke, R.A., T.B. Ward, and S.M. Smith, Creative
Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications. 1992,
Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press. 205.
[9 ]Tufte, E.R., The visual display of quantitative
information. 1983, Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Press.
[10] Spence, R., Information visualization. 2001, Harlow:
Addison Wesley / ACM Press Books. 206.

[11 Wilkinson, L., The grammar of graphics. 1999, New
York: Springer. 408.
[12] Shneiderman, B., Designing the user interface Strategies for effective Human-Computer Interaction.
1998, Reading: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
[13] Roth, S.F., et al. Interactive Graphic Design Using
Automatic Presentation Knowledge. in Proceedings of the
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(SIGCHI '94). 1994. Boston, MA.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

