Toward a Pragmatic Taxonomy of Knowledge Maps:
Classification Principles, Sample Typologies, and Application Examples
Martin J. Eppler
University of Lugano (USI), Faculty of Communication Sciences
{martin.eppler@lu.unisi.ch}
Abstract
This paper discusses pragmatic ways of classifying
knowledge maps to give an overview of their application
formats and contexts. We show where and how the term
knowledge map has been previously used and what
criteria must be met in a sound and useful knowledge
map classification. Various possible classification
principles are presented. A table matches map formats to
purposes and contents to serve as a selection framework
in knowledge management processes. Examples of some
of the main types of knowledge maps are presented to
illustrate the varieties of knowledge mapping present in
the classifications. The article concludes by discussing
its limitations and future research questions.

1. Introduction: Benefits of a Knowledge
Map Classification
An early step toward understanding any set of phenomena is to
learn what kinds of things there are in the set – to develop a
taxonomy.
HERBERT A. SIMON

The advantages of visual representations for the
field of knowledge management have long been
recognized and discussed [34, 12, 14, 38, 40, 39, 28]
and include a better overview, a faster access and a more
efficient and memorable representation of knowledge
assets (such as experts, practice documents, patents,
etc.). Visual representations have also proved
particularly useful in eliciting [20] or referencing implicit
knowledge [34, 26] and thus can help to make
knowledge more widely and easily available. The terms
knowledge map [34, 12] or knowledge mapping [39]
have been used to designate a wide variety of approaches
to organize and structure knowledge sources, knowledge
application steps, insightful concepts, expert networks or
communities of practice [38]. These varieties of
knowledge maps have so far never been systematically
classified and compared in terms of their characteristics,
unique features or application parameters (for a first
tentative classification see [12]).
There are numerous benefits that can be achieved
through a classification of knowledge maps: First, it can

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

provide a descriptive overview of the domain [2, p.12]
and can function as an inventory or repository [ibid.,
p.13] like a structured toolbox. In this way a
classification can also become a problem solving
heuristic [11, p. 68] that relates possible mapping
solutions to knowledge management challenges. Thus, a
classification reduces the complexity inherent in
choosing a knowledge map format for a particular
application context. As a further benefit, a map
classification helps to recognize the similarities and
differences among different types of knowledge maps. It
helps to compare different types of knowledge maps
along pertinent criteria. As a side-benefit of developing a
classification, one has to develop an exhaustive
description of the variables that define a knowledge
map’s application context. Finally, a classification of
knowledge maps may also reveal new forms of
knowledge maps that so far have not been applied. The
classification may systematically go beyond the current
state-of-the-art practice of knowledge mapping and show
potential future formats. Having listed the benefits that
can be expected from a systematic classification of
knowledge maps, one should also note the potential
disadvantages of this research approach. Such
disadvantages are the focus on description, rather than
explanation. Classification may lead to reification [2, p.
15], that is to say to pretending that an ideal archetype
does exist, when it’s merely hypothetical. Tied to this
criticism is the fact – relevant in many knowledge
management application contexts – that classifications
tend to be rather static and difficult to adjust as a domain
changes and evolves.
These disadvantages lead to the recommendation
that a classification system should not just rely on one
classification principle, but should propose various,
alternative classification criteria. In section four of this
article we will thus propose different useful classification
principles to structure the domain of knowledge
mapping.

2. Methods: Requirements of an Ideal
Classification System
Classification lies at the heart of every scientific field.
Classifications structure domains of systematic inquiry and
provide concepts for developing theories to identify anomalies
and to predict future research needs.
LOHSE ET AL. [25]

Before examining existing classifications of
knowledge maps (in section three) and proposing our
own set of categories (in section four), we should briefly
examine the general rules or criteria that lead to valid
and useful classifications. In this section we thus review
the key requirements discussed in classification and
categorization literature [2, 5, 11, 27, 40, 24] in order to
apply this research method adequately. A classification,
according to Bailey [2] is the ordering of entities into
groups or classes on the basis of their similarity.
Classifications minimize within-group variance, and
maximize between-group variance [5]. In other words, a
classification should maximize the homogeneity within a
group, as well as the heterogeneity among groups, thus
facilitating analysis, organization and assessment [2].
Classification (according to [5]) can also be described as
a spatial-temporal segmentation of the world (or one
aspect of it). Taxonomies, as a special kind of
classification, are tied to a purpose, in the context of this
paper allocating the right type of knowledge map to the
right type of knowledge management problem. Bailey
points out the difference between taxonomy and
typology: Whereas a typology is conceptual, deductive
and based on reasoning, a taxonomy is empirical,
inductive, and based on large sets that are examined and
grouped [2, p. v]. The classification proposed in this
paper is partly a taxonomy derived from existing real life
knowledge maps. In part, it is a typology, as it aims to
point out other possible forms of knowledge mapping
that may not yet have been applied in real-life contexts.
A high-quality classification system that is fit for use
should be both consistent and manageable. Consequently
it should meet at least two sets of criteria, namely logic
criteria and pragmatic criteria. In terms of the logic or
formal criteria that make a classification sound, the
classification has to have unique classificatory principles
in operation which are not mixed at each level of
abstraction or hierarchy [27, 40, 2]. This will ideally
guarantee that the resulting categories are mutually
exclusive (non-overlapping) [27], and that the
classification system is complete (the categories are
collectively exhaustive), meaning that there are no items
in the domain that cannot be assigned to a category (the
classification is comprehensive). A classification should
capture the totality of phenomena supposedly contained
within it. In our case, there shouldn’t be knowledge maps
that cannot be classified within the proposed system.
Furthermore, a good classification assigns items to
groups based on objective and stable attributes, so that
there are no unclear category fits of particular items. The
labels for different groups (on a particular hierarchic
level) are on the same level of abstraction [27]; the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

classification should not mix specific (sub-)groups with
very general ones. It should also be made explicit what
lies beyond the categorization scope: the boundaries of
the classified domain or area should be clear (i.e., one
should give inclusion or exclusion criteria). With regard
to the pragmatic criteria that make a classification more
ergonomic to use, one must pay attention to selfexplanatory informative category names, as well as take
into account the total number of categories that should
not result in an overly heavy cognitive load for the
targeted users. The process of item attribution to a
category is made easier, if each category has a typical
representative, a so-called prototype member that can act
as a mnemonic device for the category and thus makes it
more memorable [24].The granularity of the
classification should be in line with its intended use
requirements (not more specific than actually needed). In
summary, we can state that an ideal (sound and useful)
classification should have the following properties, of
which the first six are formal (or logical) criteria and the
subsequent three are pragmatic ones:
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

It consists of mutually exclusive categories (groups that
do not overlap),
that are collectively exhaustive (i.e., together the groups
cover the entire classified domain),
that are based on stable and objective grouping criteria (in
order to unequivocally assign an item to a category in a
classification),
that have category names on a consistent level of
abstraction (per hierarchic level),
based on one explicit, consistent and informative
classification principle per level of hierarchy,
for a clearly specified and delineated topic area or
domain,
where the categories have self-explanatory, informative
category names or labels,
and contain typical, representative (prototype) members
for each group in the classification,
resulting in a well-organized system that does not
overload the users as it contains an adequate amount of
groups that can still be managed by short term memory
(the granularity of the distinction does not exceed the level
of detail necessary for the envisioned task that the
classification supports), a system that is hence
understandable and usable by the envisioned user groups,
In the following two sections we will employ these criteria
to the domain of knowledge maps in order to assess and
develop functional classifications.

3. Review: Prior Definitions and Typologies
of Knowledge Maps
The map is the territory if people treat it as such.
KARL WEICK

In this section, we review prior definitions and
classifications of knowledge maps and point out their
limitations and the resulting need for new classifications.
The term knowledge map has so far been used in at least
seven different scientific communities: in education
studies or in researching instructional methods, such as
mind maps, concept maps and related graphic learning
tools [35], in organization studies [21, 22] and in

requirements engineering [6] where the term designates
the elicited, visualized mental models of managers or IT
users, in information retrieval to designate interactive
search result displays and search result browsing
interfaces [10], in decision support systems to designate,
among other things, the informative graphic rendering of
decision variables [33], in artificial intelligence where it
can designate the conceptual representation of an expert
domain [16], and in the knowledge management
community [38, 8]. In the context of knowledge
management, a knowledge map generally designates an
overview on a collection of knowledge related contents.
A knowledge map typically consists of two main parts: a
ground layer which represents the context for the
mapping, and the individual elements that are mapped
within this context. The elements which are mapped onto
such a shared context range from experts, project teams,
or communities of practice to more explicit and codified
forms of knowledge such as white papers or articles,
patents, lessons learned (e.g., after action reviews or
project debriefings), events (i.e., trainings), databases or
similar IT applications, such as expert systems or
simulations. Knowledge maps group these elements to
show their relationships, locations, or other attributes.
Knowledge maps answer questions such as: how do I
find relevant knowledge, how can I judge its quality,
how can I make sense of its structure, and how do I go
about applying or developing it? Definitions of
knowledge maps that we have found in the literature
follow this logic. Vail, for example, defines a knowledge
map as follows [38, p. 10]:
„A knowledge map is a visual display of captured
information and relationships, which enables the
efficient communication and learning of knowledge by
observers with differing backgrounds at multiple levels
of detail. The individual items of knowledge included
in such a map can be text, stories, graphics, models, or
numbers. [...] „Knowledge mapping is defined as the
process of associating items of information or
knowledge (preferably visually) in such a way that the
mapping itself also creates additional knowledge. “

According to Ernst & Young [29], to take a
practitioner’s definition, a knowledge map is a place to
find the source of answers, a method and format for
collecting and communicating where knowledge resides
and is lacking, typically within an organization, a visual
representation of the knowledge content areas. Based on
these typical definitions we can conclude that the
minimal criteria for a knowledge map are that it is a
graphic overview and reference of knowledge-related
content that serves a knowledge management related
purpose. Let us next look at how this domain has been
structured so far, that is to say which types of knowledge
maps have already been distinguished. In knowledge
management, the classical cartographic map types
(aimed at representing information about a geographic
territory) are less fruitful [see 30]. Eppler [12] proposes a
simple knowledge map typology based on knowledge
management tasks, namely knowledge creation and

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

development maps, knowledge identification maps,
knowledge assessment maps, and knowledge application
maps. The main problem with this classification is that it
is not comprehensive, versatile or precise enough to be
of general use in knowledge management. A different,
more abstract set of map categories is used by Anne Huff
in her anthologies on the topic of mapping strategic
thought and knowledge [21, 22]. In her mapping
typology, she focuses on cognitive maps and
distinguishes the following map types: text and language
analysis maps, classification maps, network maps,
conclusive maps, and schematic maps of cognitive
structures [21]. The problem with this classification is
that it is not based on one consistent classification
principle and not always applicable to knowledge
management. Novins [29] distinguishes among three
types of knowledge maps, namely pointer models
(pointing to the correct source, usually a person), linkage
models (adding some meta information on the sources),
and solution models (relating knowledge areas to
business problems). Pointer models are knowledge
source maps that typically map experts. They can be
geographic or organized by topic. Linkage models
provide more visual context on how the referenced
knowledge can be used, for example by linking
knowledge to a visualized business process. Still more
meta-information on the referenced knowledge is
represented in solution models. In this type of dense and
informative map descriptive and prescriptive elements
are mixed. While this is a useful categorization, its
groups are not fully mutually exclusive and the
classification only focuses on the main functions and
content types of knowledge maps and neglects other
application parameters such as graphic format, scope,
medium, creation mode, or required skill level.
All of these classifications and distinctions are
relevant, but they may be limiting the potential of
knowledge maps to too few areas. It may be beneficial to
explore new, alternative and concurrent ways of
classifying knowledge maps in order to explore and
extend their application potential beyond the currently
implemented or envisioned solutions. Developing
multiple classification schemes may also improve our
understanding of the application parameters of different
forms of knowledge maps.

4. Results: Classification Principles and
Typologies for Knowledge Maps
You do not understand anything, until you understand it in
more than one way.
MARVIN MINSKY

In the study of taxonomies, there is a general rule
that a classification should always be based on key
characteristics of its items, but – according to Bailey –
there is no proven rule to find these attributes [2, p. 2].
Nevertheless, cognitive linguist George Lakoff provides
insightful directions in his theory of categorization. A

classification according to Lakoff [24] can be one of four
types. These types are:
1.Purposive: categorizing by intended use: in our context
classifying maps by the knowledge management purpose they
serve.
2.Perceptual: categorizing by common format/look: in our
case, by the graphic format of a knowledge map.
3. Functional: categorizing by personal use or type of the
content of the knowledge map.
4. Motor-activity: based on physical interaction with the
content: in our case the medium or application context of a
knowledge map.

These classification principles can also be found in
seminal taxonomies of visual representations:
Shneiderman’s task by type taxonomy of visual
representation formats [32] suggests both application
purpose or functionality (task) and content (type) as
classification principles. Lohse et al. [25] conclude that
extant taxonomies of graphs and images in general are
either functional, i.e., by purpose, or structural, i.e., by
graphic form, although there are also model-based
taxonomies [9,36], as well as other possible classification
criteria, such as social context, or cognitive process, see
[4]. An example of a functional taxonomy has been
developed by Tufte [37], structural classifications have
been developed by Bertin [3], Horn [19] and Rankin
[31]. From these prior approaches we derive our primary
knowledge map classification principles, which are by
purpose, by graphic form, by content, by application
level, and by creation mode. We believe that these
classification principles are relevant for a pragmatic
taxonomy of knowledge maps as they all relate to the
actual application of knowledge maps. The pragmatic
logic of these classification principles can be illustrated
[see also 39] by converting them into questions or
interrogatives: Choosing a particular type of knowledge
map necessitates answering a number of key questions,
namely:
1. Which knowledge management purpose do I want
to achieve with the map? (the ‘why?’ of the map)
2. Which kind of content about knowledge do I want
to represent in the map? (the ‘what?’ of the map)
3. Who should use the map in which context or
situation and at what level (the ‘for whom?’ and
‘when?’ of the map)
4. Which graphic form should be used and who can
create the map in what way? (the ‘how?’ and
‘who?’ of the map)
While the purpose describes the knowledge
management task supported by the map (frequently tied
to an application context), the content dimension
describes the elements that are contained and referenced
in a knowledge map. Usually, a knowledge map contains
only one kind of content, although there are maps that
contain
information
on
experts,
documents,
communities, and databases in parallel. The following
table 1 shows sample knowledge map types based on
these primary classification principles. The items in the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

open lists are intended to serve as illustrative examples
and not as exhaustive options.

A. Classifying knowledge maps by intended purpose:
1. knowledge creation maps: illustrate the planned steps to
develop a certain (organizational) competence or create new
knowledge (i.e., a technology road map)
2. knowledge assessment or audit maps: illustrate the
evaluation of certain knowledge assets graphically [8, 17],
for example by a 2x2 matrix (axes: current ability and future
importance)
3. knowledge identification maps: provide a graphic overview
on knowledge assets (experts, patents, practices) and points
to their locations / coordinates
4. knowledge acquisition maps / learning maps:
a) Learning overview and learning path maps
b) Learning content structure maps
c) Learning reviewing / repetition maps
5. knowledge transfer or communication maps: shows who
transfers knowledge to whom
6. knowledge marketing maps: can be used to signal
competence to the public in a certain domain.
B. Classifying knowledge maps by graphic form:
I Table-based format (for an example see [18]):
1. person by skills table
2. skill area by people table
3. people by documents
4. team by project experience table
II. Diagrammatic format:
1. Structure diagrams
a) Venn diagram b) Concentric circles (with or without
segments) c) Matrix (i.e., 2 by 2) d) Network diagram e)
Mind Map f) Concept Map [35] g) Cognitive Map [ 21] h)
Strategy Map i) Fishbone
2. Process diagrams [15]
a) Timeline b) Swim lane chart c) Flow chart d) Event
chain e) Critical path method f) Gantt chart g) Cycle chart
h) Decision Tree i) Value chain j) Flight plan [13]
III Cartographic format:
1. globe / continent / land / island / region (geographic) 2.
park 3. tube / metro [7] 4. galaxy / stars 5. sea / ocean 6.
building / architectural map
IV. Metaphoric format:
a. from the natural realm:
1. tree 2. iceberg 3. canyon
b. man made artifacts: 1. house 2. temple structure 3. radar
screen
C. classifying maps by their content:
1. experts / researchers / groups / communities 2. institutes or
departments 3. patents 4. practice documents or reports 5.
practices 6. learning objects 7. methods 8. lessons learned 9.
websites 10. concepts 11. events (i.e., seminars, trainings,
workshops) 12.databases / repositories / knowledge bases
D. Classifying maps by the application level:
1. personal knowledge maps (visualizing one’s own skills or
expert contacts, see [13])
2. dyadic knowledge map (to support knowledge creation,
transfer or assessment between two people)
3. team knowledge maps (visualize the skills present or needed
in a project team, like the T-matrix [13])
4. departmental knowledge maps

5. community knowledge maps
6. organizational knowledge maps
7. inter-organizational knowledge maps
E. classifying maps by their creation method
1. maps that are automatically and dynamically generated by
the computer (such as self-organizing maps, see [23]),
2. maps that are semi-automatically generated (automatically
assembled and then optimized by analysts)
3. maps that are designed once by domain and mapping experts
and then used in the same way by all users.
4. maps that are iteratively created, modified, or extended by
the map user(s) themselves (community generated maps)

Table 1: Knowledge map classifications
Other possible, but potentially less useful, stable or
objective classification principles include the managerial
application domain or functional area (e.g., project
management,
strategy,
quality
management,
procurement, risk management, finance, production, etc.)
the amount of resources (time, money) associated with
generating, updating or using a map, the required skill
level of map users (from novice maps to expert maps),
the size of the map (10 entries versus 10’000 entries),
and the medium of the map (paper, poster, or digital).
Having presented different possible classification
principles and resulting typologies, we can now combine
the most relevant ones into a matching matrix that can
serve as a selection guide for knowledge maps. For this
matrix, we chose the use of the knowledge map in
knowledge management and the format of the map as
vertical and horizontal axes and the content of the map as
cell entries.
K Map Format /
K Map Use

Table

Cartographic

Diagrammatic
c

Metaphoric

Creation of
Knowledge
Assessment or
Audit of
Knowledge
Identification of
Knowledge
Development or
Acquisition of
Knowledge
Application of
Knowledge
Sharing
Knowledge
Marketing of
Knowledge

(c)

c

e

(e)

c,d,e

c,d, e

c, d, e

c

c

C

c, d, e

c, d, e

c, d, e

c,d

c,d

c,d

c,d,e

c,d,e

c, d, e

e

c,
d,e

C

Knowledge Map Content Types:
c=
concepts (ideas, theories, insights or their labels,
descriptions, references)
d=
documents (patents, method descriptions, lessons
learned, practice documents)
e=
information about experts or groups (photos,
coordinates, homepages, CVs)

Table 2: A selection matrix for knowledge maps

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The table represents the following reasoning: For the
creation of new knowledge, knowledge maps can help in
the generation of new concepts by representing emerging
topics in cartographic maps, in diagrams, or through
visual metaphors. While tables could be used in this
phase, they might not represent a rich enough structure to
uncover new insights or elaborate concepts. To assess
the knowledge of experts, groups, or departments, one
can employ (as in one example listed in this article)
simple tables. Cartographic maps cannot be easily used
for ratings. Diagrams, such as matrices, however, can
provide visual ratings easily. Metaphors, finally, may be
too playful for the task of rating knowledge assets. To
easily identify knowledge, tables usually do not provide a
concise overview. Cartographic, diagrammatic or
metaphoric maps can provide richer means of overview
in this case. In order to develop new knowledge or
acquire new knowledge through learning, one can rely on
the didactic power of cartographic learning maps (such
as trail maps outlining the learning steps), diagrams
(such as concept maps or mind maps), or metaphoric
maps that convey additional insights about the content,
or relate what is new to what is already known. The use
or application of knowledge can be supported by any of
the above means, through tables outlining sequential
action steps and corresponding documents, concepts or
experts, as well as through cartographic trail maps,
diagrammatic process maps, or metaphoric depictions
(i.e,, a ladder) that show how to accomplish a goal, by
referencing concepts, documents, or experts. As far as
knowledge transfer is concerned, tables may prove once
more not to be motivating enough to impart knowledge
to others. The rich visual appeal of the other more
graphic formats seems to make them more adequate
choices to support this type of activity. The same
reasoning holds true for the final task, knowledge
marketing, where the attention span of the target group is
typically short.

5. Application Examples
To illustrate key types from these classifications, we
provide real-life, interactive online knowledge map
examples in this section. In terms of purposes, the
examples include knowledge assessment, application,
identification, marketing, and acquisition maps. In terms
of content, they refer to experts, tools and methods,
documents, institutions, concepts, applications, and
websites.
The maps range from the departmental to the interorganizational level. None of the examples are
automatically generated maps and are thus limited in
scope (i.e., the number of map entries is always below
100).

Figure 1: A table-based departmental
knowledge assessment map of an IT consultancy

Figure
2:
A
diagrammatic,
knowledge
application map of medium-sized market
research firm [14]

Figure 3: An institution-centred diagrammatic
knowledge identification map visualizing
researchers in the area of e-learning.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 4: A Venn diagram-based knowledge
identification map listing and structuring
institutions that have expertise in the area of
health communication.

Figure 5: A metro-style knowledge identification
map documenting the experiences, experts and
documents of a three year project. [14]

Figure 6: An animated, cartographic knowledge
development map (learning path or file rouge
map) from the www.swissling.ch project [1]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
Figure 7: An (anonymized) metaphoric
knowledge identification map of a bank
[5]

6. Conclusion: Limitations and Future
Research Questions

[6]

Sapientis est ordinare. It is the function of the wise man
ARISTOTLE
to order.
In this paper, we have made first steps towards a
pragmatic – that is to say consistent and useful –
taxonomy of knowledge maps that can be used in
devising knowledge management solutions. Our
approach has been based on rules and guidelines of high
quality classifications. As a main contribution, we have
shown various ways in which knowledge maps can be
classified. The benefit of such multiple classification
principles lies in sensitizing managers and researchers
for the application parameters and requirements of
different knowledge maps formats. We have proposed a
tentative matching table that suggests how different map
formats can be used for different purposes and contents.
The lack of empirical validation of this matching is a
weakness of this paper. Subsequent research should thus
demonstrate through evaluation studies whether this
matching is indeed correct and under what
circumstances. A further open research question regards
the development of prototypes for some of the stipulated
map types in real settings, including follow-up
evaluations. Related to this question is another research
endeavor, namely to match knowledge map types with
adequate information technology applications. So far, we
have used the following IT applications to manually
create (which implies maintainability issues) online
interactive knowledge maps: www.lets-focus.com,
www.inspiration.com, ww.visio.com. There are,
however, also tools available that can automatically
generate knowledge maps, such as the solutions of
Aurigin, Autonomy or Semio, to name but three
suppliers.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Armani, J., Rocci, A. “Conceptual maps in elearning. How map based interfaces help the
contextualization of information and the
structuring of knowledge.” Information Design
Journal + Document Design 11 (2 /3), 2003, 171–
184.
Bailey, K.D., Typologies and Taxonomies: An
Introduction to Classification Techniques,
Thousand Oakes: Sage, 1994.
Bertin, J. Sémiologie Graphique. Paris : Mouton,
1973.
Blackwell, A.F. Engelhardt., Y. “A meta
taxonomy for diagram research”, in: Anderson,
M., Meyer, B., Olivier, P. (Eds.) Diagrammatic
Representation and Reasoning, Berlin: Springer
2002.
Bowker, G. & S. L. Star. Sorting Things Out:
Classification and its Consequences. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 1999.
Browne, G.J., Ramesh, V. “Improving
information requirements determination: a
cognitive
perspective.”
Information
&
Management, 39, 2002, 625-645.
Burkhard, R., Meier, M., “Tube Map
Visualization: Evaluation of a Novel Knowledge
Visualization Application for the Transfer of
Knowledge in Long-Term Projects.” Journal of
Universal Computer Science, Vol. 11 (4) 2005,
473-494.
Burnett, S. Illingworth, L. and Webster, L.
“Knowledge Auditing and Mapping: A Pragmatic
Approach.”
Knowledge
and
Process
Management, Volume 11 Number 1, 2004, 25-37.
Chi, E.H., “A Taxonomy of Visualization
Techniques using the Data State Reference
Model”, Proc. of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, 2000, 69-75.
Coyne, R. Designing Information Technology in
the Postmodern Age, From Method to Metaphor,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995.
Dherbey, G.R., Connaissance des choses
naturelles et des affaires humaines chez Aristotle,
in: Samana, G. (Ed.) La Connaissance des
Choses, Paris : Ellipses, 2005, 55-70.
Eppler, M.: Making Knowledge Visible through
Knowledge Maps, in: Holsapple, C.W. (Ed.):
Handbook on Knowledge Management, Springer,
2002, 189-206.
Eppler, M., Sukowksi, O. “Managing Team
Knowledge: Core Processes, Tools and Enabling
Factors.” European Management Journal, June
2000, 334-341.
Eppler, M.. Managing Information Quality:
Increasing the Value of Information in knowledge-

[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

intensive Products and Processes. Berlin:
Springer, 2003.
Galloway, D., Mapping Work Processes,
Milwaukee: ASQC Quality Press, 1994.
Gordon, J.L. “Creating Knowledge Maps by
Exploiting Dependent Relationships”, KnowledgeBased Systems 13, 2000, 71–79.
Hellstrom, T. Husted, K. “Mapping knowledge
and intellectual capital in academic environments:
A focus group study”, Journal of Intellectual
Capital; 5, 1, 2004, 165-180.
Heng, M.S.H. “Mapping intellectual capital in a
small manufacturing enterprise.” Journal of
Intellectual Capital, Vol. 2 No. 1, 2001, 53-60.
Horn, R. E.: Visual Language, Lexington:
MacroVue, 1999.
Hodgkinson, G P.; Maule, A. J.; Bown, N. J.
“Causal Cognitive Mapping in the Organizational
Strategy Field: A Comparison of Alternative
Elicitation Procedures”, Organizational Research
Methods, Vol.7, No.1, January, 2004, 3-26.
Huff, A. (Ed.). Mapping Strategic Thought, New
York: Wiley, 1990.
Huff, A. F., Jenkins, M. (Eds.) Mapping Strategic
Knowledge, London: Sage Publications, 2002
Kohonen, T. Self-Organizing Maps. New York:
Springer, 2001.
Lakoff, G. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things.
What Categories Reveal about the Mind, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 1987.
Lohse, G., Biolsi, K., Walker, N., Rueter, H.: “A
classification
of
visual
representations”,
Communications of the ACM, Dec 1994, 36-49.
Meyer, A.D. “Visual Data in Organizational
Research, in Organization Science , Vol. 2, No.2 ,
May, 1991, 218-236.
Minto, B. The Pyramid Principle, Logic in
Writing and Thinking, London: Pitman
Publishing, 1995.
Newbern, D., Dansereau, F. D. “Knowledge Maps
for Knowledge Management”, K. Wiig (Ed.),
Knowledge Management Methods: Practical
Approaches to Managing Knowledge, Arlington:
Schema Press, 1994.
Novins,
P.
Knowledge
Representation,
Presentation held at MKO Semi-Annual
Conference, September 8, 1997.
Peterson, M.P., Interactive and Animated
Cartography, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1995.
Rankin, R.A., 1990, “A taxonomy of graph
types”, Information Design Journal, 6(2), 147159.
Shneiderman, B. “The eyes have it: A task by data
type taxonomy for information visualizations,”

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[33]

[34]

[35]
[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]

Proceedings of 1996 IEEE Visual Languages, Los
Alamos, CA, IEEE, 1996, 336-343.
Smelcer, J.B., Carmel, E. “The effectiveness of
different representations for managerial problem
solving: Comparing Tables and Maps”, Decision
Sciences; Spring 1997; 28, 2; 391-420.
Sparrow, J. The Role of Physical Representations
in Knowledge Elicitation, Sparrow, J. (Ed.)
Knowledge in Organizations, Thousand Oaks:
Sage, 1998, 51-78.
Tergan S-O and Keller T (Eds). Knowledge and
Information Visualization, Berlin Springer, 2005.
Tory, M. and Möller, T.: A Model-Based
Visualization Taxonomy,, Working Paper, School
of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University,
2002.
Tufte. E.R. Envisioning Information. Cheshire,
CT, Graphics Press, 1990.
Vail, E.F, “Mapping Organizational Knowledge”,
Knowledge Management Review, Issue 8,
May/June, 1999, 10-15.
Wexler, M. “The who, what, why of knowledge
mapping.” Journal of Knowledge Management,
5(3), 249-263. 2001.
Wurman, R.S. Information Anxiety2, Indiana:
Macmillan Publishing, 2001.

