A Critical Review of Virtual Reality and Geographical Information
Systems for Management of the Built Environment
Richard Franklin, David Heesom and Anthony Felton
School of Engineering and the Built Environment, University of Wolverhampton
{r.franklin2@wlv.ac.uk}
Abstract
In the field of urban planning, virtual reality systems are currently used as a consultation tool providing
the ability to demonstrate the impact of a proposal on the environment. VR simulation models can be
driven in real time by the client and adapted by the designer in response to the feedback from architects,
planners and also the general public. Within the planning process, GIS systems are often used to analyse
geographic data and real time VR has been used as a medium to view the results of data calculations.
However, previous initiatives that have integrated VR and GIS to assist in urban planning have focused
primarily on the aesthetics of development locations. This paper proposes the development framework of a
novel system that allows users to interact with 3D visual data and more traditional GIS data to perform
complex ‘what if’ scenarios in real time. The results of the queries will then be visualised not as text or 2D
information, but in real time 3D.

1.0 Introduction
Urban design and planning revolves around the
key issues of human population and urban
development. These often involve complex
spatial issues and frequently planners and urban
designers communicate their ideas and solutions
through visual means. The use of visualisation
within the paradigm of urban planning and
design is based on three premises [1].
1) To understand nearly any subject of
consequence it is necessary to consider
it from multiple viewpoints using a
variety of information.
2) Understanding complex information
about urban planning and urban design
may be greatly extended if the
information is visualised.
3) Visualisation aids in communicating
with others.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Data-driven visualisation and photo-realistic
visualisation are rapidly replacing tabular or
verbal information in public presentations and
environmental impact statements. In each of
these cases however, information has often been
presented as images delivered to the user, often
with little description of the context in which
they fit, and usually with no opportunity to react
and feedback. There are two elements that are
missing from the needs of the ideal decision
support system.
1) The viewer may lack the essential
knowledge of context to be able to
approach
and
comprehend
the
information reliably.
2) Having accepted the current context,
they have no ability to test any future
projections provided against their own
expectations of how planning situations
evolve [16].

Communication and visualisation is at the heart
of the planning system. The map and plan in
two-dimensional form has been the norm,
although extensions to the third dimension are
important through urban design, which acts as
the interface between planning and architecture
[2]. More recently, advanced technology has
been implemented in an attempt to resolve some
of the salient issues surrounding urban planning.
Virtual Reality has been used in both immersive
and desktop form as a method of visualising
complex data in real time. Another suite of
technologies available includes GIS tools that
provide a digital map linked to a database
management system (DBMS). There are three
basic categories that GIS can be applied to, [3]
1) As a spatially referenced database.
2) As a visualisation tool.
3) As an analytical tool.
Both VR and GIS have been implemented into
the planning process either independently or as a
combination. These have derived various
benefits to the urban planning process.
Previous studies have identified and explored
examples of the innovative use of advanced
Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) to enhance decision-making in the
planning system. The focus of research was how
advanced ICT – the Internet, GIS and VR might
be used to enhance decision making by
facilitating greater participation in the planning
process.
One of the major challenges identified in
previous research is the need for methods, which
allow the clear communication of planning
options. Whilst planning professionals may be
content to use 2D diagrams, such representations
are not clearly comprehensible to other people.
The advent of 3D technology provides
opportunities for ever increasingly realistic
representations of planning options. The
development of technologies such as GIS and
VR with the establishment of common standards
and integration into appropriate platforms with
user friendly, intuitive interfaces is a key
technological challenge and one which requires
further research. [14].

2.0 VR in Urban Planning
Since the process of urban planning began,
designers, policy makers and the general public

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

have searched for innovative ways of visualising
the built environment before it has been
constructed. Designers have experimented with
coloured maps and site plans, cardboard models
and rich architectural renderings. However,
none of these tools have served to be a complete,
effective technique to visualise the past, present
and future of a “place” to the vast array of bodies
involved in the planning process [4].
Traditionally, real time virtual reality software
and hardware systems have been the domain of
large organisations such as the military and civil
aviation companies. However, with the decrease
in costs of both software and hardware, the
technology has become more accessible and
introduced into other areas requiring this kind of
visualisation, including urban planning.
Using virtual reality technology in the field of
urban simulation allows users to navigate a
virtual world safely and experience the
environment as it currently exists, how it could
have existed or as it might look in the future.
Existing buildings can be replaced with new
developments and trees and foliage can be
changed to see the impact. Also, databases can
be queried to see information on buildings or
areas within the simulation [4]. Past efforts have
seen the 3D development of the old town of
Edinburgh. This toolkit is now well developed
and integrated into the planning process. To
obtain planning permission in the old town it is
now mandatory to supply a CAD model of the
proposed development in the appropriate format
for it to be dropped into the virtual landscape [5].
Similarly, researchers at the University of Bath
developed a 3D computer model of Bath. Since
its completion, the model has been used by city
planners to test the visual impact of a number of
proposed developments in the city [6].
An ongoing VR project is the Sheffield Urban
Contextual Databank (SUCoD). It is a webbased 3D concept design environment in VRML
format. It allows researchers to visualise the
history of the City of Sheffield and engage in
concept design in the 3D digital canvas. Early
stage concept designs could be developed as
though the designer is working directly on the
site, hence in-situ 3D concept design. The
current design and implementation of the
environment called “Townscaping”, provides a
set of tools for users to create and edit 3D
graphic elements that can be positioned directly
onto the user-specified virtual city models. One
of the key features of Townscaping is to enable
concept design whilst in navigation. Designers

can gain immediate feedback continuously whilst
navigating around the 3D environment [18].
Real time simulation provides planners with the
ability to explore scenes to analyse the aesthetics
of a design. Unlike an animated scene that could
possibly conceal areas that need to be analysed,
the real time simulation can be fully explored.
However, although objects within the
simulations can be changed for alternative
designs, there is a need for a system that can
provide not only the realistic 3D element, but
also the capability for real time analysis
providing real time feedback.

3.0 GIS in Urban Planning
GIS has been widely applied to the planning and
management of public utilities. Typical uses
include the management of the following
services: electric, gas, water, roads, and hazards
analysis [7]. In the built environment community
there has been a steady growth in the use of
spatial data to describe features of the built
environment [2]. Using the three views of a GIS
(database, map, model), this unique visualisation
tool can help planners to see information not
only as attributes in a database, but also in
graphical form in maps and models. As an
example, an information system of the complex
underground pipe network in a town in China
has recently been developed. It combines a
DBMS, GIS and a computer network. The
system can locate the position of pipes and their
related attribute data to meet the needs of the
appropriate departments of management,
planning, query and construction. It can also aid
in decision making so when pipes leak,
technicians can analyze and handle the situation,
keeping time and costs to a minimum [17].
In another example, a town’s street network
could be visualised as 2D map data. Using
layers, information relating to each street could
be stored as attributes within a DBMS and
overlaid on the map. To see the impact that a
new residential development would have on the
population figures for a particular street, the
system could be queried. The DBMS could
contain the current population figures and a
query could provide the total increased numbers.
By combining the attribute data and analytical
rules of the database, a map view or model can
be created to provide the graphical visual, with
underlying layers forming the DBMS.
GIS has been utilised in real time disaster
decision support. However, the MkAttack
cyclone emergency exercise reported several

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

limitations that concluded the GIS was unable to
provide the answers asked of it in real time, due
to technical constraints that included limited
computer processing power and the size of
building database [19].
The ILUTE project (Integrated Land Use,
Transportation, Environment) is a developing
system designed to simulate the evolution of an
entire urban region over an extended period of
time. Information for the database is being
collated using census data, household travel
survey data, real-estate data, demographic data
and special purpose surveys. Although “what if”
scenarios could be performed, no GIS software
or data is integrated into this particular system
[20].

4.0 VR and GIS in Urban Planning
Newer concepts have provided the ability to
integrate Geographical Information Systems
(GIS) toolkits with real time virtual reality in
order to provide a 3D visual representation of
various geospatial data analysis [12]. The models
of Edinburgh and Bath only dealt with the
superficial structure of what was visible. To be
truly useful, models must be linked to the entire
array of data covering the local economy and
demography of cities, its movement patterns, its
environmental quality, the health of its
populations, its history and archaeology. Only
then can a complete picture of the way cities
actually function be assembled. Whether a user
is a professional involved with the design
process of cities, a businessman wishing to
explore the advantages of locations, or simply a
tourist wishing to navigate around the model,
something more than flying through groups of
buildings is required [8].
Previously developed toolkits have provided
uses for the combination of both technologies.
The urban simulator provides high-quality
photo-realistic simulations of local areas for
interactive fly and walk-through demonstrations.
A mode of interaction that they have developed
allows 3D selection (‘picking’) of objects in the
scene, for example a building. If necessary, it
could be deleted and from a design perspective,
alternative models can replace the object that has
been removed. Linked to a GIS system, the 3D
representation provides the capability for
dynamic query and display of information from a
database, whenever objects that contain
attributes are selected. However, the data from
the query is viewed as text and 2D information
in a separate window to the virtual model

meaning that the environmental effects of a new
development based on the data, is not seen in the
real time simulation [9].
A GIS-based intelligent emergency response
system (GIERS) is a spatial decision support
system that aims at facilitating the coordination
and implementation of quick emergency
response operations such as evacuation and
rescue. It not only incorporates important
geospatial data about the emergency situation at
hand, but also has spatial analytical and
modelling capabilities to facilitate better
planning and decision making and has reasoning
capabilities for dealing with dynamically
changing and uncertain disaster environments. In
order to enable quick emergency response
several functionalities are critical to GIERS.
These include the collection and dissemination
of data in real time as well as the capability to
analyse disaster events, to model and simulate
possible trajectories of change, to formulate
alternative
decision
scenarios
and
to
communicate decisions and actions effectively
among all affected persons and emergency
personnel. A GIERS needs to provide the
information to emergency operations using
navigable 3D GIS, a real time geographic
database, a suite of decision support
functionalities and a distributed information
architecture that is implemented through wireless
and mobile communications technologies [21].
Recently the Centre for Advanced Spatial
Analysis (CASA) launched the Virtual London
project. The system was developed using GIS,
CAD and a variety of new photo realistic
imaging techniques [11]. It is anticipated that at
least three sets of users would interact with the
model.
1) Tourists and schoolchildren who could
query information such as locations of
famous landmarks.
2) Professionals with commercial interests
that might need to make investment
decisions based on location. A business
wishing to locate a branch office in
London could use the system to assess
the impacts of its decision on the labour
market.
3) Professionals such as architects testing
their plans for new buildings. Surveyors
and accountants assessing the value of
properties and fixing taxation [8].

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Many developers have used a CAD model
library, storing full 3D information of geoobjects to spatially reference with a GIS map
object to achieve a full 3D view. This involves
the extra task of database maintenance for data
consistency and integrity. Since GIS data is
continually being changed, the linkage between
the geo-spatial data and the VR model library
could become invalid after an object has been
modified or deleted in the GIS application.
Efforts are being made in the industry to provide
a better solution to achieving full 3D virtual
environments using an improved geo-spatial data
storage structure and a spatial-based data query
language (Spatial SQL). Attribute data, 2D
spatial data and 3D data could be organised in
one single database to enable any kind of client
to access GIS data freely [13].

5.0 Existing Software Tools
As
technology
has
advanced,
several
commercially available toolkits have become
available. Previous research has undertaken
several comparisons of GIS based software
suitable for landscape visualisation, however
there is no evidence that highlights how the 3D
graphics can be queried and updated in real time
[15].

5.1 Terrex
Terrex have a reputation for developing robust
3D visualisation tools, particularly for military
use. Their software package A- Terrain Extreme
enables developers to rapidly construct complex
areas of terrain from GIS sources. Whilst the 3D
simulations that can be generated using Terrex’
tools are highly accurate, there appears to be no
evidence of a tool that will allow real time
querying.

5.2 K2Vi
K2Vi is especially useful for urban and rural
design, industrial planning, tourism and military
mission planning. It can support visualisation,
manipulation and editing of standard GIS data in
a VR environment. However, there is no
evidence that a model can be manipulated or
queried, with the results of the interaction being
updated in real time.

5.3 WhatIf?
The system by WhatIf? Technologies Inc
provides simulation models for decision support,
scenario analysis in urban and regional planning.
At the core of the system are regional planning
modules for areas such as population growth,
land use development and transportation
communication, [10]. Although users can
construct many scenarios by communicating
with spreadsheet databases and GIS, the
‘models’ of the regions are not 3D
representations, but 2D plan views.

5.4 VisSim
VisSim is responsible for producing dynamic
simulation software. Although queries can be
made, the results are not shown using algorithms
and are not graphical as in the form of 3D
imagery.

6.0 VU-MAN – A real time tool for
urban analysis
As a result of the research conducted and
reviewed in this paper, it can be seen that the
combination of VR and GIS can be advanced
further. Although there is evidence that detailed
3D simulations can also be used as an analytical
tool, such a system that could be updated in real
time in response to a variety of queries could be
developed. A new methodology is proposed to
assist in the improvement of the urban planning
and management. It is envisaged that the Virtual
Urban Management system (VU-MAN) is a
framework that will combine the technologies of
VR and GIS to provide the user with the ability
to visualise in real time, changes made to a
virtual environment whilst performing bidirectional queries and what-if scenarios.
Such a system could speed up the decision
making process and improve consultation issues
between planners, architects, developers and the
general public. For example, what if planners
propose to build residential accommodation for
3000 people? What impact will this have on the
surrounding area? Will it affect the natural light
to the neighbouring buildings? If every
household had a car, how will it affect the local
transportation network and parking?

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 1: Proposed framework of the
VU-MAN toolkit
As Figure 1 clearly shows, a query using the GIS
software is made, which in turn updates the 3D
model.
In the case of the WhatIf? Toolkit, performing a
query will return only textual information in 2D
form. This kind of feedback might provide
design and planning professionals with sufficient
information, but for other people, the data might
not be as visually clear as a 3D representation.
The proposed study will also seek to address
limitations of real time GIS analysis through
interaction with the VR model. For example, the
user will be able to click on a building in the
simulation, amend the environmental attributes
and perform various ‘what if’ scenarios using the
analytical power of the GIS system. These
amendments will then be updated in the model in
real time.

7.0 Conclusions
This paper has provided a review of various
methods of urban planning and design. It can be
seen that communication and visualisation is at
the heart of the planning system and since the
early days of urban planning, many innovative
methods of visualising the built environment
have been investigated. Virtual reality and GIS
are technologies that have been applied
effectively to the field of urban planning,
however, the development of the proposed
framework could increase the level of
information that can be queried and visualised in
real time.

8.0 References and Bibliography
[1] R Langendorf, 1992.
Cited in Visual Communication in Urban Planning
and Urban Design, 1998.
url: http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/urbanplan.pdf
[2] Andy Smith, Martin Dodge and Simon Doyle.
Visual Communication in Urban Planning and Urban
Design, 1998.
[3] Ian Gregory.
A Place in History: A Guide to Using GIS in
Historical Research, 2002.
GIS and its Uses in Historical Research.
url: http://hds.essex.ac.uk/g2gp/gis/sect13.asp
[4] Roy Chan, William Jepson and Scott Friedman.
Urban Simulation: An Innovative Tool for Interactive
Planning and Consensus Building.
Revolutionary Ideas in Planning: Proceedings of the
1998 National Planning Conference.
[5] Andy Hamilton and Ghassan Aouad.
ICT for Urban Representation.
ICT challenges in Supporting Sustainable Urban
Development.
Position Paper D1.2
[6] Vassilis Bourdakis.
Virtual Reality: A Communication Tool for Urban
Planning.
url: http://fos.bath.ac.uk/vaspapers/CAAD-TNDC
[7] Anon, 2001.
GIS Applications.
url:http://www.geography.wisc.edu/sco/gis/application
s.html
[8] Anon
Virtual London: A Proposal.
url: http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/vl.html
[9] Robin Liggett, Scott Friedman and William
Jepson.
Interactive Design/Decision Making in a Virtual
Urban World:
Visual Simulation and GIS: Proceedings of the 1995
ESRI International User Conference
[10] Anon, 2005
Urban and Regional Planning.
url:http://www.whatiftechnologies.com/downloads/wh
atIf_urbanRegionalPlanning_info.pdf
[11] Anon
Virtual London.
url:http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/research/virtuallondon.h
tm

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[12] Starmer, W. and Shufelt, J. (2002) Visualizing the
Urban Environment. Earth Observation Magazine.
May 2002. pp13 –16
[13] Andy Hamilton, Hongxia Wang, Ali Murat
Tanyer, Yusuf Arayici, Xiaonan Zhang, Yonghui
Song.
Urban Information Model for City Planning, 2005.
ITCON.org, Special Issue. Volume 10
[14] Philip James, Terrence Fernando, Andy
Hamilton, Steve Curwell.
Enhancing the Decision-making Process in Urban
Spatial Planning Using Advanced ICT. 2004.
[15] Katy Appleton, Andrew Lovett, Gilla
Sunnenberg.
Rural Landscape Visualisation from GIS Databases: A
Comparison of Approaches, options and Problems.
Journal of Computers Environment and Urban
Systems. 2003. Vol 26, pp 141 – 162.
[16] Brian Orland, Kanjanee Budthimedhee, Jori
Uusitalo.
Considering
Virtual
Worlds
As
Representations of Landscape Realities and as Tools
for Landscape Planning. Journal of Landscape and
Urban Planning. 2001. Vol 54, pp 139 – 148.
[17] Ling Liu, Baizhan Li, Haini Cai, Jianhui Wang.
An Information System of Pipeline Network for
Townlet Based on ComGIS. 2006.
Asia – European Conference on Sustainable Urban
Development. Chongqing University. April 2006.
[18] Chengzhi Peng.
In –situ 3D Concept Design with a Virtual City. 2005.
Design Studies (In Press), final version of the
manuscript accepted on 14 October 2005,
Oxford : Elsevier Science Ltd, ISSN: 0142-694X.
[19] Andre Zerger, David Ingle Smith.
Impediments to Using GIS for Real Time Disaster
Decision Support. Journal of Computers Environment
and Urban Systems. 2003. Vol 27, pp 123 – 141.
[20] Eric J. Miller, John Douglas Hunt, John E.
Abraham, Paul A. Salvini. Microsimulating Urban
Systems. Journal of Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems .2004. Vol 28, pp 9-44.
[21] Mei-Po Kwan, Jiyeong Lee. Emergency
Response After 9/11: The Potential of Real Time 3D
GIS for Quick Emergency Response in Micro-Spatial
Environments. Journal of Computers Environment and
Urban Systems. 2005. Vol 29, pp 93 – 113.

