Creating Affective Visualisations for a Physiologically Interactive Artwork
Lizzie Muller*, Greg Turner*, George Khut# & Ernest Edmonds*
*Creativity and Cognition Studios, University of Technology, Sydney
# University of Western Sydney
lizzie@lizziemuller.com, greg@gregturner.org, george@georgekhut.com, ernest@ernestedmonds.com

Abstract
This paper describes an action research project
based on the process of designing the visualisation of
heart and breath rate data for the interactive artwork
Cardiomorphologies. The project aimed to realise the
affective goals of the artist as closely as possible by
studying the audience experience of the visualisations
and incorporating the findings into an iterative design
process. The qualities of richness and ambiguity were
found to contribute to the achievement of the artists’
two major aims: 1) to create a sense of integrated
physical and mental engagement with the work and 2)
to create a reflective state in which participants
consider correlations between their thoughts and
specific physiological states

represented in this work is drawn from the participant
themselves and a complex feedback loop is created in
which the data visualisation both provokes and reflects
the participant’s reaction to it.
This paper reports on an action research project
which studied the audience’s experience of
Cardiomorphologies and incorporated it into the
process of designing visualisations of the breath and
heart. The aim was to realise as far as possible the
experiential and affective goals desired by the artist.
The paper demonstrates how the use of richness and
ambiguity in the design contributed to the goals of
engagement and reflection. It shows how these
qualities relate to the way in which participants
approach, experience and interpret information.

2. Background and Aims
1. Introduction
Creating unusual, evocative and thoughtprovoking ways of representing different kinds of
information is central to a great deal of computer-based
contemporary art practice [1, 2]. In artistic contexts the
affective qualities of these visualisations are at least as
important as their ability to convey information
efficiently and accurately. The simulation and
provocation of affective states is becoming
increasingly desirable in Human–Computer Interaction
studies in general as the number of personal
communication and entertainment technologies
increases [3, 4]. How people feel whilst using these
technologies is of growing importance. Several
researchers have pointed out that studying interactive
art has a key role to play in understanding and
designing affective human-computer interaction [5, 6].
To design and evaluate affective qualities of an
artistic visualisation it is necessary to consider first and
foremost the participating audience’s experience.
Understanding audience experience becomes even
more critical in the case of physiologically responsive
artworks such as Cardiomorphologies by George Khut,
which creates audiovisual representations of the
participant’s breath and heart rate. The information

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Cardiomorphologies is part of a series of artworks
by George Khut which use biofeedback technologies
[7]. Khut aims to give audiences an alternative insight
into the way our thoughts and physical sensations are
intimately linked. Specifically, he aims to enable
participants to influence their heart rates through
experimenting with their breathing and with their
thoughts. Seeing and hearing their heart and breath
helps the participants to perceive, focus on and monitor
physiological changes which they may not have the
ability to detect or recognise from sensation alone.
Khut’s work is part of a tradition of artists’
experimentation with physiological and biofeedback
technologies which stretches back to the 1960’s [5, 8] .

2.1. Cardiomorphologies
Individuals participating in Cardiomorphologies are
seated on a comfortable reclining chair in a dimly lit
and enclosed space. The participant is fitted with a
breath sensor (respiratory strain gauge) and heart beat
sensor (EKG). Graphic visualisations are displayed on
a large screen in front of the participant and a
sonification of the same cardio-respiratory data is
projected through a quadraphonic speaker array.

The heart sensor produces a ‘pulse’ signal for
every heart beat. The breath sensor produces a value
which increases the more the sensor (strapped around
the ribcage) is stretched. These changes are analysed to
produce various readings and statistics, the most
important analyses focus on the subject's heart rate
variations (HRV) and the relative amplitudes of the
various low frequency oscillations that constitute the
moment-to-moment changes in HRV. The participants’
perception of these changes in heart rate is
fundamental
to
the
experiential
aim
of
Cardiomorphologies, especially with regard to the
influence of breath on these patterns.
The physiological data to be visualised, then, is
simply the state of the heart and breath over time
which are easily represented and comprehended as
simple numerical values or points on a chart. The
challenge for the artist and research team was to infuse
what could be a straightforward read-out of numbers
with the affective qualities that the artist wants the
audience to experience.

2.2. Affective aims of the artist
There are two key aspects to the audience
experience that Khut is trying to create with
Cardiomorphologies. Firstly a sense of integrated
physical and mental engagement with the work and
secondly a reflective state in which participants
consider correlations between thoughts and specific
physiological states
In order to structure the research process and to
judge success Khut, together with the research team,
established a set of affective aims at the outset of the
project which articulated these experiential goals as
clearly as possible. To describe the sense of physical
and mental engagement the team chose:
i) Sensual and kinaesthetic: the projected imagery
generates and reinforces enjoyable sensations of
changing weight, motion and patterning within the
body.
ii) Close fitting: the artwork should reflect as
accurately as possible actual changes in
physiology. It should feel like a very clear
extension of the participant’s body.
iii) Quiet, concentrated, inwardly-attentive-focus:
the participant is focused on sensing and
responding to subtle shifts within their own
psycho-physiology.
And to describe a state of reflection:
iv) Explorative, curious: the experience invites
exploration and interest.
iv) Enabling: participants develop an ability to
physically sense changes in heart rate pattern, and

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

how these patterns interact with different
mental/emotional states.
v) Instructive: participants have a sense that they
have learned something about their own ability to
sense and enact changes in their own psychophysiology, as revealed to them through selfinitiated changes in their own cardio-respiratory
processes.
vi) Meaningful: the artwork provokes a consideration
of the participant’s mind-body processes in ways
that might inform their experiences and actions in
other ‘real life’ contexts.

3. Research methodology
This study is part of a series of investigations into
the audience experience of interactive artworks that
have taken place using Beta_space, an experimental
public environment for interactive art at the
Powerhouse Museum, Sydney [9-11]. A data gathering
method for working in public exhibition spaces, based
on video-cued recall, has been developed through
several Beta_space studies, and is described briefly
below. In this study of Cardiomorphologies an action
research approach was adopted, where the experiential
data gathered was used to drive a process of formative
evaluation in which the artwork was refined over two
iterations.

3.1. Video-cued recall method
This method of data gathering requires the
participant to watch a video of him/herself interacting
with an artwork and to simultaneously give an account
of their experience. It aims to elicit richly descriptive
verbal data rooted in real lived experience [12]. The
method enables participants to recall pre-verbal
perceptual, motivational and affective states that rarely
emerge from interview data alone [4, 13, 14]. With
Cardiomorphologies there were some specific
challenges in the use of this method. In previous
studies it was noted that participants seeing their own
movements was an important factor in prompting recall
[9]. In Cardiomorphologies the participant is almost
completely still, which could make it difficult for
participants to link exact details of experience to
specific moments in the video. After the reports all
participants were questioned about how easy or
difficult they found the process, and how accurate they
judged their accounts to be. The majority felt that the
sequence of memories had usually been more or less
accurate and that the visuals had prompted specific
memories at specific points. However not all were sure
that they correctly identified the right memory at the
right moment in the tape, and there was a good deal of

self-correction in which people reported a memory and
then, seconds later, re-identified the moment when the
memory occurred.
Data was collected from ten people using videocued recall, five in the first iteration (two women and
three men) and five in the second (three women and
two men). Participants were of varying ages, with
diverse professional and personal circumstances.
In analysing the data from this technique Khut’s
affective aims were used as a guideline. All comments
relating to the desired states (either positive or
negative) were highlighted and linked as closely as
possible to the aspect of the piece which had provoked
it.

cross mode was to provide a very clear and easy to
read visualisation that participants could quickly
understand.

3.2. Participatory design: focus group method
A second research process was drawn from the
field of participatory design [15] to allow collaboration
with the audience based on their experience of the
work. A group of six participants (three men and three
women
of
varying
ages)
experienced
Cardiomorphologies over the course of the day, and
then joined together for a structured group discussion.
The discussion began with the generation of
shared descriptive language. For this phase participants
took it in turns to describe the experience of the work
as it unfolded over the course of their interaction. The
rest of the group listened and noted down key phrases
that concurred with or contradicted their own
experience of the work. They marked the phrases as
either positive or negative.
The artist’s experiential and affective goals were
introduced in the second stage. Participants were asked
to assign words and phrases generated in the first stage
to different goals. The aim was to find out whether any
of the goals coincided with the participants’ own
understanding of their experience, and, if so, what
language they used to describe those experiences and
what aspects of them were positive or negative.

Figure 1. Monochrome redrawing of cross mode
(the descriptive text was not shown)
Rings mode provided a more abstract visualisation
of the heart and breath rate in (see figure 2). A simple
blue ring expanded and contracted with the breath.
This ring would appear softer and larger with slower
breath rates, and harder and thinner with faster breath
rates. A red ring represented the heart rate – the slower
the rate the smaller the ring. The aim of the rings was
to try and create a relationship between physical
(proprioceptive) sensation and visualisation. The
expansion and contraction of the rings had an
analogous relationship to the expansion and
contraction of the ribs/abdomen with the breath, and
metaphorically suggested the cycles of respiration and
blood circulation.

4. The Design Process
This section describes the process of working with
audience data to refine the visualisations, including the
initial visualisation strategy, the lessons learned from
the audience, and the improvements implemented in
response.

4.1. Visualisation strategy
For the first iteration three lightweight
visualisations called cross mode, rings mode and
spectral graph were designed. Cross mode showed the
breath and heart rate on an XY axis, which expanded
and contracted in real-time (see figure 1). The aim of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2. Rings mode

The spectral graph visualisation showed the heartrate-variability spectrum data (see figure 3), which was
more complicated, and less immediate than the
information presented in the simpler visualisations, but
in theory can be more representative of the
participant’s affective state [16, 17]. This part of the
data was very important to the artist as it showed how
psychological orientation, such as sustaining a thought
about a relaxing or stressful situation could stimulate
different physiological responses.

Figure 3. Spectral graph

4.2. Data Filtering and Shaping
During the first iteration some technical problems
were immediately observed which manifested
themselves with novice participants. The sensors were
difficult to attach and calibrate for the wide variety of
body shapes, particularly when the person attaching the
sensor is physically distant from the signal calibration
displays. Once attached, it was easy for audiences to
produce noisy data by moving the sensors, which
mostly happened at the beginning and the end of each
session, but occasionally during. The heart sensor
occasionally missed a beat, which not only corrupts the
HRV analysis, but can be very disconcerting for a
participant used to hearing and seeing the regularity of
their heartbeat.
To address these problems in the second version,
the process of filtering the data was refined and the
transitions between phases (the attaching and removing
of sensors and introducing new display elements) was
smoothed.
The reliability of the data was improved firstly by
moving from an electrode method for collecting heart
data to a handheld device such as those used in
exercise environments. In software terms the problem
was approached by making an audio calibration tool
and using low-pass filtering, limiting and damping to

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

reduce noise. The erroneous HRV spectrum data at the
beginning of each session was hidden, and the
visualisation was introduced with a slow fade after the
required five minutes needed to produce an accurate
analysis of the data.

4.3. Richness
All the participants found the cross visualisation
easy to understand (demonstrated in short affirmations
like “there’s my breath”), but in most cases it made
very little impact on them. Most didn't comment on
this visualisation in any depth (in contrast to their
response to the other visualisations described below).
The responses to rings mode were markedly
different. The ring visualisations commanded the
attention of the participants, and their reports were
more descriptive and more strongly positive. There is
evidence in the reports that the rings encouraged
experimentation
and
play,
which
deepened
engagement: “at this point…I'm all engaged by the
circles… I think they're amazing and I was trying to
experiment with my own breathing to see how much of
the shape I can sustain […] I'm trying to create
something with my breathing here. It's a very joyful
experience”
The focus group confirmed the engaging effect of
the rings (which they described as doughnuts) as
positively contributing to more than one of the artist’s
affective goals. Under the category of Quiet,
Concentrated, Inward two participants described them
as hypnotic, under Sensual and Kinaesthetic they were
described
as
comfortable,
and
under
Explorative/Curious they were described as playful
and absorbing.
A key part of the appeal and the limitation of the
rings was the colour, several participants commented
on how visually attractive the colours were, but several
also became bored with the lack of variation, and
wished the colours would change.
This feedback suggested that the visualisations
needed to offer the participants varied and creative
possibilities, whilst not undermining the hypnotic and
concentrated simplicity they found in the rings.
Richness needed to be added, but not complication. As
a result cross mode was abandoned and ring mode was
developed, including the addition of richer colour
variations and effects including fading, blurring and
deepening of different colours depending on heart rate
and breathing patterns. The result evoked a lens flare
or ball lightning effect which gave rise to a whole new
set of variables from the additive blending of colours
and contours which created an extensive palette from
which participants could create highly individual
patterns.

4.4. Ambiguity
While few participants expressed any confusion
about the information represented by the rings, there
was a great deal of confusion expressed over the
spectral graph. Three members of the focus group put
lack of understanding of the graph as negatively
impacting on the category of Close Fit, and it was also
described negatively under Quiet, Concentrated,
Inwardly attentive focus.
However the overall response to this visualisation
was ambivalent. There were a number of positive
responses to the graph based on the attractiveness of its
appearance under Sensual/Kinaesthetic. Within the
video-cued recall data there was evidence that for both
the participants that did understand the visualisation
and those that didn’t the appearance of the graph
prompted experimentation with different kinds of
thoughts and an intense effort to interpret their
physiological responses.
This indicated that there was value in the aesthetic
and suggestive qualities of this visualisation but that it
was very difficult for people to interpret exactly what it
represented. As a result it interfered with their sense of
direct connection with the work.
At the same time the focus group suggested that
several of the affective categories under Khut’s second
experiential goal; a reflective approach, were not being
achieved. Participants linked very few of their
responses to the categories Enabling, Instructive and
Meaningful, and reported that these aims did not match
their experience of the work. Interestingly they also
reported that they did not see these aspects as
necessarily desirable.
It seemed that the expectations and designs of the
artist and the research group were perhaps too literal or
didactic for the artistic context. Audiences couldn’t
interpret their physiological data very accurately, and
were also not driven by a need to understand precisely
what the data meant. The solution was to experiment
with the use of ambiguity as a positive design virtue to
encourage both engagement and reflection. Gaver et al
[18] have argued that ambiguity can be used as a
resource for design, especially in affective realms such
as art. They argue that the uncertain meanings in
ambiguous systems lead people to interpret situations
for themselves and consequently develop deeper and
more personal relations with the meanings offered by
those systems. Further than this they argue that
ambiguous systems are “evocative rather than didactic
and mysterious rather than obvious”.
Their arguments suggest that ambiguity could be
used positively to achieve both engagement, and the
seemingly elusive experiential aim of a reflective state.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

As a result the graph was transformed into the more
abstract representation by having the spectra appear
like rays from the centre of the rings after five minutes
of the experience (see figure 4). This delay allowed for
the collection of enough meaningful data from the
participant to create a true spectral display, but also
was a means to stage the introduction of new kinds of
suggestive information. The rays thus became an
invitation rather than an instruction to consider psychophysiological changes over time without breaking the
direct connection with the heart and breath rate that is
so important to the sense of Close Fit which creates
engagement.

Figure 4: Examples of the final visualisation

5. Results
The experiences reported by the participants in the
final version of Cardiomorphologies included intensely
personal feelings and emotions, which demonstrated
the affective power of the visualisations. Their
accounts revealed the extent to which Khut’s
experiential aims of engagement and reflection had
been achieved, and also some important insights into
the role of richness and ambiguity in this success.

5.1. Engagement
There was a great deal of evidence to suggest that
the aims of Quiet, Concentrated and Inwardly
Attentive Focus, and Sensual and Kinaesthetic were
achieved. After a period expectation at the start, all
reported feeling relaxed and calm. The majority of
participants reported that they were focused on their
body and their breathing: “I’m just thinking about the
heart and breathing calmly, that was the focus, nothing
else”

Several participants reported the focusing and
relaxing power of the image, for example:
“My thoughts kept jumping to external thoughts
but then I’d sort of get sucked back in and drawn back
to the image, and then I just kept starting to relax more
and more.”
Participants also gave indications that the visuals
felt like a mirroring, or extension of their physiological
and mental activities, for example at one point a
participant is not sure whether they are causing the
rings to move or whether the rings are causing them to
breathe in a certain way. Interestingly most participants
report that they notice changes in the HRV spectrum
rays depending on their mental focus, even when they
don’t fully understand what information the rays are
displaying, a point that is discussed further in the next
section.
It is clear that the relationship between the visuals
and the participants’ mental and physical states leads
them to a feeling of engagement. This supports
previous research by Edmonds et al [5] which proposes
a set of requirements for successful engagement in
physiologically driven computing and art. These
include 1) ease of connection to input and 2)
immersion in output, which together lead to 3) sense of
personal connection with technologies or ‘somatic
extension’. In the case of Cardiomorphologies there is
evidence that this state if ‘somatic extension’ was
achieved, for example:
“I’m feeling […] I don’t know if it’s the right word
but integrated with the visual, because it’s kind of
synchronised with how you’re thinking and breathing
and moving and your heartbeat and everything all
integrated together”

5.2. Reflection
The majority of participants’ experience accorded
with the affective goal of Explorative and Curious. The
opening sections of their report tend to be characterised
by words such as “curious”, “fascinated” and
“intrigued”. They explored the work in three ways; by
experimenting with their breathing, with their thoughts
or with trying to create certain patterns and shapes with
the visuals. For most this process is described in
positive terms, but there was one interesting exception.
One participant describes a feeling of frustration at
how little he could make the visuals do;
“I thought “oh, well I’ll try different things and
see what I can make this thing do…I looked at the guy
before me and I thought “oh he’s not doing much
maybe I can make it do all sorts of things” but I
couldn’t.” This coincides with a point made by
Edmonds et al that physiological artworks challenge
our commonly held notion of control [5]. Edmonds

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

suggests that it is more useful to think of the
participant as “influencing” rather than “controlling”
physiological systems, in which you are “being” rather
than “doing” something in order to have an effect. It is
an interesting challenge for the curatorial and
interpretative aspects of such artworks to consider how
audiences might be encouraged to adopt this different
approach to interaction, so as to avoid frustration.
Most participants seemed comfortable to adopt
this alternative kind of interaction, and it facilitated a
range of reflections about their body and life through
both negative and positive images and a recognition of
their physiological effect. There were two particularly
interesting aspects to this, first that the participants all
had only a very vague understanding of the kind of
information being displayed by the spectral rays, and
second that, nevertheless, the appearance of the rays
prompted in most cases the recounting of very intimate
and personally meaningful stories as a way of
reflecting on the self.
Stories told by participants included thoughts of
loved ones and of work, memories of holidays and
reflections on health and previous or current bodily
states. There was evidence of a strongly perceived
correlation between these thoughts (and their
associated physical sensations) and the visualisations,
for example one participant says:
“I tried to think of my girlfriend, who I haven’t
seen for three weeks. And I remember the lights were
really going out when I was thinking of her”
Another comments: “[I] kept trying to think of
myself as feeling really good about my body,
[imagining myself] on the bike, and just cycling along,
and I noticed that I could see the effect of that sort of
calmness, um, that came from being on my bike…”
This evidence supports Gaver et al’s suggestions
that ambiguity creates space for people to create
meaning [18]. They are engaged in the visuals, but not
fully immersed - there is a slight distance, created by
ambiguity, which encourages active reflection, and
requires that, to interpret the interaction, the
participants build connections between their own
physical and mental experiences and the visualisations
they are being shown.

6. Conclusion
The aim of the action research project was to
realise as far as possible the experiential and affective
qualities desired by the artist. The results show that the
final visualisations were very effective in this respect.
Engagement was achieved not only by creating a close
relationship between physical sensation and visual
feedback, but also by adding richness that encouraged
creative exploration. Ambiguity played an important
role in creating room for personal meaning making

which encouraged a reflective experience. An
important aspect of the affective impact of the
visualisations is the attitude of the participant and a
challenge for future work with physiologically
interactive art is to encourage a mind-set where
participants aren’t trying to achieve a goal, but rather
exploring and learning as they go.

[8]

[9]

[10]

7. Acknowledgements
[11]

Thanks to Matthew Connell and Diana Lorentz at
the Powerhouse Museum for facilitating the project.
This research was partly conducted within the
Australasian CRC for Interaction Design, which is
established and supported under the Australian
Government’s Cooperative Research Centres
Programme.”

[12]

[13]

8. References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

C. Paul, Digital art. London: Thames & Hudson,
2003.
S. Wilson, Information arts : intersections of art,
science, and technology. Cambridge, Mass.
London: MIT, 2003.
R. Picard, Affective Computing. Cambridge, Mass:
MIT Press, 1997.
T. Bentley, L. Johnston, and K. von Baggo "Affect:
Physiological Responses During Computer Use.,"
presented at OzCHI2003: New directions in
interaction, information environments, media and
technology, Brisbane, Australia, 2003.
E. Edmonds, D. Everitt, M. Macaulay, and G.
Turner, "On physiological computing with an
application in interactive art," Interacting with
computers, vol. 16, pp. 897-915, 2004.
K. Hook, P. Sengers, G. Andersson "Sense and
Sensibility: Evaluation and Interactive Art,"
presented at Conference on Human factors in
computing systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA,
2003.
K. Richards, "Let the Body Navigate: An interview
with George Khut," in RealTime, vol. 66, 2005.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

D. Rosenboom, "Biofeedback and the Arts: Results
of Early Experiments." Vanouver, BC: Aesthetic
Research Cetre of Canada (A.R.C.), 1976.
B. Costello, L. Muller, S. Amitani and E. Edmonds
"Understanding the Situated Experience of
Interactive Art: Iamascope in beta_space,"
presented at Interactive Entertainment, Sydney,
Australia, 2005.
L. Muller and E. Edmonds, "Living Laboratories:
Making and Curating Interactive Art," presented at
Siggraph, Boston, 2006.
E. Edmonds and L. Muller, "On Creative
Engagement," Visual Communications, vol. 5,
2006.
L. A. Suchman and R. H. Trigg, "Understanding
Practice: Video as a Medium for Reflection and
Design," in Design at Work: Cooperative Design
for Computer Systems, J. Greenbaum, M. Kyng
Eds. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1991, pp. 65-89.
S.Amitani, K.Hori "Supporting Musical
Composition by Externalising the Composer’s
Mental Space" Journal of Information Processing
Society of Japan, vol. 42, pp2369-2378.
M. Omodei, A. J. Wearing, and McLennan, "Video
Cued Recall: A Minimally Reactive Methodology
for Understanding, Detecting and Preventing Error
in Control of Complex Systems," presented at 21st
European Annual Conference of Human Decision
Making and Control, Glasgow, 2002.
F. Kensing, K. Halskov Madsen, "Generating
Visions, Future Workshops and Metaphorical
Design," in Design at work : cooperative design of
computer systems, J. M. Greenbaum and M. Kyng,
Eds. Hillsdale, N.J: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1991,
pp. 155-168.
R. McCraty and D. Childre, "Psychophysiological
Correlates of Spiritual Experience," Biofeedback,
Winter, pp. 13-17, 2001.
H.-S. Song and P. M. Lehrer, "Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback," Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, Vol. 28, pp.
14, 2003.
W. Gaver, J. Beaver, and S. Benford, "Ambiguity
as a Resource for Design," presented at ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, USA, 2003.

