Visualisation of Architectural Design Schemes through Static Computer
Generated and Traditional Visual Representations: An Investigation of
Subjective Responses

Nada Bates-Brkljac
University of the West of England, Bristol
{Nada Brkljac@uwe.ac.uk}
Abstract
Before architects can begin to make changes in the
actual physical environment they must create visual
representations of design scheme proposals. Thus, in
architecture, information visualisation in graphic form is
crucial for discussions and for design review process of
architectural design. Within the context of design
research and studies there has been a growing interest in
recent years in the computer methods of visual
representation of architecture. This paper presents the
first findings of an Economic and Social science
Research Council (ESRC) funded project which explores
those factors and issues which determine the perceived
credibility of visual representations of architectural
design. It specifically considers differences between
architects’ and other professionals’ perceptual responses
to the static forms of traditional and computer
visualisation. The paper concentrates on the question:
what factors are relevant to people’s perceptions and
which method of information visualisation is perceived
as a more reliable way of visualising information about
the design proposals?

1. Introduction
Architectural representations are fundamental to the
practice of architecture because they provide visual
information about design proposals. As such, they are a
graphical means of information visualisation about the
design philosophy and they convey the components,
appearance of the urban development and its impact
upon the locality. By looking at visual representations,
people make apt judgements on whether a building,
housing estate, a city centre design scheme, etc., is
‘good’, ‘bad’ and whether we ourselves ‘like it’. Thus,
representations have an important role in shaping
subsequent judgements as people expand on, or take
issue with them.
At present, perspective drawings, artistic impression,
photomontages and above all, computer visualisations
are commonly occurring methods of visual
representation in the use and in discussions about visual
representations of proposed architectural design. But
despite the superficial similarity which these methods

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

appear to enjoy –a similarity which is aided by the fact
that in many cases various methods of representation
readily become the subject of analysis and discussion there is no agreement about their perceived credibility
and reliability.
Perceiving and understanding design through
representations is a subjective process which evokes
cognitive and affective responses. While technical
research into the creation and application of computer
generated visualisation is thriving studies on the
perception of visual representations of design
information are still rare. There is considerable
knowledge
regarding
conventional
means
of
presentations such as drawings, photographs and video,
[2] in contrast the use of computer visualisation methods
and their impact is far less researched.
The theory [3] shows that it takes considerable
experience and knowledge to read architectural drawings
before one becomes skilled at interpreting them. For
those professionals from other fields, outside
architectural and urban design, involved in the process of
decision-making and design review it is even more
difficult to interpret information when presented visually.
This can increase the danger of misinterpretation of the
information and affect environmental decisions. The case
of the Heron Tower development inquiry in the UK
demonstrates some of these problems.

1.1. The case of the Heron Tower enquiry
A planning application for the Heron Tower
development in Bishopsgate in London, UK, put forward
in the summer 2000 caused controversy and questioned
the credibility of the computer generated visual
representations. In order to resolve the matter a public
inquiry, which lasted two years and cost over £2 million,
was conducted.
The main reason for this inquiry was that the
English Heritage questioned the accuracy and reliability
of computer visualisation showing that a new fifty-storey
building in the City of London, the Heron Tower, would
not affect the views of the St. Paul’s and the Tower of
London, two important historic monuments in London.
The team of experts tested and analysed computer
generated images, viewpoints and angles from where

original images were taken. The analysis suggested that
the visualisation method produced reliable and accurate
visual representations and confirmed that the
development would not affect the existing historic
environment in a negative way. This controversy is
significant in at least two respects. Firstly, the opposing
arguments exemplify the range and persistence of
concerns that have been frequently expressed in the
public debate over the appropriateness and credibility of
design schemes for new developments.
Secondly, the Heron Tower inquiry demonstrates the
importance of the visual representations as the means of
communicating design ideas and as a basis for the
assessment of the potential impact of the development on
the public realm.

2. Visual representations of architectural
design schemes
Within the range of visual representations there is a
rich repertoire of imaginative techniques such as
perspective, axonometric drawings or artistic
impressions, recently further enhanced through computer
graphics and virtual reality representations. Recent times
have seen big changes in the visual representation
methods. Over the past twenty-five years advances in
computer technology and simulation software have
fostered the use of computer generated representations
and the use of these has grown dramatically (Building
Design 6 October 2000).These computer generated,
artistic representations are usually called computer
visualisation and they include: Computer Aided Design
(CAD, CAAD, CATIA etc.) generated three dimensional
models, computer rendered photorealistic images,
photomontages, interactive virtual reality models and
video clips of computer generated three dimensional
animations.
Since the introduction of computer visualisation
there has been a renewed focus on the information
visualisation of architectural design through computer
generated representations. In a white paper promoting a
new visualisation program from the computer
manufacturer Evans and Sunderland (1999) computer
visualisation is described as “an incomparable tool" for
winning approval quickly or speeding the funding
process for a proposed project. Some researchers [1]
claim that the move towards computer representations
"reflects the acknowledgement that conventional
drawings fail to communicate effectively design
proposals. According to Groak [4] computer
visualisation offers" new possibilities, extending the
scope for good design and in particular, on increasing the
real involvements of clients and users in the design
process". Recently Winterkorn’s (2000) survey for the
British Building Research Establishment and CICA (The
Construction Industry Computing Association) identified
improved quality of communication as the most
important benefit of computer technology for architects.
While there is no doubt that, the potential benefits of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

computer visualisation are clearly substantial [5],[6]the
available research recognises that the faith in the mastery
of the technology does not guarantee the appropriate
outcome - a comprehensive understanding of the
proposed design concepts. In addition Watzek and
Ellsworth [7] have proved that test persons were not able
to recognise geometric differences of up to 15%
artificially made through digital photomontage
techniques to colour photographs of the real landscape.
Equally, however, the accuracy and credibility of
traditional representations are "too often neglected and
deliberately compromised, particularly in artistic
impressions" [8]. They are accused of failing "to tell the
whole truth" [9] and researchers [10] criticise them for a
lack of important features that affect their reliability,
such as the depth of visual field and passive interactivity.

3. Perceived credibility of visual
representations
Concern over and debate about the credibility and
veracity of visual representations of architectural design
ideas has had a long history with conflicting attitudes
taken to visual representations. Most participants in this
debate agree that information visualisation through
visual representation have to be reliable in demonstrating
design. But there is a broad disagreement on how
different genres of representation affect our
understanding of design and what criteria need to be met
so that such representations carry any measure of
authority in the representation of a proposed urban
development.
In one of many architectural text books on drawing
Ching [11] explains that the purpose of “the definitive
representation” is “to accurately represent and
communicate a fully formed design to others”. Whether
produced to assist to the client’s imagination or to obtain
a commission, representation drawings should
communicate as clearly as possible the three-dimension
qualities of design. But this is not always the case. Even
professionals who regularly read plans may experience
problems in their interpretation. For example, when
commenting on the launch of the revised proposal for a
development in London, Francis Tibbalds stated “what in
two dimensions is quite an interesting urban design plan,
in three dimensions completely misses the opportunity to
demonstrate how rich, mixed-use public environment can
be created”. (Urban Design Quarterly, 1993)
On the other hand, when considering computer
visualisation which aspire to simulate the real
environment [12] it is asserted that the very realism itself
breeds the expectation of accuracy, reliability and
authority of the representation. The persuasive power of
computer visualisation was demonstrated by several
experimental studies [13]. While there is no scientific
documentation of the influence of their inaccuracy or
bias on decision-making a recent survey [14] shows that
60 % of respondents identified ethics and truthfulness as

the most important issues relating to computer
visualisation.
According to research, to date, the major
impediment in the design assessment area is the lack of
systematic research to establish comprehensive patterns
or to tease apart the differences between professionals'
and non-professionals' perception through traditional and
computer representations [15]. As Kalay [16] points out,
while computer programs "made communication easier
and more efficient, they have not, in and of themselves,
improved shared understanding, which is fundamental
for making joint decisions and for negotiating tradeoffs
among competitive worldviews". Mahdjoubi and
Wiltshire [17] add to the debate by stating "this gap in
our knowledge has persisted and it would appear that
intuition, prior practice and trials-and -error approaches
have guided the production of architectural
representations of design proposals".

4. The ESRC project: Depicting architecture
through visual representations
The focus of this research study is on people’s
perceptual responses to static visual representations that
provide an understanding of the three-dimensionality of
design schemes and one is unable to interrogate for
information other than the view it shows.
By comparing traditional and computer generated
architectural representations the study aims to establish
whether some methods of architectural representation are
regarded as more credible in communicating design than
others and in what way and why. In this paper, which
reports on the first stage of this study, the results of the
preliminary analysis of people’s responses to visual
representations are presented.

Figure 1. Computer generated representation 1:
Photo edited CAD rendered model

of work experience and professionals from the built
environment, structural engineers, quantity and building
surveyors, planning inspectors and planners. Participants
perceptions of visual representations are discussed and
analysed during the meeting using the theoretical
framework and criteria developed by Appleyard [18]),
Pietsch, [1] Sheppard [6]and Mahdjoubi and Wiltshire
[17]. The assessment criteria to be met so that
representations carry any measure of authority in
representing a proposed urban development comprise:
x Accuracy: correct understanding of design (the scale
height, distances etc.);
x Realism: creation of an experience undistinguishable
from the real experience;
x Abstraction: the amount of information included in
the presentation (level of detail of textures, materials,
constructive details etc.)

4.2. Case Based Analyses
To reduce extraneous influences, the selected cases
for analysis were limited to the proposals for significant
commercial developments with similar contextual
attributes. The units of analysis were 'collections' i.e. sets
of images, with a descriptive role. They are put together
to allow concepts and ideas to become visible [19] and to
identify designs depicted in given images. As such, these
sets of data contain a sufficiently large number of similar
images in order to be both representative and statistically
significant and this unit and choice of representations is
regarded as "a reliable source of factual evidence" [20].
To mitigate potential biases related to the representation
method [21] each representation was presented to
participants, in its own original format and medium.

Figure 2. Computer generated representation 2:
Photomontage

4.1 Research method
4.3. Visual representations
Four sets of the final visual representations were
presented and discussed with four groups of observers.
The groups comprised of: elected members of the public
(city councillors), architects with approx. five years of
work experience, architects with fifteen and more years

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

For the purpose of this study, visual representations
were selected to represent typical computer generated
forms of representations currently used by architectural
practices in the UK. The selection of typical forms was

based on a brief survey of the images published in the
architectural journals during the past two years
(Architectural Journal) and ten randomly selected UK
based architectural practices portfolios published on the
Web. As the source of the information about the
practices, the RIBA (Royal Institute of British
Architects) directory was used.
From the survey it was deduced that, currently, two
forms of computer representations are the most used
methods of communication of architectural design in the
UK, computer generated photomontages and rendered
3D CAD models edited in photo editing software to
produce the final representations. As for the traditional
forms of representations, two sets of watercolour hand
drawn perspectives and black and white (with a limited
use of the primary colours) perspective drawings for two
different designs schemes were selected.

establish the differences between people’s perceptions of
the credibility of computer and traditional forms of
representation. Generally, from the information
collected, it is clear that the professionals appear to
endorse the perceptions that are both, implicit and
explicit in the representations and therefore are able to
evaluate the design through representations. For
example, the scale, size or the height of the buildings is
simple to comprehend. In contrast, untrained people have
expressed only their explicit perceptions, and hesitate to
express implicit perceptions which were often confusing
and mistaken. They were confident in commenting on
the colour scheme but they could not give the answer on
the question: what is the approximate distance between
the buildings on the 3D rendered image? In addition
some of untrained participants said that the “architect’s
drawings give no assurance about the accuracy while
computer images do".

4.4 Participants
Participants in this study consisted of thirty-two
people divided into two groups: sixteen architects and
sixteen professionals and members of the public. They
have been selected on the basis of several criteria that
identify ‘a good informant' [21].The architect's group
was divided into two where one consists of eight
architects with less than five years and other, of eight
architects with a minimum of fifteen years of work
experience. The group of professionals consisted of
structural engineers, quantity and building surveyors,
planning inspectors and planners. The public group
comprised of elected members of the public, city
councillors involved in the planning and development
control committees. The division into these distinctive
groups was intended to help to establish group
differences [23], values [24] and the tension between
laity and expertise [25].

Figure 3. Traditional representation 1:
Watercolour rendering

5. Responses to visual representations
The first stage of the project sought to elicit group
responses to visual representations of architectural
design through focus group meetings. The aim was to

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 4 Traditional representation 2: Black and
white perspective drawing
The second general outcome is that the assessment
and comparison of different representation methods
against the criteria proposed by the theory was a helpful
method against which the attributes of the representation
have been considered and discussed. The analytical
framework assisted in establishing a valid collection of a
robust and reliable set of data.
Participants in each group were asked to state their
preferences, based on the perceived credibility, of the
form of visual representations of design schemes. The
public group preference was a set of computer generated
representations produced by using photo editing of a 3D
CAD generated model as their first choice and a
computer generated photomontage as the second choice.
A set of black and white hand drawn perspectives was in
their opinion the least credible form of representation.
Few comments were made about this set of
representations, sometimes, only after the group
moderator explicitly referred to these representations.
This was explained by the one member of the public as
due to inability to understand what is to be built, what
form it will take, what materials will be used and similar
issues. The members of the public regarded this form of
representations as the least accurate because “it is hand
drawn” and had no colours applied to present the design
“more realistically”.

Their perceptions of the high degree of the
credibility of computer generated model on the other
hand were entirely based on the apparent realism
presented because “the development will look like this
when built”. While they recognise some problems with
shadows, reflections and sky on the images the crisp,
clean images of the development with no patina on the
stone or paving, for them, were convincing in every
respect. This form of representation is also regarded as
the most credible by the group of professionals from
other built environment disciplines and architects with
five or less years of experience. Only architects with
over fifteen years of experience regarded to the other
form
of
computer
generated
representation,
photomontage, as the most credible. Their preferences
were based on the capacity of representation to show
relationship with the existing context. The
representations supported the informed assessment of the
height, scale and size of the development They were able
to relate the old to new forms and they trusted that the
representation is accurate. In addition, the fact that this
representation had an overcast sky, and a glazed façade
with the reflection of the building across the road, in
their opinion created the realistic image of the proposed
design scheme.
The second form of hand made representations was
considered as” much more credible than black and
white” by the members of the public because it presents
“the atmosphere of a new development”. This form of
representation was not favoured by either group of
architects, nor by the other professionals. The main
issues mentioned during discussion in these three groups
were the use of colour, too much detail and lack of the
clarity of the roof construction. On the other hand, the
abstract, black and white drawing was deemed by
architects to “sufficiently communicate the idea about
the design”.
Although the findings described above present the
results of the preliminary analysis they indicate the
issues which are likely to be further revealed during the
second stage of the project, semi-structured interview
which will maximise the opportunity for the individuals
to express their personal views, preferences and
perceptions of visual representations of architectural
design schemes employed in this research.

6. Conclusions
Research studies have identified the decision-makers
demographic and professional bias to be the most
significant factors in the process of communication of
architectural ideas through visual representations [26].
Several studies also reported differences in the
evaluation of decision-tasks between experts and lay.people. For example Barker [27] states “Differences
between lay and expert appraisals can be anticipated
because of variations in the decision context, experience,
perceived role, and ability to cope with a highly complex

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

and uncertain situation”. These differences have been
confirmed by the initial analysis of groups’ perceptual
responses.
The preliminary results of the various group
perceptions show that an important requirement from
three-dimensional representations of the architectural
design schemes is the apparent realism of the visual
representation. This factor affects people’s perceptions of
credibility in the way that it makes the images believable
and possessing “no sense of fudge” according to an
architect with over 20 years of experience. Computer
generate photomontage was regarded by the majority of
participants as representation that possesses the highest
level of realism and thus, the one where the information
presented leave the viewers with the impression that it is
the most studied design which is both, technically and
accurately presented . This is enforced by the level of
detail provided by the representation.. However, in
attention to the level of detail the architects and
professionals groups were most concerned about were
not about the textures only but the clarity of the
presented structures and of the materials used. What
most of these viewers were looking for was an
understanding what materials will be used and how
‘buildable’ is the scheme.
The issue of acceptable and useful levels of
abstraction of visual representations was particularly
difficult to acquire for the perceptions and understanding
by the members of the public. Their responses relied
very much on the colour schemes used, impressions of
the atmosphere that the images created and ‘activity
indicators’ such as people and car added to the
representations.
These findings underscore the need to fit the form of
visual representations to the audience and type of
decisions to be made. The results of some current
research confirm [13] these findings which revealed that
while skilled participants appreciate traditional while
unskilled participants prefer photorealistic presentations.
There is no doubt that computer generated forms of
representation make a valuable contribution to the design
review and environmental decision-making process.
Nowadays it is technically possible to create highly
realistic and accurate computer representations of
proposed architectural designs. However, architects and
some professionals still regard traditional forms of visual
representations as both a useful and credible form of
representation. Yet, these forms appear to be better as a
means of communication they use internally, among
themselves for the discussion and analysis during the
design development stage and the stage where the
conceptual design is communicated to other parties
involved in the process. For the final stage of design they
all agreed that computer generated representations of
design “sell better” design and are likely to have more
persuasive power than traditional means of
representation.
Another form of representations which has not been
investigated in the study was frequently mentioned
during the group discussions, interactive three–

dimensional visualisation. According to theory
interactive computer visualisation is the form of visual
representation which is one of”the most important
developments in visual communication for urban
planning and urban design since the development plan
[28]. Indeed, several participants from various groups
mentioned the examples of three-dimensional interactive
computer generated walkthroughs as the most credible
form of visual representations. However, according to
the participants in this study most of them would prefer
to see a high level of detail presented through this form
of representation. This might provide unparalleled
insights into the impact that the proposed design schemes
will have on the context and detailed information about
the new buildings themselves.

Acknowledgements
This project is funded by the Economic and Social
Science research council (ESRC) and conducted by the
Faculty of the Built environment at the University of the
West of England, Bristol. Parts of the work presented are
based on the final draft of the PhD thesis “Investigating
architects’ perceptual responses to architectural
representations of design schemes” by Nada BatesBrkljac.

References
[1]

Pietsch M. S. 2000, “Computer visualisation in the
design control of urban environments: a literature
review”, Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design, volume 27, pages 521-536E.R. Tufte.
Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT, Graphics Press.
1990.
[2] Orland, B. et al (1997) Public perceptions and experts
assessments: the effect of false colour in forest
visulisation, Project report, USDA Forest Service, Forest
Health Technology Enterprise Team
[3] Gibson, J. 1960, The senses Considered as Perceptual
Systems, Boston, Houghton Mifflin
[4] Groak S. (1998) Representation in building, RSA Journal
4, 4, 51-59
[5] Orland, B. (1994) Visualisation technique for
incorporating in forest planning geographic information
systems, Landscape Urban Plan. 30, pp83-97
[6] Sheppard, R.J. Guidance for crystal ball gazers (2001)
Landscape and Urban Planning 54, pp183-1999
[7] Watzek and Elsworth, (1994), Perceived accuracy of
computer visual simulations, Landscape Journal 13 1
pp.21-36
[8] Punter J., Carmona M. (1997), The Design Dimension of
Planning, E& FN Spoon, London
[9] Evans, R. (1997), Translation from Drawing to Building,
Architectural Association London
[10] Mahmoud A.H. (2001) Can Virtual Reality Simulation
Techniques Reshape the Future of Environmental
Simulations? in Online Planning Journal: accessed on
line
at
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/planning/articles41/vrsim.htm

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[11] Ching, Francis D. K. (2002) Architectural graphics, 4th
edition, Chichester: John Wiley
[12] Luymes, D. T. (2000) The rhetoric of visual simulation
in forest design in Sheppard S. R Forest and Landscapes,
International Union of Forest Research (IUFRO), CABI
International, UK
[13] Daniel T. and Meitner, M. (2000) Representational
validity of landscape visualisations, Final report, USDA
Forest Services, Forest Health Technology, Enterprise
Team
[14] Palmer, J., Pitt, d.g. Freimud, W.A.., (1995). The virtual
landscape; converging trends from artificial intelligence,
geographical information systems, and digital
visualisation technologies in visual
visual landscape
assessment. In Proceedings of the 4th International Out
door Conference, College of Natural Resources and
Minnesota Extensions Service, University of Minnesota,
St
[15] Ali-Kodmany, K. (2001) Supporting imageability on the
World Wide Web: Lynch’s five elements of the city in
community planning, Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, volume 28, pp805-832
[16] Kalay Y.E., (1998), Computational environment to
support
design
collaboration,
Automation
in
Construction 8, pp37-42
[17] Mahdjoubi L. and Wiltshire, J., (2001), Towards a
framework for evaluation of computer visual simulation
in environmental design, Design Studies, 22, issue 2
pp193-209
[18] Appleyard D. (1977) Understanding Professional Media,
in Wohlwill, I.A.J.F. (EDS) Human behaviour and
Environment: Advances in Theory and Research, New
York, Plenum Press pp43-88
[19] Collier, (2001) in Van Leween T. and Jewitt, C. (2001),
Handbook of Visual Analysis, Sage Publication, London
[20] Van Leeuwen T. and Jewitt C., (2001), Handbook of
Visual Analysis, Sage Publications, London
[21] Nasar, J& Purcell T. (1990) Beauty and the beast
extended in Pamir. H. et al (Eds) Culture, Space,
History, Sevki Vanh Foundation, Ankara
[22] Morse, J. M. (1994), Design in Funded Qualitative
Research. In Denzin, N. (eds.) Handbook of Qualitative
Research, pp. 220-35. London: Sage
[23] Brown G. and Gifford R. (2001) Architects predict lay
evaluations of large contemporary buildings, Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 21 pp93-99
[24] Groat, L.(1982), Meaning in post-modern architecture:
an examination using the multiple sorting task, Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 2 3-22
[25] Bloor M. et al (2001) Focus Groups in Social Research,
Sage Publication Ltd, London
[26] Kaplan R. and Kaplan S. (1983) Cognition and the
environment, Preager, New York, USA
[27] Shiode, N, 2001, 3D Urban models: recent development
in the digital modelling of urban environments in threedimensions, GeoJournal 52, pp263-269

