Augmented Reality Visualisation of the Built Environment
To Support Design Decision Making
Jules Moloney
University of Melbourne
{jmoloney@unimelb.edu.au}

Abstract
This paper reviews current approaches to design
visualization in the built environment and establishes a
gap in theory and practice. While it has been
acknowledged for some time that the temporal
component is an important aspect of visualisation there
has been minimal attempts to integrate this approach
into design practice. We articulate an approach to
visualization which we term ‘temporal context’. This
approach has two aspects: (1) the evaluation of designs
in terms of spatial sequence and multiple viewpoints over
time; (2) perceptual change over time due to changing
light and atmospheric conditions. Building on our
previous research in the use of video game technology to
facilitate design, we evaluate the potential of augmented
reality (AR) technology to address temporal context. We
describe proposals for two innovative screen based AR
systems, which incorporate a multi-camera capture
mechanism, a video data base and a unique illumination
data capture approach.
Introduction
This position paper seeks to address the gap between the
experience of the built environment and the methods by
which proposals are visualised and evaluated at the early
design stages. We outline long standing problems with
design visualisation and extend the discussion to include
the temporal aspects of vision. This approach is inspired
by the under utilised fact that perception of the built
environment occurs in a temporal context: day / night
and spring / winter cycles; oscillating light and shadow;
shifting patterns of moisture and haze. The city is in
motion, and is experienced in this mode, on foot or
vehicle, our vision reconfigured over half of a second to
enable cognisance of spatial sequence and shifting focal
points [1]. In contrast to this rich temporal context,
design visualisation is static, still predominantly
undertaken with 2D plans and abstract physical models,
supplemented by computer generated views and
animations, which at best represent one camera path and
one moment in time.
The focus of the paper is on architecture and urban
design, although we anticipate the principle of evaluation
in relation to temporal context has relevance to a full
range of built environment design disciplines. While the
value of evaluating proposals in relation to realistic

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

context would seem self evident, implementation in
design practice is partial at best. There is a range of
factors at play, but from our intimate knowledge of
design process we propose the primary reasons are that
of an ingrained practice, which foregrounds traditional
drawing conventions, and as confirmed by other
researchers, the lack of efficient visualisation tools to
explore an alternative [2]. The use of augmented reality
(AR) has the potential to address this gap in practice and
technology. However we propose current approaches do
not provide an efficient means of content production, a
necessary factor if AR is to be of use in professional
practice. More over the studies to date predominantly use
head mounted displays, which are problematic in terms
of facilitating group discussion. We propose an
alternative approach based on mobile screen and nonmobile projection systems, that build on our experience
of adapting video game technology as a design aid.
In the following sections we outline the background to
design visualization in the twentieth century and the
dominance of modernist visualization paradigms, discuss
the importance of temporal context, and survey current
uses of AR for design visualization. We then describe
our proposals for screen and projection based systems
based on video capture and real time illumination
technology. Outcomes from a pilot study will be
available for presentation at IV06.
Background to the Theory and Practice of Design
Visualisation
The history of design visualisation for the bulk of the
twentieth century can be directly related to the cannons
of modernism. From its publication in 1932 until the mid
1970’s “The International Style” was the mantra for a
period of “impaired vision” in which architecture was
“conceived as a thing in itself, as if it were the only
building in the world, and designed from the inside out,
in terms of an abstract, idealized conception of its
functions, with no concessions to the landscape or
cityscape around it” [3].
Commiserate with this ethos, architectural drawings were
abstract plans and sections delineating internal function
and structure, supplemented with isometric projections to
show 3D relationships as if they were describing engine
parts. Elevations or perspective studies were identified
with a morally suspect ‘pictorial’ view of the world. As
has been well documented, the impact of this

mechanistic view of architecture has had a catastrophic
effect on cities world wide and by the mid 1970’s was
widely discredited. The socio-cultural reasons for the
failure of functional modernism are understandably
complex and dependent on local circumstances, but one
outcome was contextual relationships became of major
concern. New approaches were informed by visualisation
which attempted to place proposals in context:
photographic collage; the re-immergence of perspective
drawing and sequential sketch techniques; the use of
urban figure ground analysis; and the use of physical site
models [4 ].
The hot house for design theory and the interplay
between ideas and drawing in the 1980’s was the
Architectural Association, particularly in the design
studios of Bernard Tschumi and his student protégé’s [5].
A key strategy was experimentation with alternate forms
of architectural visualization and his design classes at the
architectural association were among the first to inform
architectural drawing with a sense of occupation through
time. The term ‘narrative drawing’ was coined to
describe this radical approach to design visualisation in
which drawings were developed as filmic story boards,
mixing standard architectural conventions with
photographs, and music or dance notation.
The promise of narrative drawing and other temporal
techniques such as Cullen’s sequential sketches [6] or
earlier uses of video [7] were overshadowed in the late
1980’s by the widespread take up of computer aided
design (CAD). Initially manual drawing conventions
were duplicated with 2D plan, elevation and perspective
views printed out and rendered by hand with pencil, ink
or water colour for design reviews. Subsequent
generations of software have allowed designs to be
modeled in three dimensions and visualised with
simulated materials and light. Early attempts at these
techniques were blocky and crude due to hardware
limitations and lack of specialist knowledge. More

recently the increase in graphics power of the desktop
computer, the development of more sophisticated
software and the increased skill level of young graduate
designers has lead to some practices being able to
generate sophisticated computer graphics in house.
However the ease with which complex geometry and
surface qualities can be manipulated in three dimensions
has meant 3D visualisation has become, to some extent, a
victim of its own success. In the hands of many there
would appear to be a predilection for abstract form
making undertaken in the vacuum of the 3D digital work
space, often exploring non standard geometry with
seductive but unrealistic surface and light qualities.
Seldom are these experiments in form making evaluated
against the urban or rural context, until late in the design
process. This deferral represents the time constraints
within professional practice as much as it does design
emphasis, as while hardware and software have
improved dramatically, the scale and complexity of
urban contexts still limits visualisation at the crucial
early stages of design. There is no time to experiment
with a range of viewpoints or camera tracks and lighting
conditions are usually based on one idealised moment in
time. The mode of presentation to clients becomes
cinematic, computer visuals and animation utilised
essentially as a marketing tool, with no ability for the
reviewers to experiment with alternate camera positions
or temporal contexts. It is arguable that the wholesale
take up of 3D digital modelling within contemporary
architectural practice has seen a regression in terms of
context evaluation, and a reinforcement of the paradigm
by which architecture is conceptually and in many cases
literally developed as an isolated object.
The ubiquitous ‘fly through’ animation may give some
appreciation of spatial sequence albeit from a non
grounded perspective, but arguably there has been little
advance in terms of evaluating design proposals in
context before key decisions are made.

Figure1. Previous approaches to visualising built environment design in context: (a) sequential sketching ;(b) video
production using miniature camera on a robotic arm and a physical scale model (Bosselmann, 1997).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Temporal Context and Real Time Design
Visualisation
In previous research we have reported the advantages of
real-time design visualisation at the early stages of
design. [8] Using a range of software developed for the
video game industry, trials in the educational context of
design studios revealed the value of real time
visualization to enable an understanding of spatial
sequence. The video game technology enabled the
simulation of typical paths through proposals, with the
capacity to fluently test a variety of design options and to
edit these from the point of view of occupation. Such
design visualization, based on spatial sequence and the
ability to freely change camera position and orientation
represents one aspect of what we term temporal context.
As outlined above, the importance of such an approach
was established by researchers in the 1960’s and 70’s.
During this period ‘videoscopes’ were physically
animated through scale models of urban environments to
produce the perception of designs as they would be
perceived from a moving vehicle [7]. The cost of
producing the physical model and the expense of the
video equipment at that time, resulted in this approach
being limited in practice. Today’s video game
technology allows this approach to be revisited at
comparatively minimal cost. To achieve this, the
geometry of the neighborhood is approximately modeled
in three dimensions and then photographs of the actual
buildings are edited to create images of the building
elevations. These are applied to the geometry and scaled
to match the accurate geometry - a process known as
texturing. Only the immediate urban blocks are
modeled, with the background being represented by a
360 degree panoramic photo applied to the inside surface
of a semi-sphere. In effect the process is more akin to
building a stage set then producing a physical model.
Once complete, virtual cameras can be animated in a
manner similar to the physical videoscope.

Linear paths are drawn through the model to match
typical vehicle routes and the virtual camera is animated
along these. Dependent on the software used, the camera
is in a fixed viewing position along the drawn path, or
can be simultaneously operated in free camera mode
while following the prescribed route. The latter approach
allows the sense of being within a moving vehicle and
being able to shift viewing direction and focus. This
represents a significant advance on the videoscope,
which produced a fixed viewing position. As revealed in
design trials, this free camera movement allows the
designer to discover un- anticipated impact of the design
options.
The idea of spatial sequence over time is one aspect of
the idea of temporal context. The second aspect is that
perception of the built environment alters over time,
according to changes in light intensity and the impact of
cloud and humidity. The capacity to animate light and
shadow in real time is computationally intensive and at
the scale of the built environment is beyond the capacity
of hardware typically available in the design studio.
Video game production gets around this hardware
limitation by the combination of pre-calculated light
maps and animated shadows that approximate real time
lighting. Accurate shadows and light falloff can be
prepared in specialist software using ray tracing or
radiosity algorithms, and each building elevation can be
extracted as a rendered image. These are then applied as
textures to the real time geometry – a process known as
‘baked in lighting’. With care and attention to detail,
photo realistic results can be achieved, albeit this is from
one moment in time. A sense of dynamic lighting can be
achieved by animating the global illumination values to
simulate day/night cycles. In a similar manner the
general ambience of different seasons can be alluded to
through global particle systems animated to approximate
light diffraction. In addition photographs of clouds can
be layered in front of the environment sphere and
animated to produce a dynamic sky, with a similar
approach taken to give a sense of animated ground

Figure 2. Aspects of Temporal context in relation to visualisation of the built environment using video game
technology: (a) visualisation of spatial sequence (b) Lighting as a combination of ‘baked in’ and animated shadow.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

shadow and wind movement. Finally, shadows attached
to selected components, such as moving vehicles, can be
calculated in real time. The amount of such interactive
real time shadow is dependent on the video graphics
capacity of the hard ware system.
In summary, temporal context when simulated in a real
time software involves two aspects: the use of fixed path
and real time virtual camera enable a sense of spatial
sequence; secondly, through combining pre-processed
lighting and animated texture maps, lights and some
accurate shadow maps, the changing perception under
different atmospheric conditions can be approximated.
Temporal Context and Augmented Reality
While the use of real time simulation using video game
technology demonstrates significant advantages over
static imagery or fixed path animations, there are
inherent advantages in investigating the use of
augmented reality technology as a means of engaging
with temporal context. In the video game scenario
described above, the quality of the outcome is dependent
on the software skills of the personnel preparing the site
model. In general, the skill level is above that found in
typical design practice. In addition, no matter how good
the computer graphics the outcome will always be an
interpretation of the actual context. Augmented reality
involves the superimposition of the design proposal
within video capture of the actual site and potentially
allows a more productive and authentic visulisation
methodology.Azuma provides a robust definition of
augmented reality as having the following attributes:
they combine the virtual and the real; the virtual is three
dimensionally aligned or ‘registered’ with the real; and
the systems allow interactivity in real time [9]. The
visualisation environment may involve the use of head
mounted displays or portable screens where the user is
physically in the space known as mobile AR, or a second
non mobile approach where the computer model is
superimposed on pre-recorded video and visualised with

stereo projection systems.Mobile AR circumvents the
production problems of video game visualization, and
the idea of using portable systems has tantalised
researchers in computer aided design for some time.
Visualisation, along with construction supervision and
post completion maintenance is one of three uses
identified for architecture [10]. There have been several
experiments in the use of head mounted display (HMD)
for design visualisation: excellent technology trials have
been undertaken at the University of South Australia
with an outdoor AR CAD system [11] , while Feiner at.
al. explored the use of mobile AR to visualise historic
buildings on location [12], design studio tests have been
undertaken at architectural schools [13]. HMD’s have
also been used with physical city models [14], but these
substitute an abstract computer model with an abstract
physical model with arguably no improvement in context
visualisation. Moreover there is a growing consensus that
HMD’s are not conducive to design as a social process,
nor do they facilitate valuable integration of traditional
media with computer visualisation [15]. Design reviews
are often a dialogue between several participants, and a
screen system rather then a HMD, allows more natural
conversation and also enables the simultaneous
evaluation of reports, drawings and physical models.
This review of AR in architecture reveals that while there
has been speculation for some time that architecture and
urban design would be obvious beneficiaries of AR
systems, there is a lack of domain specific case studies
which explore the potential for realistic context. In terms
of our requirement for a temporal version of context,
game engine systems allow the ability to evaluate from
multiple camera positions in a fluid and engaging
manner. However there are problems with the skill levels
and the time required to create realistic site models and
the lack of convincing lighting. We reject the precedent
of head mounted displays due to the importance of
natural communication and the value of evaluating
projects simultaneously with drawings and physical
models.

Figure 4. Precedent for augmented reality in design visualisation of the built environment: (a) HMD used on a
physical site (Thomas, 1999); (b) HMD used in conjunction with a physical model (Seichter, 2004).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

System Description
We describe an approach which will addresses a gap in
visualization for architecture and urban design, using a
screen based system that incorporates an innovative
video database and synchronized illumination. We
propose two screen based AR systems, mobile and non
mobile. The two systems are complimentary - the mobile
screen based system is intended for on site visualisation,
but will also double as the video recording and
illumination level recording device to generate site
information for the non mobile system.
The set up for the mobile system will be similar to the
augerscope developed at the University of Nottingham
[16]. A large format LCD screen will be mounted on a
‘golf cart’ like tripod on wheels and will display one
seamless image derived from multiple video cameras to
generate a 180 degree field of view. Also mounted on the
cart will be hardware to capture the global illumination
levels using new AR relight technology currently under
development at the HIT Lab NZ [17]. The AR relight
software allows virtual models to be lit with the current
real world lighting, creating virtual imagery that is
almost photorealistic. Portable computers will
superimpose design options on the live site video, using
ARToolkit, inertial compass and GPS tracking
technology, also developed by the HITLabNZ [18]. This
represents technical innovation in two areas: (a) the first
use of a mobile multiple camera system (b) The first
significant use of AR relight to integrate real
illumination levels with computer models in real time.
The second, non-mobile, system consists of a three
screen stereo projection system for use in a design
review setting. This involves an adoption of the database
approach used in videogame production, which will
allow users to access a range of pre-recorded video and
pre-lit design models with temporally synchronized
illumination. Once the time of day / season is selected

the user will be able to play the video and review the
design in the context of the pre-recorded motion track or
time lapse. Alternatively the user will be able to pause,
and evaluate the design in a free camera / edit mode
allowing choice of individual viewing angles and motion
paths, and the manipulation of the model using position,
rotation and scale. This system will be a unique and
innovative application in non mobile AR using a video
database for the visualization of architecture and urban
design.
Conclusion and further Work
This paper reviews current approaches to design
visualization at the built environment and establishes a
gap in theory and practice. While it has been
acknowledged for some time that the temporal context is
an important aspect of visualization there has been
minimal attempts to integrate this approach into design
practice. We have articulated a definition of what
constitutes temporal context in terms of the design of the
built environment. The potential of advances in
augmented reality technology is explored and current
approaches evaluated. We describe a unique approach
based on a mobile site based video / data capture device
and a stereo projection system based on a video game
data base.
We are currently undertaking a pilot study to establish
the feasibility and scope of work required to implement a
full trial. This pilot study is the precursor to further work
with a full program of case studies. These will be
designed to generate as much knowledge as possible on
the usefulness of the idea of temporal context in a
realistic practice scenario, the reception of the new
paradigm by a range of stake holders, and generate user
feedback on the technology. A comprehensive survey
methodology based on a modified heuristic usability
evaluation approach [19] will generate the core data for
the case study.

Figure 4. (a) Shematic plan showing video camera paths and nodes. (b) Indicative image of mobile system based on
extension of the augerscope (Schnädelbach, 2002). (c) Indicative image of non mobile system used for design review.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

References:
[1] Massumi, B. ‘Parables for the Virtual : Movement,
Affect, Sensation’, Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2002.
[2] Simpson, D.M. ‘Virtual Reality and Urban
Simulation in Planning: A Literature Review and Topical
Bibliography’. Journal of Planning Literature, 2001, pp.
359-376.
[3] Berman, M. in Thackara, J. (ed) ‘Design After
Modernism’. London, Thames and Hudson. 1988. p. 26
[ 4] Bosselmann, P. ‘Representation of Places: Reality
and Realism in City Design’. Berkeley, Calif., University
of California Press, 1997.
[5] Tschumi. ‘Spaces and Events’. In Exhibition
Catalogue ‘The Discourse of Events’. London.
Architectural Association. 1983. p.8
[6] Cullen, G. ‘The concise townscape’. New York, Van
Nostrand Rienhold, 1961
[7] Appleyard, D., Lynch K., and Myer R. (1964) “The
View From the Road” Cambridge, Massachusetts, The
MIT Press, 1964.
[8] Moloney, J., Harvey, L. ‘Visualization and
Auralization of Architectural Design in a Game Engine
Based Collaborative Virtual Environment’ IEEE 8th
International Conference on Information Visualisation,
London, 14th-16th July 2004, IEEE Computer Society
Press, pp. 827-832.
[9] Azuma, R. ‘A Survey of Augmented Reality’ in
Prescence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments’,
Vol. 6, No. 4, pp 355-385, 1997.
[10] Klinker, G., D. Stricker, and D. Reiners,The use of
reality models in augmented reality applications. In ‘3D
structure from multiple images of large-scale
environments’: European workshop, SMILE ’98, eds. R.
Koch and L. Van Gool, Berlin, Springer, 1998, pp.281283.
[11] Thomas B, Piekarski W, Gunther B. ‘Using
augmented reality to visualise architecture designs in an
outdoor environment’. Proc. DCNet'99 (Design
computing on the Net, nov 30 - dec 3, University of
Sydney, Australia), 1999.
[12] Feiner S., B. MacIntyre, T. Höllerer, and T.
Webster, ‘A touring machine: Prototyping 3D mobile
augmented reality systems for exploring the urban
environment’. Proc. ISWC '97 (First IEEE Int. Symp. on
Wearable Computers), , Cambridge, MA., 1997.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[13] Donath, D., Beetz, N., Grether, K., Kruijff, E.,
Petzold, F. and Seichter, H., ‘Augmented Reality
Techniques for Design andRevitalisation in Existing
Built Environments’, International Conference on
Augmented, Virtual Environments and ThreeDimensional Imaging, Verlag Myconos, 2001, pp. 14-17.
[14] Seichter, H., ‘BenchWorks: Augmented Reality
Urban Design’, in H. S. Lee and J. W. Choi (eds)
Computer Aided Architectural Design Research in Asia
(CAADRIA2004) Seoul, Korea, 2004, pp. 937–946.
[15] Dave, B. “Hybrid Spaces of Practice”. Digital
Design: Research and Practice, M. Chiu, J. Tsou, T.
Kvan,M. Morozumi and T. Jeng (eds.), Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Doordrecht, The Netherlands,
2003, pp. 181-190.
[16] Schnädelbach H. et al “ The Augorscope: A mixed
reality Interface for Outdoors”, Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems: Changing our world, Changing ourselves.
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, 2002.
[17] HIT Lab NZ Website: http://www.hitlabnz.org/
[18] AR Tool kit Homepage:
http://www.hitlabnz.org/forum/forumdisplay.php?f=4
[19] Nielsen J. and Mack R.L, “Usability Inspection
Methods” John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1994.

