Analyzing Actors and Their Discussion Topics by Semantic Social Network
Analysis
Peter A. Gloor, Yan Zhao
MIT Center for Coordination Science & Center for Digital Strategies at Tuck at Dartmouth,
iQuest Analytics
pgloor@mit.edu, yzhao@iquestglobal.com
Abstract
iQuest is a novel software system to improve
understanding of organizational phenomena with greater
precision, clarity, and granularity than has previously
been possible. It permits to gain new insights into
organizational behavior, addressing issues such as
tracking information while respecting privacy,
comparing different interaction channels, network
membership, and correlating organizational
performance and creativity. It extends automatic
visualization of social networks by mining
communication archives such as e-mail and blogs
through including analysis of the contents of those
archives.
Keywords—semantic social network analysis, SNA,
vector space information retrieval, temporal social
surface, automatic communication analysis

1. Introduction
As we shift from an information-based society to
one based on knowledge, it is critical that we have a kind
of “grammar” that allows us to understand patterns of
communication and, more important, to visualize new
patterns. This paper introduces a novel integrated
software system allowing organizations to drill down
into communication processes by different criteria and to
visualize the communication flow and contents, making
it easy to understand and explain its communication
patterns. The resulting communication “maps” provide a
basis for further discussions about how to design
organizations and their spaces in an optimal manner.
iQuest’s goal is to visualize and analyze
communication activity, content and unstructured text,
and interactions in a practical and unobtrusive way while
still respecting individual privacy.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

2. Related Work
Recently visualization and analysis of social
networks has become an active topic of research. There
are many tools, which take as input actors and the
strength of ties between actors to analyze and visualize
all sorts of social network analysis metrics [Was92,
Borg92, Bat98]. For example, EmailNet [Van04] has
been used to gather data on knowledge-worker
productivity in executive search firms. TeCFlow, a
predecessor of iQuest [Glo04] has been used to analyze
behavior of teenage cell phone users, managers of a
global services firm, and project team members of two
software companies. Vizster [Hee05] has been used to
identify communication pockets and gaps in Enron data,
by mining the enron e-mail archive and visualizing their
social network. Communications Garden [Zhu01] has
been used by the Arizona police department to predict
links in criminal social networks, based on semantic
analysis of communication contents.

3. iQuest Overview
Much can be learned from static and dynamic
visualizations of the communication networks that show
the evolution over time [Glo03]. A vastly extended
version of predecessor tool TeCFlow [Glo04], iQuest
takes as input any type of communication archives such
as e-mail, phone records, blogs, Weblinks, or chat
sessions. An interactive movie shows the evolution of
social networks over time, displays active relationships
in a sliding time window, and calculates and plots the
evolution of group betweenness centrality and density
over time to discover interesting events in the lifetime of
a virtual team and different phases in the life cycle of
virtual communities [Was94].
As its main graph layout algorithm iQuest uses the
Fruchterman-Rheingold spring-embedder layout
algorithm [Fru91]. Actors are depicted as nodes, ties
between actors as connecting arcs. The stronger the

relationship between two nodes, the shorter is their
connecting arc.
We use Freeman’s index for quantifying the overall
level of betweenness in a set of actors BCgroup, which
summarizes the actor normalized betweenness indices:
g

BC group =

[ BC*

'

i =1

'

BCi ]

N

[ DC*
i =1

DCi ]

[( N 1)( N

2)]

Group density of a network is defined as the
proportion of ties present in relation to all ties possible:

D=

In addition to the social network view, in iQuest the
same algorithms are also applied to textual content
analysis. Free text documents are parsed, and a keyword
index is computed, based on term frequency inverse
document frequency tfidf, where the term frequency tf in

( N 1)

where BC*’ is the largest realized normalized actor
betweenness index of the set of actors and N is the
number of nodes in the network. DCgroup is the
normalized group degree centrality, where DC* is the
largest simple actor degree and N is the number of nodes
in the network:

DC group =

4. Analyzing Social Networks by Contents

l
N ( N 1) / 2

l is the number of present edges; N is the number of
nodes in the network.
For our dynamic visualization, we are using a
sliding time frame algorithm, where we are looking at a
time interval consisting of a flexibly chosen number of
days.
We also look at the frequency with which
individuals send and receive messages. We have defined
a measure, which we call the “contribution index”:

messages _ sent messages _ received
messages _ sent + messages _ received
The contribution index is +1, if somebody only
sends messages and does not receive any message. The
contribution index is –1, if somebody only receives
messages, and never sends any message. The
contribution index is 0, if somebody has a totally
balanced communication behavior, sending and
receiving the same number of messages [Glo03]. We
then plot the contribution index against the total number
of messages sent and received of each participant. An
example of those views is shown in figure 1.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

a document is defined as
with ni being the
frequency of term i in a document, divided by the
number of all terms in the document. This is calibrated
with the frequency of term i in the document collection,
where N is the number of all documents, and Di is the
number of documents where term i occurs. tfidf is then
calculated for each term in each document according to
the classical formula [Sal89]:
tfidf = tf * log (N/ Di).
This means that the more documents two terms
share, the stronger is their link. The attraction between
two terms is based on the summation of all weights of
the common terms.
The main advantage of iQuest is its capability to
visualize concept maps and social networks over time,
based on a sliding time frame algorithm [Glo04], where
the new documents or e-mail messages added on the next
day define what new actors and terms will appear in the
concept and social network view.
The right side of figure 1 illustrates those temporal
elements. The contribution index view positions people
based on the number of messages they exchanged, and
terms based on the number of new documents in which
they appear. The centrality view plots a continuous curve
of the changes in group betweenness and degree
centrality as well as graph density of both social network
view and concept view.
iQuest fully respects privacy of users. They always
have full control about how much information they want
to include into their analysis, e.g. excluding contents, email headings, or anonymizing e-mail addresses. If
desired, they can analyze entire communities without
including any individual actor information at all.

Contribution index
view with the most
frequently used
concepts to the right

most relevant concept

Concept maps (semantic
networks) with the most
relevant concepts at any
given time
Centrality view with the
changes in group life
from most “hierarchical”
to most “democratic”

Most relevant actors

Social network with the
most relevant actors in the
center at any given time

Contribution index view
with the most active
contributors to the top
right

Time slider

Figure 1 Different Views of iQuest

4.1 Searching Concept Networks by Similarity
The concept view also permits to do similarity
searches. For example, doing a similarity search in a
bulletin board on loud speakers for term “wonderful”
finds the terms having the strongest association with
search string “wonderful” by traversing the concept
network graph.

Figure 2. Similarity search for “wonderful
In figure 2, a similarity search for term “wonderful”
shows the terms “rear” and “emma” to be the most
significant in the concept map. This means that the terms
“rear” and “emma” are the most significant in the
messages also containing term “wonderful”. (The
messages are talking about how “wonderful “rear”
surround speakers and the “emma” type speakers are).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

4.2 Identifying Topics and Main Actors in
Communications
iQuest permits to discover which actor is talking
about what topic at what point in time. Figure 3
illustrates one way of combining content and social
networks. The bottom of figure 3 shows the main actors
talking about “emma” such as Jan Vigne, as well as Jan
Vigne’s central network position in the online speaker
discussion forum.
The top of figure 3 shows the concept map
automatically generated from the text content of the
bulletin board. After thematic concept clusters have been
created, the content of the users’ mail can be categorized
and users can become members of thematic groups
according to the nature of their messages. For example,
right-clicking on term “emma” shows the most important
actors discussing this concept (box in the center of figure
3). In this way, it is possible to determine which users
have similar interests and, therefore, help them to better
collaborate and communicate. iQuest can be used to
identify the most important thematic fields. This allows
for collecting information about the issues that matter
most to the people who exchange messages.
Combining temporal textual analysis with temporal
social network analysis opens up wide opportunities for
new applications. Using temporal analysis of e-mail
content makes it possible to keep track of changes of the
thematic context of a user’s mailbox or to monitor
changes in the thematic context of a mailing list or
conversational thread. This functionality can, e.g., be
used to analyze existing mail archives from different
company departments, open source mailing lists, etc., to
draw conclusions regarding specific patterns of temporal
movement of context from one organizational unit to the
next.

Figure 4. Visualizing Information Flow in online
forum

Figure 3. Combining Actor and Content view
Comparing actor and concept information permits to
locate the sources of valuable information to identify
which groups create what knowledge. This way, readers
get additional cues on which information is important to
read and which can be ignored.
A user’s mailbox can also be compared to the
context of a general category topic. This functionality
can be used to watch personal communication that is
irrelevant to a given topic. This permits to discover new
discussion threads evolving out of originally unrelated
contents, locating the origins of new ideas. Topic
categories can be constructed after parsing collections of
documents. Users can also look out for different
conversation threads on the same topic. This can be
useful, for example, for members of an organization that
may have the same interests, but are unaware of each
other’s activities.

4.3 Tracking Information Flow in Social
Networks
Our system also easily permits to maintain a visual
history of the information flow among actors within a
discussion. Maintaining a history of the information flow
makes it possible to visually track the exchange of
messages between the users over time.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 4 identifies the most central players in an
online forum of hundreds of participants, discussing the
respective advantages of “emma.” Whenever participants
talk about “emma”, they are colored in blue. After a
specified time interval, they are grayed out again. In
figure 4, overall most active participants “jan vigne” and
“nuck” are shown conversing about “emma”, embedded
in all the actors within the speaker forum.

4.4 Combining Communication Links and
Content Similarity
We have also developed a combined view, where
the calculation of ties between actors is a weighted
average of the number of messages exchanged and the
number of common terms in the messages sent and
received between two actors. In addition to the links
computed based on number of messages between two
actors, another link is calculated based on the number of
common terms collected from all the messages that actor
A and actor B send or receive from any other actor. To
add additional flexibility, a link weight is defined
ranging from 0 to 1, and a term weight inversely ranging
from 1 to 0. The view can then be dynamically shifted
between placing emphasis on common communication
links or common terms.
Figure 5 shows the same network as a link network
and as a content network. The top of figure 5 shows the
social network of an online community, as calculated
based on e-mails exchanged between the members of the
mailing list. The bottom of figure 5 shows the same
view, with the term slider dragged to the right: additional
emphasis is placed on calculating ties based on similar
terms in messages exchanged between actors.

Figure 5. Link-term view with term weight=0 (top) and term weight=1 (bottom)

5. Sample Application – Monitoring
Positions of Web Sites in Cyberspace
It is straightforward to extend iQuest to visualize the
daily changing positions of Web sites in cyberspace. The
same algorithm that animates the exchange of e-mails
based on the triple (from_address, to_address,
timestamp) also works for Weblinks, as they have the
same temporal structure. Based on the simple insight
“you are not to whom you link”, but “who links to you”
iQuest collects all the links up to n degrees of separation
pointing to a source URL. This application is useful for
positioning brand-aware Web sites and for positioning
Blogs, as it indicates their relative standing in cyberspace
at a glance.
It even permits discovering Web trends by looking
at changes in link patterns between blogs, such as e.g.
tracking the centrality of a certain blog within the entire
blogosphere.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 6 shows the top 10 Web sites returned to the
query “avian flu drug”, as well as the top 10 Web sites
pointing to each of the top 10 Web sites returned by the
query, and the top 10 Web sites pointing to the previous
Web sites, i.e. at most 10*10*10=1000 Web sites. Note
that in fact we only have 227 Web sites, because Web
sites come up repeatedly at each subsequent level of
separation from the original 10 Web sites. Those
multiply connected Web sites of high betweeness
centrality, such as e.g www.nature.com are the ones most
deserving further investigation.
Figure 6 shows the link structure of those Web sites
also including analysis of their content, i.e. similarity by
common terms is factored in. A cluster of closely related
Web sites is emerging near the black rectangle in the
middle of the picture representing the original query.
Www.nature.com becomes one of the most central Web
sites, further pointing out the relevance of its contents for
the query “avian flu drug”.

Figure 6. Visualizing the relationships between the top Google search results to query “avian flu drug”

6. Conclusions
iQuest is currently used to further explore open
research questions analyzing hidden relationships and
their context. It assists in comparing different
technologies of interaction: Do social networks depend
on the interaction technology? In other words, does the
same group of people exhibit different network attributes
when interacting via telephone, email, face-to-face or
other? iQuest can also analyze network membership:
How do social networks change over time? Is it possible
to detect new patterns and correlate them to external
events? How do collections of ego networks correlate to
group networks? Another research issue where our tool
is helpful is to discover correlations between
communication structures and performance and
productivity: Can we correlate network attributes either
statistically or visually with performance criteria, for
example, creativity, cohesion, information overload, or
productivity? Papers describing first results of these
projects can be found on our project Web site
http://www.ickn.org/html/ckn_publications.htm.
Our tool permits organizations to develop working,
communication, process improvement, and trust-building
practices. iQuest also offers novel individual knowledge
worker productivity enhancement functionality for better
individual communication behavior. The use of iQuest
provides organizations with information about their
current communication structures and possible problem
areas and support needs. By recognizing their previously
hidden internal innovation networks, and discovering
trends and trendsetters organizations can mobilize links
and synergies of which they were not aware.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Tom Allen, Hans Brechbuhl,
Marius Cramer, Scott Dynes, Kai Fischbach, Francesca

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Grippa, Myank Jain, Eric Johnson, Christine Kohlert,
Casper Lassenius, Rob Laubacher, Tom Malone. Maria
Paasivaara, John Quimby, Ornit Raz, Josh Rosenthal,
Detlef Schoder, Thorsten Seehawer, and Antonio Zilli
for helpful discussions, suggestions, and invaluable
feedback as early testers of our software.

References
[1] Batagelj , V. and A. Mrvar. Pajek—Program for Large
Network Analysis. Connections 21 (2): 47-57. 1998
[2] Borgatti, S., M. Everett and L. C. Freeman, L.C. 1992.
UCINET IV, Version 1.0, Columbia: Analytic Technologies.
[3] Fruchterman, T.M.J Reingold, E M. Graph drawing by
force directed placement. Software: Practice and Experience,
21(11), 1991.
[4] Gloor, P. Laubacher, R. Dynes, S. Zhao, Y. Visualization of
Communication Patterns in Collaborative Innovation Networks
- Analysis of some W3C working groups, Proc. ACM CKIM,
New Orleans, Nov 3-8, 2003.
[5] Gloor, P. Zhao, Y. TeCFlow - A Temporal Communication
Flow Visualizer for Social Networks Analysis, ACM CSCW
Workshop on Social Networks. ACM CSCW Conference,
Chicago, Nov. 6. 2004.
[6] Heer J. Boyd, D. Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
Networks. InfoVis 2005, IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization. Available at http://jheer.org/vizster.
[7] Salton, G. Automatic Text Processing. Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, 1989.
[8] Tyler, J. Wilkinson, D. Huberman, B. A. Email as
Spectroscopy: Automated Discovery of Community Structure
within Organizations. HP Laboratories, 2003.
[9] Van Alstyne, M. and Zhang, J, EmailNet: A Tool for
Capturing Anonymous Email, University of Michigan working
paper., 2004.
[10] Wasserman , S., Faust, K. 1994. Social Network Analysis :
Methods and Applications. Cambridge University Press.
[11] Zhu, B. and Chen, H., Social Visualization for Computermediated Communication: A Knowledge Management
Perspective, Proc. WITS'01, 23-28, 2001.

