Geospatial Anchoring of Encyclopedia Articles
Wolfgang Kienreich, Michael Granitzer, Mathias Lux
Know-Center, Competence Center for Knowledge-Based Applications and Systems
{wkien@know-center.at, mgrani@know-center.at, mlux@know-center.at}
Abstract
An encyclopedia provides a written compendium of
knowledge consisting of articles concisely and
exhaustively covering topics of interest. Most general
encyclopedias are structured in an alphabetical manner
and favor keyword queries and link-based navigation as
the primary form of access. On closer examination, many
encyclopedia articles can directly or indirectly be
associated with geospatial references. This publication
explores ways of anchoring encyclopedia articles to
geospatial references and presents a web-based 3D
interface which allows navigation of the German
Brockhaus Encyclopedia through a geospatial metaphor.
Keywords: Encyclopaedia, Geospatial Anchoring,
Visualisation, Metaphors, Web-based User Interfaces,
Interactions, Browsing, GIS

1. Introduction
The World Wide Web instantly provides users with
large amounts of information on almost any conceivable
topic when accessed using today’s web search engines.
However, much of the information available is
unstructured and often unverifiable: While a web-based
inquiry may yield a general idea of topics and contents in
an unknown domain of knowledge, it can hardly provide
the kind of trusted and concise information required, for
example, in the composition of scientifc or business
documents or in the preparation of educational material.
Contrasting and supplementing web-based inquiry, an
encyclopedia provides a written compendium of
knowledge which contains articles from many different
fields. Each article is prepared by domain experts and
guaranteed, by the encyclopedia provider, to describe a
topic exhaustively and accurately.
Most general encyclopedias are structured in an
alphabetical manner and rely, in digital form, on
keyword queries for locating specific articles and on
link-based navigation for browsing articles. Alternative
ways of access to encyclopedia knowledge bases have

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

recently received much attention: For example, natural
language query formulation has been evaluated as an
alternative to keyword queries[1], and knowledge maps
combining article metadata and defined inter-article
relations into a unified navigation model have been
proposed [2]. This publication discusses a geospatial
approach to encyclopedia search and navigation. After a
brief introduction to the domain of Encyclopedia
systems, a description of the concept of geospatial
anchoring outlines how encyclopedia knowledge spaces
consisting of textual articles can be combined with
named geospatial references. A prototype geographical
browsing system is then presented which employs
geospatial anchoring to navigate between encyclopedia
articles.

2. Environment
An Encyclopedia provides a rich repository of
highly structured, annotated and revised information in
the form of articles covering specific topics. Today’s
digital multimedia encyclopedias typically contain
hundreds of thousands of articles which consist of textual
content as well as images, sound and video. Information
is usually reviewed and, in part, written by experts
familiar with relevant knowledge areas. Digital
Encyclopedias typically incorporate geographical
information systems, often in the form of a world atlas
providing detailed maps of terrestrial locations as well as
search facilities able to locate, amongst others, political,
topographical and morphological entities.
The work presented in this publication is based on
the online version of the Brockhaus Encyclopedia [3], a
product which enjoys a dominant market and image
position in the German-speaking European countries (the
famous German Duden is published by the same
company). With around 240,000 articles and 350,000
mentioned keywords, Brockhaus is among the world’s
largest Encyclopedias. The world atlas component of the
Brockhaus Encyclopedia contains 2,000,000 named
geospatial references, as well as detailed surface maps
and high-precision altitude information on Moon, Mars
and Earth.

3. Geospatial Anchoring
We define geospatial anchoring as the process of
attaching articles from an Encyclopedia knowledge space
to named geographical entities as provided by the world
atlas. Anchoring of articles may occur based on various
types of geospatial references made within article
content. This section discusses some anchoring scenarios
and challenges in identification and implementation of
the anchoring.

3.1. Direct geographical references
A direct geographical reference is constituted by an
article covering a topic which refers to a geographic
object. For example, an article about the German capital
“Berlin” should clearly be anchored to the according
named geospatial object in the geographic information
system. This kind of anchoring is already present in
Brockhaus, and in most other encyclopedias containing
geographic information systems.

3.2. Indirect geographical references
Indirect geographical references occur when within
the content of an article, terms are mentioned which refer
to named geospatial objects present in the geographical
information system, but not necessarily within the
Encyclopedia knowledge space. For example, an article
about French philosopher and scientist Blaise Pascal will
most certainly list his place of birth, Clermont, which,
denoting a French city, appears as a named geospatial
entity in the geographical information system, but which
is not necessarily described by an individual
encyclopedia article. A geospatial anchoring would now
connect the article on Pascal to the named geospatial
entity Clermont.
Geospatial anchors derived from indirect
geographical references supplement the net of topical
relations and explicit links between articles and enable
rapid navigation between encyclopedia articles relating
to named geospatial entities similar in the geographical,
but not necessarily in the topical domain. Expanding the
abovementioned example, users could navigate from
Pascal to Clermont, from Clermont – following a
geospatial relation visible only in the geographical
information system – to the statue of Vercingetorix on
display in the city, and from there to the History of the
Roman Empire, which again would be an article in the
encyclopedia domain. Proposals have already been made
regarding the integration of this kind of anchoring with
activities in the area of the Semantic Web [4].

3.3. Symbolic geographical references
In many cases, an article does not name a specific
instance of a geographical object, but relates to a whole
class of such objects. For example, an article talking
about ice fields would profit from a geospatial anchoring

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

to Greenland and Antarctica, both of which possess large
ice fields. In such cases, if an appropriate geographical
reference is present in the article covering the term in
question, this reference can be used. For example, if the
article on ice fields cites Greenland, this can be used to
construct a geospatial anchor as described in section 3.2
In cases where no appropriate geographical reference is
present, the geographical information system can be
queried to provide an exemplary instance of the object
class in question, for example returning the largest
object, or the object tagged as most important by some
internal ranking scheme.

3.4. Temporal spatial references
Many encyclopedia articles may refer to historical
events, which usually are anchored to geographical
references. For example, an article about the thirty year
war would refer, among others, to Denmark from 1623 to
1629 and to Sweden from 1630 to 1635. The appropriate
geospatial anchoring then has to be made in a timedependent manner. This implies that the geographical
information system supports time-based, or versioned,
named geospatial entities. Temporal spatial references
are exceptionally useful in analyzing more complex
Encyclopedia articles: Expanding on the example above,
users could navigate to Denmark in the time period
given, and then look up the various reigning powers
involved at the location, at that time, from the
Encyclopedia.

3.5 Challenges
When trying to determine the named geospatial
entities to anchor to, problems arise from ambiguities in
both the encyclopedia domain and the geographical
domain. For example, the Brockhaus Encyclopedia lists
at least twenty named geospatial entities under the term
“Berlin”. Many named geospatial entities refer to the
term “Wald” (woods in German), which in turn is
represented in more than one Encyclopedia articles. Such
ambiguities can be resolved by using additional
information present in articles (e.g. country reference,
city size), and metadata present for named geospatial
entities (e.g. hierarchy, class, size), to construct a context
and rule out as many potential mappings as possible. In
the absence of additional information, manual editing
can be applied to choose the correct anchor locations.
Another problem arises when named geospatial
entities change over time, or geospatial anchors are
constructed for historical geographical references which
may not be valid any longer. As detailed in section 3.4,
the geographical information system used must support
time-based, or versioned, named geospatial entities in
such cases. Furthermore, data sources for the
geographical information system must be created from
the historical materials themselves because it is next to
impossible to interpolate or track the various changes a
named geospatial entity has undergone over time.[5]

4. Prototype
A web-based atlas client application has been
implemented, which cooperates with the web-based
version of the Brockhaus Encyclopedia and employs
geospatial anchoring of Encyclopedia articles to enable
browsing of Encyclopedia content by geographical
context. Similar to recently published map systems like
Google Earth [6] or Nasa WorldWind [7], the atlas client
supports free navigation of Earth’s surface up to very

magnification, to switch between various modes of
interacting with the view and to execute functions like
printing a map or copying a map to external applications.
To the left, a query field enables users to search for
named geographic entities. Search results are displayed
in a relevance-ranked list. Clicking any item in this list
produces an animated transition of the viewport from the
current geographical context to that of the clicked item.
The map view initially provides users with a threedimensional view of Earth as seen from space. Some

Figure 1 Map View (top), Article View (bottom)
high magnifications, based on satellite image and altitude
data. Various dynamic map overlays provide additional
geographical, morphological, political and miscellaneous
information.

4.1. Functionality
The web atlas client interface is divided into three
major areas (compare Figure 1, top). In the center, a map
view displays the currently selected geographical
context. To the right, a number of navigation controls
enable users to move the viewport, to change

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

artistic strokes, like a background star field and artificial,
moving clouds have been added to enhance visual
experience. The map view can be manipulated using the
mouse: By default, dragging the mouse in the view will
rotate Earth accordingly, and clicking a location will
zoom in on that location and simultaneously center it in
the view, while searching for related geographical
entities in the search panel on the left side. Additional
interactivity behavior can be enabled using option
controls on the right side panel: A selection mode
enables focusing of a selected rectangle in the view, and
a measurement mode allows drawing of reference points

on the map, the distance between which is then displayed
in the interface. To support users in learning the various
functions of the interface quickly, context and operation
sensitive help messages are displayed dynamically in the
map view whenever a user activates a certain function, or
invokes a certain interaction, for the first time.
Various types of maps can be displayed in the
interface: Beside a visual map composed of satellite
imagery, topological and geopolitical information is
available, as well as specific information of geographic
interest, like average temperature distribution or time
zone boundaries. Users simply select the type of map to
be displayed from a dropdown list to change the current
view to a new map type. As a special case, maps of Mars
and Moon are available, complete with textual
descriptions of sites of interest, like crater structures on
Moon or spacecraft landing sites on Mars (compare
Figure 2).

this first layer of rendering is very fast, allowing for realtime animated sequences. However, as magnification
increases, texture resolution becomes too low for a high
quality map display. At this point, the client switches its
display method and starts acquiring map segments
matching the current viewport from the server, which
generates such segments in real-time, given coordinates
and magnification specifying the viewport.
Whenever animation is required (e.g. when an
animated transition is made from one location to
another), the high resolution map segment currently
loaded is faded out and fast texture-based rendering is
employed as described above. At the end of an animation
sequence, a new static map segment is requested for the

Anchoring of Encyclopedia articles to geospatial
references is displayed by symbols in the list of named
geographical entities on the left, and, optionally, near
labels in the map view. Selecting a named geographical
entity to which an article is anchored selects that article
in the Encyclopedia, too (compare Figure 1, bottom),
enabling users to employ the atlas view as an
intermediate step in a navigation process otherwise
following links or topical relations between articles.

4.2. Implementation
The atlas prototype has been implemented using a
client-server architecture similar to the setup described in
the MapsAlive project [8]. A server application accepts
client requests for texture maps covering the whole
planet, map segments specified by view coordinates and
queries for named geographical entities. Communication
between server and client facilitates web services. The
client application has been implemented using
Macromedia Shockwave 3D, a plug-in-based solution
which allows in-browser display of multimedia content
[9]. This technology has been preferred over considered
alternatives like Java Applets or Macromedia Flash,
because it provides both the ability to generate full 3D
views using hardware acceleration as available on a
client system and to display 2D views quickly and
efficiently [10].
The generation and display of the map view on the
client system follows a two layer approach: For lowresolution viewing, when a significant part of Earth is
visible at once, a texture map provided by the server and
cached in client memory is composited onto a geometric
model of the planet using 3D rendering techniques.
Texture resolution can be dynamically increased
whenever load time is available or increasing
magnification requires this. Because all required
information is already present in client memory, and in
most cases processed by dedicated graphics hardware,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2 Mars Landing Sites
new viewport location from the server. The drawback of
this procedure is that, especially at high magnifications,
the map view displays significantly less detail during
animation. However, the fading effect applied to static
map segments ameliorates the visual impact, and on the
positive side, performance of animation operations is
high even on older machines with less capable graphics
hardware.

5. Benefits
As outlined in the examples in section 3.2,
individual users benefit from the prototype described,
and from geospatial anchoring in general, by gaining the
ability to navigate between Encyclopedia articles through
geospatial references, even if no explicit links are
defined between these articles in the Encyclopedia
knowledge space. Two or more users benefit further
from applying the visual representation of geospatial
references as a Knowledge Visualisation[11]:
Heterogeneous groups of users can employ geospatial
references and their visual representations as a common,
comprehensive and unifying metaphor along which to
communicate and share knowledge. For example,
geospatial anchors can be used as signposts to relevant
articles, and view ports to the visual representation can
be specified as an alternative to textual queries
describing a subset of articles.

6. Future Work

Acknowledgements

The web atlas prototype has been expanded into a
product version and is currently available, for paying
subscribers, on the Brockhaus Encyclopedia Online web
pages. A major future enhancement envisioned is the
integration of dynamic content provided by third parties
into the geospatial reference framework. For example,
news articles as delivered by news agencies could be
displayed in the map view, provided they contain
information enabling the derivation of a geospatial
mapping. Information of a more technical nature, like
network analysis data, could be visualized in this way,
too [12], and would be much easier to anchor to named
geospatial entities.

The Know-Center is a Competence Center funded
within the Austrian Competence Centers Programme K
plus under the auspices of the Austrian Ministry of
Transport, Innovation and Technology (www.kplus.at).

Another challenging research direction is the further
incorporation of temporal-spatial geographic references.
Encyclopedia articles of a historical nature, relating to
named geospatial entities no longer existing in today’s
maps, or articles relating to processes or events covering
time spans as well as named geospatial entities, are
currently very hard to anchor to geospatial references.
The introduction of versioned or time-based geospatial
entities into the geographical information systems
backing the atlas application is envisioned to address this
topic.
Building on the experiences in the web atlas project, we
are currently working on extending the concept of
geospatial mapping and navigation to the domain of
Astronomy. A solar system simulator and deep space
map exhibiting similar features and anchoring
mechanisms as the web atlas client is currently being
designed and implemented, and will be made available
with future versions of the Brockhaus Encyclopedia.

Conclusions
In this publication, we have discussed geospatial
anchoring of Encyclopedia articles and presented a
prototype system enabling users to browse encyclopedia
knowledge spaces through a geospatial metaphor. In the
absence of an all-encompassing ontology able to provide
total coverage navigation between encyclopedia articles
by topic, alternative ways of browsing the hundreds of
thousands of articles available in large encyclopedias
have to be considered. Geospatial references are present
in, or can be extracted from, a majority of articles, and
can be integrated into easily comprehensible
geographical metaphors, thus constituting a substantial
enrichment for the navigation facilities of large
Encyclopedias.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

We would like to thank Arndt Frederichs and Bernd
Kreissig, both of Bibliographisches Institut & F. A.
Brockhaus AG, for their feedback and efforts.

References
[1]

Ji-Rong Wen, Jian-Yun Niew, Hong-Jiang Zhang,
“Clustering User Queries of a Search Engine”
Proceedings of WWW10, 10th International Conference
on the Worldwide Web, ACM, Hong Kong, 2001.
[2] Wolfgang Kienreich and Michael Granitzer. “Visualising
Knowledge Webs for Encyclopedia Articles”
Proceedings of IV’05, 9th International Conference on
Information Visualisation, IEEE, London, England,
2005.
[3] Bibliographisches Institut & F. A. Brockhaus AG,
Germany, 2005. http://www.brockhaus.de
[4] Max J. Egenhofer. “Towards the Semantic Geospatial
Web” Proceedings of GIS’02, Conference on Geographic
Information Systems, ACM, McLean, USA, 2002.
[5] Robert F. Chavez. “Generating and reintegrating
geospatial data”. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM
Conference on Digital Libraries, ACM, San Antonio,
USA, 2000.
[6] Google Earth, Internet, 2006, http://earth.google.com
[7] Eric Sokolowsky, Horace Mitchell and Jeff de La
Beaujardiere. “NASA's Scientific Visualization Studio
Image Server” Proceedings of VIS’05, IEEE Conference
on Visualization, IEEE, Minneapolis, USA, 2005
[8] Michael Potmesil. “Maps Alive: Viewing Geospatial
Information on the Worldwide Web” Proceedings of
WWW6, 6th International Conference on the Worldwide
Web, ACM, Santa Clara, USA, 1997.
[9] Macromedia, Inc., subsidiary of Adobe, Inc. Shockwave
3D, Internet, 2006. http://www.macromedia.com
[10] Andreas Riedl, Gernot Katzlberger, Harald Tomberger.
“Entwicklungs-/Modellierumgebungen für Web-basierte
Geo-Virtual
Reality
Applikationen
eine
Gegenüberstellung”. Proceedings of CORP2002 &
GeoMultimedia’02, Vienna, Austria, 2002.
[11] Remo A. Burkhard. "Learning from Architects: The
Difference between Knowledge Visualization and
Information Visualization". Proceedings of IV’04, 8th
International Conference on Information Visualisation,
IEEE, London, England, 2004.
[12] Kevin S. McCurley. “Geospatial Mapping and
Navigation of the Web” Proceedings of WWW10, 10th
International Conference on the Worldwide Web, ACM,
Hong Kong, 2001.

