An Experiential Learning Model: Re-Creating the CBS GOLF PGA Computer
Animated Open, Inside the Classroom
Paul Lipsky
New York Institute of Technology
Communication Arts Department
Old Westbury, New York
plipsky@nyit.edu

Abstract
This exploratory case study looks at an Experiential
Learning Model based on Project Based Learning.
Graduate students were given the assignment to
recreate a 3D computer animated open originally
created for CBS Sports PGA tournament. A total of six
learning objectives were initiated, evaluated, and
interpreted: creativity, skill sets, productivity, team
work, deadlines, and client skills.

1. Introduction
Effective technology education requires that an
instructor transfer skills, knowledge, and values. Shield
(2000) states that technological understandings and
accomplishments are acquired through the processes of
designing and making. Shield adds (2000, p. 1) that “the
subject is essentially one concerned with practical
action and capability”. Shield concurs with Wild and
Quinn (1998) and explains that education, at its highest
levels needs to be concerned with developing the ability
to enable students to “predict the outcomes of
innovative situations” with the objective of enabling
real world performance later on in the creative student’s
career. Other scholars have called for project based
learning models in design education. Dyne, Taylor, &
Boulton-Lewis, (1994) called for learning materials be
purpose built. DiMarco (2004, p.2) states that
“coursework and laboratory work that challenges
students should simulate real conditions”. These
scholars share the idea that project based learning
works. The goal of this case study was to explore
Project based Learning and provide an interpretive
description of the goals, processes, execution, and
assessment of a case involving students learning
animation techniques based on recreating a real-world
project. This brings us to some interesting research
questions: Does using Project Based Learning and
emulating real world projects provide tangible learning
outcomes? And; how does an educator bridge the world
between the theory of teaching computer graphics as an

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

exercise in the classroom and the real world of creating
animation for television? To answer these questions
and evoke new suggested directions for further research,
a case study of student learning using PBL was
analyzed, interpreted, and reported in narrative form.

2. Methodology
The rational for this study was based on literature
review which suggested further research in Project
Based Learning (PBL) citing few reported experiences.
In this exploratory case study, PBL was employed to
provide students with a framework for student learning
and research methodology with the goal of establishing
a reliable platform for analysis. Marti, Gil, and Julia
(2006) explain that Project based Learning (PBL)
provides an educational strategy by employing a
problem solving methodology. In addition, the
researchers stated that "PBL improves student learning
initiatives" (2006 p. 1). I refer to myself as Instructor
for this paper.
The project established interpretation of several
critical learning objectives. These learning objectives
were developed and based on a capstone graduate class
at the New York Institute of Technology’s graduate MA
program in Communication Arts, in additional to more
traditional outcomes such as: creative abilities, skill
sets, and productivity others were established such as
team work, deadlines, and most important, the role that
the client plays in the industry. We accomplish this by
bringing in Douglas Towey, the Creative Director for
CBS Sports as a professional in this industry he was
very familiar with functioning in the role of client for
animation projects. Also, in past semesters, nonindustry professionals came to the classroom and
functioned as client. These experiences are just as
important and become learning experience for the
student, because they teach the pitfalls of dealing with
inexperienced clients.
The learning objectives that were analyzed and
interpreted were:

Creativity: The ability of a student to design ideas
based on a given assignment or task. The Instructor
explains this skill as “Creative Problem Solving”
because in the real world, you don’t always work on
your own designs – but mostly on someone else’s – so
creativity is accomplished in the way you solve the
creative task at hand.
Knowledge: The technical skill set needed to execute
the designs of the given assignment. This would entail
having an excellent grasp of the latest software
packages with experience in technical problem solving.
Productivity: The all- elusive ability to find the
energy to finish. All too often, students want to move
on before completing a creative task to its most creative
conclusion. The Instructor explains this as the
"professional equation” students must understand that
(it takes 50% of your time to finish 80% of your
animation - then an additional 50% of your time to
finish the last 20%) Having the energy to follow
through is all-important.
(Less traditional tasks to teach)
Team work: Given a group project, the ability to
work well together as a creative team to produce under
deadlines. In an ever-increasing freelance job market,
this is a valuable skill.
Deadlines: Pressure is pressure and students need to
realize that at times they will need to perform
extraordinary leaps of creative work at a moment’s
notice.
The role of client: The Instructor considers this the
most important skill to teach in the classroom. Client’s
desires and needs are paramount and in the end, this
must drive the whole creative process – and even
sometimes the non-creative process. Students must
overcome the strong desire to produce work that only
satisfies their creativity, exclusive of the client’s needs.

3. Case Analysis
In past semesters our time was spent creating original
animation. First we would meet with the client to
determine their needs. Then we would design story
boards and, once approved by the client, we would
spend the semester animating until the client was
satisfied. This semester, was completely different. We
spent the entire semester re-creating a real-world project
that had already been completed. Based on the student’s
experiences and the outcome of the final animation,
educational value came in the matching of details and
the insight each student gained in addition of the other
learning objectives.

4. Data Gathering
The initial phase of data gathering, the first task
measured was to break down the information in each
storyboard frame into geometry to be modeled in

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Autodesk Media & Entertainment’s 3D Studio Max
software and the live action video that would need to be
gathered. [see figure 1.]
The next phase measured was how the live action
footage of the golfer was placed in the 3D
environments. Because of the limited 3D camera
moves, it was determined that the live action was
probably placed on 3D cards and rendered inside the
environments.
Next, a lecture on how all the layers could have been
rendered separately and then re-composited using
Autodesk Media & Entertainment’s Combustion
software. (Also referred to as “breaking out elements”)
was initiated. This step is often overlooked by the
beginner, but it plays a crucial role in how much control
the animator has with the client and turnaround time for
changes. Incorporating too much of the final animation
in the 3D realm limits both the time for changes and the
subtle additions the animator might want to add within
the world of compositing.
In the last phase, a total of sixteen students, broken up
into two students per group were assigned one of the
eight scenes. Again, this worked well by helping to
foster a teamwork approach. The instructor met with
each two- member team, and suggested approaches into
breaking up the tasks needed to perform.

5. Conclusions
Interpretation of learning outcomes.
Creativity: Student’s refined his/her creative problem
solving skills. By having to reproduce something
exactly, the student realized the subtle nuances that the
original animation team used. From lighting to camera
placement, the student could see how everything was
done for a reason.
Knowledge: I’ve always advocated that the best way
to learn something is under a deadline and handed the
creative task as opposed to trying to learn it from a
tutorial. Having to reproduce each scene was probably
more technically challenging then what the original
animation team had to do. Each student had to learn
new tools for 3D and compositing that they had never
used before as the pending deadlines approached.
Sometimes one approach could be found but it was
determined either inefficient, or too labor intensive, and
another technique was sought.
Productivity: The “production equation” is worth
repeating again: (50% of the time is used to complete
80% of the project – another 50% of the time is used to
finish the last 20%). This project tested these limits and
showed the student just what types of dedication goes
into creating animation for television that is worthy for
airing.
Teamwork: With today’s hiring dynamics of growing
and shrinking an internal work force based on needs, it

is important for a student to be able to quickly
assimilate to a team to do excellent work and leave a
lasting impression with co-workers. These are the skills
of the future, and this will help in getting better quality
work. This project went a long way in meeting this
objective.
Deadlines: Our client, Doug Towey, had only limited
time to spend in the classroom which lead to
uncertainties of his availability for corrections. This
presented a challenge even though small QuickTime
moves were uploaded for him to look at; the real
learning experience came when he was in the classroom
critiquing the student’s work. Trying to reproduce this
animation was a monumental challenge for my students
and tight deadlines kept them focused which allowed us
to finish by the end of the semester.
The role of the client: It could have been easy enough
to just complete a group project on our own, but since
we had to meet the needs of the client, we needed to
teach skills not found in a book. Issues such as the
length of time the client’s logo stays on the screen, are
more important then other esthetic issues that the
student might rather focus on. The students need to
learn that the client drives everything, but as a
professional animator, we can develop skills to control
the situation as best as we can. We call these skills
“client wrangling”, and learning these ins and outs in
the classroom goes a long way in formulating the
careers of the students.
Because of the uncertainties of teaching a class with
an outside client and grouping the students into teams
there
is
always
a
certain
unconventional
curricular/assessment flow to the class. An area for
future study would be to prove the educational value
based on the final animation produced by the students
since this exceeds what’s done in a more traditional
tutorial driven curriculum. In addition to better manage
the uncertainty of an outside client an area for further
research would be a better defined learning outcome
and assignment for client based skills.

6. References
Cunningham, S. (1999) Report of the 1999
Eurographic/SIGGRAPH Workshop on graphics and
visualization education Retrieved from:
http://www.siggraph.org/education/conferences/GVE99/paper
s/GVE.FullReport.pdf
DiMarco (2004). Teaching Computer Graphics and
Multimedia, A Proctical Overview. In J. DiMarco (Ed.)
Computer Graphics and Multimedia: Applications, Problems,
and Solutions. (p. 2.) Hershey: Idea Group Publishing.
Dyne, A. M., Taylor, P. G., & Boulton-Lewis, G. M.
(1994). Information processing and the learning context: An
analysis from recent perspectives in cognitive psychology.
British Journal of Educational Psychology, 64(3), 359-372.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Giese M. (2005) An Educator's Journal: spring and summer
2004. Journalism & Mass Communication Educator, winter
2005; 59, 4, 342.
Gülbahar, Y. Tinmaz, H. (2006) Implementing Projectbased learning and e-portfolio assessment in an undergraduate
course. Journal of Research on Technology in Education,38,
309.
Kolb, A., & Kolb, D. A. (1999). Bibliography of research
on experiential learning theory and the Learning Style
Inventory. Department of Organizational Behavior,
Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH.
Lee, C., Tsai, F. (2004) Internet project-based learning
environment: the effects of thinking styles on learning transfer
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 20, 31-39.
Shield, G. (2000). A Critical Appraisal of Learning
Technology using Information and Communication
Technologies. Journal of technology Studies, 26 (1). [retrieved
from http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ejournals/JOTS/Winter-Spring2000/shield.html]
Waks, L., (1999) Reflective practice in the design studio
and teacher education. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 1999
Vol. 31 No. 3, 303-316
Wild, M., & Quinn, C. (1998). Implications of educational
theory for the design of instructional multimedia. British
Journal of Educational Technology, 29(1), 73-82.

Original CBS Sports
Frames

Student Frames

Figure 1. side by side comparison of
original animation from CBS Sports and
Student’s animation.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

