Database and Narratological Representation of Australian Aboriginal
Knowledge as Information Visualisation using a Game Engine.
Malcolm Pumpa.
Queensland University of Technology, Australia, and
Australian CRC for Interactive Design (ACID), Australia.
m.pumpa@qut.edu.au
Theodor G Wyeld.
IEP, ITEE, The University of Queensland, Australia, and
Australian CRC for Interactive Design (ACID), Australia.
twyeld@itee.uq.edu.au
Abstract
Current database technologies do not support
contextualised representations of multi-dimensional
narratives. This paper outlines a new approach to this
problem using a multi-dimensional database served in
a 3D game environment. Preliminary results indicate it
is a particularly efficient method for the types of
contextualised narratives used by Australian
Aboriginal peoples to tell their stories about their
traditional landscapes and knowledge practices. We
discuss the development of a tool that complements
rather than supplants direct experience of these
traditional knowledge practices.
Keywords: Aboriginal Knowledge Domain,
Narrative as Metadata, Torque Game Engine as
Information Interface.

1. Introduction
In response to requests by Australian Aboriginal
elders and communities to preserve and communicate
their culture for current and future generations, the
process of gathering and documenting Aboriginal
knowledge has accelerated in recent times. This has
also been due to the increased capability of digital
environments to store and manipulate large amounts of
information in various accessible formats. Most
recently it has been found that some formats are more
suited to representing the Australian Aboriginal oral
cultural tradition (such as audio, video, graphics) than
others. However, one of the most important issues
which has arisen and continues to influence the design
of these digital tools is that of representation of the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

environmentally contextualised narratological nature of
Aboriginal knowledge traditions.
Current database storage mechanisms don’t appear
to support the sorts of narratological knowledge
practices used by Aboriginal knowledge traditions.
What is needed is a multi-dimensional non-linear,
database visualization schema that better supports real
time narratives spatially contextualized.
As such, this paper critiques how Aboriginal
knowledge practices have been, until recently,
represented in digital media and then suggests some
prerequisite characteristics of such media if they are to
support traditional knowledge traditions. Finally, a
digital environment – Digital Songlines – that promises
to fulfill many of these prerequisites is examined in
more detail.

2. Background
Aboriginal knowledge is a contentious area of study.
This is because Aboriginal knowledge exists as a selfcontained knowledge tradition, radically separate
ontologically and epistemologically from Eurocentric
knowledge traditions. Its purpose is to reify culture and
identity [12]. However, current technologies for the
representation of this knowledge tend to embody
assumptions that are based on a Eurocentric scientific
knowledge tradition. This allows Aboriginal knowledge
to be objectified and commodified for use in a wide
range of ‘scientific’ fields. This raises questions about
the validity of current methods of study. A critical
principle to be addressed is that Aboriginal knowledge
is embedded and deeply associated with their land.
This includes the relationships that people have
developed with that land or ‘country’ over time. This

knowledge is primarily situated in “kinship, language
and humour” [8, p4]; not objects, artifacts, or
recordings as such.
To understand the nature of the holistic Australian
Aboriginal knowledge practice and how it relies on a
reciprocal relationship with the environment, or its
spatial context, we can refer to a Western abstract
spatial concept: Descartes arbitrary three-axial spatial
coordinate system.
While space is a difficult concept to define, we give
it coordinates when we try to describe what space is –
up, down, left, right, near, far and so on. In the
Cartesian coordinate system we apply three arbitrary
axes – x, y, and z – to locate objects in space. But, we
do not ordinarily think of the space in which we live as
having three axes. It is only when we abstract spatial
coordinates out of this space that we apply the arbitrary
axes to make sense of it. If we can accept the Cartesian
spatial concept as an abstract, arbitrary mapping of
space for representational purposes, then it is possible
to imagine other spatial realities too. For example, a
space which is brought into existence through the
meaning making traditional knowledge practices of
Australian Aboriginal peoples who see their existence
as having a reciprocal meaning with the environment in
which they find themselves.
Hence, it is clear, there are vital differences in
Western (or in the specific context of the Australian
experience - Eurocentric) and Aboriginal knowledge
traditions and practices. For example, Western
traditions emphasize the differences between what
exists and how we represent it in a variety of symbolic
systems. By contrast Aboriginal knowledge traditions
emphasize the unity of symbol and object – of what
exists and how we represent it. In Aboriginal
knowledge traditions, language, ceremony, singing,
dancing and other representational forms can influence
events and cause real world events to happen. Objects
and phenomena can be ‘sung’ or ‘talked’ into and out
of existence. These processes of the amalgamation of
representation and reality have been going on since the
Dreamtime (in Australian Aboriginal terms, the time of
creation of all things) and continues to this day.

3. The Problem with Current Database
Technologies for Narrative Representation
The difficulty with current systems is that they are
founded on the same philosophical methodologies that
underpin Descartes axioms. For example, in a
relational database there are linear relationships
between he objects contained and their metadata. This
can be mapped out in an arbitrary coordinate system.
Like the Cartesian system, this mapping relies on

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

differentiation of object from its symbolic abstraction
or semiotic reference. In this system the object and its
representation can be completely unrelated other than
the relationships that we agree to give them. In a sense,
the Aboriginal knowledge practice is the obverse of
this. With no written language, any representation of an
object is considered as real as the object itself [3]. This
means that the consequences for an object and its
representation are similar. For example, a sketch of an
Australian Aboriginal person is thought to be part of,
rather than merely a representation of, that person.
For Aboriginal knowledge to be visualized in a
Western database manner it needs to undergo two
processes. Firstly, it must be objectified and secondly,
organized into relational categories. Due to its nonrepresentational
nature,
however,
Aboriginal
knowledge lacks an easily accessed metadata system
that would make it amenable to these two processes.
In effect, Aboriginal knowledge objects are
embedded in a multi-dimensional narrative of story,
song, dance, art and ceremony. This narrative embeds
any knowledge ‘object’ in a matrix of relationships that
is both temporal and spatial. Because the narrative is
not a representation but is as ‘real’ (in a spiritual and
metaphysical sense) as any object which it refers to,
there is no explicit metadata available to distinguish
categories of objects; the metadata is contained
implicitly in the narrative and resists representation in a
conventional relational database schema.
To-date the organizing and categorizing of
Aboriginal knowledge has followed two main types of
database application. Firstly, complex relational
schemas that have proven to be largely unworkable in
terms of access and metadata. Secondly, the
ontologically flat database with a simple schema of one
or few fields that more accurately reflects the nonrepresentational nature of Aboriginal knowledge.
However, in this solution it is too difficulty to query the
data [3, 15].
Both these methods use narrative as the ‘glue’ or
metadata to establish relationships in the database
schema. However, due to the non-representational
nature
of
Aboriginal
knowledge
narrative,
categorization of knowledge objects is extremely
difficult. The expression of Aboriginal knowledge
narrative that is multi-dimensional and nonrepresentational is the landscape itself. Thus there is
no duality or contradiction between data and narrative
in Aboriginal knowledge as both are embedded in and
defined by the landscape.

Various authors have posited that storytelling or
narrative has a vital role to play in information
visualization [16, 6, 14]. and that the nuances and
uncertainties of both forms can effectively complement
each other. In Aboriginal knowledge, the landscape is
both the visualization of knowledge and the narratives
of knowledge.
Therefore, any attempt to present the complexity of
Aboriginal knowledge and practices in a digital
environment needs to provide a visualization of the
landscape that is capable of embedding a wide range of
knowledge objects. In effect the visualization of
landscape, if effective, provides the schema (types of
objects and relationships between them) of a complex
database of Aboriginal knowledge. There still remains
the problem of accessing the data in all the many
locations in the landscape. The most effective
visualization for this is to allow the user to ‘be in the
landscape’ in a virtual sense. A much less complex
parallel in Western knowledge tradition would be
allowing a user to walk through a virtual library and
access books from the shelves. The virtual Aboriginal
knowledge landscape provides a more complex
relationship as it not only provides the ‘books’ or
knowledge objects but the narratives which describe
how they came to be there and the human actions
necessary to ensure that they continue to exist.

4. A New Approach
Representation.

to

Narrative

Referring to the characteristics of Aboriginal
knowledge practices in Christie [4], any supportive
representation of Aboriginal knowledge needs to
enable the user to become involved in an extended
collaborative, performative narrative which pursues a
purposeful journey through a sentient (responsive)
landscape, exploring and reaffirming relationships with
significant people and the land. However, the current
state of representation of Aboriginal knowledge seems
to be split into either data based tools or narrative
based tools – collecting and telling. For all intents and
purposes, in Western thought, the dichotomy between
database and narrative presents a large obstacle. As
Manovich [10, p12] states, the “database and narrative
are natural enemies. Competing for the same territory
of human culture, each claims an exclusive right to
make meaning out of the world”.
Hence, any digital tool based exclusively on one or
the other is presenting at best only half of the
knowledge practice tradition. On the one hand,
database tools struggle with the dual agendas of
metadata and the selection of knowledge categories. On

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

the other hand, purely narrative tools, such as digital
storybooks, struggle with the linearity, lack of multidimensionality and simplification of the digital
publishing formats. Both these types of tools also lack
the essential capacity for the user to ‘perform
knowledge’ (to actively participate in knowledge
construction), rather than merely access and manipulate
what is given.
Although the database is increasingly the preeminent symbolic form of information resource in a
digital society [10], the enduring power of narrative has
become recognized in recent times as adding meaning
to the information. For example, in the work of Brown
[1] he addresses the differences between logical
argument and narrative which explains the power of
narrative in the corporate world to reveal the various
roles of narrative as sequential events, explanations of
cause and effect and also as metadata. We can see the
value of this approach in Huggins’ [8, p4] assertions
that Aboriginal narratives are cultural institutions of
collective memory which are “held in ‘lived’
experience”; that these narrative structures are not
easily understood by conventional approaches to
history and, “the only way the Indigenous narrative
memory can be properly understood is through the
paradigms of Indigenous people.” Hence, narrative
forms a powerful ally as metadata in any knowledge
data collection.

5. Capturing Specific Narratological
Contexts in a 3D Game Engine
In an attempt to address the need to combine
narrative and knowledge artefact as a database of
information which emulates Australian aboriginal
cultural understanding, the Digital Songlines project
was formed in 2003. It uses a computer game engine to
immerse participants in a narratological landscape
similar to that espoused by its indigenous contributors.
The Digital Songlines environment attempts to
match important characteristics of Aboriginal
knowledge in the way it is able to amalgamate the
power of database and narrative. It presents a
visualization of a landscape which has elements of
sentience or responsiveness. To visualize this sentience
the data objects are embedded in an interconnected
network of multi-layered pathways or Songlines
(pathways of Aboriginal knowledge practice). This
network of data is made accessible by a matrix of
interactive narrative which acts as a metadata structure
for the data objects. In effect, the narrative and the
situation in a landscape provide meaning, purpose and
ownership to the data objects in an intuitive and

complex manner which is extremely difficult for a
conventional database to emulate.
The “essential task (of the game design) is to
envision a dramatic storyworld, not a storyline” [8,
p56]. The storyworld is made powerful by the
designer’s control which “is exercised through the rules
of the gameworld rather than the events of the
gameworld” [2, p52].
Frasca [5] elicites a
corresponding typology of the requirements of
powerful game design, which relies on 3 ideological
levels. The first and weakest level deals with
representation and events, the second and more
powerful level deals with the manipulation rules or
what the player can do in the game, whilst the final and
most powerful level is that of goal rules or what the
player must do to ‘win’ or, in the case of Digital
Songlines, what they must do to reveal knowledge
contained in the sentient landscape. Manovich [10]
states that having multiple trajectories between data
objects does not necessarily constitute a rich narrative
and that, “the author also has to control the semantics
of the elements and the logic of their connection so that
the resulting object will meet the criteria of narrative.”
He quotes Meikie Bal [in 10, p1] as to the criteria of
narrative, “it should contain both an actor and a
narrator; it also should contain three distinct levels
consisting of the text, the story, and the fabula; and its
‘contents’ should be "a series of connected events
caused or experienced by actors."

6. Testing of Multi-Dimensional Narrative
Representation in a 3D Game Engine
A highly resolved proof-of-concept prototype
Digital Songlines application has been developed. It
includes arrays of 3D objects used to recreate a
landscape populated by indigenous flora and fauna.
These assets have been imported into the game style
application based on the Torque Game Engine. The
active features include sound, animations, weather and
daylight simulation. An established mechanism to
import digital terrain models existed and it was
modified for importing satellite based geo-spatial data,
or data that is prepared for use in GIS software, for
accurately mapping the cultural heritage landscape
including ancient rock art [4].
The terrain data in vector or raster based formats is
layered with spatial attributes that identifies where the
features are located in geographic space as relevant to
Aboriginal cultural heritage. The geo-spatial data
includes various files that make up a cultural metafile
set with vector data representing trade routes
(Songlines), a table containing the artefacts belonging

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

to significant places and their location, and data
including the indigenous names for sites, watercourses,
hunting grounds, scar trees and other significant places.
These are positioned correctly in the 3D world using
GPS coordinates. In addition, native vegetation specific
to the area was included in the 3D world. Flora and
fauna were surveyed and photographed on-site and
modelled for inclusion in the environment [9].
While the primary use of the tool has been in the
area of cultural history, a wide range of potential
educational installations have been identified including:
museums, science centres, cultural centres, interpretive
centres, community consultation, local councils,
forestry, water resources, development organisations,
schools, mining, safety training, media and data fusion
capabilities [9].
What the Digital Songlines project provides is a
vehicle for the unfolding of real-time narratives
involving Elders and the ancestral spirits of the
landscape. These narratives consist of the network of
Songlines that traverse the country and reinforce
Aboriginal knowledge practices. At any one location in
the landscape the user may be able to access
information from any number of Songlines, which offer
different perspectives on what exists in that place, who
can be in that place, what activities can be done in that
place, how that place came to be, what needs to be
done to maintain that place, the ownership of that
place, and many other deep and subtle nuances of
Aboriginal knowledge (see figure 1).
In terms of contemporary Aboriginal knowledge, we
have developed some animated sequences from an
Aboriginal dreamtime story that is included as part of
the world in a transparent manner. Developing the art
works for the animations and some 3D objects with
cultural significance requires regular consultation with
indigenous artists and representatives from the country
to ensure they are portrayed correctly (see figure 2).
Many issues have arisen from the creation of these
virtual spaces of some 400 square kms and its reliance
on the computational capacity of real-time hardware
and visualization technologies. Some are difficult to
resolve in a suitable way to communicate the presence
required within the virtual space. Such as, how to
convey immersive narratologies like: while in place,
indigenous knowing pauses at each rock, knows the
cycles of the winds, can track underground water, find
food and medicine, and uses of the land to speak its
stories and keep its history. The kind of knowledge
represented and the ‘field’ in which it is held by local
indigenous peoples is often deep, subtle and most
intimate (Langloh-Parker, 1953).

Although anchored by a database, the Digital
Songlines delivery tool is in the form of an immersive
narrative. In this sense, we have not only partially
ameliorated the ‘flat database versus dynamic
narrative’ problem faced by most Aboriginal
knowledge digital tools but we have done it in a
manner that also supports the cultural form Aboriginal
knowledge takes – narrative in practice. As such it
blurs the non-Aboriginal dichotic distinction between
subject and object at the level of the interface itself.

7. Preliminary Results

Figure 1 Example of Aboriginal knowledge in
practice – woman weaving a fishing net.
To address this the Digital Songlines project uses a
‘tiered’ model where ‘layers’ of content are created,
accessed, and linked back to the virtual model of the
physical place. With such a model, we are able to
conceive of the (virtual) land as an interface through
which the more traditional dynamics of software
creation can be accessed. This layered model allows us
also to participate in indigenous knowing and ‘beingwith’, at the most basic level, as the tool is used.
The content can be layered to support narratives
(such as land ownership issues, spiritual knowledge,
historical and oral stories) and as a community content
development and archiving tool (re-populate the virtual
spaces with indigenous content). These can be used in
entertainment, display, community consultation and
education, such as museums, cultural centre displays,
as an indigenous language walk, or bush tucker
(traditional food) walk, or oral history lesson. These
are all developed with the notion of land-as-interface
where the (virtual) land is layered with information and
practices that arise from that very landscape.

The Digital Songlines project has been
enthusiastically received by numerous Aboriginal
communities, groups, schools and museums. These
groups have grasped the opportunity to gather
information relating to their particular area of ‘country’
using a range of digital media. This is leading to the
up-skilling of many community members in digital
media. It is also providing a cultural focus for the
sharing of knowledge practices between generations.
Early, informal evaluation groups of Aboriginal adults
and children have responded enthusiastically both to
the Songlines concept and also to the visual interface
and interactive activities that are possible within the
Songlines environment.
More formal evaluation of the Songlines
environment and user interactions will take place
during 2006. Investigations into cultural aspects of
cognition, information visualisation, pedagogical
application and sociological aspects are planned. These
studies will use a variety of ethnographic and
phenomenographic methodologies. They have the
potential to yield rich data about the nature of
representation of Aboriginal knowledge, the
pedagogical implications for Aboriginal learners, and
the participatory design process for the construction of
accurate local landscapes and cultural activities.

8. Conclusion

Figure 2. Screen image of animated fish with
representative contemporary Indigenous art work.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

In its review of the Digital Songlines project, this
paper has explored some key questions around the
nature of Aboriginal knowledge, issues surrounding
appropriate representation of this knowledge and the
way specific features of the Songlines environment
appear to be addressing these key issues. We argued
that environments should be responsive to the need for
a database that reflects not only the content of
knowledge but the forms of its communication in
knowledge practices. We have argued that the key
mechanisms for this aspect of representation of

Aboriginal knowledge practice in the Songlines project
lie in the combination of a user experience that is
collaborative and performative with a sentient
responsive landscape and a multi-layered narrative.

9. Acknowledgements
This work is supported by ACID (the Australasian
CRC for Interaction Design) established and supported
under the Cooperative Research Centres Program
through the Australian Government’s Department of
Education, Science and Training.

[11] Mieke Bal, Naratology: Introduction to the Theory of
Narrative, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985, 8.
[12] Nakata, M. “Indigenous Knowledge and the Cultural
Interface: Underlying issues at the Intersection of Knowledge
and Information Systems.” Plenary Paper-IFLA Glasgow
Scotland August 2002.
[13] Rose, Deborah Bird. Nourishing Terrains. Australian
Aboriginal Views of Landscape and Wilderness. Australian
Heritage Commission. 1996.
[14] Tufte, E. R., 1997, Visual Explanations: Images and
Quantities, Evidence and Narrative, Graphics Press,
Cheshire, Connecticut.

10. References
[1] Brown, S. J. The Social Life of Information. Harvard
Business School Press, Harvard, 2000.
[2] Crawford,C. Interactive Storytelling. New Riders.2003.
[3] Christie, M. “Computer Databases and Aboriginal
Knowledge”, in International Journal of Learning in Social
Contexts Number 1, pp 4-12 . Charles Darwin University,
Darwin, Australia, 2005.
[4] Christie, M., “Digital Tools and the Management of
Australian Desert Aboriginal Knowledge”. Draft Published
by Making Collective Memory with Computers, School of
Australian Indigenous Knowledge Systems, Charles Darwin
University, Darwin, NT 0909, Australia.2005
http://www.cdu.edu.au/centres/ik/pdf/digitaltools.pdf
[5] Frasca,G., “Simulation versus Narrative: Introduction to
Ludology”, in The Video Game Theory Reader, Edited by
Mark J.P. Wolf & Bernard Perron. Routledge, 2003.
[6] Gershon N. and Ward P., “What Storytelling Can Do for
Information Visualisation”, in Communications of the ACM
vol.44(8),31-37.
[7] Hart, V. “Mapping Aboriginality.” Investigating
Queensland’s Cultural Landscapes: Contested Terrains.
Setting the Theoretical Scene. Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, 2001.
[8] Huggins, J. Plenary Address. Deadly Directions
Conference, AIATSIS Library Conference, August 2005.
[9] Leavy, B., Hills, J., Barker,. C., Gard, S., and Wyeld, T.
“Digitising the Arts, Culture and Heritage Landscape of
Aboriginal
Australia”,
in
Beyond
Verisimilitude;
Interpretation of Cultural Heritage through New Media, New
Heritage Forum, Hong Kong, 13th & 14th March 2006.
[10] Manovich, L. The Language of New Media. MIT Press,
Boston, 2001.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[15] Verran,H. Knowledge Traditions of Aboriginal
Australians: Questions and Answers arising in a Databasing
Project. Draft Published by Making Collective Memory with
Computers, School of Australian Indigenous Knowledge
Systems, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, NT 0909,
Australia.2005. http://www.cdu.edu.au/centres/ik/pdf/
knowledgeanddatabasing.pdf
[16]
Wojtowksi,W. and Wojtkoswki, W.Gregory.
Storytelling:its role in information visualization. 2002.
Proceedings of the Fifth European Systems Science
Congress, October2002, Crete http://www.afscet.asso.fr/
resSystemica/Crete02/Wojtkowski.pdf.

