Visual Web Mining of Organizational Web Sites
C Oosthuizen, J Wesson, C Cilliers
Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University
Port Elizabeth, SOUTH AFRICA
{Craig.Oosthuizen, Janet.Wesson, Charmain.Cillers}@nmmu.ac.za
Abstract
Existing web usage mining (WUM) tools do not
indicate which data mining algorithms are used or
provide effective graphical visualizations of the results
obtained. WUM techniques can be used to determine
typical navigation patterns in an organizational web site.
The process of combining WUM and information
visualization techniques in order to discover useful
information about web usage patterns is called visual
web mining. The goal of this paper is to discuss the
development of a visual web mining prototype, called
WebPatterns, which allows the user to effectively
visualize web usage patterns.
Keywords--- visual web mining, data mining,
information visualization, web usage patterns, radial
tree layout, user testing.

1. Introduction
Web site design should incorporate human-computer
interaction principles to help visitors find information.
By comparing the typical navigation patterns with the
site usage expected by the site designer, the structure
(information architecture) of the site can be evaluated
and suggestions given for its improvement [1].
An organizational web site can be described as a site
which has a high level of content. The Nelson Mandela
Metropolitan University (NMMU) Computer Science
and Information Systems Departmental web site is an
example of such a web site. Web usage mining (WUM)
techniques can be used to analyze the large amounts of
web usage data collected by the web server in order to
determine typical navigation patterns.
This paper discusses the goals of WUM and the
steps involved. A brief description of WUM is given as
well as the data to be analyzed. The data mining
algorithms used are discussed and appropriate

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

visualization techniques proposed for each algorithm.
Based on these visualization techniques, the design and
evaluation of an interactive prototype for visual web
mining is presented.

2. Web Usage Mining
The purpose of WUM is to reveal the knowledge
hidden in the log files of a web server [8]. WUM can be
broken down into three main phases, namely
preprocessing, pattern discovery and pattern analysis
(Figure 1). In the first phase, log files are preprocessed in
order to retain only the appropriate information. In the
second phase, various methods are used to identify
interesting patterns. These patterns are then stored so that
they can be analyzed in the third phase of WUM, to
determine which interesting patterns.
Preprocessing involves identifying different
sessions, users, pageviews and clickstreams [7]. Part of
the preprocessing phase includes cleaning the server log
to eliminate all of the irrelevant items [4]. The log file
also needs to be parsed into data fields. Pageview
identification determines which page file requests form
part of the same pageview and what content was
provided.
Pattern discovery relies on various statistical
methods and data mining algorithms to detect interesting
patterns [8]. Quantitative statistical methods are the
easiest to apply and allow one to determine information
such as the frequency of visits to a page, average path
length and the average view time of a page. Some of the
more useful and appropriate data mining algorithms used
for pattern discovery are sequential patterns, association
rules and cluster analysis.
Pattern analysis involves the evaluation of each of
the patterns identified in the pattern discovery phase and
deriving conclusions from them.

Figure 1. Web Usage Mining Process [5]

3. Web Site Structure
Although there are many tools available to aid
WUM, this form of web site analysis has shown limited
success. This has been attributed to the fact that the need
to understand the web site’s content and structure is often
overlooked [5]. The structure of the web site is required
to identify potentially interesting navigation patterns.
This enables the evaluator to interpret each navigation
pattern in terms of the specific web site content.
The structure of a web site is created by the
hyperlinks between various pageviews. These hyperlinks
connect the individual web pages and provide a means
for the user to navigate through the site. This path should
allow the user to access the content they are looking for
in the fewest possible mouse clicks. The ‘three-click’
rule states that any page within a site should be no more
than three clicks from the homepage [10]. Although this
rule is not an official standard, it can serve as a guideline
and assist in developing a successful navigation structure
for a web site. The structure of the site and preprocessing
the content are interrelated tasks [5].
During a user’s navigation session, all activity on
the web site is recorded in a log file by the web server.
The log file does not differentiate between various
sessions from different users. It is simply a text file
which captures each access by a user on a particular day.
The fields that were identified as necessary for the
analysis of web usage patterns are: date, time, IP address,
URL, user name and user agent.

4. Web Usage Mining Algorithms
In order to extract any usage patterns from the log
file, various data mining techniques need to be applied to
the data. Data mining techniques are divided into two
categories, namely supervised and unsupervised
techniques [2]. In unsupervised techniques, there is no
particular reason or goal for creating the model.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Supervised techniques are generally used for prediction.
Unsupervised techniques include association rules,
sequence analysis and cluster analysis, of which
association rules and sequence analysis are discussed
below.

4.1 Association Rules
The purpose of association rule mining is to discover
relationships between items found in a database of
transactions [2]. In terms of WUM, a transaction is
described as a collection of time-ordered web page
accesses or items, with an item being a single page
access. An association would then imply that certain web
pages within a web site are frequently accessed in
different user sessions. Association rules could also be
used to discover relationships between various usage
paths, which indicate that certain paths are followed
frequently in different sessions.
Association rule mining is a two step process. The
first step is to find all frequent itemsets (sets of web page
accesses) which occur at least as frequently as a predetermined minimum support (frequency). The second
step is to generate strong association rules from the
frequent itemsets which satisfy both the minimum
support and minimum confidence [5], where confidence
is the percentage of items which satisfy all the conditions
in the association rule.

4.2 Sequence Analysis
Sequence analysis is the process of determining the
longest time ordered paths that satisfy a user specified
minimum frequency. In the case of WUM, sequences are
the web usage paths. Since the log files represent a user’s
interaction on a web site, the goal is to discover patterns
in the form of sequences [3].
A user supports a sequence s if s is contained in a
session for this user. The problem involved with mining
sequential patterns is to find the maximal sequences

among all sequences that have a certain user-specified
minimum support. Sequences satisfying the minimum
support are called large sequences.

5. Visualizing Web Usage Mining Results
Information visualization (IV) is the process of
creating visual interfaces to help users understand and
navigate through complex information spaces [7]. The
data that is visualized in WUM is web usage data, which
consists of sets of URLs and web usage paths (Section
4). Another factor that has to be considered is the
importance of showing the structure of the web site being
analyzed, and not only the usage data. A problem with
visualizing web site structures is that they are not
necessarily hierarchical in nature. Due to the many
hyperlinks that may exist, the structure may represent a
connected graph rather than a tree.
One way in which this problem is addressed is by
looking at the usage data when drawing the structure
diagram. For each web page within the web site, only
one link leading into it is displayed. This is the link that
is followed with the highest frequency. By doing this, all
the web pages are displayed but the connected graph is
reduced to a hierarchical structure.
A popular way to visualize the structure of
hierarchically organized sites employs a tree metaphor
[4, 7]. The trees are frequently laid out radially, with the
root page in the middle and pages at various depths
positioned in circles around the root node. The radial tree
layout utilizes screen real estate more efficiently than a
vertical layout. Straightforward implementations of tree
layout algorithms work well for relatively small sites
with tens to hundreds of pages. Most organizational web
sites can be classified as relatively small so this
technique was chosen to visualize the static web site
structure.

5.1 Visualizing Association
Since the purpose of association rules is to show that
two or more web pages or web paths are accessed
together frequently within a user session, the
visualization technique needs to be able to show all the
associated web pages at once.
A disk tree or radial tree can be used to represent
hierarchical information as shown in Figure 2. The
primary node or home page is located in the centre of the
graph. Each successive descendant falls on concentric
rings spanning out from the centre. On each of these
rings, the nodes are allocated space according to how
many leaf nodes fall under it [7]. Nodes with a large
number of descendants are allocated more space than
those with fewer descendants. The advantage of the disk
tree is that the area in which the tree is displayed is used

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

more efficiently than a hierarchical tree. This allows a
larger tree with more levels to be displayed in a smaller
space.
In order to show the association between various
page accesses or usage paths, visual cues can be used.
For instance, pages or paths which are associated can be
coloured similarly. Three associations are shown in
Figure 2, labelled A, B and C. Each association is
coloured differently. These indicate that the web pages
within each association are accessed frequently together.

Figure 2. Visualizing Association using a Radial
Tree

5.2 Visualizing Sequences
When visualizing user navigation sequences it is
also essential to show the structure of the web site.
Radial trees were therefore also selected as an
appropriate
visualization
technique.
Navigation
sequences, however, not only indicate which pages were
accessed but also include the order in which they were
visited. This means that the start and end points need to
be represented using directed edges.
Navigation sequences can be visualized using radial
trees by colouring all the pages visited in a specific
sequence using the same colour and then using directed
arrows to show the order in which they were visited.
Figure 3 indicates how a radial tree can be used to
visualize user navigation sequences.
An example of two separate sequences is shown in
Figure 3, the first sequence showing a path from 0 to 1 to
2, and the second showing a path from 0 to 3 to 4. These
two sequences represent the most popular paths accessed
by the users.

Figure 3. Visualizing Sequences using Radial
Trees

6. User Interface Design
An iterative design approach was followed to design
the user interface (UI) of the prototype. Conceptual
model extraction was used to obtain feedback from users
and improve the UI design.
The UI was designed to enable the user to view the
web usage patterns over a specified period and consisted
of three coordinated views (Figure 4). The three views

displayed are the graphical view on the left which shows
the visualization of the WUM results; the textual view at
the bottom which provides the WUM results in textual
format; and the filtering view on the right which allows
the user to select what data should be analyzed by the
WUM algorithms.
The graphical view illustrated in Figure 4 uses a
radial tree to display the structure of the web site being
analyzed as well as the results of one of the WUM
algorithms. The graphical view displayed is dependent
on which WUM algorithm is selected. For example, the
currently selected view in Figure 4 shows the most
frequent paths followed by the users.
There are five buttons below the filtering menu
which allow the user to switch between any of the WUM
algorithms. The user can also filter the data according to
specific criteria using the filtering menu. The ‘Period’
option allows the user to specify the date and time range
to be used. The ‘Page Selection’ option allows the user to
specify how much of the web site is displayed in the
graphical view.
At the bottom of the filtering menu is an ‘Apply’
button which applies the desired filtering to the data,
invokes the selected WUM algorithm and refreshes the
graphical and textual views. Any of the three graphical
views can be selected by clicking on the desired view.
The selected view is then displayed as is shown in Figure
4.

Figure 4. UI Design of WUM prototype (Frequent Paths)

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

7.1 Implementing Association

7. Implementation
The WebPatterns prototype was implemented using
a three-tier architecture, comprising a Presentation Layer
in which the visual pattern analysis is provided, an
Application Layer in which the pattern discovery is
implemented, and a Data Layer in which the
preprocessed clickstream data is stored (Figure 1). The
Presentation Layer was implemented using C# and
FlowChart.NET for the radial tree component and runs in
a Windows XP environment. FlowChart.NET also
supports the typical interaction techniques used for
interactive visualization tools, such as zooming, panning,
filtering and details-on-demand. The Application Layer
was implemented as separate web services with the
WUM algorithms written in Java and running on a Sun
Server. The Data Layer was implemented as an Oracle
database which was also installed on the Sun Server.
The following sections discuss the implementation
of the interfaces for the association rules and sequence
analysis algorithms (Sections 5.1 and 5.2).

The results of the association rule mining are
displayed using colour to indicate the associated pages
on the radial tree. The initial design in Figure 4 did not
enable a user to select a specific page and show all other
pages associated with the selected page. The prototype
was therefore implemented to show a default view of all
the pages associated with the home page using a default
threshold (frequency) and enable users to select a
specific page (Figure 5).
The graphical view is divided into four areas to
show the different number of associations. The first area
shows the pages associated with the selected page with a
frequency above the given threshold; the second area
shows the two pages associated with the selected page;
and so on. The frequency of the associations is shown on
the radial tree using a rainbow colour legend.

Figure 5. Association Paths in WebPatterns

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The user can select to view the next four
associations or the previous four (if applicable) using the
buttons labelled accordingly. The user can also select an
alternative page from the URL list, change the threshold
and view the pages associated with the selected page. For
example, as shown in Figure 5, the pages associated with
the home page (page 0) are pages 1, 3, 5 and 9 with
frequencies of 85%, 82%, 65% and 27% respectively.
Pages 1 and 3 are both coloured red since their
frequencies fall in the same range (80-100%). In the
second graphical view, page 1 is associated with pages 3,
5 and 9 as indicated by the three different colours.

7.2 Implementing Sequence Analysis
The results of the sequence analysis algorithm are
displayed as a number of frequent paths on the radial
tree. The initial design did not allow for a node (page)
being part of more than one path (Figure 4). An
alternative technique had to be developed to allow
multiple paths to contain the same nodes. Instead of

colouring the nodes in a path using a given colour,
multiple edges are drawn in colour between these nodes
using Bezier curves to indicate the different paths and
only the target nodes are coloured (Figure 6).
The default view displays the five most frequent
paths for the entire web site above the given threshold
(Figure 6). Colour is used to indicate the paths, the target
URLs and the frequency. The user can navigate to see
the next five most frequent paths or the previous five (if
applicable) using the buttons labelled accordingly. The
user can also select one or more target pages from the
URL list and select to view only the most frequent paths
to the selected pages (Figure 6). For example, as shown
in Figure 6, the most frequently accessed path to page 11
was 0ĺ3ĺ11ĺ15ĺ11 with a frequency of 61%, which
indicates that most of the users navigated to page 15
before returning to page 11. This may indicate problems
with the information architecture of the web site or the
design of page 11.

Figure 6. Frequent Paths (Show All) in WebPatterns

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

8. Evaluation
User testing was conducted in order to evaluate the
usefulness of WebPatterns. Three metrics were identified
for the evaluation of WebPatterns, namely effectiveness,
satisfaction and usefulness. The usefulness of
WebPatterns was determined as the combination of the
perceived ease of use and the perceived usefulness of
WebPatterns [6].
A framework for evaluating visual mining tools was
adapted from Margescu et al. [9]. This framework
recognises quality of use as a key concept to evaluate
WUM tools. Quality of use includes quality of
interaction, quality of visualization and quality of
information. A post-test questionnaire was then compiled
based on these measures. The task list was created in
such a way that the participants were not only required to
determine the results of the WUM algorithms, but also
give their interpretation of the results. The results of this
questionnaire were then used to determine the quality of
use of WebPatterns.
Eight participants were selected for the evaluation of
WebPatterns. These participants were selected based on
the user profile of the target user population. Eighty
seven percent (87.5%) of the participants had more than
three years experience in web management. All
participants except one were able to complete all the
tasks correctly. The only participant who could not
complete all the tasks, achieved a 76.92% overall task
completion rate.
An analysis of the post-test questionnaire completed
by the participants revealed very high ratings (mean >
4.4 out of a maximum of 5). Since all the ratings were
4.4 or higher, it was concluded that the participants were
very satisfied with the quality of use of WebPatterns.
The participants were asked if they would use
WebPatterns to assist in similar tasks in future. All the
participants indicated that they would like to use
WebPatterns in the future to complement existing WUM
tools.

Conclusions
Web usage mining (WUM) can allow web
developers to analyze the information architecture of
organizational web sites. Existing tools fail, however, to
illustrate the algorithms being used and effectively
visualize the results. Two WUM algorithms were
selected based on the type of data collected by the web
server, namely association rules and sequence analysis.
A radial tree was selected as the most appropriate

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

visualization technique for both these algorithms. An
iterative design approach was used to develop the UI of
the WUM prototype. This process resulted in the
implementation of a WUM prototype, called
WebPatterns, which can be used to interactively explore
the web usage patterns of an organizational web site. The
results of the evaluation clearly show that the
participants found WebPatterns easy to use and were
highly satisfied with the quality of information and
visualizations provided.

References
[1] BERENDT, B. and SPILIOPOULOU, M. (2000):
Analysis of Navigation Behaviour in Web Sites integrating
Multiple Information Systems. The VLDB Journal 9:56-75.
[2] BERSON, A., SMITH, S. and THEARLING, K. (2004):
An Overview of Data Mining Techniques. In Building Data
Mining Application for CRM.
[3] BÜCHNER, A.G., BAUMGARTEN, M., ANAND, S.S.,
MULVENNA, M.D. and HUGHES, J.G. (1999): Navigation
Pattern Discovery from Internet Data. In Proceedings
WEBKDD '99, San Diego, CA. August 1999.
[4] CHEN, J., SUN, L., ZAIANE, O.R. and GOEBEL, R.
(2004): Visualizing and Discovering Web Navigational
Patterns. Seventh International Workshop on the Web and
Databases (WebDB 2004), June 17-18. Paris, France.
[5] COOLEY, R. (2003): The use of web structure and
content to identify subjectively interesting web usage patterns.
ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT) 3(2): pp 93116.
[6] DAVIS, F.D. (1989): Perceived Usefulness, perceived
ease of use and user acceptance. MIS Quarterly 13(3): pp 319340.
[7] EICK, S.G. (2001): Visualizing Online Activity.
Communications of the ACM 44(8): pp 45-50.
[8] EIRINAKI, M. and VAZIARGIANNIS, M. (2003): Web
mining for web personalization. ACM Transactions on Internet
Technology (TOIT) 3(1): pp 1-27. February.
[9] MARGHESCU, D., RAJANEN, M. and BACK, B.
(2004): Evaluating the Quality of use of Visual Data-Mining
Tools. In Proceedings 11th European Conference on
Information Technology Evaluation, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
pp 239-250. 11-12 November.
[10] MIGHTYMEDIA
(2004):
Website
Design.
http://www.website-design-101.co.uk (Last Accessed: 28
November 2005: Last Accessed: 28 November 2005, Last
updated:
[11] USABILITY BY DESIGN (2004): Likert Scale.

