A Conceptual Model for Evaluating Aesthetic Effect
within the User Experience of Information Visualization

Nick Cawthon; Andrew Vande Moere
Key Center for Design Computing and Cognition; University of Sydney, Australia
{nick@student.usyd.edu.au; andrew@arch.usyd.edu.au}

Abstract
This paper proposes a conceptual model for which
one might begin to assess aesthetic effect within the user
experience of information visualization. Through first
defining, then illustrating new dimensions of aesthetic
that exist within the context of information visualization,
this paper goes on to suggest that a user centered
evaluation method not solely centered around task
efficiency metrics is now imperative.
Keywords – aesthetic, information visualization,
user experience, metaphor, evaluation, user centered
design.

1. Introduction
In today’s information society, our perceptual capacity is
continually being tested with an increasingly inordinate
amount of data in which one is expected to process,
either knowingly or pre-attentively. In addition to the
amount of data that has been stored on computers for
decades, many other types of information – newspapers,
magazines, catalogs, procedures, forms, guidelines, live
audio and video broadcasts – are now being digitized and
made increasingly available [1]. As Woods, Patterson
and Roth query, ‘can we ever escape from data
overload?’ [2]. Connectivity has expanded beyond the
formal definition of a workstation computer – in our
pockets, embedded into our automotive dashboards, onto
the fronts of our refrigerators. The human computer must
maintain a higher level of attentive efficiency more than
ever before and conversely, the methods in which we
present information must be as easy to analyze as
possible.
Information visualization is commonly defined as
‘computer-supported, interactive, visual representations
of abstract data used to amplify cognition’ [3]. The last
phrase in this sentence, ‘to amplify cognition’ is a
pertinent one. The primary purpose of information
visualization is to offer insight into the dataset that it
represents – not merely the creation of beautiful displays.
The field of information visualization offers the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

advantage of being able to picture not only vast
quantities but also abstract sets of data, normally
unrecognizable by human perception. Tufte [4] states,
‘graphics reveal data’. Another goal of information
visualization is to display unique perspectives on a given
data set – aspects that would normally be
unrecognizable. Information visualization offers direct
interactivity with the viewer, potentially exposing
emerging trends or patterns that might emerge from the
data, showing a lead-up to specific milestones
surrounding an event or occurrence. Results of these
viewer-discovered
perspectives
can
be
better
characterized as a user experience.
User experience is a subject commonly tied to
interactive applications – typically software and web
interfaces. It holistically describes the relationship a user
has when using an application and the resulting product
of this interaction.
In this research, the goal of measuring user
experience is to illustrate to what extent users are either
satisfied or unsatisfied with their interaction with a given
visualization. User experience provides the basis for a
heuristic model that can be used to evaluate and inform
designers of information visualization applications in the
early phases of their development.
This paper does not attempt to be exhaustive, but
instead concentrates on mapping a quantitative effect of
perceived aesthetic, investigating what relationship it
might have to the greater user experience of information
visualization.

2. Aesthetic
One can look at the antonym anesthetic to begin to
derive a suitable definition for the word aesthetic. An
anesthetic is used to dull or deaden, causing sleepiness
and numbness. In contrast, aesthetic is seen as something
that enlivens or invigorates both body and mind,
awakening the senses.
This section introduces the notion that there are
additional dimensions of aesthetic to consider other than
a perspective merely centered on the object. Examples of
historical analytical aesthetic studies are first outlined to

validate the importance aesthetic has held in the past as
well as provide a base for future research in which can be
built upon. The current challenges and misconceptions of
aesthetic are then illustrated both to give context and
relevance to the introduction of additional aesthetic
dimensions.
Analytical aesthetic. In reviewing aesthetic studies,
measures of order and complexity persevere as the
common denominators in a vast majority of both
traditional and modern analytical metrics [6] [7] [8].
These studies place their focus not on the user, but
instead on the characteristics of the object. The
resounding consistency of these viewpoints across not
only a wide range of disciplines, but across generations
as well, illustrate that there is a legitimate need for these
studies to persist. There are qualities of aesthetic design
that designers should be aware of to help them intuitively
craft visually appealing displays. These suggested
measures range from limiting the amount of edgecrossings [8] to reducing the number of sides in
polygonal shapes [6]. Their application is ubiquitous and
can be applied easily to any visual design, information
visualizations included. Without these fundamental
analyses on what makes a design appealing, there can be
little progress made as to why aesthetic is important.
Challenges and misconceptions. The foremost
challenge to aesthetic becoming an essential variable in
the design process is recognition of importance. In order
for aesthetic to be accepted along with such factors as
operating speed or overall functionality, interaction
designers must comprehend the change in behavior
between interfaces that display visual beauty and ones
that disregard appearance. Too often in the software
development process, aesthetic is seen merely as an
added bonus, requiring additional resources and
programming time in order to even attempt.
Fogarty et al. [9] claim that aesthetic is confined not
just to developmental constraints as applications are
often designed to intentionally counter the notion,
suggesting that an element of visual appeal ‘correlates
with a level of fragility and inefficiency’. Karvonen [10]
goes on to cite that there exists a fear of beauty in
interface development that somehow would ‘connote
defects in the functionality of the underlying system’.
These opinions couldn’t be further from the truth.
Streamlining understanding. To streamline is to
offer the least possible resistance, to remove any
extraneous characteristics that would otherwise impede
elements such as water, air or in the case of visualization,
aesthetic. As earlier stated, one of the main advantages of
information visualization is the reduction of complex
datasets into simplified forms, optimizing them for
cognitive consumption and streamlining their meaning.
Analytical aestheticians have shown that that in turn; the
more efficient (maximum order / minimum complexity)
a message is presented visually, the higher the level of
perceived aesthetic [7] [8]. This efficiency of display
(and corresponding level of aesthetic) should enhance,
not detract from the functionality of given system by

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

allowing the user to achieve a deeper level of discovery
and exploration.

2.1. Aesthetic dimension
By no means disregarding the analytical assessment of
what is beauty, this study proposes other, more suitable
dimensions, in which aesthetic might be found in the
context of information visualization. Yet, the complexity
of information visualization is such that it has begun to
push the limitations of analytical measure. In addition,
there exists a more intimate relationship occurring
between application and viewer than what can be
measured only on a subjective scale. Claiming that affect
can be found in elements of a user’s experience other
than the initial appearance of objects that comprise a
display, the following sections suggest new dimensions
for understanding aesthetic.
Aesthetic in narrative. The fields of technology,
entertainment and art have converged to produce
information visualization. Visualization designers should
now realize this medium holds many of the same
qualities as those found in other temporal entertainment
mediums, such as cinema, theatre, or dance [11].
Fundamentals of cinematography, choreography and
staging also apply to any objects presented in a visual
display, their interactions and visual relationships
instinctively draw our comparisons to the common
behaviors found in organisms. Motion typology based on
mapped data suggests arbitrary attributes such of
flocking, separation and swarming [Figure 1].
In the example below, boids of information swarm
together as a group, based upon stock market data levels.
As one boid – the mapped returns of a single company –
experiences behavior different from that of the average
market index, it breaks from the pack to take its own
trajectory. The relative indices of different groups of
companies, at times representing those experiencing the
same industry-specific fluctuations, can begin to flock
together to reflect similar distress or prosperity.

Figure 1. Information Flocking Boids [12]
A quality of aesthetic can also be seen to exist in
effective storytelling. An effective story ‘conveys great
quantities of information in relatively few words in a
format that is easily assimilated by the listener’, or in this

case, the viewer [11]. Whether directing a movie,
television commercial or visualization, the challenge
remains the same – how to show an optimal amount of
information in a way that retains audience attention
while delivering a message.
Information visualization relies upon not only on the
visual abstraction of data, but in the gradual revealing of
behavior patterns within the display dimensions
themselves. With any success, it is through these subtle
identifying elements that a dialog with the user is
created, authoring gradual clues as to what the rules of
interpretation might be. Viewers begin to instinctually
author the plot internally, based upon their path of
interaction through retrieval of data. One storyline might
play out completely different from another, based upon
how progression through the interactive elements of a
display.
Not being confined to just temporal visualizations,
narration exists with static display elements – growing,
changing color, diminishing, even flowering [Figure 2]
over time – these characteristics can all based upon
mapped variables as well. These are behaviors which are
typically not attributed to large sets of data, but instead
objects found in nature.

Figure 2. People Flowers [13]
In the context illustrated above, each flower represents
an individual as they exist in a chat-room, their height
and bouquet growing with time and posting activity,
respectively. These time-based displays are as much a
narrative as a temporal visualization incorporating
elements of animation and transition. Over days and
weeks, the viewer begins identify agents within the
display no longer through their physical identity, but
instead recognize them as a flower which is growing and
blossoming as a result of a healthy environment.
Aesthetic in metaphor The use of metaphor also
plays a large part in presenting this sense of intrigue.
Metaphor in visualization is used to help understand
systems in conceptual terms they already know,
appealing to both familiarity and experience [14]. These
are crucial elements in designing visualizations to appeal
to the greater numbers, not just the industry sect.
Bartram heralds the use of metaphor as ‘a means of
conveying information in user interfaces in a compelling
manner’, for several different reasons: it is perceptually
efficient; it has a rich interpretative scope; because it is
still relatively under-utilized; and because it is

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

increasingly practical [15]. A continual challenge for
visualization designers is the authoring of novel
metaphors that further expose relevant meaning,
increasing dimensionality without overloading density,
possibly discouraging interaction.
Aesthetic in interaction. When one finds a
visualization display intriguing, they will be more
inclined to interact with auxiliary information beyond the
task at hand, typifying the important sense of play [14].
Visualization designers succeed when they encourage
play, promoting exploration of the trends and patterns
underlying in these datasets, not merely the completion
of an initial task.
The field of information visualization has received
only minimal mainstream commercialization over the
past few years. As a result, a vast majority of users are
not immediately familiar with abstract display techniques
as they would with a standard pie chart or bar graph.
Simple curiosity is an existing factor when looking for
trends in usage; users are drawn to objects they are not
immediately familiar with. A level of intrigue is a
property that exists in the interpretive relationship
between people and artifacts [16]. This instinctual
decision-making to decipher symbolism results in
continuous nurturing of the interpretive relationship.
Confusion has the potential to be used as an effective
storytelling element, further encouraging discovery. By
impelling users to interpret situations for themselves,
they establish deeper and more personal connections
with those systems [16]. Perhaps users need more time to
fully understand a visualization display, but enjoy this
process more, have a deeper level of understanding and
insight, or would be more likely to use the application
repeatedly [14].

4. Proposing a conceptual evaluation model
The previous section outlined different dimensions of
assessing aesthetic, suggesting that there are
complexities to understanding affect within the user
experience of information visualization. This section
illustrates the need for additional measures of
visualization evaluation to compensate for these factors.
First, an alternative to the metrics that focus only on
efficiency of task will be introduced, highlighting some
of the current, more relevant methods used in the field of
web usability research. A conceptual model will then be
proposed with hopes that it might serve the purpose of
bringing a more user centered design philosophy to
future evaluations of information visualization.

4.1. Current evaluation methods
Participant task timing and the quantified fulfillment of
their initial goals often comprise the bulk of
understanding of overall user experience of interactive
systems [7]. Basing user experience on these metrics
seems cold and unfeeling – an efficiency of task metric
or comparative performance should not be the sole
means for empirically evaluating the success of

information visualization. Suppose the advantage is not
how fast one can retrieve requested data, but rather in the
greater experience and peripheral knowledge gained.
Norman [17] states, ‘it is only through our emotions
do we unravel problems, as the human emotional system
is intertwined with our cognitive abilities’, conveying
that if the user finds a positive affection towards an
object, they will be more encouraged to think creatively
in order to solve any problems which the display might
present. Norman’s theory was initially applied towards
how to successfully evaluate an industrial product, but is
equally relevant to the field of information visualization
as well. Traditional concerns for clarity and precision are
superseded in such systems by the need to provide a
provocative user experience [16].
In the field of web usability, site evaluations rarely
rely on counting the number of clicks or pages that it
takes for a user to complete a given task. It is not
efficiency that lays paramount to these investigations, or
server log files which contain all of the above metrics
would suffice for all user-centered research. Instead, a
trained moderator sits with the user, slowly walking them
through each step, patiently asking them to describe their
thoughts and reactions as they are happening. This
personal, real-time interaction is essential to a greater
understanding, due to the emotions (either positive or
negative) that are revealed during these sessions.
Statistical metrics mean little if not observed in context.
Authoring visualizations that not only meet but
exceed user expectations demands this type of close,
one-on-one attention focused on context of use. This user
centered design based process applied to both
development and testing phases would benefit the
information visualization industry. User centered design
is a philosophy that looks the needs and wants of the user
at each stage of the design process. The interaction that
exists within a given information visualization is a
complex environment, it is imperative to test whether the
validity of the designer’s assumptions about interaction
are correct. Through further understanding of user
centered design, as well as what causes both positive and
negative reactions from users, designers can more easily
author visualizations that are intuitive.
It is with these thoughts in mind that this paper
proposes a model to investigate how to more effectively
map user experience in relation to aesthetic.

4.2. Better modeling user experience
This conceptual model of aesthetic effect in information
visualization is based on an arousal response assessment
called the Wundt curve, as discussed in further detail by
Berlyne [18]. Berlyne referred to the Wundt curve as a
“hedonic function”, defined as investigating the
variations in pleasure versus pain response to arousal
stimuli.
As Saunders & Gero [19] propose, the Wundt curve
can be calculated as a sum of cumulative-sigmoidal
functions. Sigmoidal describes the characteristics in the
initial stage of growth as ‘being approximately

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

exponential; then, as competition arises, the growth
slows, and at maturity, growth stops altogether’ [20]. A
combined aesthetic acceptance curve may also
applicable using this model, compiling results from the
variety of aesthetic dimensions, but applying different
testing methods that might be tailored towards each.

Figure 3. Evaluation model of aesthetic effect in
user experience - based on Berlyne. [18]
In analyzing the relationship aesthetic might have to the
greater user experience of information visualization, the
components of this evaluation model are as follows:
•

•

•

•

The shaded, upper and bottom regions indicate
the spectrum of positive and negative user
experiences, generalized as reactions of pleasure
and frustration. The scale of user experience
spanning from either positive (+1), negative (-1)
or neutral (0).
The initial, ramped boundaries of both pleasure
and frustration do not immediately come into
effect until a certain level of aesthetic is
achieved. This compensates for a given
visualization that neither invokes positive nor
negative reaction.
The boundary of pleasure comes into effect at a
rate faster to that of frustration. The duration in
between these two is significant, in that it
indicates an assumed period of patience before
the user potentially encounters feelings of
frustration.
The center axis indicates the level of aesthetic
in a given visualization, potentially extending
infinitely. As introduced in the previous section,
there exist multiple dimensions of aesthetic.
That is not to say that each of these dimension
are to be investigated uniformly. Testing for an
optimal level of interaction and play may differ
completely from seeking the prime extent of
using metaphor. It is possible, however, that this
model be used in each of these separate
dimensions, using different testing methods, so
a composite, averaged mean can be found.

Within the context of this specific model, the points
along the Gaussian curve indicate visualizations
with the following attributes:
•
•

•

•

Point one (1) maps a visualization that holds a
minimal level of aesthetic, falling outside of the
both the pleasure and frustration boundaries.
Point two (2) maps the optimum level of
aesthetic for this measure, nearly reaching the
peak of the pleasure boundary. However, any
increase of aesthetic effect after this point
causes a negative reaction.
Point three (3) maps close to a neutral user
experience, having a similar vertical co-ordinate
than point one (1), but based upon a greater
level of aesthetic instance, where it become a
detriment to the overall user experience.
Point four (4) maps a negative user experience
due to the level of aesthetic in the tested
information visualization. The downward trend
of the curve is as such that if any further level of
aesthetic is attempted, a further increase in
frustration and subsequently, negativity, will
result.

5. Future Work
The curve of ‘acceptable aesthetic’ may indeed vary
from visualization category to visualization category. A
lower tolerance for a quantity of aesthetic elements
illustrated when viewing one method of data mapping
versus another is certainly a feasible scenario. It is with
this specification that this study might tailor initial
observations to an individual type of display.
The proposed aesthetic dimensions will need be
further investigated and defined, studying their relative
importance in both designers and first time users of
information visualization. From these pilot studies, a
better coding methodology can be made on how to tally
presented levels of intrigue, ambiguity, narration and
metaphor.
It is also of interest to measure how different user
experience metrics compare or contrast with one another.
Would a protocol analysis (analyzing words spoken as a
user is interacting with the system) confirm the same
results as user experience viewed from a biophysically
generated data, such as heart rate or skin temperature?
Asking for a subjective response in perceived aesthetic
may reveal yet another different indication of aesthetic
effect.

6. Conclusion
To effectively evaluate information visualizations, one
needs to know what the viewer is feeling as much as
what they are doing. Unfortunately, most existing
empirical evaluation methods have not yet adopted a user
centered philosophy. In order to facilitate this transition,
the testing process within information visualization

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

development must first be recognized as being important
as the overall design phase itself. Only through user
research can testing on whether the validity of the
designer’s assumptions about behavior surrounding
interaction is correct.
This paper has outlined new perspectives on not
only the nature of how to perceive aesthetic, but also
placed these perspectives within the context of an
evaluation process as well. A conceptual model has been
presented to suggest that user experience should be
paramount when considering the success of given
visualization, as well as introducing the notion that too
high level of aesthetic might indeed have a negative
connation.

Acknowledgements
Thank you to the faculty at the Key Center for Design
Computing and Cognition at the University of Sydney
for your continuing encouragement and support.

References
[1]

G Geisler. Making Information More Accessible: A
Survey of Information Visualization Applications and
Techniques,
http://www.ils.unc.edu/~geisg/info/infovis/paper.html,
accessed March 2006.
[2] D Woods, ES Patterson, EM Roth. Can We Ever Escape
from Data Overload? A Cognitive Systems Diagnosis,
Cognition, Technology & Work, 4(1): 22-36. 2002
[3] SK Card, J Mackinlay, B Shneiderman. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, San
Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 1999.
[4] ER Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press. 1990.
[5] L Manovich. Post-Media Aesthetics,
http://www.manovich.net/DOCS/Post_media_aesthetics1
.doc, accessed March 2006.
[6] G Birkhoff. Aesthetic Measure, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, Harvard University Press. 1933.
[7] D Ngo, JG Byrne. Another Look at a Model for
Evaluating Interface Aesthetics, Int. J. Appl. Math.
Computing Science, 11(2): 515-535. 2001.
[8] H Purchase, D Carrington, JA Allder. Empirical
Evaluation of Aesthetics-based Graph Layout, Empirical
Software Engineering, 7(2002): 233-255. 2002.
[9] G Fogarty, J Forlizzi, SE Hudson. Aesthetic information
collages: generating decorative displays that contain
information. Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
2001.
[10] K Karvonen. The Beauty of Simplicity. Proceedings of
the ACM Conference on Universal Usability, November
16–17, Washington DC , 2000.
[11] N Gershon, W Page. What Storytelling Can Do for
Information Visualization, Communications of the ACM,
44(8), 31-37. 2001.
[12] A Vande Moere. Time-Varying Data Visualization Using
Information Flocking Boids, presented at IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization (INFOVIS'04),
Austin, TX, 2004.

[13] R Xiong, J Donath. PeopleGarden: Creating data
portraits for users.
http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/becca/papers/pgarden,
accessed March 2006.
[14] A Vande Moere. Form follows data: the symbiosis
between design & information visualization, CAAD
Futures 2005. Vienna, Austria, IRIS Publications, 167176. 2005.
[15] L Bartram. Can motion increase user interface
bandwidth? Proceedings of 1997 IEEE Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 1997.
[16] W Gaver, J Beaver, S Benford. Ambiguity as a Resource
for Design. Proceedings of CHI 2003 conference on
human factors in computing, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida,
USA. 233-240. 2003.
[17] D Norman. Emotional Design - Why We Love (or Hate)
Everyday Things, New York, Basic Books. 2004.
[18] DE Berlyne. Aesthetics and Psychobiology, AppletonCentury-Crofts, New York, 1971.
[19] R Saunders, JS Gero. The Digital Clockwork Muse: A
Computational Model of Aesthetic Evolution. AISB'01
University of York, York, UK. 2001.
[20] Wikipedia – definition of sigmoidal.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sigmoidal, accessed March
2006.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

