Redesigning the User Interface of the InterLearning Software –
Graphic Design Meets Computer Science
Philippos Pouyioutas
Intercollege
46 Makedonitissas
Nicosia 1700, Cyprus

Evripides Zantides
Intercollege
46 Makedonitissas
Nicosia 1700, Cyprus

Maria Poveda
University of Cyprus
75 Kallipoleos
Nicosia 1678 Cyprus

Aspasia Papadema
Intercollege
46 Makedonitissas
Nicosia 1700, Cyprus

pouyioutas.p@intercollege.ac.cy

zantides.e@intercollege.ac.cy

mpoveda@ucy.ac.cy

papadema.a@intercollege.ac.cy

Abstract
In this paper we present the redesign of the user
interface of the InterLearning software. InterLearning is
an in-house developed e-learning software that has been
in use for the last 3 years at our College. The software
was developed by a team of computer scientists.
InterLearning has been evaluated by both students and
faculty since its development, in terms of the functionality
that it offers. It has subsequently been enhanced based on
the feedback of the users. The software has only started to
be used by some Design faculty and students this year.
Our experience from its use within this Department has
revealed the need for redesigning its interface. Both
students and faculty have expressed some negative views
with regards to the screen layouts, menus, icons, colours,
textual representations and fonts used. Based on this
feedback, we have redesigned the interface taking also
into consideration feedback obtained during the redesign
stages from some Design faculty members and Design
students. This paper presents the results of the evaluation
of the existing interface by faculty members and students
and describes the new interface designed by a team of
Graphic Designers based on the feedback obtained.

The InterLearning software was introduced to some
faculty of the Design Department this year, during an oneday seminar with hands-on experience. The software was
also used for the first time to support a Design course
during the Summer 2005 semester [15]. On an overall
basis the idea of e-learning support to Design courses was
embraced by both faculty and students. However, several
comments and suggestions were made regarding the
interface of InterLearning. A general comment described
the interface of the software, as a non contemporary
visual interpretation of the Institution and reveal the need
for the existing interface to be upgraded and redesigned to
be more visually popular.
In Section 2 of this paper we briefly explain the reason
for developing the InterLearning software and present its
interface. In Section 3, we present an evaluation of the
existing interface of the software from the point of view
of both the students and faculty members of the Design
Department. In Section 4 we present the software’s new
interface as it has been redesigned based on the feedback
of the Design faculty and students. Finally, in
Conclusions, we summarize the learning outcomes from
this research work and address our future work.

2. The InterLearning Software
1. Introduction
The in-house developed Intercollege Web-Based
Educational Environment (IWBEE) provides Intranet
services to both students and faculty members. The
IWBEE consists of a Faculty Intranet Module and a
Student Intranet Module. It also includes the
InterLearning (similar to WebCT) and InterTest (similar
to QuestionMark) in-house developed educational
software, which are accessed through the IWBEE. This
software allow faculty to develop web-based educational
material, which is available to students through the
Student Intranet and Internet sites. The IWBEE has been
in use for three years now and our faculty and students
gradually become more involved with e-education and elearning. Our research work that led to the development
of the IWBEE has been widely published [1-15].

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The InterLearning software was developed in-house at
Intercollege as part of the IWBEE. A question that needs
to be addressed herein is why we proceeded with the
decision to develop new software since there is a plethora
of such tools available in the market (WebCT [16],
Blackboard [17],). The dilemma of off-the-shelf software
vs. in-house developed software needed to be addressed.
It is also important to note that we had already bought the
WebCT software and had started using it to some extent.
The reason we proceeded with the development of a new
software was that faculty members wanted simple-to-use
software providing basic functionalities. Our conclusions
from the training and then the subsequent use of WebCT
were not positive. Faculty found WebCT quite
complicated and therefore hard to use. They also thought
that they were not ready to use many of the functionalities
available in the software. Furthermore, Intercollege was

not at a stage to fully commit itself to a very heavy
investment in providing support for the use of WebCT.
Finally, the InterLearning software was developed within
a bigger project funded by the Cyprus Research
Promotion Foundation (130000 Euros). According to the
project specifications, we had to develop educational
software for supporting web-based teaching and learning.
The InterLearning interface showing the facilities

available to the lecturer is shown in Figure 1. We have to
note here that the design of the screen interfaces of the
software was done by a team of computer scientists which
designed and developed the software. Although the team
had background in Human Computer Interaction, we did
mot utilise any Graphic or Web Designer for the design of
the interface.

Figure 1: The Existing InterLearning Interface

3. The Student and Faculty Evaluation of the
InterLearning Interfaces
The existing interface of the InterLearning software
was found by the authors to be a non contemporary visual
interpretation of the Institution and it was therefore
suggested to be upgraded and redesigned to be more
visually popular [15]. If typefaces are the clothes that
words wear then the process of selecting the most
appropriate font that 'suits' a word depends on very
important factors, like its literal meaning, the context that
it is used, the way it is designed etc. Any interface should
reflect the principles of typography and if necessary, it
could challenge traditional typographic conventions.
"Text as image" could be created by blending words and
illustration on a constant predetermined typographic grid.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The text should appear as a communicative medium that
becomes a dynamic image to offer effective
communication. In some cases typefaces could also serve
strictly as a design element whose main purpose would be
to attract the attention of the viewer-student or just create
an interesting texture. The Interface should convey
information with maximum effect balancing image and
text and visually interpreting the concept of E-learning
[18-33]. However before proceeding to redesign the
interface, we decided to carry out a survey questionnaire
amongst selected faculty members of the Design
Department and students of the same Department.
The existing interface was thus evaluated (through a
questionnaire) by selected faculty and students of the
Design Department. Faculty and students were presented
with the existing version of the interface and were asked

As far as faculty are concerned 85% stated that they
would change the interface. The equivalent percentage of
students was found to be 100%.Most faculty and students
also stated that they would have liked to have some more
sections covering events, exhibitions and web-sites of
Artists and Designers. Finally their evaluation as far as
the design is concerned is presented in Figure 2.

to fill a questionnaire. They were asked to rate the
interface using a scale from 0 to 4 (0 ->very poor, 1 ->
poor, 2 -> satisfactory, 3-> good, 4 ->very good). They
were also asked to indicate whether they would change
the existing software and what extra functionality they
would have like to have.

Reflecting a Contemporarary & Upgraded Visual Identity
Art and Design Contents
Design Interactiveness
Friendliness (is it visualy attractive?)
Colours Used for the Visual Identity
Graphic Design Aesthetic (Considering the Target Group)
Layout and Grid
Typography(use of appropriate typefaces)
Creativity
General Design Concept for the Visual Identity
0

0.5

1

1.5

Selected Design Faculty

2

2.5

3

Design Students

Figure 2: Faculty and Student Evaluation of the Existing InterLearning Interface
It is very clear from Figure 2 that the design aspects of the
existing interface were found to be by both selected
Design faculty and Design students poor. Figure 2 data is
in line with the general belief of faculty members and
students that there is need for redesigning the interface. It
is important to note that both faculty members and
students scored very similar to identical
The main basic finding of this survey is that both
faculty and students prefer the new version of the
interface. We will therefore proceed and implement it in
our software.

4. Redesigning the InterLearning Interface
As the visual culture of the post-modern era is
constantly changing, so do the demands of the typical
westernized viewer, who is inevitably exposed to a
plethora of images on a daily basis. The media have
managed to shape and increase the number of visual

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

stereotypes, making in this way the role of the Graphic
Communicator even harder. Today's designers-in search
for creative authenticity- are asked to think
interdisciplinary and consider a range of aspects on the
actual process of design. The creation of a successful
interactive interface, among other factors, should firstly
consider its target audience that is trying to communicate
the information to. In the case of the survey done for the
existing Intercollege InterLearning Interface, the results
as presented in the previous section, have shown that this
target audience, was not satisfied by the way that
communication has been constructed and presented to
them.
Specifically, the original concept and layout had been
designed using ready made images from icon galleries
and follow a non typographical approach leaving the
viewer with no interest on the design aesthetic. The visual
metaphors that are used, like a country-style house as
'home page', paper with pen for 'course outline', an Asian

female lecturer for 'lecturer information', an apple and
books for the 'lecturer's material', a weighting balance for
'assessment', an old fashion pair of glasses for the
'revision kit' and a map pin in exclamation for
'announcements' do not only lack an overall visual
coherence but they also fail to reflect a contemporary
solution and visual appeal to the terminology. Also the
variations of the cold blue colour and the 'computerized
style' typeface used, in relationship with the absence of a
typographic grid, create a non balanced interface. This
also does not match with the overall design and concept
of the College's web page.
Our first task for the new InterLearning Interface
(Figure 3) was to create an overall visual identity that is
based on a concrete concept and reflects an ephemeral and
contemporary layout, that would also relate, with the
overall identity of the College. In order to have an overall
visual consistency graphic symbols that embrace many
possible-and hopefully valid- interpretations by the
viewers were designed. For example, the new line-art
graduation hat for 'lecturer information' is a visual

metaphoric sign for both genders from any ethnic
background. DVDs/Cds icons have been added on 'other
material' to upgrade learning resources and a new section
titled 'events' represented by a line art invitation and an
envelope has been introduced so that students are
informed about events like exhibitions, talks, seminars,
related with their field of studies. The 'revision kit' is
humorously interpreted by a first aid kit as a metaphor for
the urgent knowledge needed for mid-terms and exams.
Similarly, the sign of 'announcements' represented by a
loud speaker, reflects the importance of communicating
any extra information by the tutor. The new sign designs
introduced are neutral, simplified, coherent and
systematic. The elegant typography and the
'straightforward' grid, balance in a minimalistic way with
the warm orange shapes and the empty space of the page.
The whole layout is more user friendly, it does no longer
seem accidental and shifts to a higher level of visual
attractiveness. It easily relates with the home page of
Intercollege (Figure 4) and introduces the viewer to an
upgraded and contemporary Interface design.

Figure 3: The New InterLearning Interface

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 4: The Intercollege Web-Site

5. Conclusions
In this paper we presented the redesign of the
interface of the InterLearning software based on the
evaluation of the existing interface by both selected
faculty members and students of the Design Department.
Our future work involves the implementation of the new
interface in our software. We will also evaluate the whole
interface of the IWBEE and more particularly the
interface of our InterTest software and of our Faculty and
Student Intranet, aiming at redesigning and improving the
interactivity of our system.

References

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[1] Pouyioutas, P., Poveda, M & Apraxin, D 2004, ‘The
Impact of Web-Based Educational Software: Off-theShelf vs. In-House Developed Software’, Intl Journal
of Information Technology Impact, Vol. 3, No. 3,
pp.121-130.
[2] Pouyioutas, P, Apraxin, D, Ktoridou, D, Poveda, M
2004, ‘The InterLearning Web-Based Educational

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

[3]

IEEE

[8]

Software’, IASTED Intl Conference on Web-Based
Education, Austria, 2004, pp. 595-600.
Pouyioutas, P, Poveda, M, Apraxin, D & Kalogerou,
V 2004, ‘InterLearning – A Comparison Analysis of
Students’ Perspectives’, Intl Conference on Applied
Computing, Vol. 2, Portugal, 2004, pp. 70-74.
Pouyioutas, P, Poveda, M & Apraxin, D 2004,
‘Students’ Evaluation of the InterLearning Software’,
16th World Conference on Educational Multimedia,
Hypermedia and Telecommunications, Switzerland,
2004, pp. 2264-2269.
Pouyioutas, P, Poveda, M & Apraxin, D 2004,
‘Design, Development and Evaluation of Web-Based
Educational Software’, Intl Conference e-Society,
Spain, 2004, pp. 267-275.
Pouyioutas, P, Poveda, M, Soleas, G, Kalogerou, V,
Apraksin, D & Kouroufexis, A 2004 ‘The Intercollege
Student Intranet’, International Conference on
WWW/Internet, Spain, 2004, pp. 21-27
Pouyioutas, P. Poveda, M. & Kalogerou, V. 2005, ‘A
College Intranet and its Impact on Students and
Faculty’, Journal of Information Technology Impact,
Vol. 5, Issue 1, pp. 1-13.
Pouyioutas, P & Poveda, M 2005, ‘A Model for a
National Learning Objects Repository for Cyprus’,
International Conference on Databases and
Applications, Austria, February, 2005, pp. 111-115.

[9] Pouyioutas, P, Poveda, M, Kalogerou, V & Apraksin,
D 2005, ‘The InterTest Multiple-Choice Web-Based
Software’, International Conference on Web-Based
Education, Switzerland, February, 2005, pp. 436-441.
[10] Pouyioutas, P, Kalogerou, V & Christou, C 2005,
‘Using the InterTest Multiple-Choice Web-Based
Software to Automate the Intercollege English
Placement Test’, International Conference on
Learning Technologies, pp. 369-375, Italy, March,
2005, WIT Transactions on Information and
Communication Technologies, Vol 34, WIT Press,
ISSN pp. 1743-3517.
[11] Pouyioutas, P., Kalogerou, V. & Poveda, M 2005,
‘The InterTest Web-Based Multiple-Choice Testing
Software – Developing and Evaluating English
Language Tests’ 4th International Conference on WebBased Learning, Hong Kong, 2005
[12] Pouyioutas, P. & Poveda, M. 2005, ‘Designing a
Learning Objects Repository for Cyprus - The Views
of Higher Education Faculty’, 4th International
Conference on Web-Based Learning, Hong Kong,
Springer Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
3583, Hong Kong, 2005, pp. 111 – 121.
[13] Pouyioutas, P. Poveda, M & Kalogerou, V. 2005, ‘The
Intercollege Faculty Intranet’ International Conference
on E-Society, Malta, June,2005, pp. 27-34.
[14] Pouyioutas, P. Kalogerou, V. & Poveda, M. 2005,
‘Student Evaluation of the NEPTON’ International
Conference on E-Society, Malta, June, 2005 , pp. 467472
[15] Pouyioutas, P & and Zantides, E. 2005, E-Learning
Support for Design Courses – Lessons Learnt,
International Conference on Teaching and Learning
with Technology in Art Design and Communication,
London, 2005
[16] WebCT 2005 http://www.webct.com/
[17] Blackboard 2005 http://www.blackboard.com/
[18] Zantides, E. ‘Type, Inter-type and meaning
Typographic’ Beirut 2005,
A typography and graphic design conference, 14-16 of
April 2005, Beirut, Lebanon Lebanese American
University (Proceedings due for printing)
[19] Zantides, E., ‘Rays of Conversation-Chypre/Cyprus’,
Biennalle Internationale Design 2004 Saint-Etienne
Parc Expo, France, Azimuts 21/22 Revue de Design,
Saint-Etienne, pages 259-260, ©Azimuts et les
auteurs-November 2004
[20] Zantides, E., ‘Alternative Themed Posters’,
International Biennial of Graphic Design, Golden Bee
6, Russia, Expo Parc Exhibition Halls, Moscow,
Russia, page: 74, ©The Golden Bee 6 PressSeptember 2004
[21] Zantides, E., ‘Soldiers are finally going home...’,
Artiade 2004-Olympics of Visual Arts, August 2004,
Athens, Greece
[22] Zantides, E., ‘The use of type in Fine Art. How
interpretation of the text defines perceptual stance,
Communication & New Technologies’, The 2ND
International Conference on Typography and Visual
Communication,
University
of
Makedonia

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

Thessaloniki, Greece, 24-29 June 2004, Altervision
and the University of Makedonia Press (Proceedings
due for printing)
Zantides, E., ‘Itta/Defeat’, Images and views of the
Alternative Cinema: With the Gaze of the Other, Alain
Renais, Lettrist Movement, New Algerian Cinema
Theatro Ena , Nicosia Cyprus, page 55, 19-26 June
2004, Puplished by The Cultural Services of the
Ministry of Education and Culture, Cyprus, June 2004
Zantides, E., ‘To Palioman/The struggle’, Gender
Explorations, Diatopos Centre of Contemporary Art,
Nicosia Cyprus, pages: 4, 22-23, 27, 5-11 March
2004, Puplished by The Mediterranean Institute of
Gender Studies 2004
Zantides, E., ‘Design and Theory / When does the
Reader become the Writer?’, Between text & reader,
The 2003 ATypI Conference, Vancouver, Canada, 2428 September 2003, AtypI Association Typographique
Internationale
Zantides, E., ‘The packaging of Gender, The
Languages of Gender’, Spell Gallery Nicosia Cyprus,
pages: 9, 13, 26-27, May 2003, Puplished by The
University of Cyprus
Zantides,
E.,
‘Graphic Fine
Art
LampsChypre/Cyprus, Azimuts 21/22’ Revue de Design Biennalle Internationale Design 2002 Saint-Etienne,
Saint-Etienne
Parc Expo France, pages: A2 21/22, 481, November
2002, Puplished by Azimuts
Zantides, E., ‘Intertextuality and its influence on
optico-acoustical languages: why is this happening?’,
The Shape of Language-2002 Conference, Rome Italy,
ATypI Association Typographique Internationale,
September 2002
Zantides, E., ‘Serial thought on everyday graphic
symbols. The construction of an Intertextual Visual
Orchestra’, The 1st International Conference on
Typography and Visual Communication, University of
Macedonia Press, Thessaloniki Greece, June 2002
Zantides, E. ‘Serial Memory’ Art Technology and
Civilisation, Melina Merkouri Exhibition Hall,
Nicosia, CD-ROM Published by the Ministry of
Education and Cultural Services, “Fournos” Cultural
Center of Athens and the University of Cyprus,
Nicosia,
Cyprus,
January
2000,
CD-ROM
“Memories”.
Zantides, E. ‘Between the flags’ Parikia Istion, Artist’s
Village Samos Greece, Salonica, pp. 10-11, July 1999,
Published by the North Greece Chamber of Fine Arts.
Zantides, E. ‘Autre Semeion-Other semeion’ Biennale
of young artists from European Countries and
Countries from the Mediterranean, Rome, Italy, pp.2223, 44-45, May, 1999, Published by the Cultural
Services of the Ministry of
Education in Cyprus.
Zantides, E. ‘Altro Segno’ Visioni di Futuro, Vision
d’avenir, Roma 1999, Arti Applicate, Nicosia, Cipro,
pp.89, April 1999, Published
by Castelvecchi
Arte.Keramopoulos, E., 2003, The GOQL Language,
PhD Thesis, University of Westminster, 2003.

