The Walker‘s Perspective: strategies for conveying landscape perception using
audiovisual media.
Prof. Christophe Girot, Fred Truniger, MA
Prof. for Landscape Architecture at the ETH Zurich, Scientiﬁc Assistant, ETH Zurich
girot@nsl.ethz.ch, truniger@nsl.ethz.ch
Abstract
This paper presents a method and three case studies for
the integration of video into the practice of landscape architecture. As a design practice, landscape architecture is
heavily dependent on visualisations. Traditionally maps,
perspectives and photographic stills were used, but today
these techniques are clearly no longer up to the task: they
convey little information about the way we perceive landscape. Landscape perception has changed dramatically
since the introduction of the moving image and highspeed travel. Contemporary visualisations of landscapes
must therefore include these dynamic parameters in order
to meet the profession’s needs.
We propose video as a new tool for visualizing the
perception of, and communicating about, landscape. In
this paper we ﬁrst introduce an analytical grid for the
evaluation of video as a means of visualising landscape
perception, from the vantage point of the slowest traveller,
the pedestrian. Using three case studies, we then describe
how video may be used to understand the speciﬁc situation of a walking perceiver. The ﬁndings are important both
for practitioners and researchers in landscape architecture and for researchers of all disciplines interested in
human perception.

1. The Problem of Visualisation in Landscape
Architecture
The process of perceiving landscape involves not only
visual perception but also the whole body and all ﬁve senses. The human body perceives the aesthetics and the atmosphere of places, feeding the impressions into its cognitive system where they are processed according to many
possible mental dispositions. The result of this process is
not a simple, one-dimensional image of landscape, but a
dynamic, situational, and personal experience of space.
Landscape architects are interested in these processes and
in the possibilities of visualizing the actual experience because their task is to build environments for living beings.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

They must produce surroundings that provide a satisfying
landscape experience, so that their designs will be accepted
by the “user”. Thus, the better an architect knows how the
human being perceives the landscape, the more adequately
he or she will be able to design.
The walking perspective is a subset of the human
landscape experience. It is perception in motion, in an environment that is constantly changing. Other than the traditional discussion of landscape as a visual phenomenon and
a question of aesthetics, the perspective taken here poses
the problem of landscape perception within the framework
of the perception of space. What is the speciﬁcity of perception in this situation that must be taken into consideration when designing for the (walking) human being? How
can a dynamic experience of space, as triggered by moving
with one’s own legs, be transferred into a visualisation and
thus be shared among individuals? And how can the analysis of such a visualisation be introduced into the design
practice of the landscape architect?
This paper argues that the dynamic experience of
landscape can be transferred to ﬁlm and video. The peripatetic experience is presented here as a case study and
shows that the effect of landscape on the perceiver can be
conveyed not by mere visualisation but by narrating the
lived experience. Through its ability to tell stories, the moving image provides a unique instrument of the conversion
of subjective experience into a universally understandable
form. By dynamically visualizing experiential knowledge
we all gain through our senses on a daily basis, it places
an instrument at our disposal that communicates “corporeal” knowledge more apropriately than other visualisations.
Film and video thus open the ﬁeld for the understanding
between landscape practitioners and lay people.
In this paper, we ﬁrst provide an overview of key positions in the research on the perception of the pedestrian. We
then identify three basic problems in the representation of
dynamic landscapes by means of ﬁlm. Finally, the analysis
of examples from both cinema and landscape architecture
teaching shows how ﬁlm and video are able to mediate a
sense of actual experience to the spectator.

2. Related Literature: Key Positions
Walking has often been identiﬁed as a spatial practice.
According to Martin Heidegger, it is an extremity of perception and a primordial means for the experience of the
world mediated by the activity of the body [1]. The border
between the wandering subject and the space it traverses
(i.e. the landscape) dissolves. For Walter Benjamin a true
ﬂâneur perceives most of all the ephemeral, the cursory,
and the present [2]. While walking, the pedestrian experiences the space of his immediate environment in the very
moment of his passage.
In order to outline the related theory of peripatetic perception, we summarize the most important positions.

2.1 Yi-Fu Tuan: The Space of our Experience
In his seminal writings on space, the geographer Yi-Fu
Tuan asserts that geography can no longer treat space as an
inert and absolute container in which human beings navigate [3]. A drawn map depicts a territory and a terrain, but
never a space. Space is a dynamic concept: it shifts for each
person as he or she moves through it and is emotionally
effected by perceptions of it. Space is where their lives take
place; it is also coloured by the combination of feelings and
thoughts. Tuan calls this combination “experience”.
With the integration of human experience into the question of space, Tuan has effectively changed the way geographers think about their subject. A shift has taken place
from the study of geometrical relations to the study of the
meanings of certain environments: contemporary theories
take it for granted that in order to understand a space one
has to understand its meanings and connotations. Tuan’s
work thus forms the foundation for the treatment of landscape as a space and therefore also for the study of the perception and experience.

2.2. Michel De Certeau: The Discovery of “Another Space”
In L’invention du quotidien [4] the French historian
Michel de Certeau talks about “Walking In The City”. De
Certeau describes two basic experiences in and with the
city that are based upon two different spatial concepts. The
ﬁrst is characterized by the panoptical view that traditionally has been the basis of any engagement with the city in
science and planning. Here the city is merely a view. The
spectator is neatly detached from the object of examination
fulﬁlling one basic rule of traditional landscape aesthetics:
to be a distinguished viewing subject in front of the object
one is viewing.
The second experience de Certeau describes is the very

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

different one of the pedestrian walking on street level. The
object of his view is nothing less than remote and separated
from the environment he is currently and quite physically
immersed in. According to de Certeau, the city this observer perceives is a metaphorical one that invades the clearly
readable text of the planned city. Here every walk will produce a different “reading,” delivering a new expression of
how the city and the perceiver can affect each other.
Unlike the “panoptical” city, which can easily be visualized in maps and plans, the “constructivist” city of the
pedestrian is a dynamic compound of manifold sources
that is decipherable only with difﬁculty [5].
For the discussion of landscape visualisation De
Certeau‘s account of how people in New York describe
their own homes is fruitful. He distinguishes two types of
descriptions: “seeing” and “walking”. In the ﬁrst type the
narrator “sees” a map in front of his inner eye and gives an
account of the mutual positions of different things: “Next
to the kitchen there is the dining-room.” In the second type
the same apartment is crossed virtually: “From the kitchen
go through the left door and enter the dining-room.”
De Certeau shows that a standard description of everyday environments tends to ﬂuctuate between the two types.
The pair “seeing” and “walking” can be translated to the
moving image as “seeing” and “telling”.

2.3 Francesco Careri: The Immediacy of Landscape Perception and the Production of Meanings
“Walking as an aesthetic practice” has recently been
scrutinized by Franco Careri in his book Walkscapes [6].
Careri is an architect who also works in the ﬁelds of landscape architecture and art. His aim as a university teacher
is to ﬁnd new practices for the design of landscape. He
asserts that walking is a practice for the landscape architect to describe and modify metropolitan spaces that often
have a nature still demanding comprehension. To walk is
to ﬁll urban spaces with meaning rather than with things,
as traditionally a designer does. In Careri’s opinion, walking and perceiving are ways of producing new meaning
for environments.
According to Careri, the speciﬁc nature of this production of meaning lies within the present. The presence of
a perceiving subject marks a sense of the hic et nunc in a
given place. The visualisation of an environment of meanings will have to bear the imprint of the very moment of
registering it. Unlike the photographic image, which – according to Roland Barthes – always reminds the viewer
that it represents a past moment and protagonists who may
be long dead [7], ﬁlm and video are able to give the impression of a continuous present time. Moreover, ﬁlm’s capacity to tell stories with pictures and texts makes it an ideal
vehicle for the transfer of meanings into a medium.

2.4 Vivian Sobchack: A Carnal Phenomenology of
Film
Since the early 1990s Vivian Sobchack has researched
and widely published on the phenomenology of ﬁlm. With
her book The Address of the Eye: A Phenomenology of
Film Experience [8], Sobchack revived a discussion in ﬁlm
and media theory that had been dormant for almost half a
decade after André Bazin’s seminal writings [9]. Through
Sobchack’s intervention, ﬁlm phenomenology has again
become a major issue in ﬁlm theory.
Sobchack refers to Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s existential phenomenology [10] and his notions of the corporeality of consciousness and the body’s role as the site of our
experiences. She argues that the “expressed perception of
an anonymous, yet present ‘other’” in ﬁlm does not only
make “sense” visually and audibly, but also haptically.
Through the address of her own eye the spectator speaks
back to the cinematic expression to “see the seeing as well
as the seen, hear the hearing as well as the heard, and feel
the movement as well as see the moved.” [11] According to
Sobchack, cinema transposes the invisible privacy of a direct experience into a visible form, and into a intersubjective language of direct embodied experience. Film experience thus makes the direct embodied experience visible
to others, beyond the single consciousness that lives it. If
Sobchack is right, the perception and experience of walking that is conveyed only fragmentarily by other media
can be represented by ﬁlm and other related audiovisual
media in a broader bandwidth as an embodied experience.
With this step out of the common hermeneutic and cognitive paths of ﬁlm theory, Vivian Sobchack introduces
into the dialogue about ﬁlm the less sharply deﬁned ﬁeld of
experience that Yi-Fu Tuan broached some 20 years earlier
in geography. Through Sobchack’s work the ﬁlmic representation of personal spatial experience can be accessed as
an actual contribution to the practice of landscape architecture and other disciplines that are concerned with the actual
transformation of the world.

The basic problem of space is its dependence on experience: a combination of feelings and thoughts that is not
likely to be easily referred to either in scientiﬁc or in architectural research. This poses considerable problems for
an exact study of knowledge visualisation regarding the
walker’s space. We will address this problem in the next
section.
Yet the research on the space of our experience has
yielded distinct perceptive modes of the peripatetic that
could only be hinted at partially in the short account above.
To sum up this section we repeat the identiﬁed parameters
of peripatetic perception.
1. Representation of routes
According to Michel de Certeau, humans perceive
and process paths as a mixture of micro-narrative passages
(e.g. “you go along a corridor”) and remarkable views. The
representation of routes in ﬁlm are expected to function
analogously as a compound of narration of passages and
depiction of places.
2. Immediacy of perception
In walking, a person enters into the closest proximity
and merges with it. The mode of perception is one of the
ephemeral and immediate.
3. Representation of the body
Walking is, according to Martin Heidegger and others,
an extremity of perception mediated by the activity of the
body. The status of the body will therefore have to be analysed in the ﬁlmic representation of the walking perspective.

3. Three Basic Parameters of Landscape Representation in Film
The speciﬁc knowledge developed in ﬁlm studies delivers three more parameters of the peripatetic perception in
ﬁlms that contribute to the analytical grid proposed here.

2.5 Conclusion and Transfer
We have only been able to sketch a small portion of
the research already done in the ﬁeld. Brevity rendered it
necessary to restrict the overview to some main aspects.
The mentioned positions provide some guidelines for the
evaluation of a visual representation that can effectively
convey a sense of the peripatetic perspective.
This paper takes as a given that there has been a considerable shift in our society’s rapport with the environment
that is mirrored in the contemporary theory of landscape.
The merely aesthetic and infrastructural treatment of our
surroundings has made room for a more complex analysis
of this relationship as a spatial problem.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

1. Who is watching? (point of view and personiﬁcation of
the given perspective)
Theories of the spectator in the cinema include the notion of the point of view (POV) that is reproduced in the cinema. The POV in the cinema denotes the “abstract other”
that constitutes the view given in a movie and serves as a
possibility for the spectator to identify with what is seen.
For the discussion of the representation of the walking
perspective the given POV must be taken into account.
2. What is shown and how? (framing)
Another issue is the framing of single shots. The immediacy of the perception of the walking person and the

subjectively centred nature of the view involves an attentiveness for details that are important or interesting for the
particular viewer represented in the POV. For example, as
we have learned from Francesco Careri, the viewer’s attention is drawn to special sights that mean something to
the walker.
The discussion of the representation of the walking
perspective makes it necessary to identify both the views
offered and the meanings they imply.
3. Representation of space (dis/continuities)
A fundamental characteristic of the ﬁlm medium is its
capacity to bring remote places together through montage.
No other medium disposes of such a powerful instrument
for constructing new spatial relations. And yet, real spaces
need not be represented in their totality in order to give the
spectator an impression of continuity. In fact, the opposite
is true: the very fragmentation created by editing may help
enhance the viewer‘s (perhaps unconscious) impression of
reality. Quite obviously the montage of discrete shots is the
basis of spatial representation in a ﬁlm and must be analysed carefully in order to understand the spaces created. An
analysis from this angle has to question the representation
of routes that is produced by micro-narrations and remarkable views. Here again sound is an important part of the
shot because it renders a direct and atmospheric sense of
space.

4. The Analytical Grid
The problem of getting signiﬁcant results in the study
of landscape representations is raised by the dependence of
space from the soft factor “experience”. We meet it by introducing a set of parameters applied to the study of landscape ﬁlms. This incorporates both the knowledge we gain
from the analysis of related research and the speciﬁcally
ﬁlmic parameters of landscape representation. If embodied
experience can effectively be transferred to the ﬁlm medium, we have to be able to ﬁnd distinct formal parameters of
the ﬁlmic representation that cue the spectator’s embodied
reactions.
The analytical grid used in this paper is formed by the
three ﬁndings in the related literature (section 2) discussed
above and the three basic parameters of landscape representation in ﬁlm (section 3). The given list of parameters
is not exhaustive, but allows for a basic analysis within the
scope of this brief paper.
Not all the parameters will be found in all three case
studies. We concentrate instead on the main parameters
in each speciﬁc ﬁlmic representation of the pedestrian’s
view.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

5. Three Case Studies
5.1 Jonathan Hodgson: Feeling My Way. Animated live action, GB 1997, 5:30 min.
Jonathan Hodgson‘s short animated ﬁlm Feeling My
Way is a combination of live action ﬁlm and animation.
The ﬁlm tells the story of a person walking from home to
a meeting, condensing an actual span of more than half
an hour to only ﬁve minutes. The camera perspective is
introduced in the very ﬁrst shot: the camera goes down the
stairs, and at the front door a hand enters the lower boundary of the frame to open it. This is a classic subjective point
of view shot as it is well known in the cinema.

The whole ﬁlm is edited as a series of longer shots,
but in such a way that spatial ellipses will normally not
be noticed by the spectator. The shots however are not left
as they were taken by a camera but painted over at some
instances and enriched with written texts. These texts stem
from the subject’s stream of thoughts. The walk to the ofﬁce thus turns into an inner journey. The main focus of the
narration is not the actual world surrounding the walker,
but rather his perception that focuses on different objects.
These images do not portray the geometrical-spatial walking path, but the experience of a subject passing through
different spaces.
In this visual representation the sound of a ringing telephone can for instance trigger an association to another
phone call yet to be made. This reminder invades the visual
representation of the walk as text: “RING Ring SIMON”.
5.1.1 Immediacy of perception and framing. The
above example explains how the immediacy of the peripatetic perception is represented in Feeling My Way. The
protagonist’s inner voice constantly reacts to what happens
around him, ornamenting the actual view with invisible stories. In addition, the walker’s subjectivity not only reacts to
these perceptions, it also shapes them, when some parts of
the photographed image are painted over and by this means
highlighted. Other parts, momentarily uninteresting for the
walker, are completely blanked out in white or black. This
special masking – the highlighting and blanking out of por-

tions of the frame – functions as a direct and powerful visualisation of a fact well-known in the theory of perception:
seeing is intentional. Human perception radically reduces
the potentially overwhelming data obtained by the senses
to the important or interesting, in order not to collapse in an
overload of information.
5.1.2 Representation of routes. The covered distance
is represented mainly within the picture as a camera movement. However the time of the journey is radically compressed and so are the actually represented stretches of way.
The bulk of the movement takes place between the shots.
To follow the narration, the spectator needs the information that the journey leads toward a meeting at nine
o’clock. The red double-decker buses hint at London as the
location of the walk. The actual route taken is comparatively unimportant for the spectator vis-à-vis the fact that the
personal perceptions of the walking subject are singled out
so prominently. The space recounted in Feeling My Way is
implied by its title. It is not a documentary of the physical
path, but an account of the experiences the subject makes
traversing it.
5.1.3 Conclusion. Feeling My Way is a direct visualisation of the space of the walking experience. Rather than
a document of the topography of the traversed space, it
visualizes the associations as well as the focused and already interpreted perceptions that a human mind processes
to make sense of the surrounding world. With animated
interventions in the ﬁlmed live action pictures Jonathan
Hodgson is able to give spectator a glimpse of what goes
on inside his own mind: invisible sensations and thoughts
well known to all of us as the ordinary “way of seeing” the
landscape around us. If landscape is as much a construct of
our mind as one of our landscape architects, then Feeling
My Way shows us how the mental component works.

5.2 Peter Liechti: Hans im Glück (Lucky Jack).
Documentary, CH 2003, 90 min.
In Hans im Glück (HIG) the Swiss ﬁlmmaker Peter
Liechti documents his attempts to quit smoking by walking
approximately 100 km between the cities of Zurich and St.
Gallen. His only companions are a camera and a diary to
record the journey.
Liechti has to undertake the hike three times in order
to achieve his goal. Each time he takes a different route,
allowing him to see the region of his childhood in three different ways. The journeys are represented by the camera’s
gaze; the subjective voiceover commentary excerpts
thoughts Liechti noted in his diary along the way.
5.2.1 Who is watching? (The POV and the immediacy of perception). All walking in HIG is triggered by the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

desire to stop smoking. Thus, the hiker’s state is comparable to that of a drug addict in the process of detoxiﬁcation.
Accordingly, his temper is not very friendly. His trip to the
top of the Säntis peak, a ﬁrst order tourist attraction, turns
out to be a disaster. In his view, the modernist chalet on
top looks like a UFO, and the other tourists present are his
enemies. The voiceover says: “I’m in a really bad mood but
today I enjoy being miserable. My addiction is my war and
I‘m waging it against everybody here.”
These words exemplify the perspective that is rendered
by the narrative of HIG: the ﬁlmmaker projects his physical unease and emotional turbulence onto the landscape
which he faces, thus transmitting his subjective view of it
to the ﬁlm‘s viewer. The ﬁrst-person commentary clearly
expresses indignation about the scenes the “I-walker” experienced and gives the background for this subjectively
perceived and negatively interpreted space. At the same
time, the POV of the images reinforces the existence of
this perceiving and interpreting subject: the camera is at
the height of Liechti‘s eye. The single shots often show
marginal observations that strike only a certain type of viewer who can make meaning out of them. Eventually the
view of the camera matches the distance of a real-life encounter when the man behind the camera addresses a person directly.

The clearest clue to the subjectivity of the representation is given when either the ﬁlmmaker‘s voice can be
heard from behind the camera and when a high-angle shot
shows the walking feet, clearly ﬁlmed from Liechti‘s own
perspective.
All factors in this short excerpt of HIG provide a distinct feeling for the subjectivity of this speciﬁc representation of the space on top of the Säntis even though the body
itself is not to be seen in the picture (except for occasional
glimpses of hands and feet).
5.2.2 Representation of routes. HIG documents a
hike from one city to another, passing through an entire
region of Switzerland. The journeys bring Peter Liechti
through three different topographies: along Lake Constance
through the pre-Alpine mountains of the Alpstein massive
and along the Swiss Mittelland (the urbanised ﬂatland north of the Alps). This analysis is conﬁned to the example of
the trip over the Säntis. Here we can distiguish two forms
of representation of routes:

1. The high-angle shot of the walking feet.
Repeatedly Liechti shows us his subjective POV of his
own feet as he walks.
This shot, which ﬁrst appears at the start of the ﬁlm,
establishes the POV as the view of Liechti himself, who is
undertaking the catharsis of the journey into non-smoking.

vious experiences and incorporates it into his own body
scheme. His understanding of what he sees on the screen
relies not only on his visual and aural capabilities but also
on an embodied interpretation of his perception. In addition, we have been able to show that the account of the route
depends not only on images that contain movement within
the frame but also on micro-narratives that give the viewer
a sense of the travelled distance. HIG thus tells a space
and the landscape of eastern Switzerland in an embodied
perspective as much as showing it.

5.3. Danae Anastassiou & Patricia Manzi: Entweder oder?VWXGHQWÀOP&+PLQ
The spectator immediately understands this view as he can
integrate it into his own body scheme and align it with his
day to day perspective. The notion of covering a distance is
inextricably tied to the spectator’s own walking experience
through this single shot. The experience of the route is thus
embodied in a unique and well-known POV.
2. Substitute movement
About to leave the top of the Säntis, Liechti shows us
the view of a departing cable car heading down to the lowlands. The next shot is a view out of the window of the gondola down to the lower station. Whereas the second shot is
in movement, showing the movement within the frame itself (as does the high-angle shot of the feet), the view of the
departing cabin is a purely narrative element signalling the
protagonist’s departure from the mountaintop. This micronarrative works hand in hand with the voiceover commentary about the urge to leave the place, as well as the next
shot from within the cabin. The departing cable car lets the
spectator visibly understand that Liechti will continue his
trip very soon. It is a substitute movement. The sight of the
cabin works as a narrative element that spurs on the narration (and in this case also the narrator) towards the end of
the journey. The actual movement, however, takes place
between the shots, as ﬁlmic montage allows. The resulting
impression matches the way we would normally recount
our experiences to others: a mixture of a description of the
main attractions (the mountaintop, the cable car, the arrival
at the bottom and the visit to a traditional sports festival
right after) and some background information about the
visited places and how we got there. In other words, the
sequence is an interpretation of the lived experience of a
visit to the Säntis.
5.2.3 Conclusion. Peter Liechti’s ﬁlm Hans im Glück
gives the spectator an embodied perspective of the experience of a hike up and down a mountaintop. The spectator
links the impression he gets from the ﬁlm to his own pre-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

In the ﬁrst shot of Entweder oder? two women walk
along a short path and then part in two different directions.
The next frame is a split image showing both women as
they walk in different environments.
Pursuing the same technique, the whole ﬁlm juxtaposes two walking experiences. While the woman on the left
side of the screen walks through urban spaces, the woman
on the right traverses strips of forest and rural land. The

two movements are edited in a way that similarities of the
kind of movement become obvious. But at the same time
the two shots show the differences one encounters when
walking in a planned, developed, and paved environment
or on unpaved, “natural” ground.
Unlike the previous two ﬁlms, the POV of Entweder
oder? is not a subjective one. The images of both women
present their actions from a third perspective, pointing at
the different efforts one has to make when moving in dissimilar environments.
5.3.1 Representation of Routes. Routes are represented in Entweder oder? not as continuous spaces, but
as fragments of paths that highlight neither the target the
pedestrian is aiming at nor the path itself. We don‘t know
nor want to know where they are going. Instead the focus
is the very act of walking, and the route is represented by
showing the effort to master it. All shots show the women
in order to let the spectator visibly take part in both their
actions. Thus, more than just showing two different situa-

tions, the video also provides an account of the experience
offered by the two peripatetic situations. As Vivian Sobchack and others assert, the spectator feels the effort the
woman on the right side of the split screen has to undergo
compared to the woman on the left, because of the capacity
for empathy.
Entweder oder? demonstrates that a ﬁlm does not necessarily need to show a subjective camera POV (as the
two earlier examples did) to allow the spectator to engage
in a corporeal experience. This is because the spectator‘s
view itself is embodied – “the address of the eye” (Sobchack).
5.3.2 Conclusion. After two examples with a distinctly subjective POV, this example suggests that a third-person POV can communicate landscape experience in a corporeal manner. The simple fact of a juxtaposition of two
different corporeal situations triggers the empathy of the
spectator to ﬁgure out how it feels to be in either of the two
situations. Entweder oder? thus succeeds at translating the
actual experience of walking on different grounds into the
visualisation with video.

instrument in moving beyond the strict Carthesian split
between body and mind that has fundamentally shaped
modern Western science. It will help us to develop a necessary new understanding and a deepened knowledge of the
interactions between human beings and their environment.
After a long period of designing the landscape according to infrastructural guidelines, the experiential knowledge is increasingly being taken into account in the design
of our everyday landscapes. This change of perspective in
landscape practice needs visualisations of experiences as
a basis for its communication towards non-professionals.
Video is, according to our knowledge, the most appropriate
medium to support the landscape architect in these seminal
changes because it allows for the dynamic portions of our
landscape perception to be represented. As the fastest and
easiest to use member of the ﬁlmic media “family” it uses
the ﬁlm language almost everyone today has learned to understand in the cinema. Moreover, through its capacity for
telling stories it disposes of the probably most powerful
means of storing and communicating knowledge in human
history.

References
6. Visualizing Corporeal Experience with
Video: Conclusion
The embodied reaction of the spectator to a cinematic
representation of the body is best illustrated by the famous
example of the almost uncontrollable leg movements of
men watching a suspenseful football game on television.
Exactly the same sort of engagement with the actions seen
on the screen is at work in all of us and fortunately allows
us to take part in the presented narration much more profoundly than in any other representation of the real world.
The corporeal immersion of the spectator in the action
may be stronger in a ﬁlm that employs an openly embodied
POV. However, the last example we quoted shows that the
third person view can also trigger embodied reactions in
the spectator and convey the actual landscape experience.
The covering of distances; the speciﬁc view of the pedestrian with its special focus on the immediate and currently
interesting; the representation of a corporeal image and the
routes this anonymous body is wandering through: are all
within the reach of the ﬁlmic representation.
This characteristic of the moving image to mediate
between the visual (as well as aural) representation and the
user in a corporeal manner makes it a rewarding topic for
research into the visualisation of human perceptions of the
environment. Situated in the heretofore intangible ﬁeld of
human experience, where no standardised data can be obtained, the moving image can thus become an important

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[1] Martin Heidegger. Gelassenheit. Pfullingen, Verlag Günther
Neske. 1959.
[2] Walter Benjamin. “On the Mimetic Faculty”. In: Reﬂections:
Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical Writings. New York,
Schocken Books. 1986; Walter Benjamin. “On Some Motifs
in Baudelaire”. In: Illuminations: Essays and Reﬂections, tr.
Harry Zohn. New York, Schocken Books, 1968.
[3] Yi-Fu Tuan. “In Place, Out of Place”. In: Miles Richardson
(ed.): Place: Experience and Symbol. Baton Rouge. 1984;
Yi-Fu Tuan. Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press. 1977;
Yi-Fu Tuan. Topophilia. A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, And Values. Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall
Inc. 1974.
[4] Michel de Certeau. L‘invention du quotidien 1: Arts de faire.
Paris, Union Générale d‘Editions. 1980.
[5] Kai Vöckler. “Psychoscape”. In: Walter Prigge (ed.): Peripherie ist überall. Frankfurt/Main, Campus Verlag. 1998.
[6] Francesco Careri. Walkscapes. Walking as an aesthetic practice. Barcelona, Editorial Gustavo Gili. 2002.
[7] Roland Barthes. La chambre claire. Note sur la photographie. Paris, Gallimard Seuil. 1980.
[8] Vivian Sobchack. The Address of the Eye. A Phenomenology
of Film Experience. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
1992.
[9] André Bazin. Qu‘est-ce que le cinéma? Paris. Cerf. 1945.
[10] Maurice Merleau-Ponty. Phénoménologie de la perception.
Paris, Bibl. des idées. 1945.
[11] Vivian Sobchack. “What My Fingers Knew: The Cinesthetic
Subject, or Vision in the Flesh.” In: Carnal Thoughts. Embodiment and Moving Image Culture. Berkeley / London,
University of California Press. 2004.

