The balance between Aesthetics, Usability and Corporate Identity:
Graphic User Interface design within a commercial company
A.E.J. Debije-Meessen, J.A.H. Jansen
Océ Technologies B.V., the Netherlands
{andrea.meessen, jacqueline.jansen}@oce.com
Abstract
This paper describes the search for a balance between
aesthetics, usability and corporate identity in product
development. This case study shows that usability has
been integrated in the process for some time now.
Aesthetics and corporate identity is relatively new and
not yet incorporated at the same level. Over the past
three years we developed a new software style called
Ocean. For the first time, as a starting point of the
design process, the design team created an aesthetic
concept. During the following design process, small,
splintered checks are carried out on usability and on
perception. However, no overall test is carried out to
evaluate the perception of the product as a whole. Do
our users experience the software product as
professional, independent and human? Do they
recognise the Océ brand they know from earlier
marketing campaigns? Looking back on the Ocean
design process, aesthetics proved itself to be a valid
requirement. Expanding our tests with professional
checks on perception would complete the embedding of
aesthetics in our design process. This is a bridge that
still needs to be crossed. To be able to cross this bridge
we, as graphic user interface designers, need proper
evaluation methods, better information and more case
studies. In other words, we need backup from the
Information Visualisation field in order to achieve this
acceptance.

1. Introduction
A lot can be said about aesthetics, usability and
corporate identity individually. All three are important
aspects of a product. How can a good balance be
achieved between these three aspects? Are they equally
important or is one more important than the other?
Working as a graphic designer within a design
department that views usability as its higher purpose,
aesthetics tend to “fall by the wayside”. Not only

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

during the design process itself but also as part of the
evaluation process. The main question is; how can we
incorporate aesthetics into the design and evaluationprocess in a way that it is measurable? In our search
for an answer to this question, we will look at an
example of a design process. This article describes the
search for balance within our product development
process.
Technical
requirements

Brand eye [1]
Aesthetics

Visually impaired
users

Océ Corporate
Identity manual

Usability
Corporate
Identity
Consistent products

Product
marketing

Fig. 1: Relationship between aesthetics, usability
and corporate identity surrounded by important
requirements and limitations. The ones beyond
the control of the ID department are in italics.

2. About Océ
Océ is one of the world’s leading suppliers of
professional printing and document management
systems. The company develops and manufactures
systems for the production, distribution and
management of documents - in colour and black and
white, in small format and wide format - and supplies
these to offices, industry and the graphics market.
The company provides printers, scanners,
peripheral equipment and printing media in addition to
document management software, innovative products
in the areas of system integration and outsourcing of

document management activities. Océ focuses
primarily on professional environments in which its
products are well known for their productivity and
reliability, ease of use and total cost of ownership.
With ease of use as one of Océ’s unique selling
points, a lot of time and effort is invested in developing
user-friendly products. Within Research & Development, the Industrial Design department focuses on the
user and his/her working environment. A team of
product-, interaction- and graphic-designers along with
usability experts combines new Océ technology with
high-level design to produce competitive products.
The specific characteristics of the company are
conveyed in Océ’s corporate identity through the use
of visual elements as images and colour. The red-bluewhite palette is a blink of the eye at the colours of the
national flag. Océ is an international company but
proud of its roots [2].

customers. Aesthetics was a relatively new aspect and
seen as a strictly graphic matter. At that moment we
had too little arguments to convince others of the
importance of a pleasant user experience [3].
The first generation of the desktop application
was inspired by the Windows 2000 look and feel of
Microsoft products [4] and was further enhanced by
our own Océ icons and graphics. We then linked up to
the operating system, which seemed to be a smart and
simple way of integrating the user’s current working
methods.

Fig. 3: One of our desktop applications based
on the Windows 2000 style: Océ DocWorks;
for professional reprographic users.

Fig. 2: An example of the current corporate
identity of Océ (e.g. on the Internet, 2006).

3. The origin of our current desktop and
web applications
As a company that originally developed
standalone copiers and printers, Océ has since moved
towards offering document management solutions. For
the industrial design department, this meant developing
“systems” for users, a complete, integrated package of
hardware and software products. The main focus was
on user interaction and usability, the goal was to
develop usable and intuitive products that would fit in
with the working environment of our professional

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The first generation of web applications was
developed in “the early years” of the Internet when
technology was new and limited to plain html. Océ's
corporate web style at that time can be summarised as
“full blue screens with white text”. A web application,
which is used for object-action tasks has fundamentally
different design requirements as a website, which is
used for retrieving information only. Our corporate
colour combination did not lend itself readily to
intensively used applications. Less intense colours and
contrasts are more suited to creating a pleasant all day
user experience. This resulted in the “Vanilla style”.
In both cases, the issue of aesthetics was
limited to colour use, main layout and graphics. While
technology did influence the appearance of our
products quite considerably, our products were not
based on a specific graphic or aesthetic concept. At the
time, this solution met our requirements and several
user tests showed that the Océ products that hit the
market at that time were well received.

In a second layer surrounding the core values,
words such as fresh, safe, intuitive, valuable were
placed as sub characteristics. Both layers were visually
represented using images.
The words and even more so the images were the
starting point for colour pallets and mood boards.
With these impressions, the first rough style directions
became clear.

Fig. 4: Example of a web application based on
our Vanilla style: Océ IntraLogic; for office users.

4. Developing a new look & feel for Océ
desktop applications.
Two years ago, we reached a stage where the look
and feel of our desktop and web applications reached
its border and functionality was becoming more and
more complex. New interaction concepts were created
and we needed to develop a new graphic skin. The
graphic design group together with several interaction
designers discussed the question: What should be the
look and feel of the next generation of Océ software
products?
The initial step involved creating a brand eye [2]
to visually represent the company’s image and brand
values. Terms such as independent, vision and human
describe the essence of our brand and were placed in
the middle of the brand eye. In the first layer
surrounding the essence of the brand, words such as
user-centred, professional and differentiating were
placed as core values.

Fig.6: One of the mood boards resulting from
the brand eye exercise; showing the values of
the Océ brand; human, valuable and vivid.

Fig.7: Initial functional sketches developed
from the mood board.

Fig. 5: The Océ software "brand eye” developed
and used as a design tool.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The rough sketches resulting from this brand
eye exercise made it clear that we were searching for a
way to create a strong, Océ look that would dominate
the standard windows look. We investigated solutions
in terms of use of colour but also in terms of designing
application window headers in a style that was specific
to Océ.

on a scale how well it is described by a given term.
Each term is illustrated, using images so that each
respondent understands the term in the same way, thus
limiting differences in word associations. The test
question was as follows: How is the current Vanilla
style perceived? How is the new Ocean style
perceived? Is it an improvement on the Vanilla style?
The test demonstrated little difference in
emotional perception between the two styles. In
general the test showed that the Océ products were
perceived as ‘nicer’, ‘more joyful’, ‘more relaxed’ and
‘less distant’ than competitors' products. Océ products
also scored high on ‘childish’ and ‘less serious’. Both
Vanilla and Ocean fall in the cluster of positive
emotions, whereas competitors' products fall in the
cluster of negative emotions.

Fig.8/9: Two colour concepts resulting from
the brand eye exercise. Both examples show the
“corporate header”, an Océ element, instead of
the standard windows title bar. The “red
concept” uses the red Océ corporate colour as
a main colour, which makes the interface pretty
overwhelming and garish. The “blue concept”
uses the brand's red colour as an accent colour
and blue as main colour to emphasize the
professional side of our brand.

To make sure we were heading in the right
direction, a test was carried out as to how the Vanilla
style and the first set of Ocean sketches were
perceived. This test was a student research project of
the TU Delft. Two methods were used for this test; the
PrEmo [6] and Personality Scale [7] method. Both
methods have been earlier subjects to doctorate
research at this university.
PrEmo allows the respondent to judge a
picture by assigning icon-and-sound representation of
positive and negative emotions. Personality Scale
allows the respondent to judge a picture by measuring

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 10. In a study on the style perception
of Vanilla respondents qualify the Vanilla Web
style to be nicer, more joyful, more relaxed,
less distant and milder in comparison to
3 competitors applications.

5. Developing the next generation of Océ
software products
A long process of developing and engineering
began in order to design all details, handle all technical
difficulties and create a solid look and feel. The blue
concept was developed into the Ocean style. As
mentioned in figure 8, this style encompassed more
than just the colour blue. Blue was used to create a
recognisable element (corporate header and navigation
bar) and ensured consistency across all products. The
core content of each application has a fresh, clear look
created using yellow, greenish colours combined with
light purples and grey tones. The Ocean style uses a

flat, open and therefore visually accessible style. We
kept 3D effects to a minimum, opting instead for basic,
sloping lines. The icon collection was adapted to this
new style. Metaphors were cleaned up and the drawing
style was adjusted to the typical Ocean style with
component specific colour palettes.
During this engineering process, a usability
check was carried out on readability, contrast and use
of colour. The first step involved a colour blindness
simulation with Vischeck[5]. The results showed that
the design was usable by users with all types of colour
vision deficiency. This was followed up with a
usability test on use of colour. To ensure a reliable
outcome, the test was performed using four different
monitors, each showing the same screens in a different
way. The test showed some weak points in terms of the
usability of the graphic design. We addressed these
weak points and colours were changed to increase
readability.
But these two tests give no judgment on
aesthetics or on the perception of the final product.
Test users were not asked for their first impression or
questioned about recognition of the Océ brand.

6. The road ahead
The first generation of Ocean products will be
released soon. From our point of view, all of these
products are very usable and reflect the Océ brand of
quality. We are expecting feedback from our customers
shortly after product introduction. We intend to visit
our customers and hear about our users' initial
experiences.
For the upcoming period we have planned a user
test to evaluate our icon set on use of metaphors. Next
to that concrete plan we will work on new, extended
user tests as conducted with the TU Delft students.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Fig.11/12: Final screenshots (main screen and a
start-up screen) of a typical Océ Ocean product.

7. Conclusion
With this Ocean design process, Océ has taken its
first steps towards incorporating aesthetics and
corporate identity into our product development
process in a professional way. The full potential of this
step we have taken will only be achieved if aesthetics
and corporate design are evaluated and regarded with
the same importance as usability. What we, as graphic
designers, need is more information and “back-up”
from information visualization experts. We need
proper evaluation methods, information and more case
studies in order to make this essential part of product
development an integral aspect of our work within the
department and company.

References
[1] http://www.branddriveninnovation.com/wpcontent/brand%20driven%20innovation.pdf
[2] http://www.oce.com/
[3] Norman, Donald (2004): Emotional Design.
http://www.jnd.org/
[4] http://www.microsoft.com/
[5] http://www.vischeck.com/
[6] http://www.tns-nipo.com/sub_ext.asp?e083
[6]http://www.designandemotion.org/media/files/August_20
05.pdf
[7]http://www.io.tudelft.nl/live/pagina.jsp?id=58661788a39b-41aa-9925-56cfa32fecd4&lang=en

