Developing User Requirements for Visualizations of Literature Knowledge
Domains
Sarah Faisal, Paul Cairns, Ann Blandford
UCL Interaction Centre, University College London
31-32 Alfred Place, London, WC1E 7DP, UK
s.faisal@cs.ucl.ac.uk, p.cairns@ucl.ac.uk, a.blandford@ucl.ac.uk
Abstract
As researchers we are constantly working with our
literature domains. Making sense and familiarizing ourselves with such domains is a cumbersome but necessary
task that is part of every researcher’s career, especially
novices. Literature Knowledge Domain Visualizations exist which assist users in extracting and interpreting interesting patterns. However, these visualizations tend to be
developed without reference to the particular needs of researchers or without addressing the specific challenges of
the literature knowledge domain. This paper therefore targets the needs of researchers as they work with their literature. We conducted a qualitative study to understand how
researchers make sense of their literature domains. Such
information assisted us in coming up with a set of design
considerations and guidelines which we believe will assist
in building visualizations that are useful for the general research population.

1 Introduction
Starting off as a novice researcher in a novel domain is
a burdensome task, since one needs to get familiarized with
the domain. Researchers have to go through huge amounts
of literature to try and understand the structure and settings
of the domains to which they belong. The field of Information Visualization (InfoVis) seems ideal for assisting in
such a task since it provides the means for representing information on the screen using visual cues, which in turn reduces the effort needed to gain knowledge. For example, it
would assist researchers in extracting patterns and building
associations faster than when relying on standard textual
hyperlink mechanisms. Using InfoVis as a means to solve
such a problem is not new. Previous work has been done in
knowledge domain visualization (KDViz) where literature
knowledge domains have been represented visually. Such
visualizations use computer generated algorithms that extract certain patterns and in turn represent them visually
on the screen [4]. These visualizations however do not
seem to have been built to target the particular needs of
researchers.
We argue that working with literature forms an inseparable part of the experience of researchers and hence this

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

work approaches KDViz from the perspective of the researchers needs, goals and methods. The study described
here explores the means and the tools that researchers use
in order to make sense of their literature domains through a
descriptive theory which sheds light on this phenomenon.
It reveals the importance of users’ subjective and personalized experiences when interacting with such a domain.
To our knowledge this user perspective has not been previously highlighted. From such an analysis, a proposition is
presented as to how such information can be used in creating literature domain visualizations revealing a set of design guidelines, one of which is interaction which supports
users’ subjective experience. This proposition and associated guidelines, we believe, will make such visualization
useful for the general research community.

2 The literature domain
One of the major goals of Knowledge Domain Visualizations (KDViz) is the representation of knowledge by
visually painting a picture of the scientific development
and evolution of a domain. In other words, it attempts
to give a general view of what is going on across a particular discipline over a period of time. The ideas these
studies tend to represent may include for example: how
popular a particular field is, how popular a particular author is, the evolution of a particular field, the diffusion of
research topics, etc, all within a specific domain. These
visualizations use specialized algorithms which in turn extract certain patterns and semantic similarities [2] out of the
domain’s data, and represent them visually on the screen.
These patterns are then used to visually represent citation
patterns, such as the evolution and significant contributions
within a knowledge domain [3], where the entire citation
domain is visualized. It is claimed that these visualizations
assist audiences with special interests, such as domain analysts and experts, yet we have found no evidence of usability studies to prove such a claim. In addition, we see
that there is more to this domain than what is being represented by these visualized patterns. Looking closer we can
see that these visualizations are built on certain assumptions according to which such patterns are being extracted
and represented. These assumptions are not based on re-

searchers’ experiences and needs of such a domain. As
indicated, the knowledge gained out of the literature domain is of interest to the general research community. Any
researcher when entering a specific field goes through the
primary step of familiarization in which they try and make
sense of their literature domains. Since we are interested in
building visualizations that target the general research population, we need to verify whether or not the assumptions
used in building the existing literature domain visualization tools comply with researchers’ literature sense making experiences. For example, one of these assumptions
is: each publication in a field can be characterized by its
list of keywords [1], however one of the researchers who
we interviewed indicated that they do not trust keywords
since in certain cases they do not really reflect what they
are looking for in a document. This example indicated that
there are additional or different criteria upon which different visualization patterns need to be presented. It is this
type of knowledge that we are really interested in in this
study.
In addition to the literature KDViz, there exists another category of research conducted in the area of visually representing literature data. However, the main intention behind these studies was the development of new interactive visual metaphoric solutions for representing large
amounts of interrelated information. They were not really intended to assist users in making sense and working
with their literature. In other words, the application domain was not in itself the problem, but how to represent
large amounts of interrelated information in an understandable and usable way. Seminal examples of such work are
Fairchild et al’s SemNet [5] with its syntactic 3D representation, Mackinlay et al’s [6] Butterfly with their organic
interface, and Shneiderman et al’s [7] GRIDL with the idea
of categorical grouping.
From here we can safely say that it is not clear from
all of these previous studies what information researchers
truly need to visualize in the literature domain. Hence, this
study has been devised to fill in the missing gaps which
relate to researchers’ literature knowledge domain requirements. It is our primary aim to understand researchers’
experiences in the task of building and making sense of
literature domains. From this understanding we will determine the literature domain information that needs to be
portrayed in order for these visualizations to be useful by
the general research population in addition to the means
with which this can be achieved.

3 The study
The study conducted was qualitative. It aimed at
gaining a general understanding of the problem of learning
about a new literature domain from a user’s perspective.
Interviews were conducted and analysed using grounded
theory [8]; from this descriptive theory general design
guidelines are proposed.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

3.1

Statement of purpose and study scope

The main goal of this study is to derive a high level
descriptive theory across both the psychology and the
human computer interaction (HCI) fields in relation to
understanding the different ways in which researchers
make sense of, work with and perceive their literature
domains. It intends to gather enough information to
determine the different literature entities and tools that
researchers work with in addition to the knowledge they
gain in relation to their literature domains. From this
descriptive theory, the basic requirements for a literature
domain visualization tool will be determined.

3.2

Method and setting

Researchers are the main audience this study targets
since they are the primary users of the literature domain.
In order to get the intended high level understanding of the
problem at hand, information needs to be gathered from
researchers of varying experience and knowledge of a domain in which they are working or proposing to work. This
study focuses on researchers from the domains of Psychology and HCI because they were available at the time of
the study. Due to the type of information needed from the
study, semi-structured interviewing was used as the data
gathering tool. Since it is a fairly open and flexible framework it provides the opportunity to learn additional relevant information not previously known. In total, eight interviews were conducted with researchers of varying experiences (ranging from an experienced professor to a first
year PhD student) in the fields of psychology and HCI. The
questions asked emerged from the conversations held during the interviews. Outcomes that arose during the analysis
of the gathered data guided the decision as to which subject
to interview next, which depended greatly on the subject’s
previous research experiences. The analysis of these interviews was performed using the grounded theory methodology, which is an inductive theory development methodology. It assists in analysing the data from a higher-level
case perspective which assists in identifying categories and
concepts through open coding and relating these codes using axial coding, and finally determining a single storyline
around which everything else is draped through selective
coding. The process of gathering the data, analysing it and
so on was continued until a saturation point was reached
after a total of eight interviews. This rapid attainment of
saturation is unusual but may reflect the very concrete attributes of what defines literature, and the broad agreement
of how to approach literature in research, at least across the
subject areas of the interviewees, .

4 The overall literature domain sensemaking story
Grounded theory assisted in developing a descriptive
theory from which the general literature domain sense-

making underlying story was revealed. As the details of
forming a grounded theory can be quite complex, it is useful to describe here the overall story of the theory before
giving the fuller details that make up the basis for the theory.
Researchers are constantly working and interacting
with their literature domains. The information about a domain is strongly related to literature data such as the authors and their associated publications. Thus, a domain is
quite simple in relation to the entities it incorporates yet a
vast amount of complicated interrelated knowledge can be
gained. This study reveals that the sense making process
of ones literature domain starts with trying to determine
who the members of the community are and their associated research interests. The community can be seen as
a globe that surrounds its associated entities which represents the members, their interests and the literature they
produce. We identified that it is the community that forms
the primary source of the literature domain sense making
process.
Various research interests exist within a community,
each embedded with its members. Members of the community collaborate with one another to produce knowledge,
which is reflected by the literature itself. It is work that
goes into these pieces of literature that results in the advancement of knowledge, and hence the development and
evolution of the specific research domain. The process
of understanding one’s literature domain results in gaining vast amounts of knowledge. Some of this knowledge
is quite explicit and direct, such as who collaborated with
whom on a piece of work, whereas some is more implicit
and subjective such as who is influential in a particular domain, or what piece of work or idea changed the course of
a field’s development, etc.
The understanding of one’s literature domain is one
of the key phases researchers go through as part of their
careers. It is through this understanding that they get
familiarized with the research domain to which they belong, gain knowledge of seminal work in the area, and get
ideas for their own research. It is this understanding that
assists them in participating in the overall advancement of
research.

Figure 1: Understanding of One’s Literature Domain

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Sub7: “...I think that this is quite the whole point in a way,
we are trying to build up some picture of um you know an
understanding of whatever our area is”.
We can say that the understanding and sense making process of one’s literature domain starts with knowing who the
members of the community are, in addition to their associated research interests (Figure 1). More importantly, it relates to the ideas that researchers generate of their domains.
The papers, in other words pieces of literature, represents
the lower level concrete entities that researchers interact
with in order to gain information which eventually leads to
gaining knowledge of their literature domains.

5 Analysis
Having given a general feel for the theory of the
literature domain sense-making process, we turn to the
detailed findings of the interview analysis. Grounded
theory allowed for a number of categories and associated
relationships to be identified through an iterative process
of analysis using open, axial and selective coding. These
results are further interpreted to reveal a close relationship
with the literature domain understanding process.

5.1

Categories and concepts

Four main categories were identified during the open
and axial coding processes which reflect the interviewees’
subjective experiences while working with their literature
domains. These are:
• The research community
• Literature
• Influence
• Evolution of a discipline
We discuss each of these separately as they form the basis
for the complete theory.
The research community represents the central category
around which the sense-making process begins. From a
higher level perspective, it reflects a social activity where
people with similar interests communicate to share ideas
and knowledge. A researcher’s community varies along its
dimensional scope from global to local. Global reflects the
outside community to which the researcher belongs. Contact with members of such a community is done occasionally, when meeting in conferences, via e-mail or through
telephone conversations. On the other hand, the local community represents the immediate community which surrounds the researcher on a daily basis, for example, members of his or her research department. One’s research
community is not location specific instead it is specific to
the interest it incorporates, which is shared by members of
various locations. The community is made out of members who form the main entity around which the community exists. It is these members, the people, which participate in expanding the general body of knowledge. Such is

achieved through the ideas they possess which is reflected
through their work, in other words their publications. It is
these ideas that form a valuable source of information.
Sub2: “this [community] is where I look for literature”.
Literature represents the concrete piece of information
from which knowledge is gained. It is through literature
that knowledge is transferred and communities are formed.
However, literature in this sense does not just represent the
actual physical papers, but also the ideas which these papers reflect. These ideas are documented within papers,
and are created from researchers’ subjective views. It is
these ideas that researchers generate in the sense making
process that are of interest more than the actual physical
papers per se.
Sub3: “...there’ll be a core body of people who are aligned
with particular kinds of ideas”.
Sub6: “...I think I would go for ideas...what it means actually it is not the paper but the ideas”.
Papers form the concrete entities from which knowledge of the literature domain is gained. These entities can
be summarised as follows: authors’ names, topic, keywords, title, abstract, introduction, conclusion, source and
publication year, where most of this information is found
in the paper’s citation string. Even though authors and papers are two different entities, it is not possible to separate
them.
Sub2: “It is hard to separate that [articles] from authors,
’cause ultimately they were written by authors”.
The distinction between both was not made apparent
unless subjects were explicitly asked. For example:
1. Subjects tended to mix up the pronouns when referring to authors and/or papers.
Sub2: “I look at who is out there doing that sort of
work, I look at those papers”.
There seems to be some sort of an association between
author “who” and paper, as if they were equivalent.
2. Subjects associated authors with the citing task rather
than the paper itself.
Sub1:“I also look at people who have cited the paper”.
In this example it is interesting the way the subject
uses the word “look at people” and not “look at
papers”, where the actual action involves explicitly
looking at the papers.
In addition, during the interviews subjects always
seemed to remember the names of the authors that they
were referring to in their examples. However, when talking about a paper they seemed to either refer to it as “the
paper written by ...” or they referred to it by explaining
the ideas that the paper presented, again reemphasising the
notion of ideas.
Information regarding the literature domain is gathered through researchers’ engagement in certain activities
which satisfy some of the goals they might have at the time.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The activities may include interacting with concrete entities such as: looking for authors, following citation links,
looking at authors’ collaborators’ work, and identifying
general ideas, topics and keywords. Hence, we can say
that it is the low level paper entities that the researchers engage with in the sense making process, and it is the ideas
that they generate out of such an engagement that causes
knowledge to be gained.
Influence is related to the ideas members are producing.
Some of these ideas are more influential than others. Influence is something that causes an impact. An impact
is characterized by something that causes a change in the
way people, members of the community, think and work.
Whether such an impact is received with agreement or disagreement, it is still an indicator of influence.
Sub3: “I could name you papers that have been influential
... in terms of changing thinking in a particular area”.
Sub5:“... you have to read what they [influential authors]
are doing even if you don’t agree”
The changes that such an impact may cause may be
on a global or a personal level. The global level indicates
that the changes that occur will be reflected on the domain
in general. On the other hand, the local level indicates that
the changes may also occur on the personal level, affecting
the actual researcher and his or her ideas and work and not
the global community.
Sub3: “...there have been papers that have been influential
...actually changed the way I have thought of my work”.
Sub4: “I suppose when you say influential I consider it to
be influential to my own ideas”.
It is crucial to point out that it is quite impossible to
put an objective explicit measure on the amount of impact
or change caused by a person, since this characterization
is very subjective, even though there are certain concrete
factors that may be taken into account such as, the number
of citations an author gets or the status of the publication.
Sub3: “I think they [influential authors] are cited a lot,
but you get to hear about them for other reasons”.
In contrast to the influential author, it is very rare to
find a paper that is on its own influential. In most cases it
is the work which is presented through a group of papers
that is influential, rather than a single paper.
Sub5: “...It is not often that one article always comes up”.
Sub6: “...I think I would go for ideas...what it means actually it is not the paper but the ideas”.
Therefore, it can be concluded that influence is a quite
subjective matter which is affected by the views that different people may have. Hence, it is something that cannot be
readily measured.
The evolution of a discipline is something that is related
to a change in the status quo. It can be defined as the way
in which a discipline progresses or evolves through time.
It is normally caused by radical changes in influential people’s ideas over a period of time. Evolution occurs when
such ideas are met with general acceptance by members of

the community.
Sub5: “...evolution is kind of a development or how a discipline developed from other disciplines”.
Sub7: “...there is that thing of collaboration so that you
work together and then perhaps people from different disciplines can perhaps contribute to one another’s work
and it’ll develop that way”.
The understanding of the evolution of one’s literature
domain did not’t seem to be of major interest to the
interviewed researchers. Some interviewees expressed
interest in the topic of evolution, whereas others did not.
Sub4:“...it is a bit beyond my scope”.
Sub5: “...I have always been interested in linking disciplines together”.
Sub7: “...I suppose it is about what people find interesting
and, you know, decide to invest their time in”.

5.2

Interpretation

By interpreting these interrelated categories further,
they can be broken down into four different parts which
relate to the process in which the literature domain understanding occurs. These parts are: the concrete data,
the activity, the perceived information and the knowledge
gain. The knowledge gain reflects the process by which
the knowledge and understanding of the domain occurs.

deduced, such as forming subjective views reflecting influence and discipline evolution. Such perception is derived
from the concrete data in addition to an individual’s point
of view and interpretation, hence forming a subjective perception and not facts.
The learning and knowledge gain of the domain is the
major goal behind interacting with one’s literature domain.
When interacting with the concrete data a certain amount
of information is perceived, and therefore knowledge about
the domain is gained. The learning of one’s literature domain is a slow and in some cases unintentional process that
happens gradually with time, as soon as the researcher’s career begins, and continues throughout the researcher’s career. Sub1: “...so it was a slow process of learning where
to look for these things, reading them and just getting interested”.
Sub6: “...no, it just happened...This is very dangerous because I may miss out”.
Sub7: “I did’t set out to do that deliberately”.
From this interpretation, it can be concluded that the
understanding and sense making of one’s literature domain
starts with the concrete data. By interacting with the data
through a number of activities, knowledge of the domain
is gained and information is perceived. This knowledge
may differ from one researcher to another, depending on
their needs and experience at the time. This perception is
also considered as knowledge being gained. Therefore, it
is safe to say that working with the literature domain is
an experience that forms a major part in any researcher’s
career.

6 From theory to design

Figure 2: Breaking the Literature Domain Understanding
The concrete data reflects the pure factual data from which
the researchers make sense of their literature domains. It
represents the entities they work with throughout the understanding and knowledge gain process. It includes both
the community and the literature categories and their associated subcategories. Throughout the sense making process the main analysis revealed that there is always an activity with which researchers are involved. As a result of
people’s engagement with such an activity sense making
occurs. Such activities as indicated are involved with interacting with the concrete literature entities. As a result of
interacting with such data additional information may be

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

This descriptive theory revealed the information
researchers needed and gained as part of their literature
domain sense making process, in addition to the means
and tools with which this was achieved. The findings of
this theory can be interpreted in the form of general design
guidelines which in turn form the general requirements
around which literature domain visualization tools need
to be designed and built. Three main design guidelines
are identified: the visual representation, the subjective
experience and the personalization qualities.

6.1

Visual representation

In addition to the need to represent the basic literature
concrete entities, all relationships must be visualized
as well. The study revealed that in certain cases the
distinction between authors and their associated papers
was not made evident. Hence, the visualization tool must
be as flexible as possible in that it should allow users
to see both the members, papers and their associated
relationships, and not one or the other as exists in many
existing LKD visualization tools in which they use single
units of analysis which is typically either author e.g. [3] or

article e.g. [2].

6.2

Interaction: subjective experience

The interviews revealed that working with one’s
literature domain is quite a subjective experience, hence
the knowledge gained from such an experience differs
from one researcher to the other. Such knowledge depends immensely on the researcher’s background, current
knowledge and goals at the time. The theory revealed
that the sense making knowledge gain was achieved as
part of executing certain activities. It is the engagement
with these specific activities that leads researchers to
gaining knowledge of their literature domains. Hence, it
can safely be stated that researchers working in similar
research domains do not all make sense of their literature
domain in the same manner even though they all work
with similar concrete entities. As a result, the visualization
tool should support such subjectivity of the experience by
supporting users’ varying goals and motives. The only
foreseeable manner in which the tool would allow for such
a subjective experience is for the tool to be interactive.
Hence subjective experience equates with users interacting
with the tool. In other words, we regard manipulation as
essential since static visualizations only allow for a limited
and concrete amount of information and knowledge to be
gained. This emphasises the necessity of building a system
which supports various interactive activities which in turn
would enrich the experience.

6.3

Personalization: the introduction of ideas

Another interesting and crucial finding of the theory,
which also affects the design guidelines of the LKD visualization tool, was the introduction of the notion of ideas.
As indicated, researchers when making sense of their literature domains tend to be interested in the ideas that the
members or the papers express more than the concrete papers per se. Ideas represent the major link that ties up the
literature domain understanding process (Figure 1). Due
to its importance and criticality within the knowledge gain
process, it must be supported as part of the visualization
tool.
However, the challenge lies in that these ideas are
quite personal and do not pre-exist as part of the concrete
literature entities. For example, the same papers might be
read by two researchers each with a different interest in
mind, hence different ideas would be generated. The descriptive theory revealed information with regard to the notion of ideas. For example, researchers associated authors
to ideas more than to papers, where the same idea may be
reflected in various papers which may be written by various
authors, etc. Up to this point no knowledge visualization
tool supports such a concept in which personalization is
supported and represented as part of the tool. Adding such
a concept into a visualization tool is quite challenging with

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

unknown consequences which might affect the visualization experience as a whole. Future work intends to tackle
such a challenge and explore its effects on the visualization
experience.

Conclusion
We have presented a different perspective to the literature knowledge domain visualization tools. We have
shown that in order to visually represent knowledge, personalization is crucial. Users must be able to incorporate their individualities into the visualization experience.
Hence, we claim that static visualizations or visualizations
that allow for users to merely fly through the visual representations are not the answer. We have revealed that
these visualizations should be built around a set of activities which incorporate users’ literature domain experiences. We claim that having an interactive visualization
would be the answer. By interactive we mean visualizations that would allow for users to gain subjective experiences with which they would be allowed to personalize
their own knowledge and hence the visualizations. It is important to note that this claim is grounded within the findings of the study which we have presented in this paper.

References
[1] Borner, K., Chen, C. and Boyack, K. (2003) ’Visualizing
Knowledge Domains’. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology.
[2] Chen, C (1999). Visualising semantic spaces and author cocitation networks in digital libraries’ Information Processing and Management, 35(3), 401-420.
[3] Chen C. and Paul R. J (2001). Visualizing a knowledge domain’s intellectual structure’. IEEE Compute, 34(3), 65-71.
[4] Chen, C (2004). Searching for intellectual turning points:
Progressive Knowledge Domain Visualization’ In proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America (PNAS), 101(1), 5303-5310.
[5] Fairchild, K.M., Poltrock, S.E. and Furnas, G.W.(1988)
SemNet: Three-dimensional representations of large
knowledge bases’. Cognitive Science and Its Applications
for Human-Computer Interaction. Guindon, R (Eds), 201233.
[6] Mackinlay , J. D., Rao, R. and Card, S. K. (1995) An organic user interface for searching citation links’. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, Denver, Colorado, United States, 6773, ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co, New York,
NY, USA.
[7] Shneiderman, B., Feldman, D., Rose, A. and Ferr Grau, X.
(2000) Visualizing digital library search results with categorical and hierarchical axes’, In proceedings of the fifth
ACM conference on Digital libraries, San Antonio, Texas,
United States, 57-66, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA.
[8] Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. M. (1998) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory, SAGE Publications.

