A Projection-Based Multi-view Time-multiplexed Autostereoscopic 3D Display
System
Ying Zhang, Adrian Travis
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1PZ
{yz282; arlt1@cam.ac.uk}

Abstract
This paper presents our implementation of a multiview autostereoscopic 3D display system by using timemultiplexing approach, Digital Micro-mirror Devices
(DMD), and the optical Wedge®. The whole system
consists of three major parts: high frame rate DMD
projector, an active shutter, and an optical Wedge®.
This research investigates and develops the approaches
to interface and control DMDs at very high bit rates and
ultra-high frame rates to drive a novel flicker-free 3D
flat panel device, with a wide viewing area and without
need of special viewing glasses or head-tracking system.
It needs to design a digital interface circuit capable of
receiving video image data in a conventional format and
translating it into a form appropriate for display on a
DMD light modulator. This approach differs from
existing ones in that it facilitates the modulation of the
DMD to achieve much high frame rates, though with a
trade-off in greyscale resolution. The outcomes of this
research will have the great potential for
commercialising the autostereoscopic display systems.

information, and used view-sequential approach to
encode depth information [10].
Based on the success of the Cambridge’s viewsequential 3D displays, and the fast advancement of the
SLM technology, such as DMD technology [3] and
Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) micro-displays, over the
years, this research intends to create a multi-view 3D
display with wide fields of view by using new SLM
technology instead of CRTs.
It is well known that 3D displays almost exclusively
require orders of magnitude more information than the
2D counterparts [11, 12]. This is one of most important
reasons for considering the use of SLM technology
replacing CRTs. Furthermore, the high pixel bandwidth
is of critical importance to 3D displays, since it has the
potential for increasing the amount of parallax
information. In addition, CRTs are analogue device,
bulky and difficult to run. The DMDs are binary device,
which allows both the colour depth and spatial resolution
to be optimised to encode the desirable quantity of 3D
information, and allows for much easier implementation
of the time-multiplexed systems [4, 5, 6].

Keywords --- Autostereoscopic Display, Projection
Display, Digital Micro-mirror Device, Time-multiplexed
3D Display, Digital Light Processing, view-sequential
3D Display, Virtual Environment.

Motivation of this research is that the timemultiplexed autostereoscopic displays have not yet been
made in a flat panel format, and the reason behind this is
the requirement of a high bandwidth display device for
the time-multiplexing system.

1. Introduction

2. Principle and System Components

Autostereoscopic display technology provides the
viewers with 3D perception of the images without the
need of wearing either special glasses or other headsets.
There are two approaches to implement the autostereoscopic 3D display system: spatial-multiplexing and
time-multiplexing [8, 9, 10].

The principle of the 3D effect generation in this
autostereoscopic display system is somewhat similar to
that behind the parallax barrier displays. If a narrow slit
is placed in front of an object, the viewer’s each eye will
see a different fraction of the object. If the object is
replaced by an artificial stereoscopic image of a scene
with the corresponding perspective of that head position,
the viewer can see two different perspectives of the
scene, then a retinal disparity occurs, inducing stereopsis
(see Fig. 1(a)). If several such slits are used, and each slit
is synchronized with a corresponding distinct image of
the scene, the viewer can experience 3D effect of the
whole scene.

The time-multiplexing approach requires high speed
imaging devices to generate a sufficient amount of pixels
within the temporal resolution of the viewers’ eyes. It is
heavily dependent on the bandwidth of the adopted
Spatial Light Modulator (SLM) [7]. The Cambridge’s
view-sequential display relies on this approach [10].
University of Cambridge has been developing viewsequential 3D displays for the past two decades [1, 2, 9,
10], and achieved great success. Those displays used fast
Cathode Ray Tubes (CRTs) to generate pixel

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

This whole multi-view autostereoscopic 3D display
system consists of three major parts: high frame rate
DMD projector, an active shutter, and an optical

Wedge®. The high frame rate projector is synchronised
with the active shutter, which is a ferroelectrics liquid
crystal shutter with the sequential on-off switching
function. The high bandwidth projector projects the
images onto a diffusive screen. The shutter is placed in
front of the screen (see Fig. 1(b)).
The frame
synchronisation signal controls the shutter’s sequential
on-off switching.

Image

The block diagram of the projection system of this
multi-view autostereoscopic 3D display system is shown
in Figure 2. It uses time-multiplexing approach and three
DMDs, one for each colour (Red, Green, and Blue). For
the whole system, the optical Wedge® is also introduced
to create a flat panel time-multiplexed 3D display. The
following Section 3, Section 4, and Section 5 will
describe the high frame rate projector, the DMDs, and
the optical Wedge®, respectively.

Shutter

(a)

Projector

Diffusive Screen
Shutter with Slits

(b)
Fig.1: Diagram Shows Stereoscopic Principle

3. High Frame Rate Projector
The high frame rate projection system is a large
bandwidth image source and must be able to generate
sufficient images to create the 3D perspectives. If the
temporal bandwidth of the human eye is assumed to be
approximately 50Hz, the number of views equals to the
frame rate being divided by 50. The projection system
used in this research is a self-built projector, which is
centred on three Texas Instruments’ 0.7 XGA LVDS

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

DMD chips, one for each colour. It can display 1500
images per second where the images are 1024 × 768
pixels with 24 bit RGB (8 bits per colour). Hence the
projector can support 1500/50 = 30 views of 3D
perspectives. The computed 3D perspectives are fed into
the projector via a DVI (Digital Visual Interface) output
of a graphics card interface to an internal frame buffer.
The frame buffer is double buffered allowing one frame
to be loaded while the other is displayed. From the frame
buffer the images are fed into the formatters, which in

turn send the correct bit sequence to the individual
DMD. Each time a new image is read from the frame
buffer and a pulse is sent to the shutter controller which
controls the shutter (see Fig. 2). The controller has an

onboard counter that cycles through each slit. The data
transfer rate between the projector and the host computer
is up to 12.8 Gigabits per second.

Frame Sync
Reset Sync

Controller

Shutter Driver Board

Shutter
Formatter/Controller
Red

Frame Buffer

Driver Board

Blue

Projector

Green

Fig.2: Block Diagram of the Projection System

4. Digital Micro-mirror Device (DMD)
The DMD is the only volume production device
which is both a micro-electronic mechanical system
(MEMS) and a SLM. The DMD is developed by Texas
Instruments Corp. It is a MEMS because it consists of
hundreds of thousands of moving micro-mirrors, which
are controlled by underlying CMOS electronics. The
mirrors are highly reflective and used to modulate light,
thus making the DMD an optical MEMS as well as a
reflective SLM. The attributes of being binary device,
high speed, high precision, and broadband capacity make
the DMD much attractive for many applications.
The DMD is a kind of CMOS SRAM device with a
superstructure array of micro-mechanical mirrors
functionally located over each memory cell. Memory
cells on the DMD loaded with a logical ‘1’ will position
the mirror, through electrostatic forces, so that the
incident light is reflected into the aperture of the
projection lens. Memory cells loaded with a logical ‘0’
are positioned so that the incident light directed away
from the projection lens and into a light sink. The ‘on’
state light is optically recombined with the other colour
components and projected onto the viewing screen.
This research is using 0.7 XVG LVDS DMD chip.
Its micro-mirror arrays are up to 1024 × 768, and it
supports the data transfer rate up to 12.8 Gigabits per
second. This is sufficient for the delivery of 1500 frame
per second at a greyscale resolution of 8 bit per colour
(RGB), which at least requires the data transfer rate to be

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

1500 × 8 × 1024 × 768 § 9.44 Gigabits per second. The
supporting electronics are custom built.

5. The Optical Wedge®
The Wedge® is a kind of simple optical waveguide,
which is made of optically transparent material, and it
works through internal reflection (see Fig. 3). A ray,
which is injected into the Wedge®, bounces up the
waveguide until it reaches the critical angle at which
point it exits the Wedge®. By ensuring that the rays
focus on the exit plane, a flat panel display can be
created by inserting a diffuser at the exit plane. The
diffuser is required, since the rays almost vertically exit
the waveguide. In this display system, the image from
the DMD projector is injected into the Wedge®. The size
of the image seen on the diffusive exit-surface purely
depends on the size and the design of the Wedge®.
Therefore, the screen size can be purely adjusted by
changing the Wedge® optics. Integrated with a same size
shutter, the flat panel time-multiplexed 3D display
system can be implemented.
However, some factors need to be considered with
the Wedge®. Ideally, the Wedge® needs to match the
projector optics. This is a bit difficult in practice, since
the projector optics is optimised for projection of the
micro-displays. However, a good result can be achieved
even without matching these two parts. In addition,
image distortions also arise due to the inherent
nonlinearities.

The advantage of this multi-view displays is that
viewers perceive a 3D image when both their eyes are
anywhere within the viewing zone. This type of display
accommodates multiple viewers, each viewer can see 3D
image from his or her own point of view. Looking
around objects in the scene simply requires moving the
viewer’s head. Head-tracking, with its associated
complexity and lag problem, is not required.

Fig. 3: Principle of the Optical Wedge®

6. Conclusions
This is an in-progress research project in University
of Cambridge based on the technology proposed in the
group. By using time-multiplexing approaches, this
system is a projection-based multi-view autostereoscopic
3D display system which is centred on three Texas
Instruments’ 0.7 XGA LCDS DMD chips which are used
for ultra-high frame rate data generation and delivery;
one for each colour (Red, Green, and Blue). Frame rate
is 1500 per second and resolution is 8 bits per colour.

The disadvantage of this multi-view displays
includes the difficulty of building a display with many
views, and the problem of generating all the views
simultaneously, because each view is always being
displayed, whether anyone is seeing that particular view
or not. Specially, it needs particular approach to generate
and deliver ultra-high frame rate data to meet the
demands of time-multiplexing, which is synchronised
with the sequential on-off switching of the ferroelectrics
liquid crystal shutters.
Future work includes overcoming the image
distortions in the optical Wedge®, increasing the number
of views, and optimising the position of the shutter in the
path of light modulation so as to reduce the size of the
ferroelectrics liquid crystal shutter, since it is a bit
difficult to manufacture large ferroelectrics liquid crystal
shutters.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

C. N. Moller and A. R. Travis, “Correcting Interperspective
Aliasing
in
Autostereoscopic
Displays,” IEEE Trans. On Visualization and
Computer Graphics, Vol.11, No.2, March/April
2005.
A. R. Travis, “The Display of Three-Dimensional
Video Images,” Proc. IEEE, Vol.85, pp. 18171832, Nov. 1997.
L. J. Hornbeck, “From Cathode Rays to Digital
Micro-mirrors: A History of Electronic Projection
Display Technology,” TI (Texas Instruments
Corp.) Technical Journal, July-Sept. 1998.
D. Dudley, W. Duncan and J. Slaughter,
“Emerging Digital Micro-mirror Device (DMD)
Applications,” TI (Texas Instruments Corp.) online
documents.
“DMD DiscoveryTM 1100 Controller Board &
Starter Kit,” TI (Texas Instruments Corp.) Products
documents.
“DMD DiscoveryTM 3000 Digital Controller,” TI
(Texas Instruments Corp.) Products documents.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[7]

O. Cossairt, C. Moller, A. Travis, and S. Benton,
“Novel View Sequential Display Based on DMD
Technology,” SPIE Proc. Stereoscopic Displays
and Virtual Reality Systems XI, Vol.5291, Jan.
2004.
[8] K. Perlin, S. Paxia and J. Kollin, “An
Autostereoscopic Display,” SIGGRAPH 2000
Conference Proceedings, New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA, July 23-38, 2000.
[9] A. R. Travis, “Autostereoscopic 3D Display,”
Applied Optics, Vol. 29, No. 29, Oct. 1990.
[10] N. A. Dodgson, “Autostereoscopic 3D Displays,”
Computer, Vol. 28, No. 8, August 2005.
[11] J. Y. Son and B. Javidi, “Three-Dimensional
Imaging Methods Based on Multiview Images,”
IEEE/OSA Journal of Display Technology, Vol. 1,
No.1, September 2005.
[12] P. May, “A Survey of 3D Display Technologies,”
Information Display, Vol.21, Nos. 3&4,
March/April 2005.

