Web 3D based dialogue for public participation and the VEPs Project
John Counsell, Steve Smith, Nadezda Bates-Brkljac
University of the West of England, Bristol,
{John.Counsell@uwe.ac.uk, [Steve Smith] gostudio@btinternet.com, Nadezda.Brkljac@uwe.ac.uk}
Abstract
It is becoming increasingly important to European
democratic governments to increase public participation.
One of the areas that gives rise to significant public
dissatisfaction and feelings of dis-empowerment is that of
local planning. “Not in my backyard” or ‘NIMBYism’ is
now often quoted as the almost automatic response to
local planning proposals. We argue that more effective
tools are required to clearly display local planning
proposals in web based interactive 3D, free at the point
of access. Initial workshops have shown that such tools
are only likely to be used if those so doing can influence
the outcome. Consensus needs to be obtained among a
broad group to exert strong influence. Tools are
therefore needed to share concerns, examine
alternatives,
and
propose
solutions
through
collaborative citizen based examination and discussion.
This paper describes the development and trialling
of prototype tools for this purpose in the Virtual
Environmental Planning System (VEPs) project. The
focus of this paper is on tools to support collaborative
dialogue and to draw attention to or to focus on specific
issues in a 3D web based interactive environment. The
issues may be presented synchronously in the form of
whiteboard conferencing, or asynchronously. Playback
facilities for previous synchronous discussion may be
useful as a record of points of agreement, and in this
respect require subsequent additional more expansive
description for full understanding by others. Similar
tools are required to support asynchronous debate. It is
suggested that effective, easy to use, to understand and
review records of synchronous exchanges of views or
tools for asynchronous discussion may need to create an
illustrated narrative, and in this respect adopt the readily
understood language of film.

1. Introduction
The goal of the project is that groups of citizens can
engage with each other, and possibly with 'experts', and
appraise planning proposals in a VR context virtually on
the web, sharing common interfaces and able to engage
in dialogue and draw attention to or focus on issues by
‘marking up’ points of concern or consensus. Beyond
this the project partners are developing tools to allow
these groups to collaboratively develop alternatives, and
to upload their own models or the modified models of
others into the same context for exploration.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

While the full project results are not expected until
2008 the first iteration of tools and tests with
collaborative discussion and comment on line by user
groups is beginning now. These results will then be used
to guide the refinement and further development of the
system.
Issues of verisimilitude in supporting effective
judgements in planning appraisal are discussed. For
example whether it is important that VR optimised for
the web tends to offer a less photo-realistic appearance
than CAD generated VR; when and how to express
uncertainty as part of a narrative; and to what extent
detail should be depicted. These suggest approaches to
navigating from one issue of concern to another, as part
of a narrative explanation of a point of view, during a
web based collaborative discussion. Within this
discussion it is suggested that the form of representation
in itself constitutes an important element of the dialogue.

In the VEPs ePlanner toolset, invoking the
comment tool captures the viewport (camera)
coordinates, and stores them for retrieval with
the comment.

2. VEPs
VEPs, the ‘Virtual Environmental Planning System’,
is an Interreg IIIB funded European project focused on
the North West Europe region.[1] The project began in
late 2005 and runs until December 2007. It brings
together partners from the UK, Germany and France,
with skills in geographic visualisation and spatial

planning. VEPs has received additional support from the
UK government as a potential contribution to its ePlanning programme. VEPs aims to develop a common
and transferable web based visualisation system that
enables citizens to view, analyse, interact with and
respond to proposed changes, to collaborate and
comment together and pose and test their own alternative
solutions. To increase participation it is considered
essential that it be free at the point of use, so it will make
use of the web and open source tools. It is intended to
test this system in different demonstration case studies.
The project is thus expected to improve future public
participation procedures on planning strategies and
development proposals by making planning information
more accessible and easier to understand for the general
public, while at the same time facilitating the decisionmaking structures of planning authorities. The proposed
approach is to use an interactive three-dimensional (3D)
virtual reality (VR) visualisation that it is suggested
should enable the viewer to grasp highly complex
information without the need for training, because users
can see and experience both the visual impacts of the
planned development and judge the environmental
impact in associated (GIS based) simulations. A process
of iterative testing by user groups and iterative
refinement is being used to ensure that the final outcome
meets user needs, based on the Experience and
Application Research (EAR) Methodology advocated by
ISTAG. [2]

3. Computer Generated Visualisation
Architecture in general has been greatly influenced
by computer technologies such as computer-aided design
(CAD) software packages. In parallel Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) have been extensively
developed with urban planning as a major area of
application. There is research that now indicates that
these recent moves towards computer generated
visualisation models reflect the acknowledgement that
conventional
techniques
fail
to
communicate
environmental information either effectively or clearly.
Pietch goes on to say that with “increasing participation
of non-design professionals such as elected council
members and members of the public, the demand is there
for a better communication medium than conventional
2D drawings”. [3]
The importance of visualisation is being recognised
as crucial for almost all environmental and planning
professionals who need to represent, communicate and
evaluate design ideas and planning proposals.[4] In
addition however according to Sawczuk “the design and
planning process revolves around client’s needs and
therefore the client should be part of the team…”[5] It is
thus significant that his findings revealed that while
skilled participants appreciate traditional media, such as
outline drawings, unskilled participants prefer more
photographic representation. Similarly, it has been
reported that when lay-people are exposed to architects’

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

drawings the “plans had little meaning as the people
could not understand what was represented”.[6]
Some research suggests that three-dimensional and
interactive computer visualisation (based on using 3D
VRML in research into community based 'planning for
real') is one of the “most important developments in
visual communication for urban planning and urban
design since the development plan” [7] [8]. Kaplan and
Kaplan argue that “a simplified model is more likely to
parallel people’s cognitive structure. Hence the very
simplicity of the model may encourage its use. A
simplified model also encourages generality; details
make things particular, thus narrowing their range of
appropriateness. Finally, simplification reduces the total
load to one’s processing” [9]. This is an area that needs
more research to establish when it is appropriate to
simplify, by how much to simplify while retaining
verisimilitude, and how reliable are the consequent
judgements.
“The basic goal of realistic rendering is to create
images perceptually indistinguishable from real scenes.
Since the human observer judges the fidelity and quality
of the resulting images, the perceivable differences
between the appearance of a computer graphics image
and its real world counterpart should be minimised.
Thus, visual perception issues are clearly involved.”[10]
We would in contrast endorse the view that “reality is
complicated and messy. Rather than realism, what is
more often desired is verisimilitude. We want the
appearance of reality which has been organized and
structured to make its meaning clearer, if necessarily
more limited than the infinite complexity of reality.”[10]
Santella and DeCarlo [11] also justify the use of
abstraction in non-photo-realistic representations based
on experiments with eye tracking data. They found that
viewers tend to spend more time looking at regions that
have been abstracted less in artistic renderings, which
suggests that abstraction can be used as one means of
ordering and structuring, for example to guide attention
to more ‘important’ regions of an image.[12]
Boyd Davis et al state that “the construction of
Virtual Realities should be seen as an intentional activity,
based on thoughtful well-informed and inventive
decision-making. It is a design process in the best and
broadest sense of the term….the decisions in that design
process should ultimately be based on effectiveness. All
the decisions made can be evaluated by asking: will this
project, in this form, achieve the desired result?”[13]
Most of the research in this area of VR is focused on
metrics for comparing ‘realism’ against reality, by
contrast we are more concerned with the consistency of
the planning appraisal judgement from the time of
experiencing the VR representation to the moment of
confrontation with the built outcome. If the ‘unskilled’
user is shocked, when they finally sees the built result of
the planned proposal that they evaluated, then the earlier
VR representation clearly lacked verisimilitude. By
which time it is too late!

4. Verisimilitude versus Photo-realism
It is recognised that VR optimised for the web tends
to offer a less photo-realistic appearance than that of
CAD generated 3D models and what is known as highend or immersive VR. However this is not necessarily an
issue since it is questionable whether endorsable
decisions are enhanced by photo-realism, because there
is some evidence that photo-realistic representations tend
to be seen as already built and thus to some extent not
open to debate. “The relevance to VR is that, like most
computer representations, Virtual Environments and
Virtual Objects have a precision and a finality which
may be difficult to resist - the ‘real presence' which is
one of their strengths could, used inappropriately, be
their weakness.”[13]
This implies the possibility of expressing the degree
of contrast between alternative proposals intended for
debate by increasingly non-photo-realistic and thus
‘uncertain’ representations. “As long as the guiding
image is still developing it remains tentative, generic,
vague…This vagueness however is by no means a
negative quality. The sketch stands for a whole range of
possibilities without being tangibly committed to any one
of them.”[13] It is also suggested that a scene will often
contain a fixed and unchallengeable context that should
therefore remain represented in a photo-realistic manner.
Therefore we suggest that it would be useful to distort
part only of a photo realistic VR scene to draw attention
to specific less certain and more challengeable
proposals.[14]
Boyd Davis et al go on to state that “Distortion is a
loaded word. It implies falsehood. We think we know the
difference between a visually distorted and an
undistorted image. However, distortion' can be a more
subtle affair, which assists rather than impedes the user's
experience…A crude example from this century would
be the use of selective focussing to take in and out of
attention different parts of a movie scene, perhaps
pulling focus' from one character's face to another's.”[13]
It is not surprising that this juxtaposition of perhaps
uncertain ‘model’ superimposed on ‘real’ context has
long been effectively used in planning appraisal in the
form of photo-montage.
It is suggested that photo-realistic representation is
one part of a spectrum that can itself be used to express
the views of someone engaged in collaborative
discussion. To convey their view that one option is
‘better’ than another, the user could rank the options
through the assigned representation. Users should thus be
able to contrast photo-real representation at will with a
range of other representation techniques, more graphic or
more cartoon like.
It is also an issue as to whether over much detail acts
as a distraction to focused decision making at early
proposal stages when it is more important to assess a
range of potential interpretations, such as the alternative
3D ‘massing’ of building proposals. However there is the
opposing issue that an absence of detail that is implicit in
the real end result presents a misleading interpretation of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

the relationship between the potential building and its
context. Detail can be shown to underpin judgements
about relative size. Hence in the original Exmoor
National Park Design Guide of 1979 [15] it was
suggested that in order to reduce the apparent impact of
large agri-sheds in the landscape, details such as doors,
windows, guttering and downpipes should all be of
exaggerated dimensions. They would it was suggested
then look like much smaller (and thus less intrusive)
buildings closer to the viewer.
Consequently it may be thought that judgements
formed on the basis of for example generalised building
blocks that lack detail may thus lack verisimilitude and
hence be flawed. Little research has yet been found that
addresses these issues or that establishes how citizens
can make reliable informed decisions at an early stage in
the planning process to establish acceptable ‘fuzzy’
templates that positively establish the bounds of
acceptability, rather than merely reacting to detailed
proposals.
There has been much research on the issues of
navigation and wayfinding in virtual spaces. This paper
is not seeking to address this. It is however examining
some approaches to navigating from one issue of concern
to another. It is suggested that these are complex
problems without easy or ready-made solutions. In these
circumstances it may necessary to permit the user to
select the mode of representation that the user considers
best fits their needs, to encourage exploration of multiple
modes of representation, and to facilitate multiple means
of navigating from one point of concern or issue to
another. The VEPs project is seeking to define a spatially
referenced comment or dialogue ‘markup’ language that
enables comments to be viewed via different interfaces.

4. VEPs research methodology
The VEPS project is researching the extent to which
users, who make decisions together about proposals for
change of mutual concern in a digital environment,
endorse those decisions when they are confronted by the
final built outcome. The EAR methodology is being used
to work with groups of users, in order to lead to user
engagement in the research process and to user driven
optimisation of the final system. Initial workshops have
been held in the UK, France and Germany, focused on
Planners, Architects, Citizens and Politicians, and invited
open discussion about needs and issues. The workshops
have identified among others the following requirements
for collaborative use of such a system, that it should
facilitate:
x free access to tools and data to ensure that it is
available for all;
x the visual representation of comments /objections;
x search functions and queries;
x users enabled to set their own visualisation
preferences;
x public participation with optional playback of the
complete argumentation chain or just with results;

x

interaction with other users and particularly with
decision makers;
x tools for leaving comments; rating / ranking
comments; peer group moderation of commenting;
replying to comments;
x the freedom to choose and explore different options.
It was particularly stressed that while use of the system
may possibly be facilitated by decision makers, it must
be seen as independent / unbiased.
Based on analysis of the outcomes of these
workshops tools are being developed to enable an initial
asynchronous collaborative discussion by these groups,
together with facilities to add comments and mark-up to
3D visualisation. Work tools have been prototyped to
examine how citizens can upload their own modelling
into this context for exploration of 'what-if' alternatives
without requiring explicit CAD skills, and to share their
modelling with others, or to download and modify
modelling by others, before sharing it in further
discussion. These will where possible be based upon
existing digital city or countryside modelling in the
VRML or emerging X3D international standards. One
approach under development is to enable comments and
markup to be appended as if overlaid on the viewport.
This is similar to the work undertaken by M.C.
Stellingwerff in his research with Dutch Architects.[16]
In considering how users may effectively objectively
rank order alternatives to arrive at a measurable
consensus a range of alternative approaches may be used
from ‘contingent valuation’[17] to ‘Kansei engineering’,
a technique that “involves determining which sensory
attributes elicit particular subjective responses from
people and then designing a product using the attributes
that elicit the desired responses.” [18]

The comments typed in the box below the
view of the scene are uploaded with a link to
that view, by clicking the submit button

5. Retrieving information such as comments
The focus of these tools is on the real-time
interactive use of a credibly representative VRML or

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

X3D based urban model as an early design stage
planning appraisal system, based on an underlying
database of spatially referenced information. Searching
such a model for existing non-visual information such as
comments has been handled in various ways. A simple
approach to associating comments with objects that are
the subject of discussion in the web VR scene, such as
for example buildings, building detail, or street furniture,
involves attaching a hyperlink to the geometric object
that invokes the comment. The simplest form of retrieval
of hyperlinked comments in conjunction with objects is
that later users ‘discover’ the hyperlinks through
interactive exploration, clicking on each object that
engages interest in order to invoke the page of
information or commentary associated with it.
Refinements of this approach require the cluttering of the
field of view via floating labels or spurious objects
(similar to the heads of 3D map pins). These may be
(semi-)permanent or invoked as the result of a specific
search.
The issue remains of how to draw the users’
attention (while absorbed by interaction with or
immersed in VR urban space) to unknown information,
or to desired information that is related to a place or
location that is not known but is in the neighbourhood.
There remains a need to identify more effective means of
drawing the eye and the attention of the viewer
simultaneously to multiple objects of interest in the
credible urban scene, without discarding that very
credibility in the process. While the subjects of a specific
search could also cause parts of the web VR model to be
false coloured, high-lighted, or otherwise distorted to
attract attention, this will tend to obscure the very
portions of the image to which attention is desirably
drawn.[19] We would argue that an outcome that
obscures or clutters the field of view is undesirable,
since a particular value of such models is held to be the
convincing sense of presence that they convey, and that
the filmic technique of selective focus accentuating
objects of interest is perhaps more appropriate.
There may in these circumstances need also to be a
more effective means of drawing attention to each
instance in the scene. Currently there seems to be an
implicit assumption that so few coincidences are
discovered between search pattern and match that the
viewer will recognise them. In the Valhalla Project [20]
led by UWE, Bristol a VRML server application was
developed to search the spatial information database for
instances of desired objects based on search terms typed
into the web interface. Instigating a search in the
database could reference multiple instances of the same
plant or other object within or outside the visible VRML
scene. It was possible to return search parameters that
restricted the field of view to a focus on each instance in
turn, and this formed a visual sequence that tended to
create a filmic narrative, although more work would have
been desirable on scripting rules that gave a sense of
order to the seemingly randomly chosen sequence.

6. Narrative and storytelling
Many design practices produce video from their 3D
modelling to ‘sell’ their proposed new building or
planning schemes. The asynchronous process that they
use to create photo-realistic video from CAD 3D is
filmic. The techniques of film making from storyboard to
script and editing are entirely applicable to this
process[21]. The success of the resulting video sequence
also depends on the strength of the underlying narrative,
which is therefore likely to be more loaded towards one
application or outcome rather than any others. While
this approach is appropriate for an architectural practice
wishing to publish its proposals in the best possible light
to client or the public it consequently restricts a broader
collaborative engagement in that design or the unbiased
evaluation of alternatives. In a VR environment it is still
possible to tell stories in a similar manner, but users can
also freely take control and choose their own viewpoints
and explore new paths and routes.
Peters states that the camera is the user's viewpoint,
it only becomes 'significative' when it is shown to
explain information to others. [22]. One important aspect
of being able to explain or tell a story remotely while
using web based VR is a facility with which to take
control of someone else's browser and show them the
view that you wish them to see. In VR generally there
have been various attempts to insert a virtual guide into
the scene, but even on expensive high-end systems these
have often seemed statue like and lacking in animation.
Until these problems can be overcome in web based VR
palettes of more abstract tools such as laser-pointers or
selective perhaps focus related ‘search lights’ are needed.
In this manner these tools become a mediator between
the local user and the scene being viewed. These
‘abstract Avatar tools’ ought to enable the viewer take a
look through the eyes of the remote ‘narrator’, or be used
for example in the guise of a 'Spectacle de Son et
Lumière.'
There is also an implicit assumption in much VR
that movement is linear and corresponds with movement
in the real world. In the film world Eisenstein described
as long ago as 1946 those non linear conventions
developed to tell effective stories and to draw attention,
using a filmic visual language that is now accepted by
the film and TV viewing public world wide. An example
is that of montage - the juxtaposition of shots as opposed
to sequential procession - through editing, authoring or
interaction.[23] Such a narrative juxtaposition may form
an acceptable alternative in those situations where a
single wide angle view cannot serve, however
automating a technique of generating a filmic and
therefore ‘acceptable’ series of montage shots of an
urban model in VRML would be in itself a demanding
task. Similarly Boyd Davis et al suggest that “In place of
time-delays arising from the accidents of place, we could
use time-delays as an analogue of other qualities, for
example the remoteness of one idea (as embodied by an
object, building, etc.) from another.”[13]

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

In the VEPs project attempts to create and explore
tools to generate an asynchronous narrative description
of one persons appraisal of a scheme, or of a series of
alternate proposals, for later review by other
collaborators, are at an early and fairly crude stage.
However workshops to evaluate these prototype tools are
commencing shortly for which the results will be
available before the IV conference itself takes place.
These results will also guide the further development of
the tools over the next year and a half.

The comments of others can be retrieved with
their modelling, clicking on the comment
buttons on the right invokes each view in turn,
forming the basis of a narrative explanation of
the originators ‘point of view’

Conclusions
It is argued that replication on the web of existing
plan and cartographic-based approaches to planning will
tend to perpetuate the requirement for trained
interpretation, thereby excluding the general public.
Effective tools are held to be required for collaborative
citizen based examination and development of
alternative proposals. This paper has described the basis
on which the VEPs project is seeking to establish a new
open standard web VR approach to enable citizens to
view, analyse, interact with and respond to proposed
changes, to collaborate and comment together and pose
and test their own alternative solutions.
The
visualisation also needs to support easy to use upload of
citizens own models, and to provide extensive support
for shared comment and debate.
It is suggested that user choice from a variety of
forms of representation are needed both for narrative
description, for expressing certainty or uncertainty, and
for drawing attention to or focusing on issues of concern.
Just as it is clear that unskilled users are more
comfortable with ‘realistic’ images than with drawings,
so it is suggested that they are likely to be most
comfortable with the language of film, deployed in a
familiar way in the medium of VR. Thus the emerging

comment / dialogue markup language being developed in
VEPs may in due course resemble an instruction set for a
‘robot’ cameraman.
Finally it is suggested that much more research is
required into the area of verisimilitude for which it is
suggested that the ‘Occam’s razor’ judgement is whether
or not the viewer holds to the same view when they
experience the final built result that they formed from the
VR based visual representations. It is increasingly
important to determine how the model can be effectively
simplified to draw attention to, or express a bandwidth of

References
[1] www.veps3d.org Virtual Environmental Planning system
,funded Dec 2004 to 2007, by INTERREG IIIB NWE-ENO
(a Community Initiative Programme funded by the
European Regional Development Fund www.nweurope.org
)
[2] ISTAG Report on Experience and Application Research
“Involving Users in the Development of Ambient
Intelligence” http://www.cordis.lu/ist/istag.htm
[3] Pietch S.M. (2000) Computer visualisation in the design
control of urban environments: a literature review,
Environment and Planning : Planning and Design, volume
21, pp 521-536
[4] McKechnie, G. E.( 1997) Simulation techniques in
environmental psychology in Stokols, D.(ed.) Psychological
perspectives in environment and behaviour, Plenum
Publishing Corp. New York,
[5] Sawczuk, B (1992) The management of the design process,
in Nicholson, M. (ed) Architectural management, E&FN
Spon, London, pp 84-89
[6] Harrlichack M.A, (1993) The effect of rendering
technologies on the evaluation of computer generated design
simulation, Master thesis, College of Env. Science and
Forestry, State University of New York, Syracuse, NY
[7] Smith., A.H. et al. (1998) Visual communication in
urban planning and urban design, Paper 2, Online
Planning Journal , http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk
[8] Shiode, N.(2001) 3D Urban models: recent developments in
the digital modeling of urban environments in
threedimensions, GeoJournal 52, pp263-269
[9] Kaplan R. and Kaplan S. (1983) Cognition and the
environment, Preager, New York, USA
[10] Santella, A. (2005) The Art Of Seeing: Visual Perception
In Design And Evaluation Of Non-Photorealistic Rendering.
Doctoral Dissertation, Graduate School—New Brunswick
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey.
http://www.research.rutgers.edu/~asantell/thesis.pdf
[11] Santella, A. DeCarlo, D. (2004) Visual Interest and NPR:
An Evaluation and Manifesto. In NPAR ’04: Proceedings
of the 3rd International Symposium on Non-Photorealistic
Animation and Rendering, pages 71–150. ACM Press, 2004.
[12] Kolliopoulos, A, (2005) Image Segmentation for Stylized
Non-Photorealistic Rendering and Animation. MSc thesis.
Graduate Department of Computer Science University of
Toronto. http://www.dgp.toronto.edu/~alexk/kolliopoulosthesis2005.pdf
[13] Boyd Davis, S. et al. (1996) ‘The Design of Virtual
Environments with particular reference to VRML’ published
by the JISC Advisory Group on Computer Graphics in the
UK.
http://www.agocg.ac.uk/reports/virtual/vrmldes/vrmldes.pdf

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

uncertainty, a ‘fuzzy’ template within which any
outcome will be judged acceptable, without sacrificing
verisimilitude, and so inducing what are later found to
have been flawed judgements.

Acknowledgements
The project work presented in this paper is co-financed
through the INTERREG IIIB North West Europe
programme.

[14] Appleton, K. and Lovett, A. (2003) GIS-based
visualisation of rural landscapes: defining 'sufficient'
realism for environmental decision-making, Landscape
and Urban Planning, v.65, issue 3, pp117-131
[15] ENP Design Guide (1979) published by the National Park
Authority.www.exmoornationalpark.gov.uk/index/learning_about/learning_publicati
ons.htm
[16] Stellingwerff M.C. (2005) Virtual Context - investigating
the characteristics and opportunities of digital visualisation
media for situated approaches to architectural design in an
urban environment. Doctoral Thesis at Technische
Universiteit
Eindhoven
on
line
at
http://www.bk.tudelft.nl/users/stelling/internet/thesis/stellin
gwerff_thesis.pdf
[17] O'Doherty, R. (1996) ‘Using Contingent Valuation to
Enhance Public Participation in Local Planning’ - Regional
Studies - Taylor & Francis
[18] Mania, A. (2001) ‘Fidelity Metrics for Virtual
Environment Simulations based on Human Judgements of
Spatial Memory Awareness
States’ Doctoral Thesis
University of Bristol, Dept of Computer Science.
http://www.sussex.ac.uk/Users/km3/thesis_complete.pdf
[19] Counsell, J. (2003) ‘Pointing the finger; a role for hybrid
representations in VR and video?’ in IV03 7th Intl
Conference on Information Visualisation London, edited by
Banissi et al, published by the IEEE Computer Soc. Los
Alamitos California. Pp xxxx
[20] The Valhalla Project EC - IST-2000-28541.
http://environment.uwe.ac.uk/valhalla
[21] Phillips,R., Counsell, J, (1996) 'A procedural approach to
simplification of detailed 3D cityscape models for Virtual
Reality' in proceedings of the JEC-GI'96 joint european
conference on geographical information, Barcelona,
published by IOS Press, Amsterdam.
[22] Peters JM. (1981) 'Pictorial Signs and the Language of
Film'Amsterdam : Rodopi.
[23] Eisenstein, S. (1946) ‘The Film Sense’ Harcourt Brace &
co.

