Multivariate Relational Visualization of Complex Clinical Datasets in a Critical
Care Setting: A Data Visualization Interactive Prototype
Anthony Faiola, Simon Hillier
School of Informatics and School of Medicine, Indiana University
afaiola@iupui.edu, shillie@iupui.edu
Abstract
One mission of medical informatics is to provide
physicians, nurses, and other health care providers with the
technology and tools for interpreting large and diverse data
sets, so that appropriate critical care decisions can be
facilitated. Ideally, medical data visualization provides the
means to transform data into information and contextual
knowledge suitable for interpretation and decision-making
[31, 9]. The authors propose a model through which data is
organized into multivariate multidimensional critical care
patient data visualizations (CPDV). It does this as the
primary means to represent and manage complex contextbased patient data at various user-defined temporal
resolutions. Furthermore, user-defined spatial organization
of multiple (clinically related) datasets allows rapid
visualization of significant trends that are related to several
co-variables. Currently, anticipated findings from usability
testing support the notion that the proposed model will
facilitate medical decision making in a critical care
environment.
Keywords—Medical data, visualization, humancomputer interaction, multivariate, multidimensional,
health care.

1. Introduction
The intensive care unit (ICU) is a data rich
environment. By definition, ICU patients have significant
organ system derangement and have very little physiologic
reserve. Optimal medical care requires intensive monitoring
of organ function, frequent multimodal diagnostic testing,
and many consultations from subspecialty physicians and
other health care providers. In this kind of a critical care
environment, it is often difficult to make rapid evaluations
of a patient's condition because of the overwhelming
volume of data that is continuously generated. Sources of
patient-generated data include continuous automatic
physiologic monitoring and intermittently determined data
that is gathered by bedside care providers and from various
diagnostic testing sources. In addition to patient-generated
data, there are vast arrays of clinical data generated that
document the treatment that is received by the patient. This
data includes drug therapy, respiratory therapy, physical
therapy and all other clinical interventions [16].

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The best clinical decisions pertaining to the care of
these patients are made when physicians can easily organize
and understand the vast flood of data from these various
sources.1 Unfortunately, physicians and other health care
staff have to retrieve this critical data from multiple
locations and organize it into a cohesive profile of the
patient’s current condition. Furthermore, the data that is
retrieved from these diverse sources is usually presented in
a form that does not allow trends and relationships between
co-variables to be immediately recognized. To make the
situation worse, critical care physicians (CCP) work in a
highly stressful environment and are usually pressed for
time, frequently looking after several critically ill patients.
As a result, the process of monitoring, evaluating and
treating complex medical problems is labor intensive and
time-consuming; it demands that physicians analyze data in
text and numeric form. Although the monitoring devices of
a modern ICU are intended to support the instantaneous
recognition of problems, only a limited amount of past data
can be reviewed on the monitor itself. For example,
although current monitoring devices, such as HP’s CareVue
9000, maintains a comprehensive log of a patient’s entire
critical care period, its output is in conventional spreadsheet
form, with, at best, a few parameters displayed as X-Y
plots.
Medical data visualization (MDV) can provide
valuable assistance for data analysis and decision making
for critical care physicians (CCPs). How CCPs perceive and
interact with patient data can affect their ability to arrive at
the best critical care solution. As seen with the earliest
visualizations of computerized tomography data, the
medical field has provided excellent opportunities for the
application of data visualization technology with the
potential to help improve healthcare that can improve
health-related outcomes [33]. In a real-life critical care
context , the clinical decision making process should always
be supported by relevant and reliable clinical data [2]. In
1 The primary sources of data include: Bedside physiologic
monitoring devices (at least 6 physiologic parameters),Ventilator (6 15 parameters plus flow loop display) Laboratory data (at least 25
parameters), Radiology (x-ray imaging and text dictation of
interpretations), Nursing records (vital signs, nursing progress notes,
patient care documentation), anesthetic records, surgical procedure
notes, physical therapy, respiratory therapy, social work, dietician,
clinical pharmacist, chaplains text entries, subspecialty consult notes,
and previous medical history and old clinic data.

this case, the use of MDV can be considered a data analysis
method in which physicians are able to select the relevant
variables to model and decide on representation or encoding
of factors to better obtain the analysis results and draw
conclusions [2].
In sum, because of large datasets of different forms and
sources of data, CCP`s find it difficult and cumbersome to
make rapid critical evaluations of a patient’s condition.
What CCP`s need is an integrated platform through which
data can be organized into a uniform multivariate and
multidimensional data visualization as the primary means to
represent and manage complex patient critical care data.
This includes an intuitive human-computer interaction
(HCI) that allows access to various time resolutions and
subsets of patient data, with control at each level of detail,
presented in a manner that allows the examination of past
events and trends and enables the physician to explore their
relationship to the current clinical status.
The authors propose a critical care data visualization
(CPDV) model that is currently being developed and tested
at the Indiana University School of Informatics and School
of Medicine (IUPUI). The unit will provide a way of
integrating quantitative and qualitative data that is encoded
by a display with the capability for output in various
visualization formats (e.g., PDF) and on a range of devices
including computer displays, printers, cell phones, and
specialty devices.

2. Background
Most data visualization research has centered on
personal medical histories. As Plaisant et al. [23] suggested,
medical records can be highly complex with data intervals
ranging from minutes to decades. They also noted that
clinical data can be divided into a range of scalable values
for simplicity of interpretation in which critical events can
be viewed relative to a patient’s past and current status.
Plaisant et al. and other earlier attempts at data tracking
systems for personal and biographical histories used an
intuitive approach to visualizing histories with graphical
time scales [12, 34, 4].
The development of medical computing has evolved
over four decades with considerable progress in the areas of
interactive computer-based clinical record systems for the
practitioner and data visualization for medical and science
researchers [37, 36]. Needs among practitioners have been in
the area of both longitudinal and contemporaneous data to
better support clinical epidemiology, risk management, and
critical care assessment. Applications of computing power
have provided those involved with advances in medical data
analysis. Nevertheless, there has been limited success in
longitudinal patient data tracking (comprehensive record
systems) because of the multiple sources and complexity of
data. Health care professionals have complained about the
lack of a well-organized, comprehensive, and easy-to-use
patient record system. Even more problematic has been the
lack of success in capturing relational or context-based data
that would allow physicians to expedite an immediate
comparative analysis during a patient episode in a critical
care setting.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Moreover, other problems have been identified that
encumber physicians ability to acquire, record, and organise
patient care data efficiently. Many of the issues have
concerned the interaction design of graphical user interfaces
of medical data visualization products. Yoder [36] suggests
that the earliest computerized medical information systems
were designed primarily to improve qualitative services to
patients by providing some meaningful data to aid in the
prognosis and treatment of disease.
Since the 1970s, a small number of scholars and
researchers [33, 28, 27, 7, 8, 6] have been developing
techniques of visual representation using primarily twodimensional (statistic-based) forms, with only a few
hundred data points (with mostly black to white values).
The first stage of exploratory data analysis [33, 15] dealt
with either one or two variate data, in two-dimensional plots
with which scientists were able to encode data with multiple
parameters or multidimensional data points. Tukey’s data
analysis technique signified the beginning of a new trend in
scientific visualization, in which anyone could visually
decode information more efficiently from data in real time.
Of course, the availability of high resolution color displays
and proprietary software gave way to the study of
multidimensional multivariate (MDMV) data visualization.
MDMV is a sub-field of scientific visualization that deals
with the analysis of data with multiple parameters and key
relationships among them [35].
The evolution of data visualization was seen at the
1987 NSF workshop on Visualization in Scientific
Computing [20] and the IEEE Visualization 1991
conference [22], which became a watershed event defining
the next two major stages in the discipline. Wong and
Bergeron (1997) state that during this next stage, “two and
three-dimensional spatial data were the most common data
types being studied, although multivariate data started
gaining more attention” (p. 4).
Our proposed visualization method is an off-shoot of
these techniques, whereby correlations are shown between
variants, using 1) points and lines to generate a scatter-plot
matrix, and 2) a reference grid to better facilitate data point
location [10]. However, CPDV is both multivariate and
multidimensional. Multivariate refers to the dimensionality
of the dependent variables, while multidimensional refers to
the dimensionality of the independent variables and the
study of relationships among multiple (dependent and
independent) parameters (factors) [3, 18].

3. Human-Computer Interaction and
Cognitive Theory
Human-computer interaction theory and practice can play a
significant part in the creation of MDV tools and visual
systems that can support physician decision making [26].
Theories on cognition and perception provide system
designers with an understanding of information processing
[13, 14]. This is important, because the science and craft of
designing interaction behaviors for MDV systems continues
to be a daunting task for software developers.
Some of the earliest research in cognitive psychology
research showed that visualizations enhanced problem

solving capabilities by processing information that is
unidimensional or multidimensional [1, 25]. Because the
mind is not adept at processing large sums of data, it prefers
to simplify complex information into patterns or
configurations that are much easier for it to assimilate [24].
For example, in Miller’s [21] early work in three
dimensions and color, he concluded that “the span of
absolute judgment and the span of immediate memory
impose severe limitations on the amount of information that
we are able to receive, process, and remember” (p. 97). His
work contributed to our current understanding of how to
organize stimuli into chunks to decrease the “informational
bottleneck” (p. 97). This addresses the specific problem of
the limits on human information perception when
attempting to understanding complex multivariate data; a
technique for filtering large data sets to better serve
cognitive strategizing and data comprehension. This process
would provide for an explicit attempt to preserve dataset
relationships and therefore allow for an easier deciphering
of data [10].
Kosslyn [19] also concurs that images provide a better
means than words for expressing subtle spatial, color, or
textural relations. Dreyfus [11] stated that this is because of
the brain’s ability to store dense amounts of visual
information, while escaping the limits of text or numbers.
Most importantly, empirical findings have shown that
properly designed visualizations have the potential to give a
clear picture at a glance. This is because the laws of
semantic configuration must be learned, but images provide
automatic comparisons and obvious relationships [5]. Using
cognitive fit theory, Vessey [32] attempted to illustrate the
process of problem-solving as an outcome of the
relationship between representing and solving a problem.
Thus, there must be a match between the problem
representation and the task in order to enhance decisionmaking [32]. Kellen [17] continues this notion by stating
that visualizations are the best fit for spatial or relational
tasks where value interpolation or perceiving relationships
of data are used. Therefore, when developing visualizations
of complex and multivariate data, the designer should give
full attention to the tasks performed by the decision-maker
to optimize the solution.
Tufte’s [29] model, although not multivariate or
multidimensional, is one example of an attempt at
consolidating, integrating, and visualizing a broad array of
data. Unfortunately, little is known of the impact of his
models in the real world, because of a lack of empirical
data.

4. The Critical Care Patient Data
Visualization System
The goal of the proposed computer-based critical care
patient data visualization system (CPDV) is to collect online
and manually entered data within a specified time frame and
then to push the data to a visualizer engine for online graphic
representation. Using CPDV, data visualization can assist
physicians to assess a specific situation of a patient quickly by
recognizing essential changes to multiple physiological
readings over a designated time frame. Using selection

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

menus, physicians control the necessary data sources, time
periods, and time resolutions to narrow down their diagnosis
and final assessment of a patient’s condition. Using the
CPDV, physicians are able to focus on the most relevant
parameters for characterizing a patient’s critical state at that
moment.

Figure 1. MDV designed by Edward R. Tufte. The larger
illustration on the top explains the meaning of the
components [29, p. 110-111].

4.1. Rational for Maximizing User Interface
Control of Context-Related Data
The CPDV user interface has been designed to
maximize the clinicians’ ability to control what data is
visualized during a specific context-related patient
episode or general periodic review. Achieving a degree
of control to scrutinize relational data in a multivariate
visualization is imperative for physicians (See Figure 2).
For example, a child who has recently undergone
cardiac surgery may experience instability of the
cardiovascular system. When an anesthesiologist or
cardiovascular surgeon is asked to evaluate that patient
for cardiovascular instability, they will need to review
particular datasets in order to understand the current
clinical situation. However, a nephrologist (kidney
specialist) who is asked to review the same patient,
because of concerns about the function of the kidney,
will review a somewhat different clinical dataset. In both
cases it is important that the clinician have data presented
in a way that clearly displays the relationship between
important variables. In current practice, it is uncommon
to present “treatment data” (e.g., drug doses, ventilator
settings) adjacent to “response data” (e.g., heart rate and
other physiologic data).
We propose that clinical data be presented in a
“context-related” fashion. In this way, the response to
interventions can be readily visualized. Data should be
grouped according to its relevance to the particular
clinical problem rather than according to its source (See
Figure 2). Clearly, the process of presenting or
visualizing data should be customizable. An
anesthesiologist will have different data visualization
priorities than a nephrologist. Similarly, a child who has
undergone cardiac surgery will have (in most cases)
different data presentation requirements than a 70-yearold man who has an acute exacerbation of chronic
respiratory disease. Thus, data presentation can be
tailored to the patient, the disease, the consulting
specialty, or the acute medical problem under analysis at
any point in critical care.

visualized. Because the purpose of the CPDV is only to
show a patient’s recent history, the CCP can only view a
maximum of 11 days. Each day is divided into 3 hour
increments by default, but the CCP must still indicate which
hours of those days are to be examined. Once the day and
hours are selected, the CCP must decide whether to view
the MDV in increments of 30 minutes, 15 minutes, 1
minute, or 30 seconds (see Figure 3).
Figure 4 shows three examples of the CPDV interface.
The full interface consists of the patient’s profile on the top
with the data visualization on the bottom. The illustration
shows the interface with the control panel and visualization
underneath. The middle illustration shows the full size of
one visualization after activating the control panel. The
bottom illustration shows the reduced size of five data
visualization so a CCP can view them relationally.
Individual visualization can be dragged and dropped at
arbitrary positions to rapidly compare patient data.

Figure 3. Illustration of MDV control panel with two primary
tabs to indicate seven data sources and multiple variables of
data resolution for the visualization.

5. Methodology
5.1. Subjects
Figure 2. Five relational critical care datasets from a fictitious
clinical scenario. Physicians view this data using CPDV when
asked to resolve acute problems.

Twenty senior anesthesia residents from the Indiana
University School of Medicine participated in the study.
The 20 were split into 2 test groups.

4.2. The CPDV Interface
5.2. Treatment
CPDV uses a data visualization system that allows a
multivariate and relational (multi-data-source) display to
present the contextual change in the patient’s status over
pre-selected periods of time resolutions. A multivariate
comparative analysis is vital in a relational diagnosis to
observe the interrelated effects and interactions of
physiological conditions. Each visualization displays the
selected critical care data parameter from each bedside
monitoring device with hyperlinks to manually-entered data
from each healthcare practitioner.
Figure 3 shows the control interfaces. The CCP must
first select the data source tab to select (check) which of the
types of datasets are required for the relational analysis (e.g.,
Ca, iNO, or CO2). Once these are selected the physician
uses the data resolution tab to indicate the time period to be

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The study included the design of preliminary MDV
prototypes as solutions to fictitious clinical data provided by
CCP at Indiana University School of Medicine (See Figure
2). The 20 residents were divided into two groups. Each
group was given the same clinical scenario (see below) and
then given nine questions to answer. However, group one
was asked to answer the nine questions using the traditional
form of medical data (in the form of numeric-based charts)
to resolve the problems outlined in the scenario. Individuals
from group two were asked to answer the nine questions
using the MDV prototypes as their only source of critical
care information. Individuals from both groups were timed
to see how long was required to respond to each critical care
question. Part two of the study consisted of a post-test

questionnaire, which was completed while comparing the
traditional form of data visualization with the newly
developed MDV prototypes. Further inquiry in part two was
necessary to determine which form of visualization enabled
the participants to resolve the clinical scenario most rapidly.

acute deterioration in the patient’s condition. The bedside
nurse states that the patient’s mean arterial pressure (ABP)
and mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) have declined
and the mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) has
increased over the past 15 minutes. Review the attached
trend graphics and answer the following questions.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

What is the current ventilator rate (RR)?
What was the mixed venous oxygen saturation at noon
yesterday?
When did the pulmonary artery pressure begin to
increase?
When was nitric oxide inhalation commenced?
What was the starting dose of inhaled nitric oxide?
What happened to the mixed venous oxygen saturation
after starting nitric oxide?
What event precipitated the most recent acute
deterioration?
How does the current mean PA pressure compare to the
mean systemic pressure?
Identify a cause for the periodic increases in PA pressure.

Findings from these twenty subjects are being analyzed
and used to create a final dynamic CPDV prototype.

Conclusions

Figure 4. Three examples of the CPDV interface with profile
data, control panel and data visualizations.

5.3. Clinical Scenario
A 6-month-old infant undergoes repair of an AV canal.
The post-operative course is complicated by pulmonary
hypertension, requiring nitric oxide (iNO) to be started on
the second postoperative day. On the third postoperative
day you are called to the bedside at 1415 because of an

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

We have shown that MDV provides a means to
transform data into contextual knowledge, which can
provide valuable assistance for data analysis and decision
making during critical evaluations of a patient’s condition.
Data visualization is important to providing an immediate
analysis of patient data, i.e., MDV allows a CCP the ability
to more quickly assess, appraise, and execute decisive
action in the critical care context.
The goal of our approach is to design a completely
automated MDV platform with a control interface that
allows CCPs access to each level of data and past events
that are relevant to a patient’s current clinical status. The
CPDV model is a solution to organize and display
multivariate data through visualization devices. Using
CPDV, data visualization can provide physicians assistance
to quickly assess a specific patient by recognizing
associated changes in multiple physiological, diagnostic,
and interventional variables. Using selection menus, CPDV
allows physicians to control the necessary data sources,
their time periods and temporal resolution. This approach
will greatly accelerate the clinical data gathering process
that is vital to critical care decision making. The goal of the
CPDV project is to design high usability visualizations and
interface behaviors that could allow CCPs a rapid and
controlled analysis of various sources of data from a
relational (context-based) perspective. A recent empirical
study will provide findings that allow further development
of the system beyond the prototype stage. We are convinced
CPDV has the potential to enhance patient care by
improving the quality of clinical decision making. This is
because CCPs will waste less time foraging through
multiple datasets when data is presented in a manner that is
customizable to their needs, presented in an organized
context-related format, and is in a single location.

[18]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

Baddely, A. (1990). Human memory: Theory and
practice. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon
Bellazzi, R. & Zupan, B. (2001). Intelligent data analysis:
Special issue. Methods in Informatics Medicine, 5, 362364.
Bergeron, R. D., Cody, W., Hibbard, W., Kao, D. T.,
Miceli, K., Treinish, L., & Walther, S. (1994). Database
issues for data visualization: Developing a data model.
Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization '93 Workshop on
Database Issues for Data Visualization, 871, 3-15.
Boens, J., Borst, F., & Scherrer, J., (1992). Organizing
the clinical data in the medical record. MD Computing, 9,
149-155.
Bower, B. (1972). Mental imagery and associative
learning. In Cognition in learning and memory. New
York: John Wiley, 27-47.
Chambers, J. M., Cleveland, W. S., Kleiner, B. & Tukey,
P.A. (1976). Graphical methods for data analysis. New
York: Chapman and Hall.
Cleveland, W. S. (1985). The elements of graphing data.
Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Cleveland, W. S. (1993). Visualizing Data. Summit, NJ:
Hobart Press.
Coiera, E. (1997). Guide to medical informatics, the
Internet and telemedicine. London: Chapman & Hall
Medical.
dos Santos, S. R. (2004). A framework for the
visualization of multidimensional and multivariate data.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Leeds, United
Kingdom.
Dreyfus, H. (1984). Symbol sourcebook: An authoritative
guide to international graphic symbols. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Factor, M., Gelernter, D. H., Kolb, C. E., Miller, P. L., &
Sittig, D. F. (1991). Real-time data fusion in the intensive
care unit. IEEE Computer, 24, 45-54.
Faiola, A. (2002). A visualization pilot study for
hypermedia: Developing cross-cultural user profiles for
new media interfaces. The Journal of Educational
Multimedia and Hypermedia. 11(1), 51-71.
Faiola, A., Groth, D., & Altom, T. (2005). Integrating the
visualization of personal histories to enhance file search
in 3D landscapes: Applying file search to 3D view. In G.
Salvendy and J. Jacko (Ed.), Human-Computer
Interaction - Ergonomics and User Interfaces, Theory
and Practice, Volume 4 - Theories Models and Processes
in HCI. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction. Las Vegas: Nevada.
(Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, CD-ROM).
Fisherkeller, M. A., Friedman, J. H. & Tukey, J. W.
(1975). An interactive multidimensional data display and
analysis system. In Dynamic Graphics for Statistics,
Voilume?
Horn, W., Popow, C. & Unterasinger, L. (2001). Support
for fast comprehension of ICU data: Visualization using
metaphor graphics. Methods of Information in Medicine,
40, 421-424.
Kellen, V. (2006). Decision making and information
visualization: Research directions. Retrieved on March
23,
2006,
from
http://www.kellen.net/Visualization_Decision_Making.ht
m

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]
[37]

Keller, P. R. & Keller, M. M. (1993). Visual cues,
practical data visualization. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1983). Ghosts in the mind’s machine:
Creating and using images in the brain. New York: W.
W. Norton & Company.
McCormick, B. H., DeFanti, T. A. & Brown, M. D.
(1987). Visualization in scientific computing. Computer
Graphics, 21(6):1–14.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information, Psychological Review, 63, 81-97
Nielson, G. M. & Rosenblum, L. (Eds.). (1991).
Proceedings IEEE Visualization ’91, San Diego, CA:
IEEE Computer Society Press.
Plaisant, C., Milash, B., Rose, A., Widoff, S., &
Shneiderman, B. (1996). LifeLines: Visualizing personal
histories. Proceeding of CHI`96, ACM, New York, 221227.
Spence, R. (2001). Information visualization. New York:
ACM Press.
Tegarden, D. P. (1999). Business information
visualization. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems. 1, Article 4. Retrieved on March
22,
2006,
from
http://cais.isworld.org/articles/14/default.asp?View=html&x=22&y=6
Tory, M. & Möller, T., (2004). Human factors in
visualization research. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 10(1), 72-84.
Tufte, E. R. (1983). The visual display of quantitative
information. Cheshire, CT: Graphic Press.
Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning information. Cheshire,
CT: Graphic Press.
Tufte, E. R. (1997). Visual explanations: Images and
quantities, evidence and narrative. Cheshire, CT:
Graphic Press.
Tukey, J. W. (177). Exploratory data analysis. New
York: Addison-Wesley Press.
Van Bemmel, J. H. & Musen, M. A., (Eds.). (1997).
Handbook of medical informatics. Heidelberg, New
York: Springer Verlag.
Vessey, I. (1991). Cognitive fit: A theory-based analysis
of the graphs versus tables literature. Decision Sciences.
22, 219-240.
Vidal, F., Bello, K. W., Brodlie, N. W., John, D., Gould,
R., & Phillips, N. J. A. (2006). Principles and
applications of computer graphics in medicine, Computer
Graphics Forum, 25(1), 113–137.
Whiting-O'Keefe, Q. E., Simbork, D. W., Epstein, W. V.,
& Warger, A. A. (1985). Computerized summary
medical record system can provide more information
than the standard medical record. JAMA, 254(9), 11851192.
Wong, P. C. & Bergeron, R. D. (1997). Thirty years of
multidimensional multivariate visualization. In G.
Nielson, H. Hagan, & H. Muller (Eds.), Scientific
visualization: Overviews, methodologies and techniques.
Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press, 3-33.
Yoder, J. W., Schultz, D. F. & Williams, B. T. (1998).
Journal of Medical Systems, 22(5), 325 - 337.
Yoder, R. D., Evans, M. R. & Sweeney, J. W. (1967).
Processing pictures with computers. An introduction,
Journal of the American Medical Association, 200, 11711175.

