Streamulator: A New Approach to Online Office Hours
Dana M. Lee
Assistant Professor, Ryerson University, Toronto Canada
danalee@ryerson.ca

Abstract
Streamulator is an easy to use Web-based automated
streaming application that allows for live online video, audio
and desktop content. It does not require the end user to
download and install software on their computer prior to
accessing the interactive sessions. Because it is an in-house
solution, Streamulator can be developed and modified for
future requirements. The concept of online office hours is
discussed, along with Streamulator’s stages of development
and implementation within this framework.

1. Introduction
The expression “online office hours” has several
definitions, up to and including live online collaborative
learning among many people simultaneously. Streamulator
is an automated streaming application developed by Jeremy
Littler in the Digital Media Projects office at Ryerson
University. With Streamulator, it is possible to live webcast
lectures and presentations from classrooms or personal
computers at remote locations. It can stream a combination
of audio, video and desktop content.

2. Why Online Office Hours?
Before describing the details of Streamulator, the benefit
of an online collaboration over more traditional methods
needs to be considered. Certainly, one-on-one office hours
are valuable in situations where a student is in circumstances
that deserve the respect and privacy of an individual session.
For this reason, there will always be times when this type of
meeting is more appropriate. Nevertheless, because of
increased demands on a professor’s time, and because often
parallel inquiries come from many students requiring similar
answers, a group oriented collaborative approach is often
more suitable.
However, gathering together a large number of students
in one room outside of scheduled class time poses several
problems. Classroom availability is often at a premium.
Many colleges and universities now offer continuing
education programs, which make use of most of the lecture
rooms in the evening. While students might appreciate the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

opportunity to receive additional tutorial time, they are
somewhat reluctant to travel to school for a single session.
This is especially true of institutions that self-describe as a
commuter campus, at which a high proportion of students
travel from the suburbs. Even inclement weather can
discourage otherwise interested students from making the
trip to the lecture hall.

3. Asynchronous Text-Based Communication
When email was initially introduced to university
campuses in the mid-1990s, online office hours were thought
to be that quiet time within the week where a faculty
member would reply to his or her electronic correspondence.
This definition is now rather quaint, as we are all well aware
that email never stops and can consume a significant part of
each day.
Because of its asynchronous nature, email is useful for
correspondence that is not of an urgent nature. It is less
effective in a group setting because participants email to one
another over a long period of time. As well, it is inefficient
because correspondents often use the “reply all” feature to
duplicate all the preceding communication before adding
more information to the thread. If two people send replies
more or less simultaneously, information is lost in each of
those messages. Indeed, electronic mail can be unwieldy
even as a simple unification tool – ask anyone who has
attempted to arrange a meeting time between several parties
by using email.
If we take asynchronous email one step further, by
allowing individuals to post their communication in one
common area or “room”, we create a discussion board. There
are several commercially available software packages that
handle this elegantly such as Blackboard, WebCT, and so
on. These applications are excellent tools to use in an
exchange of ideas over a long period of time - days or weeks
if necessary.
A discussion board can be effective for clarification of
ideas and collaborative efforts over time, especially in
situations where an electronic record or trail of the
correspondence may be required. In many cases, this will be
adequate interactivity for a busy professor wishing to answer
commonly asked questions in a group-oriented manner.

However, because it is text-based it can transmit only a few
of the implicit behaviours that we display to one another in
normal face to face communications [1]. In the absence of
signifiers such as body language, facial expression, and tone
of voice, incidents of misunderstanding, and in more extreme
cases frustration, flaming, and other transgressions of what
we commonly refer to as “netiquette” can arise [2].

4. Adding Multimedia
To overcome some of these limitations, more layers of
electronic media are necessary. Multimedia communication
adds live or pre-recorded one-way video and audio using a
webcam and microphone. There may also be capability for
online whiteboards (the ability to draw with a mouse or bit
pad, and have those illustrations duplicated on the remote
computer’s screen.) The interface may also feature the ability
to retrieve slides and videos on demand. Some or all of these
elements are sent over the Internet as a combined web page.
The first and arguably the oldest application of this toolkit is
a structured online session. This is essentially a lecture sent
over the Internet featuring video, audio, and some form of
additional graphical content such as the whiteboard or
prepared slides [3]. Here the Internet is used as a
transmission conduit, and allows the classroom to extend
beyond the bricks and mortar of the institution to anyone
with online access and authorization to view the material. It
is a monologue, and does not allow the remote student to
interact with the lecture. Indeed, using this software many
structured and pre-recorded online sessions can be uploaded
for delivery on demand. Applications that have been
developed for this type of transfer include Anicam-Live [4].

5. Synchronous Two-Way Communication
A more interactive approach to online office hours
includes simultaneous two-way communication. The
simplest version of this is some form of online text chat,
where students and the faculty member can type back and
forth to each other in a box or window. More complex
applications add real-time video and audio from the
professor. As before, whiteboards, slides and videos can be
used as additional material.
There are a number of synchronous multimedia
communication applications that have been developed using
this model. While this list is not exhaustive, it includes
JoiNet [5], NetMeeting [6], and Breeze [7] along with more
widely available applications such as Yahoo Messenger [8],
MSN Messenger [9], and AOL Instant Messenger [10].
These are all well developed and tested interfaces. Many
of them require the end user to download and install software
on their computer prior to accessing the interactive sessions.
Some involve a high degree of server integration or
interaction with an off-site server. All of the consumer-type

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

applications expect the user to acquire a username and
password for that particular messaging system. None of
these systems are compatible with each other, so using any
one of these for interactive learning requires that students
sign-up for that particular service.

6. Streamulator: Another Solution
The author’s requirement was for an interface that would
require no special software for the end user, and a front-end
that could be installed as a stand alone package on any
computer, while recognizing that a host server would still be
needed for the streaming application.
The online sessions involved teaching principles of
television technology to students in the Radio and Television
Arts program at Ryerson University. Since the discussions
were designed to clarify principles of physics and electronics
to arts students, there were a number of prerequisites that
had to be met. A high degree of interaction was desired – the
sessions would involve questions from the students, a
display of technical equipment and other props on the
webcam, excerpts from Powerpoint slides, and lots of talking
and hand gestures to clarify concepts. The online atmosphere
was to resemble as closely as possible the weekly in-class
lectures featuring all of these elements. The students’
interface was to be simple enough so that they wouldn’t
concern themselves about it, but feel as if they were in the
same virtual space as their colleagues and the professor.

6.1 Streamulator History
In many of our lecture theatres at Ryerson, we
incorporate a presentation technology podium. This
technology integrates an LCD projector, computer with
Internet access, VCR, DVD player, a document camera,
wireless microphone and external audio and video inputs for
additional outside devices. The Streamulator program was
originally created as a way of making lectures from these
rooms accessible to others, without requiring a large
investment of additional equipment, software, or personnel
to run the streaming video interface.
Since then, Streamulator has evolved into an increasingly
sophisticated application that is relatively easy to use and
can be installed and run on any computer. The student does
not need any additional software to receive a Streamulator
webcast - they simply surf to a web page. Streamulator
composes the page and lays out the various multimedia
frames.
The Streamulator software, originally designed as a
simple video streaming package, had to evolve into a
multimedia application as more requests were made for a
richer feature set. Streamulator now includes a two-way text
chat box which opens up as a separate window on both the
host and end user computers, so that it may be resized and

repositioned on the desktop. Slides are converted to a
standard dimension and displayed on the Streamulator
destination web page. The source of the slides can be either
“screen captures” which are resized automatically, or as
popular image formats (.jpg, .bmp, .tif, .gif) downloaded
from the professor’s computer. Chapter markers can be
added during the session for use by students who will be
viewing the program at a later date. By clicking on these,
they can jump immediately to a particular point in the prerecorded stream.
What makes Streamulator unique is its ease of use. Unlike
some other online synchronous software applications,
Streamulator is run as a one-person show, requiring no
special equipment or additional operators [11].
The entire video stream, the time-stamped slides, and the
chapter markers are saved on both the streaming server and
the presenter’s computer during the session. A complete
show is then assembled by the Digital Media Projects office
and published online for later access. Students can then
watch the session at any time, from start to finish. If they are
using Internet Explorer, their web browser allows them to
jump directly to selected parts of the presentation by clicking
on a thumbnail of the appropriate slide, or by selecting the
appropriate chapter marker.

7. Advantages of Online Office Hours
A student can be anywhere that has Internet access during
the online office hours session: at school in a computer lab,
at home, in residence, even at a local coffee shop with
wireless Internet access. They don’t have to be sitting at the
computer by themselves – sometimes a small group of
students will cluster around a computer, collaborating
together while the session is going live. Unsolicited feedback
indicates that students enjoy instant access to the professor
for an evening, especially before a mid-term examination.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that students also use the
session in its pre-recorded form as Internet radio. They will
play the two hour session back on their computers, listening
in the background for key points, while doing other work.
When they hear something relevant, they go to their
computer, back up a minute or so into the stream, and watch
the parts of the discussion that interest them most. This has
become such an important “second airing” use of the
software that a podcast generating component is being
considered for a future Streamulator release.
The author teaches with many samples of hardware and
technology every week. All of the physical props needed for
a remedial session covering several weeks’ review would be
almost impossible to transport to a lecture hall. With the
online session, everything needed for the presentation is
close at hand, in the presenter’s office – nothing is forgotten
or left behind. As well, there is no chance of leaving
important Powerpoint slides, other graphical content, videos,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

web links, or any other ‘soft’ materials behind – it’s all on
the computer, and is available as needed.
Audio and video augmentation of the online hours
experience greatly increases comprehension over text-only
interaction because students can read the vocal and visual
styles of the professor. In turn, the instructor can use vocal
inflections, facial expressions, hand gestures and props to
emphasize important or complex material.

8. Some Consequences of the Online Office
Hours Experience
The feedback from the students has been very positive
regarding the value of Streamulator online office hours.
However, as with any new technology, it requires the
professor to acquire new skills.
The presenter of a session must be reasonably computer
literate. Because of the nature of a multimedia presentation,
there are often several windows open during the session - the
Streamulator web camera interface, text chat window, and
slide browser are a minimum. While not strictly necessary,
the author also prefers to have a standard web browser open
to confirm transmission of audio, video and slides, and a
paint program to modify screen captures and slides on the fly
during the session. In addition, the presenter needs to
monitor and adjust the headset microphone levels as needed.
All of this takes a certain amount of application juggling. It
is not for the faint at heart.
Troubleshooting is often required at this early stage of
development with Streamulator. While the software works
well, the students are still becoming accustomed to the web
page interface and its requirements. Sometimes, their screen
resolution is set too low, or other small problems appear
such as occasional video freezing due to low bandwidth
connections (e.g., dial-up.) Fortunately, Streamulator is
unique in that it simultaneously generates both a low and
mid-bandwidth stream – the appropriate one is automatically
selected by the student’s computer. Nevertheless, the
presenter should have enough computer knowledge to give
students simple instructions for overcoming these problems
and to minimize their frustration with the online experience.
The conditions imposed on an online session are not just
technological in nature. The instructor must apply a high
degree of implicit communication during the presentation
[1]. This means that the professor should use eye contact by
looking at the webcam lens as if it were an actual student.
Facial expressions and vocal inflections are also important
to help explain and clarify key points. In effect this is
television, and an ability to play to the camera and be an onair presenter at a professional level is a definite asset.
Fortunately, this training is less of an issue for many of us in
the Radio and Television Arts program, because it is a skill
set that we have already perfected by working in the
electronic communications industry.

Because audio and video feedback from the students is
non-existent, there is very little implicit communication back
to the presenter. The subtle nodding of heads, occasional
puzzled looks, smiles of acknowledgment, and quiet “aha”s
in the lecture hall are all absent. The only student reactions
are the words in the chat window. Therefore it is critical that
the presenter ask leading questions such as “Does everybody
understand this?” then wait for a written response from the
users. Hopefully, the answer is a resounding and repetitive
“Yes!” from the assembled online community.

9. Conclusions
Web streaming capability has been technically available
on the Internet for several years. For some time, two-way
online communication has been a solution in search of a
problem. Despite the developments in application software,
there is still work to be done in online collaborative research
circles, in terms of ease of use from the content originator’s
point of view, and the simplicity of interface at the end
user’s computer.
Because it is an in-house solution, as user feedback
continues to inform the process, Streamulator can be
developed and modified for future requirements. At Ryerson
University it has become a cost-effective alternative solution
for the university’s interactive streaming media demands.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

10. References
[1] Albert Mehrabian, Silent Messages: Implicit Communication of
Emotions and Attitudes. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA, 1981.
[2] David E. Hailey Jr., Keith Grant-Davie, and Christine A. Hult,
“Online education horror stories worthy of Halloween: A short list
of problems and solutions in online instruction”, Computers and
Composition 18 2001, pp. 387-397.
[3] Monson H. Hayes and Lonnie Harvel, “Distance learning into
the 21st century”, Proceedings ASEE Workshop, Charlotte, NC.
June 1999.
[4] Michael Verhaart, “AniCAM: Developing stream based
teaching resources (software review)”, Educational Technology &
Society 6 (4), 2003, pp. 173-176.
[5] HomeMeeting, url: http://www.homemeeting.com
[ 6 ]
N e t M e e t i n g
H o m e ,
u r l :
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/netmeeting
[7]
Ma c r ome di a
Breeze,
url :
http://www.macromedia.com/software/breeze
[8] Yahoo! Messenger with Voice - Chat, Call, Share Photos, and
More, url: http://messenger.yahoo.com
[9] MSN Messenger Version 7.5, url:http://messenger.msn.com
[10] AIM.com, url: http://www.aim.com
[11] Adam D. Fein, and Mia C. Logan, “Preparing Instructors for
Online Instruction”, New Directions for Adult and Continuing
Education 100 (2003), pp. 45-55.

