The Art of Gemotion in Space
Yoichiro Kawaguchi
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033 JAPAN
yoichiro@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Gemotion explores the potential innovation in the convergence of the media content industry and traditional culture that may become more commonplace in the future.
Here, I will discuss a few examples of such collaborative
efforts. Above all, I would like to take this opportunity to
look at the issue of how the five senses – particularly, sight,
sound and touch – which form the key elements of virtual
reality, relate to traditional performing arts. From there, I
hope to shed light on the signs emerging on the horizon of
future media content.

a live dance performance, with the dancer outfitted in a
”wearable computer.” The GEMOTION program was controlled by the data from the movements of each part of the
dancer’s body. The computer is able to perceive the dancer’s
most delicate movements, simultaneously changing in the
shape and color of the CGI that instantaneously respond to
the performance.

Keywords— gemotion = growth, gene + emotion.

1. Reacting Performing Arts on the Stage
Figure 1. Gemotion Stage Plan
How to create the digital space collaborating with traditional performing arts? Performers and/or the audience
interactively react with the concept of the world traditional
performing arts on the stage.
I set up a massive screen set to create a multifariously
emotive GEMOTION space that immediately incorporates
the audience’s every motion as the emotional parameters of
the resulting artwork. When the large number of children
in the audience running in front of the screens, their movements set the GEMOTION piece in motion, and the faster
and louder the children ran and played, the more the colors
and sound would flow and change in response. Much like
a concerto, the resulting piece was the product of the emotions that arise when humans and art come together in animated interaction. To participate in this interaction, visitors
actually enter the piece’s internal conceptual space, and feel
they have a glimpse into the full significance of the artwork
from within the inner working of the computer generated
image (CGI). The first attempt of this was staged at an international media arts exhibition at the Daejeon Municipal
Museum of Modern Art in South Korea at the end of 2000.
The opening show for the SIGGRAPH 2001 featured

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2. Gemotion Performing Arts collaborated with Japanese traditional dance

Figure 3. Gemotion Performing Arts using
wearable sensors (2002)

Figure 5. Gemotion - Interactive Space(2)

Figure 6. Responding CGI on the stage

Figure 4. Gemotion (2003) - Interactive
Space(1)

Japan’s traditional performing arts have given rise to a
refined, stylistic beauty all their own. In the opening show
of eAT KANAZAWA ’02, I experimented with art-science
interaction that would translate aspects of this traditional
art’s incredible beauty into CGI. Transforming the uniquely
delicate, yet splendid Japanese dance movements into abstract visuals created in emotive computer graphics, the result was an array of metamorphosing shapes and colors.
The waters of Japanese dance run deep, and experimenting with the creation of CGI that represent these taut, contained movements and mysterious, yet refined world is an
extremely appealing prospect. Creating the feel of wabi and
sabi, and the delicate colors of the hydrangea brought to life
an artistic voice entirely new to digital space.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

2. Mobile Growth as Digital Genetic Code
Everyday objects that are not usually associated with art
can also be incorporated into the artist’s work. This was the
concept behind the idea to create an exciting and engaging
conceptual space for interactive communication in which
the audience could actively participate in the performance
using their cell phones. The larger screen gives participants
an overwhelming sense that they are a living part of the performance. The deeper inside they feel they have gone, the
more they are gripped by a sense of otherworldly reality –
much like interplanetary space travel in which artificial life
lives and breathes. The audience is also able to play around,
directing cell phones toward the giant CGI projected onto
the screen in whatever manner they wish as the mood strikes
them. If a participant calls the growth model that generates the computer program behind the performance, his or
her personal telephone number is instantly recorded when
its signal is received. These numbers serve as the genetic

code, the growth stimulus integers that directly affect the
creation parameters of the growth model, and the participants’ own personal growth model bursts onto the screen,
transforming and growing moment-by-moment before his
or her eyes. Nearly limitless possibilities in terms of shape,
and the different number associated with each cell phone,
guarantee each participant a completely personal work of
art generated by a uniquely individual growth model. This
experiment allowed the audience to enjoy creating a growth
model artwork only they themselves are capable of generating with their personal phone. It is an electrifying experience to watch an artwork that is yours alone come to life
before one’s eyes. The genetic code carried in one’s cell
phone number works on the piece in a cyber sense as if the
artwork were a part of one’s physical self.

Figure 7. Mobile Growth in Museum

Figure 8. Mobile Growth (2002). Each personal phone number generates a unique Mobile Growth.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 9. The various Mobile Growth

At an exhibition held at Tsukuba Museum of Art in April
2002, I made color printouts of the individual artworks
available for those who wished to take them home. This
service proved extremely popular with people who lined up
every day around the ”cell phone corner.” This experiment –
creating an experience for an audience, facing a large screen
and using their cell phones, to create the genetic code for a
dense and detailed work of art, which they can take out – is
a novel approach that differs entirely from any artistic style
tried in the past.
I also created this installation space for cell phonegenerated communication at the opening performance of
the international SIGGRAPH conference held in the United
States in July 2002. The audience vied with one another
to call the growth model at this installation. The audience
can also exchange the genetic codes that form the basis of
their own personal artworks to create next-generation art
that would represent the genetic artworks of the child or
even grandchildren of the original pieces. The possibilities
are fascinating – artificial genetic life forms generated by
growth models from cell phone data open up other realms
of communication in which sharing a new type of artistic
space within cyber space becomes possible.

Figure 11. If you pushed Gemotion Screen, he
gets angry and pushes back your hands.

3. Bumpy Screen Responds as Living Entity

Figure 10. Gemotion (2000), Bumpy Screen
responds as living entity.

Now, imagine a flat screen suddenly stretch and contract.
Imagine the surprise of witnesses’ shock at seeing such an
unexpected phenomenon. What would happen if the screen
in a movie theater, for instance, began to move toward the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 12. Gemotion plan in a gallery space.

audience, bulging and collapsing as if it lived and breathed?
For quite a while now, I have wanted to create this moment
of pure, child-like, novel surprise. I have been fascinated
by the idea of projecting images that create the complete
illusion of three-dimensionality (3D) onto a screen, making

Figure 13. Bumpy Screen Sketch(1)

it seem to stretch and contract like a mollusk to elicit the
full range of human emotion captured in child-like wonder.
This is where my concept for GEMOTION, ”generative,
emotional, interactive artwork,” began. Realizing that it
was technically impossible to jump immediately to a movie
theater-size screen, I decided to conduct my first experiment
on a miniature screen, stretched over one end of a cylindrical tube.
First, 3D images were projected onto the cylinder’s falsebottom undulating screen. In the same manner, it is also
projected onto the surfaces of the surrounding environment,
giving the audience, who are enveloped by these images,
the impression that they actually standing inside the image
itself.
The audience approaches the cylindrical screen placed
at the center of the installation space. As they do, the flat
screen senses their movement and stirs to life. When the
seemingly flat screen suddenly begins to move, the audience reacts with shock and surprise. Amazed, they move
closer to the cylinder at the center of the room, and as they
do, it suddenly begins to bubble up and collapse into itself,
creating even more surprise. The screen rises and falls in
sync with the 3D effect of CGI, making the audience believe that it is a real living entity. Mixing cyber and real
space has an oddly stimulating effect that is felt throughout
the entire body, and it is this aspect that is attracting more
and more attention to GEMOTION artworks.
What is involved in generating real-time responses from
a projection screen to make it seem as if it were a living
entity? Where are the sensors located? Is it possible for
a work of art to respond while going through the natural
progression of emotions like a living being does?
Emotional reactions take many forms: intensity, quiet,
serenity, seductiveness, childishness, innocence, weakness,
anger, among others.
As described above, I have named this type of experiment GEMOTION. The word GEMOTION, meaning Gene,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 14. Bumpy Screen Plan

Figure 15. Bumpy Screen Sketch(2)

Growth + Emotion, has the same emotional connotation as
the concepts behind my new pieces. Hypothesizing genetic
codes, growth and emotion, these pieces are designed to
open the doors to a new world of reality for art.
Seeing with one’s eyes, touching with one’s hands, feeling on one’s skin, eliciting reaction – these are the basic
behaviors involved in human contact. Moving one’s body,
gesturing, dancing, when the audience wishes to confront
a work of art in these ways, this interactive space is transformed into a living, breathing ”channel” that makes possible a new type of human-art communication.

Figure 16. The mechanism of the Gemotion
Screen

Figure 18. Gemotion Bumpy CGI

Figure 17. The bumping control mechanism

4. Acknowledgment
We thanks to Shunsuke Ohno, Masayuki Takagi and
Koki Okada for technical assisted for Gemotion Dance. We
also thanks to Ryuma Niiyama, Mariko Fujita and Akihiko
Miyadera for making mechanical architecture for bumpy
screen.

References
[1] Y. Kawaguchi. A morphological study of the form of nature,
July 1982.
[2] Y. Kawaguchi. Morphogenesis. JICC Publishing Inc., 1984.
[3] Y. Kawaguchi. LUMINOUS VISIONS(DVD). Odyssey Productions, 1988.
[4] Y. Kawaguchi. COACERVATER. NTT Publishing, Tokyo,
1994.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 19. The Future of the Bumpy Screen

[5] Y. Kawaguchi. The art of growth algorithm with cells. Artificial Life V, pages 159–166, 1997.
[6] Y. Kawaguchi. YOICHIRO KAWAGUCHI(ggg-books 38).
TransArt, 1998.
[7] Y. Kawaguchi. Self-organized objects with the growth
model, 2000.
[8] Y. Kawaguchi. The cg art of yoichiro kawaguchi, 2002.
[9] Y. Kawaguchi. Introduction of CG, pages 2–32. Maruzen
Publishing, 2003.
[10] Y. Kawaguchi. Origin of the universe, 2003.
[11] Y. Kawaguchi. The Art of YOICHIRO KAWAGUCHI.
Growth Publishing, 2005.

