Curating Digital Media–Next Generation of Japanese Media Art & Exhibition
Tomoe Moriyama
Curator, Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography/Project Associate Professor, The University of Tokyo
t.moriyama@syabi.com

Abstract
In 1960s, Japanese Digital Artists were already
introduced internationally by their pioneering works. In
2002, Digital/Media Art became the required course of
junior-high/high school art classes, and digital art
expressions including computer graphics have been in the
ascendant to show the broader diversity than ever. Like
other Asian countries, government has started supporting
the Media Art contents and today’s Japanese art students,
whose works have been highly evaluated even overseas, to
enter a new phase. I would like to report on the current
situations of media art education and support system for
Media Art in Japan and consider the future of upcoming
talents, by examining examples; Japan Media Arts
Festival and also quote the experience of many exhibitions
on media art for over ten years, at the Images &
technology Gallery in Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of
Photography, which founded as a public institution of
image media..

1. Introduction
We must be clear about what we mean, when we
think about “vision,” imaging and our ways of perceiving
the outside world. Even in Japan, where imaging
technologies advanced, many people do not understand
about what “imaging” is. By “Imaging” means the creation
of images through any medium that is not simply manual:
those that can be traced, reflected, photographed,
reproduced and projected. The term is not restricted to
animation, video, film or other means of creating pictures
in motion. “Imaging” encompasses shadow play, magic
lantern, anamorphose and all the processes of visualization.
Since the Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography
(TMMP) opened as a center for photography and other
visual media, it has been important to discuss what
“imaging” means.
Japanese Digital Art has been highly evaluated from
its beginning in the 1960s. The members of CTG
(Computer Technique Group) who participated in the
exhibition entitled Cybernetic Serendipity held at ICA,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

London in 1968, were students at The University of Tokyo
and Tama Art University at the time. They presented their
original XY-plotters and performed “happenings” at
Tokyo-Garou (Tokyo Art Gallery) where they would later
be discovered by a curator Jasia Reichardt while her
research in Japan. [Figure 1]

Figure 1.
Jasia Reichardt(Ed.), Cybernetic Serendipity,
Studio International London, 1968 and Kennedy,
©CTG 1968 (idea:M.Komura/Program:K.Fujino)
As Reichardt said, our generation – people who were
younger than five in 1970 – was not surprised about the
application of technology to art or vice versa. We are not
surprised by the newness of technology itself but rather by
the new concept which emerge from it. My generation’s
successors are members of the digital generation. By the
time they were born, the world was already networked.
Mine is a fortunate generation that has been able to study
with teachers, curators, researchers and artists who were at
the forefront of the new image-making technologies in the
1980s. There was a growing interest in realizing the idea
of the Musee Imaginaire, which Katsuhiro Yamaguchi,
one of the pioneers of media artist, called Imaginarium. It
was this impetus which let led to the founding of Japan’s
first museum of photography and imaging. [Figure 2]

Figure 2-1. Magic Lanterns

Figure 2-2. TMMP and its permanent collection

media arts through an annual “Japan Media Arts Festival”
at TMMP. The Fundamental Law for the Promotion of
Culture and Arts in 2001. It defines “Media Arts” as
“movies, cartoons, animations and arts that utilizing
computers and other electric devices.” From an economic
point of view, also the Law for Creation, Protection and
Promotion of Applying Contents in 2004 acknowledging
the value of intellectual property of popular cultural
institutions such as movies, games, music, photography,
animation and comics, all major Japanese industries in the
international market. From 2002, all Japanese junior-high
and high schools launched the new curriculum in which
digital media/images are taught as a subject of art lessons.
According to our survey, 63 percent of art museums have
already exhibited something related in media arts, and 17
percent are interested though they have not yet developed
any such exhibitions. About 45 percent major Japanese
museums have less than 5 staffs in charge of exhibition
and public/educational programs, and merely have
specialists of exhibition engineering. Many people have
pointed out that the shortage of curatorial staff and budgets
is a problem. Some curators/educators regard media arts as
hard to handle and cost-consuming. [Figure 3]

The Images and Technology Gallery, the B1 floors of
the Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography, are the
results of that initiative. Here, the broad field of imagemaking is divided into five themes based on its permanent
collection from pre-cinema history to contemporary
interactive-installations
like
C.Sommerer
&
L.Mignonneau’s work – themes on Imagination,
Animation, 3rd Dimension, Magnified View and
Documentation as “time and place remembered”. The
following chapters describe about the current situation of
media art museum in Japan and how I realized those 5
themes via many media art exhibitions in past 10 years
realized these five cyclic themes.

2. The Current Situation in Japan
Figure 3. Graph from the survey
In 2004, our group–the Media Arts Research
Committee started a study on Japanese policies and
situations of institutions that are related to media arts. We
did a survey for 185 major museums in Japan and
analyzed various exhibitions and the international
institutions like ZKM, Ars Electronica Center etc. We
hope that museums or public facilities can be a center for
the creative domain of media arts in the postmodern era.
As many artists and researchers think that collaboration
between scientists, engineers and artists will be effective,
we should seek alternative ways to introduce media arts
because these arts involve their environments and interact
with audiences in non-traditional ways.
The Agency of Cultural Affairs of the Japan Ministry
of Education and Science take initiatives of promoting

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Through this research, we realized that we should
develop and share how to exhibit or organize them on
common hardware platforms. Then, exhibiting media arts
would be more economical and easy to handle by few
numbers of staff.

2.1. Various examples and analysis in TMMP
Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography has
gained more visitors since it began having many media
arts exhibitions. Here I describe some examples and
suggestions as new systems by which we can carry out
media art exhibition more easily. There are five cyclic
thematic exhibitions. Larger scale of visual image history
and the contemporary works crossed equally in “Re-

Imagination –image/media/museum” in 2002-2003, which
round to the six public museums in Japan. Usually,
contemporary installations like Kazuhiko Hachiya's multiviewpoint experimental system Centrifuge and other
historical visual devices like magic lanterns or peepshows
are exhibited separately, but in this show, those were
introduced at the same time.
In the exhibition “A Universe on Storyboards: Birth
of an Image” in 2003, the “intersection” between
workshop and exhibition was also introduced. In this
exhibition, I displayed storyboards, puppet models and
character sketches as the backgrounds of music videos,
animations, computer games and commercial movies by 9
artists including Koji Yamamura and his work “Mount
Head.” “Digital Forest” exhibition featuring Tamas
Waliczky and other digital image artists considered
healing and curing in our digital age. A kind of contrastive
feeling of healing/digital age was crossing there. In the
“Mission: Frontier–deep space of our perception”
exhibition, it focused on expressing the frontier which
unites art and science. A new frontier was born from two
different fields of art and science. We exhibited lots of
works related new, beautiful technology in space, like
Takuro Osaka's visualization of cosmic-ray from outer
space, or the deep sea and the inner space of our body.
[Figure 4]

Figure 4. Brochure, Mission: Frontier and MetaVisual
I tried to exceed a kind of hyper visual space in a
certain form, which appears in “Meta Visual –the history

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

and futurescapes of our perception.” Strange feelings and
splendid expressions of depth, like illusion appeared in
Kohei Nawa's spatial installations were introduced. Since
this exhibition toured to France, I had to make it very
compact and handy. To France, I carried lots of works by
Maywadenki, Yoichiro Kawaguchi etc as flip books in
iPod photo, or Toshio Iwai's Electroplankton as game toys,
in NintendoDS. This exhibition enabled us to enjoy both,
huge installations/small designed product, at the same time
as a mixture in the spatial intersection.
I had been in charge of these 5-6 exhibitions in a year.
Thus, the systematization of the media art exhibition
touring in many places turned out to be necessary. If many
people need media art exhibition, we have to make its
realization more easily. Then, I got an idea of applying
genetic algorithm method as the technique of composing a
media art exhibition, by the art and engineering field. In
this system, which generates space arrangement
automatically, the characteristic elements are inputted as a
character in which they adjusted each other more
effectively.
The work group as an individual which had restrictive
conditions on the drawing with which the exhibition room
was restricted is arranged, and those installations have
their conditions, such as lighting, sound, motion and
operation, considered and are generated automatically.
The analysis of my past exhibition plan is already
advanced, and a “Meta Visual” exhibition is due to
perform systematically exhibition plan constructed by the
manual technique, and it is possible to share it from now
on. Usually, the evaluation of the exhibition activities
organized by local government such as Tokyo city, is not
based on any criticism etc., but judged only by the number
of visitors. Even if everyone understands that is a problem,
the method by which we can rely is not generalized yet.
But we can see how the media art can reduce a cost and
increase a number of visitors, from 170,000 to 430,000
people in a year, after we invite The Media Arts Festival
Japan in 2001.
From now on, evaluation of easy usage and universal
quality will be performed by use of some kind of network
technology, such as ID tag card. By proving the high
quality in the media art field, its outstanding cost
performance, and wonderful works, the characteristic
elements of this field is understood still more widely,
evaluated, and could reach much more height. A large
amount of budget is applied for the research of science or
engineering field which using the edged technology needs
to be introduced to us in more intelligible, scalable and
easy style. Making them familiar via digital art/media art
exhibition is the mission which this area has, and there we
can find a new aspect in the new century.

2.2. Contests and Educational Program in Japan
Today, the students from elementary school to high
school study animation, photography, comics and various
digital expressions in their fine art classes. This recent
change in curriculum perplexed many teachers who were
not familiar with those expressions and drove them to call
my museum for help. They would ask what to do with lack
of the personal computers and we would introduce visual
devices and animation toys like Magic Roll,
Phenakistiscope, and Peepshow to ease them, explaining it
is not only about computers. They would also bring their
classes to the museum each semester. Apart from
theoretical lectures and technical workshops, we regularly
hold workshops as “school programs” where students can
actually learn how to make optical toys and animation
devices. Unlike many countries, this cooperation between
educational institutes and cultural facilities in media
education has just started in Japan. This certainly is a great
progress. However, we still have a way to go: With only
few exceptions, “artist” as profession cannot make good in
Japan. The social conditions for the artists are totally
different from the artists in the countries where they can
concentrate on their creative works. We must establish a
system to support and promote the artists, who will
emerge as a consequence of the educational reform, by
providing the places to show their works, and by making
functional business model.
In the “GLOBAL MEDIA” annual series exhibition,
triumphal return introduction of the activity of the
Japanese artists who plays an active part in the
international festival like SIGGRAPH or Ars Electronica
etc. was carried out. Especially, in 2005 exhibition, while
introducing exhibition of three Japanese young students
groups awarded in the “next idea” section of Ars
Electronica, the installation of Death Clock by Tatsuo
Miyajima & Hajime Tachibana which enables to dive into
cyber network world was shown by using beautifully
designed RFID tag card. This work made a cyber/real
space across, and introduced the trial bringing a kind of
ubiquitous method into the exhibition space.
Also “OTAKU: persona=space=city” exhibition was a
triumphal return show of the architectural biennial in
Venetia. The curious interest of people who want to know
about unknown field of OTAKU=Nard culture increased.
And huge numbers of visitors were waiting to enter this
show for 2 hours, and also we had over 9000 persons per
day in total with the visitors to The Media Arts Festival,
Japan. It was the moment of encounter of visual arts and
Otaku culture, as a remixed, hybrid culture field which
was newly recognized. [Figure 5]

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 5.
SinkTop, honorary mentioned in Ars Electronica
2004 and GLOBAL MEDIA2005/OTAKU
All three awards of “the next idea,” a newcomer
section established in commemoration of the 25th
anniversary of Ars Electronica Festival, went to Japanese
students (SinkTop by the post-graduate school of Waseda
University, MOONY by IAMAS and Visual Resonator by
The University of Tokyo,) and this exhibition was their
triumphal return. In addition to introducing new artists,
this exhibition has illustrated the current situation of Japan
from outside. Though, in Japan, even in the educational
field, things that have been valued overseas and reimported are easily accepted and considered important,
what we tried to accomplish there was not re-import. We
presented the situation itself where the new value, ideas
and aesthetics that were born in Japan are directly and
strongly exported to overseas. It is a pattern of
“homecoming exhibition” of young generations’ activity
in abroad.
It is important to mention “Digital Stadium” on NHK
BS1, which is an internationally rare example of a TV
program supporting young artists. In the program, the jury
members consisted of media artist, CG artists and other
experts, including Toshio Iwai, Kazuhiko Hachiya and
Maywadenki, review the digital art works from all over
the country and the award-winning works will be shown in
“DAF Tokyo exhibition.” Each week, they invite artists
like Golan Levin from abroad to give performances in the
studio letting the young viewers learn the actualities of the
art scene. This exhibition has improved the brand-image of
digital/media art, and brought business opportunities to
some of the artists. In consequence of the exhibition, they
started working for TV programs, making opening
animation or motion graphics.
“Promotion of media arts” is stated in the Basic Law
on Culture and Art Promotion (BUNKA GEIJUTU
SHINKO KIHON HOU), and several years prior to its
enactment in 2001, the Agency for Cultural Affairs started

to hold the Media Arts Festival, Japan. Since 2001, the
festival has been held in Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of
Photography, and will celebrate the 10th anniversary in
2006 fiscal year. The CG Contest for Students organized
by CG-ARTS Association has even longer history. This
competition is held annually to explore the young talent
among the students, and provide them with the place for
exhibition. Jury members evaluates the applied works in
art, design, entertainment and industrial fields based on
how new expressions are sought logically, technically,
aesthetically and creatively.
In 2005, professors from universities with mediarelated faculties, researchers, artists and a curator were
among the jury members to select the 25 works out of
1379 applicants. A best award, two awards for excellent
works, and five honorable mentions go to each of the three
sections of the competition (interactive/still image/
animation,) and from all the applicants, U-18 award for
one student under the age of 18 are selected. Some of the
artists, who were awarded in the past, now take active part
internationally. Recently, there appeared some students
who won both awards in the main part of Media Arts
Festival and in this contest at the same time.
Works in the 2005 fiscal year (exhibited in the Media
Art Festival in February, 2006) show radical traits that
would renew the impression of the Japanese media art, on
top their tremendous improvements in techniques
employed in their creation. As to the awarded pieces, there
was no premature awkwardness that we would expect
from creations youth.
In the animation section, in addition to some Koji
Yamamura like all-Japanese animation, there was a
strange CG animation entitled OH HISSE by Akira
Yamakawa and Kojiro Shishido, which shows the
acrobatic movements of children in a comical mass game.
Another work by Kozo Takano, City obscura, portrays
actual landscapes in a rather fantastic way to give them
Diorama like unreal impression, using a historical
drawing/skating equipment Camera Obscura. Takeo
Tsushima’s Allegory of Media Art analyzes Vermeer's
masterpiece spatially, using the stereoscopic principle. A
visitor can enter the stereographic space of Vermeer's
painting with an interface that he manipulates with hands.
Among the award winners is Shunsaku Hayashi, often
compared with Kento Suto, who was previously awarded
for his still images with overwhelming intensity. They
both were in elementary schools when their names first
appeared on the award winners’ list. Awarded in 2004 for
his digital illustration with vivid lines, Hayashi turned to
the moving image this year and produced a notable
animation BLACK FOG. [Figure 6]

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 6. 1) A.Yamakawa & K. Shishido, OH
HISSE and T.Tsushima, Allegory of Media Art
(Right, below)

2) K. Takano, City obscura(Left above),
S. Hayashi, BLACK FOG (U-18) and M. Nishimura
Plants (Right)
There are more competitions and exhibitions in
addition to the ones I have mentioned above: “IVRC Student VR Contest” is a technology-based contest. “The
Imaginative of Information Art” is intercollegiate media
art exhibition. And “DiVA exhibition” by Art-Science
Association focuses on both science and art.
Engineering system technology course in The
University of Tokyo (Interfaculty Initiative in Information
Studies) attempts to make use of art work expression as a
way of publishing the result of their research. “Gakkan
works exhibition” is the outcome of what the students
study during their course.

3. Conclusion
As mentioned before, the investigation based on my
exhibition activities showed that a social need in the media
art field is great and strong. Although large numbers of
cultural facilities are willing to have media art activities,
usually the shortage of know-how and equipment is
difficult. The institutions or museums which have
performed pioneering activity must share the know-how
which they have. Also we must be conscious about the
prosperity of the present digital contents field having a
source in the avant-garde art activities and expressions in
the early 60s. What is the next stage of media art? There
are three possible elements to this, 1) Making products as
a multiple artwork, 2) Creating educational materials, 3)
Public art. Thus I want to propose new cultural facilities,
something like Malraux suggested in the past, as an ideal
circumstances for media arts. One approach to this task is,
establish a kind of exhibition-support system using a
genetic algorithm that materializes both adjacent works
effectively. We put each artwork’s element like lighting,
movements, interaction etc as CONDITIONS, and also put
special conditions of the exhibition room as
CONSTRUCTION. And after the tentative DEICISION,
the trial is repeated as RE-CONSIDERING,
REPLACEMENT and SHUFFLE like GA theory. [Figure
7]

Figure 7. Exhibition Model using GA
Moreover, the system which feeds back the opinion of
visitors is required so that an exhibition may not be
appreciated only by the number of visitors. IT technology
rather than the classical questionnaire in paper is effective,
to evaluate the quality as a trial, and to feed back to
subsequent enterprises. In the "Meta-Visual" exhibition, in
2005, the new questionnaire system for counting a total
numbers of the opinions automatically, using the wireless
pen tool by NTT COMWARE CORPORATION.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

If the place of media art exhibitions increase in
number, a more interesting work and the new talent can be
seen, and we can turn and continue the trial of our
perception which we have continued from B.C. to the
future. Today’s world is one of shared cultural aspirations
and shared images. Imaging is at its center.
Meanwhile, as I suggested earlier, we should come to
terms with the simple truth that, just as we must look to
our past, so our future too will have its roots in the present.
Like many of the Asian countries, government’s
support for media art and the activities for “Promotion of
media art contents” have started in Japan. Student works
have been highly evaluated even overseas. In the spring of
2005, over 160 Japanese four-year collages and
universities had courses or lectures of digital/media art
studies. The number is still increasing, and it will be over
200. And if we are to include other schools and academic
institutes, the number would be far more. That is to say
countless students graduate from these educational
facilities each year. There are over 60 digital/media art
related events held every year. And the number of major
digital/media art organizations in Japan is over 80.
Where would the new talents for the next digital
expressions be found? Media art will not be confined in
the cybernetic space and computer screens, but it will
certainly spread its stage to other fields, including product
design, interior design, educational materials, public art
and media performance, employing old and new concepts
that would verify its significance. Yoichiro Kawaguchi's
Gemtion with traditional Japanese dance and Toshio Iwai's
Sho of Light 㨪 the sound of the sho returned as light 㨪
with Mayumi Miyata, a renowned sho player, were among
the attempts of juxtapose digital images with real-time
performances. Not only the traditions have universal
values, but there are new values that would attract media
artists and people in the world as well. As the conventional
values unique to Japan such as “WABI” and “SABI” have
been brought abroad, the concept “MOE, cherish
affection,” which was recently established in the
Akihabara’s OTAKU culture, is becoming familiar notion
in France and other countries.
Also, new artists are making their own fields where
they can give birth to the new expressions, by
interconnecting digital domain to the domains once
considered to be irrelevant (literature, medical science, and
body reconstruction.) To support the digital/media art
education, we must not limit its area by preconceived
ideas. It is important to create the social links between the
museums and the other specialized institutions, and give
the students opportunities to experience these emerging
subfields on educational purposes. And it is the educators
who play essential roles in creating this alternative
digital/media art space.

For the last several years, the Japanese government
has subsidized researches in science and technology with
the projects such as “CREST” for group researchers, and
“SAKIGAKE, a forerunner” for individual researchers.
Exhibition in workshops and museums where people from
children to adults can attend is an effective way to share
the results of these cutting-edge researches.
As mentioned above, in the CG Contest for Students,
there are several young artists who pay homage to the past
pre-cinema history of image media. Tokyo Metropolitan
Museum of Photography has invited contemporary artists
to give workshops in which the participants make image
devices originated before 19th century. A unique
educational kit co-produced by ELEKIT/EK Japan Ltd.
and TMMP to make motorized Phenakistiscope,
Heliocinegraph and Zoetrope was developed for the
exhibition “Meta-Visual” in 2005, and it is planned to be
for sale internationally by latter half of 2006. [Figure 8]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

Figure 8. Meta-Visual Workshop and La Nature,
1882
If the policy for supporting the development of such
tools and kits is established, the students and the pupils
who study digital/media art as a compulsory can be more
easily become familiar with the concept of the image
media. It is not that all the children who receive media art
education will be media artists. It is for the students other
than those who wish to be artists as well. The
reinforcement of the media art education will mean a lot,
especially in a country like Japan where those in the
administration lack the know-how on the field. Until now,
we could not do much more than just pointing out the
importance of media literacy and our media education has
just started.In this paper, I have mainly explained the
situation around Japanese new generation. But certainly,
new generation's footsteps are approaching to our digital
art world.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography
http://www.syabi.com
Media Arts Research Committee & Computer Graphic
Arts Society, The proposals for administrative policies to
enhance cultural values of research on the cutting edge
science technologies as forms of media arts, Computer
Graphic Arts Society, Tokyo, 2005.
Tomoe Moriyama, ReImagination:Image/Media/Musuem
Kousakusya publishing, Tokyo, 2002
Tomoe Moriyama, Meta Visual: 10e Anniversaire du
Tokyo
Metropolitan
Museum
of
Photography,
FILIGRANES Editions, Paris, 2005
Tomoko Hatanaka, Tomoe Moriyama, Where Art and
Technology Meet – Media Arts in Museum Exhibitions and
Workshops, Proceedings of International Symposium on
Empirical Aesthetics: Culture, Arts, and Education,
National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2005
Tomoe Moriyama, <Down the long, Dark Road Ahead –
to n_ext: New Generation of Media Artists> in n_ext: New
Generation of Media Artists, pp.28-30, NTT
InterCommunication Center [ICC], NTT Publishers,
Tokyo, 2004

