Distorted Conversations: On and Offline Explorations of Genomic Art
Holly Longstaff, MA
The University of British Columbia 227 – 6356 Agricultural Road, Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z2
{longstaf@interchange.ubc.ca}
Abstract
This paper explores the metaphors of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), or the genetic
engineering of human embryos, through genomic art.
Conversations about technologies like PGD typically
center on issues of genetic determinism and autonomy.
“Distorted conversations” exposes these issues by
pushing the metaphor of ethical determinism as
expressed through anonymous “conversations” distorted
through online isolation and offline visualization
technology. Participants are invited to contribute their
hopes and concerns about this technology on a blog site.
Portions of these conversations are converted into
minuscule text and adhered to petri dishes that would
typically be used during PGD procedures. Observers are
then invited to join in this distorted conversation through
the aid of a microscope. In this way, the conversation
mimics the actual procedures of PGD and every aspect
of the online and offline portions of the piece are
controlled by and manipulated through PGD-type
technology.
Keywords--- pre-implantation genetic diagnosis,
genomic art, genetic and ethical determinism, autonomy

1. Introduction
The genetic engineering (GE) of human embryos
during pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD)
simultaneously draws out deeply held hopes and
concerns for society’s members. [1] Yet discussions
about this and other similar procedures often fail to
articulate these important and sometimes troubling
aspects of genomic science. In the aftermath of critical
cultural junctions like the Human Genome Project,[2]
ma n y artists have recognized this omission and have
begun to explore subverted issues related to emerging
technologies . As new GE technologies stretch our
cultural and ethical boundaries, so too must the art that
explores them. “Distorted conversations” exposes
obscured topics by pushing the metaphor of ethical
determinism as expressed through anonymous
conversations distorted through online isolation and
offline visualization technology.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

2. Background
PGD is used to analyze genetic material from in
vitro human embryos in order to screen for so called
abnormalities or identify genetic markers for specific
conditions. During PGD, cells (called blastomeres) or the
polar body (structure extruded from the egg or embryo
after fertilization that contains a copy of the genetic
material) are extracted from the fertilized embryo at day
3 when the embryo has 8-10 cells. [3] DNA from these
embryos is then multiplied thousands of times in order to
identify specific genes. Genetically “good” embryos are
then selected and put back into the uterus of the female
patient and grown to term.
Scientific conversations about technologies like
PGD typically center on issues of genetic determinism
and autonomy . We talk of “bad” embryos with abnormal
markers being identified and discarded and conditions
being avoided. Topics relating to broad ethical
considerations
are
often
absent.
“Distorted
conversations” exposes the deterministic assumptions
surrounding PGD by pushing a metaphor of ethical
determinism.
Benefits of PGD are usually couched in our shared
obsession with the principal of personal autonomy. This
concept is sometimes viewed as an overriding ethical
principle in the Canadian health care system and its
policies, often trumping conversations regarding
relational autonomy,
justice, beneficence, and
nonmaleficence. [4] [5] To highlight this issue,
participants of “Distorted Conversations” are forced to
participate through isolated online environments that
mimic a state of perfect (and impossible) personal
autonomy .

3. Distorted Conversations
In “Distorted Conversations” participants are invited
to contribute their hopes and concerns about this
technology on a blog site. Those who contribute
anonymous thoughts to this site will likely never meet
face-to-face. They instead participate in fractured,
isolated online conversations, contributing their thoughts
as a group of autonomous individuals. Their opinions
originate from within the DNA of embryos similar to
genetic conditions. The potential for ethical dilemmas
stemming from PGD exists, although it is not tangible.

These ethical dimensions, much like the genetic
conditions PGD technology detects, will develop over
time and impact society, whether we expose them or not.
Selected online conversations are converted into
minuscule text and adhered to petri dishes that would
typically be used during PGD procedures for the offline
portion of the piece. These dishes are then arranged in
piles around a microscope. Observers of the installation
are invited to join in this distorted conversation through
the aid of a microscope. They are also free to contribute
to the autonomous online conversion via the blog site. In
this way, conversations mimic the actual processes of
PGD and every aspect of both the online and offline
portions of the piece are controlled by and manipulated
through PGD- type technology.

4. Conclusions
“Distorted Conversations” should expose issues
about PGD that might not otherwise surface. The
participants can use this piece as a tool to communicate
deeply personal beliefs and in doing so, spark continued
debate and dialogue about this technology for observers.
The piece is also perpetual in that participants and
observers may continue to contribute their thoughts to
the blog at any time. It is hoped that this piece will
continue to foster public debate and dialogue about
genomic science.

5. References
[1] Robinson B.A. (2005). Pre-Implantation Genetic Diagnosis.
Religious Tolerance. org maintained by the Ontario
Consultants on Religious Tolerance. Retrieved on November
15, 2005 from http://www.religioustolerance.org/abo_pgd.ht
and Simoncelli, Tania M. & The International Center for
Technology Assessment. (2003). Pre-Implantation Genetic
Diagnosis: Ethical Guidelines for Responsible Regulation.
Submission to the President’s Council on Bioethics. Retrieved
on
November
15,
2005
from
http://www.icta.org/doc/pgd%20guidelines.pdf
[2] See for example: Gene (sis) Contemporary Art Explores
Human Genomics. (2000). Retrieved on February 23, 2006
from http://www.gene-sis.net/artists_kac.html, Transhumanist
Arts & Culture. (2006). Retrieved on February 23, 2006 from
http://www.transhumanist.biz/
[3]Chen, Serena M.D. (2005) Can Preimplantation Genetic
Diagnosis (PGD) Reduce the Risk for Recurrent Pregnancy
Loss? The InterNational Council on Infertility Information
Dissemination, Inc. Retrieved on November 22, 2005 from
http://www.inciid.org/printpage.php?cat=pgd&id=265
[4] Government of Canada Privy Council Office. (2000).
Federalism and democracy: The Canadian experience.
Retrieved on November 27, 2005 from http://www.pco
bcp.gc.ca/aia/default.asp?Language=E&page=pressroom&sub=
speeches&doc=20000414_e.htm

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[5] I am using Beachamp and Childress’s definition of
autonomy here although they are clear that the principle DOES
NOT override all others according to their account of
biomedical ethics. Beachamp,Tom and Childress, James.
(2001). Principles of Biomedical Ethics Fifth Version. Oxford
University Press

