Benefits of Information Visualization Systems
for Administrative Data Analysts
Victor González, Alfred Kobsa
School of Information and Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
{vmgyg,kobsa}@ics.uci.edu
Abstract1
This paper reports results from a study on the
adoption of an information visualization system by
administrative data analysts. Despite the fact that the
system was neither fully integrated with their current
software tools nor with their existing data analysis
practices, analysts identified a number of key benefits that
visualization systems provide to their work. These benefits
for the most part occurred when analysts went beyond
their habitual and well-mastered data analysis routines
and engaged in creative discovery processes. We analyze
the conditions under which these benefits arose, to inform
the design of visualization systems that can better assist
the work of administrative data analysts.

1. Introduction
Empirical studies of the benefits of information
visualization systems have generally been designed as
laboratory experiments (see [1] for an overview). Lab
approaches allow one to maintain tight control over the
experimental tasks and conditions, and thereby to identify
and measure more precisely the effects of individual characteristics of visualization software. However, lab
approaches are limited when we want to study how a
system assists people in the context of actual professional
work, rather than in isolated experimental tasks. Workplace studies and in situ observations are a better means
to obtain a more comprehensive picture and to determine
the critical factors that lead to the adoption of a system
[4]. We decided to conduct such a situated study to reveal
the benefits that data analysts obtain from using a
visualization system in the context of their current work
routines, data, and software infrastructure.
Anecdotic evidence from vendors and developers
indicates that data analysts envision clear benefits from
information visualization systems as soon as they become
introduced to them. They quickly understand that these
systems can enhance their work by allowing them to view
1
This research has been supported by the Center for Research on Information Technology and Organizations (CRITO), UC Irvine.

entire data sets, to flexibly manipulate data, and to easily
turn findings into charts and reports. Our study confirms
this anecdotic evidence but additionally indicates that
these benefits are mainly achieved when analysts are
driven to abandon their routine data analysis processes
and to come to a new understanding of their data.
In this paper, we present a number of cases in which
analysts obtained clear benefits by using an information
visualization system to support creative discovery
processes. These benefits were achieved when subjects
visually explored their data to discover new relationships,
trends, and outliers. The administrative data analysts
discovered that this kind of analysis was not common
practice for them, and that their current tools did not
support nor promote such practices. They had to find out
how to conduct this kind of analysis, both with respect to
doing it visually and the required depth of analysis.
In the remainder of this paper, we will describe the
participants of this study (Section 2) as well as the
research methods (Section 3). In Section 4, we report that
benefits mostly occurred when analysts departed from
their routine data analysis, and describe three types of
benefits that we observed. In Section 5 we substantiate
our claims with a number of case studies. Section 6
finally discusses the results and presents some recommendations for the design of information visualization
systems aimed at supporting the work of administrative
data analysts.

2. Data analysts participating in our study
Our subjects were five office workers who routinely
use large amounts of numerical data on their jobs and
were therefore likely to benefit from information visualization systems. Four subjects came from different
administrative units of the University of California,
Irvine; the fifth works for a major U.S. aerospace
company. The role of each subject is briefly described
below.
Subject A is a statistical analyst in a Human
Resources Department. He is in charge of distributing
information to a large number of people in his own unit
and in external organizations (e.g. unions). He routinely

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

accesses central databases,
and feeds report generators
that he had created since
joining the department a year
ago.
Subject B works as a
senior assistant director at a
Planning and Analytic Studies
unit. She performs high-level
analytic work and is proficient
in software tools like statistics
packages, spreadsheets and
graphics programs.
Subject C manages grants
for more than twenty faculty
who frequently request status
reports for their funds. She
also produces regular reports
for the Dean and other units
on campus. She uses mainly
spreadsheets,
but
only
exploits a small part of their functionality (e.g., she does
not program or use macros).
Subject D works as a director at the Research Administration unit. She supervises more than twenty staff
members who provide support to all researchers on
campus. She exchanges information (spreadsheets,
reports, etc.) with other units on campus, and with federal
and state research entities.
Subject E works as Senior Finance Analyst and
Project Supervisor in the aerospace industry and monitors
the financial situation of more than a hundred projects. He
is an expert in programming spreadsheet macros and web
forms.
All subjects distribute information and generate
reports for others on their jobs (e.g., for colleagues,
supervisors or external organizations). They have to
access, integrate and consolidate data from different
repositories (e.g. data warehouses or the Internet). To
process, analyze and deliver their data, they routinely use
tools like spreadsheets, small database programs (e.g.
Microsoft Access), word-processors and presentation
software. One subject whose job requires high-level
analytical work also uses statistical tools on a daily basis
(specifically SPSS).
While the responsibilities and roles of our subjects
varied, the common denominator was that their work
routinely requires the analysis and interpretation of large
amounts of numeric data that are created by themselves or
by others. Our subjects worked in different organizational
units and at different hierarchical levels, which let us
observe how people with different perspectives use an
information visualization system. Since our subjects used
different software systems to support their data analysis,
we also expected to see how the introduction of a
visualization system would affect the usage of their
current tools.

Figure 1: InfoZoom's overview mode

3. Methods
3.1 Visualization system used
Subjects in this study used humanIT’s InfoZoom
Professional 3.62 EN (formerly FOCUS [6][7]). We opted
for Infozoom since it represents a good example of how
the paradigm of information visualization can be
implemented in a software tool, and since we found in
prior research that users generally had few problems
learning and using this system [3][5]. InfoZoom presents
data in three different views.
In the “overview” mode, the value distribution of each
database attribute is displayed as a horizontal bar (in the
case of categorical data) or as an ascending or descending
horizontal graph (in the case of quantitative data). Fig. 1
shows a small car database in this visualization mode. In
the “Manufacturer” line, one can see that most car models
in the database are being produced by VW. The “Cylinders” line shows that nearly all cars have four cylinders.
The ascending line in the “MPG” attribute (miles per
gallon) indicates that the mileage is not evenly distributed, but is skewed towards lower values. The same holds
true for “Horsepower”, “Weight” and “Acceleration”.
Attribute lines are completely independent in this mode,
i.e. one cannot make any comparisons between them.
In InfoZooms “wide view”, the whole database is displayed in table format. This view is useful for comparing
a few objects only and for viewing individual data values.
The “compressed view”, finally, compacts the
visualization horizontally to fit the window width. In this

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

view, a database object is a vertical “column” in the
visualization. Through (hierarchical) sorting of attribute
lines, correlations and other dependencies between
attributes can be revealed. An example for a discovery in
InfoZoom’s compressed view is given in [8].
In all three views, values of (identical adjacent)
attributes become textually, numerically or symbolically
displayed wherever space permits this. Making sense of a
database thereby becomes facilitated [3].
InfoZoom's central operation is “zooming” into information subspaces by double-clicking on attribute values,
or sets/ranges of values. InfoZoom thereupon displays
records only that contain the specific attribute value(s).
Fig. 1 actually does not show the complete cars database,
but rather the result of such a zooming operation into
those car models whose “Origin” is European (to indicate
this, InfoZoom displays the value “European” in red,
which is not visible in Fig. 1). Slow-motion animation
makes it easier to monitor the changes in the other
attributes. InfoZoom also allows one to exclude certain
attribute values or disregard attributes, define new
variables in dependence of one or two existing ones,
highlight extreme values, and create a variety of charts
(mostly for reporting purposes).
InfoZoom can read a number of file formats for
tabular data, and also supports ODBC access to database
servers. InfoZoom data files can be saved as spreadsheets
in which further manipulations can be performed.

3.2 Procedures
Prior to installing InfoZoom at the workplaces of our
participants, we conducted initial interviews to familiarize
ourselves with their job descriptions and work practices.
We asked about their educational backgrounds, training,
main responsibilities, work processes in which they are
involved, people with whom they interact, etc. We
devoted a significant amount of time talking about the
ways in which they currently perform data analysis, their
routines, the situations that trigger it, and the software
tools they use to support it. The interviews were semistructured and lasted for about 50 minutes on average.
Soon after the initial interview, participants received a
90-minute one-on-one tutorial and training in the usage of
InfoZoom. They had the chance to practice using the
system through exercises that covered its main
functionality.
After the training, we asked the subjects to use
InfoZoom with their own data. They could choose any
data set that was related to any project they were carrying
out at the moment. The goal was to let them understand
the system within the context of their own work.
Six interviews were scheduled with each participant
thereafter during the duration of the study, with at least
one week in between. Subjects could report their
experiences analyzing their own data with InfoZoom and

trying to integrate the system into their current work
practices. During these sessions, they also received
additional help and advice. The interviews lasted between
25 and 45 minutes and were audiotaped and transcribed.
A final interview was scheduled at the end of the
study, where we discussed in detail the overall experience
of using InfoZoom.

4. Results
This section presents some of the preliminary results
of our study. We first describe the circumstances under
which most of the observed benefits occurred. We then
describe these benefits in more detail and provide
examples.

4.1. Benefits occurred when routine data analysis
broke down
Our subjects perform data analysis when they have to
produce reports for themselves or for other people. As
data analysts learn what is required on their jobs, they
develop routines and use templates to facilitate the
creation of such reports and to save time. Report
templates or previous reports are reused periodically:
"We have a table format, and a lot of what we do
we've been doing for some time historically. So we have
various formats archived, and it's often easier to fall back
on what's already written and then just make some minor
changes.
Data Analyst B - 01-17-03
In the case of such recurring reports, analysts already
know beforehand what the important relationships are.
Data analysis in this case only consists of checking that
the current data is consistent with these expectations. (If it
is inconsistent, analysts will first assume that there are
errors in the data rather than changing their expectations).
Whenever data analysts need to create new reports
for which previous reports are irrelevant, they have to
perform a much deeper analysis. Analysts thereby lack a
point of reference for a comparison and have to spend
considerable time ascertaining that their understanding of
the data is correct. Our study showed that this second type
of analysis is neither a common nor a predictable part of
the their daily work. Such an analysis may be needed,
e.g., when an external entity requests a report for the first
time, or when supervisors or colleagues encounter
problems and want relevant data to be analyzed. Data
analysts develop routines and templates to accommodate
such extraordinary situations, but they cannot go very far
making provisions for every possible request.
The need for a deep analysis arises whenever the
creation of reports requires from data analyst to go
beyond what is considered in current routines. Such a
breakdown of current processes forces people to abandon
well-mastered routines and faces them with the challenge

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

of recreating them. This breakdown can only be overcome
by trying to make sense of the data from a new
perspective.
In such a situation, software tools are required that
allow one to quickly manipulate data and to look at it in
different ways. If the tools are adequate, they will help
overcome the breakdowns. If this is complicated or
tedious, or if the effort required is too high compared with
the achievable benefits, it is very likely that these
breakdowns remain unsolved. When first introduced to
InfoZoom, our subjects mentioned many such unsolved
questions and expressed the expectation that the system
could help them to finally obtain an answer.

system provides immediate visual feedback. After
evaluating the results, operations can also be undone very
easily.
"In Excel, it's not easy... you have to select attributes
of the people you want to go in there. I don't know, but I
use it, it's easier because I can tell [InfoZoom] what I
want by clicking instead of trying to figure out where I
want it on my graph..."
Data Analyst D - 02-21-03

5. Case studies of benefits and lack of benefits
5.1 Quest for complementarity vs. usage in
breakdown situations

4.2. Identified benefits for data analysis
In general, the administrative data analysts in our
study felt that visual tools benefited them in three
different ways, which will be described below.
4.2.1 Flexibility in handling data. InfoZoom gave data
analysts more flexibility in handling information. Data
analysts appreciated being able to quickly include or
exclude data for visualization, so they could concentrate
on certain portions of data:
"...[InfoZoom] allowed me to focus and compare... by
comparing each committee, maybe I'm able to identify,
'well there's a training need for this persons' or 'maybe
we've been disproportionately assigning workload to this
third committee'. Whereas if I had a table, it wouldn't be
nearly as easy to say, 'OK, let's separate out all the C and
let's just look at A and B because their work is more
similar to each other'. [InfoZoom] allowed me to look at
problems from different vantage points more easily and
quickly"
Data Analyst C - 12-10-02
4.2.2 Full picture of complete data. InfoZoom allows
data analysts to obtain a clear picture of their complete
data, and to be able to see the wealth of information that
lies in this data. Data analysts quickly discovered
properties of their data that were not clearly visible or
straightforwardly obtainable with other tools.
"InfoZoom helped me to understand my data.... just
like that one example of how we could find how many
years the average PhD student took to complete the
program under each faculty. I didn't know it could come
up with that information, or I don't know if Excel could
have. Maybe it could have, but it would have taken more
of my time, but it surprised me some of the information
that it could come up with."
Data Analyst D - 02-21-03
4.2.3 Easy extraction of charts and reports. Finally,
InfoZoom offered to analysts easier ways for extracting
reports from data than their current tools. They found that
querying the data with InfoZoom was easier since the

The potential benefits of the visualization system were
detected early in the adoption process, in fact mostly
already the first time that subjects had the chance to
visually interact with their own data. While using
InfoZoom for work-related problems was a requirement
for participating in the study, subjects turned out to
actually be very keen to try out the system on some of
their current problems and data.
Their first approach to using InfoZoom was to see
how it could complement their existing tools. Initially,
many of our subjects tried to duplicate with InfoZoom
what other tools already provided to them. Gradually
they realized, however, that their current procedures for
data analysis were shaped by the characteristics of their
current systems. Using InfoZoom would therefore require
major changes in these procedures, which was not
worthwhile upfront. While InfoZoom offered some
potential advantages compared with their current tools,
they realized that the actual challenge was that by
replacing some of their tools with InfoZoom, they would
discard not only these tools but also comprehensive
familiar solutions for data analysis. This situation
produced some frustration in two of our subjects, since
they liked the advantages of information visualization but
could not integrate the system in such a way as to
complement their current well-mastered practices. They
kept looking for ways to achieve complementarity, but
their existing data analysis solutions were too refined and
self-contained to make changes seem worthwhile.
Other subjects, after trying for a short time to simulate
their existing system, opted instead to use InfoZoom to
solve data analysis breakdowns that occurred in their
work. They had questions about relationships among data
attributes, wanted to know their distributions, or
understand dependencies among them. Solving these
questions was not perceived as being critical for their
daily work, but rather as having a positive impact on
future analyses. Furthermore, they considered this to be a
good way to explore the integration of InfoZoom into
their work processes.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Using InfoZoom to solve breakdowns let our subjects
analyze data in a new way. Soon they started to realize
that the kind of data exploration that InfoZoom enabled
was definitely not part of their typical routines for data
analysis, in two senses. First, given that they had been
working as data analysts for quite a long time, deeper
analysis is not something they do every day; it emerges
only once in a while, when uncommon reports are
requested from them. Second, they generally do not
analyze data visually due to a lack of appropriate tools.
They gradually discovered that InfoZoom was
empowering them to be creative, to move beyond their
present concerns and questions regarding their data, and
to discover new information in the data. Experiencing the
value of visual representations as part of creative
processes was a strong source of motivation for them
during our study. In the following section, we describe
three cases how subjects engaged in creative processes
while using InfoZoom.

5.2 Examples of benefits when analysts went
beyond routine data analysis
5.2.1 Debunking wrong assumptions.
A project
manager who is well versed in the usage of spreadsheets
and has good analytical skills was interested in exploring
her data to support in-house training efforts of her
department. For some time she had noticed an increased
delay in some of their internal processes (namely protocol
approval). She decided to use InfoZoom and to visually
comprehend the relationships between different variables
and how they affected the time to complete the process.
She was able to quickly determine that her original
intuition regarding the reasons for this delay were wrong,
discover the real cause, and take further actions to
alleviate the problem:
"Well, I would say the most dramatic result was where
a trend clearly and obviously debunked a
misapprehension that we had.... We had made an
assumption that certain things would hold up protocol
approval, and it was clear immediately visually that the
number one variable that holds up protocol approval is
whether there is any off-site component. It was a real
revelation for us, and I don't think we would have come to
that drawing down tables."
Data Analyst C - 12-10-02
After debunking their initial flawed assumptions, she and
her team decided to continue monitoring this chief factor
for delays, and to restructure their reports accordingly. In
other words, InfoZoom let them to instigate a new data
analysis process and a new way of looking at their data
that will give high weight to this particular variable.
5.2.2 Answering long-time unsolved questions. Another
subject, a financial analyst, had kept for a long time a list
of unanswered questions about some properties of the
data that she works with on a daily basis. The answers to

these questions were not critical for her work, but
knowing them would enable her to be more responsive to
external demands. People from other units often asked her
about these properties, and her reaction was to send them
the data so they could find out the answer for themselves.
She knows how to use her software tools to produce the
results, but was reluctant to spend much time doing it
herself. When we started the study, she was motivated
because she realized that InfoZoom offered a quick way
to answer these questions.
"They were always asking us that kind of questions or
"how many women in the program vs. men," "how many
undegrads we have vs. grads," "how many are in the
PhD, in the Master's Program." So we were asked those
kind of questions but it was tedious to get the results."
Data Analyst D - 02-21-03
This analyst determined the answers to these questions,
but also came up with further insights that she shared with
people from other administrative units. She used the
discovered information to advise other administrators of
certain previously unknown relationships in their data.
After this exercise, she suggested many ways in which
their processes for data analysis and reporting could be
modified, so as to include references to the valuable
information that she had found.
5.2.3 Checking trends before the extra step. A senior
data analyst used InfoZoom as a way to pre-explore data.
She is very well versed in statistical packages
(specifically SPSS). For a while, she tried in vain to
duplicate with InfoZoom what she can easily do with her
current tools. Nevertheless she decided that visual
exploration was something that she was lacking. While
conducting research for a major report to extra-mural
organizations, she used visual representations to derive
new interesting trends from her data. For those trends that
looked promising, she took the extra step and applied
more formal statistics to confirm its significance. This is
another example of a creative use of InfoZoom, where the
goal was to look at the data and to explore them. Once
candidates for relationships and trends were identified,
they could be incorporated into existing work practices.

6. Discussion
The fact that some of our subjects were able to use
InfoZoom to support creative problem solving that was
not part of their daily routine teaches us important lessons
about data analysis. Creative discovery processes are
almost never structured, and require lots of interaction
with the data before one can make sense of them and
discover interesting facts. This explains why InfoZoom
became such a valuable tool. InfoZoom is a relatively
transparent and intuitively comprehensible system that
allows for very flexible interaction [5]. Our users were

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

therefore relatively easily able to identify relationships
between variables that they found important.
Once they found such relationships, they aimed at
establishing a routine that would let them revisit these
relations regularly in the future. They did not want to
repeat the discovery process though, but to monitor the
discovered trend or relationship over time using their
familiar tools and processes:
"...What I would really love to do is to include all the
2002 data because the reports I was running was 2000
and 2001.... it would be helpful, like I said, not to ask new
questions, but to go back and ask some of the same
questions but including the 2002 data"
Data Analyst C - 12-10-02
Subjects mentioned that once they had discovered a
noteworthy property in the data, they would try to use
tools other than InfoZoom to either obtain additional
information, or create templates or procedures that would
facilitate (and possibly automate) the generation of
reports about this property. This indicates that InfoZoom,
and probably also other visualization tools, support a
general discovery phase that precedes the routine data
analysis process, rather than support the routine analysis
processes themselves. For our data analysts, the benefits
of visually exploring the data can only be understood in
the context of an activity whose final goal is a new data
analysis routine supported by templates and automated
procedures. The real value of InfoZoom lies in using it in
creative ways to discover something, rather than just to
confirm something. This implies that tools like InfoZoom
have to provide the means not just to visually reveal
properties of data, but also to transfer the data and the
discovered properties to other applications, so that the
findings can be further analyzed and compiled into
queries for future reports.
We observed that subjects who wanted to use
InfoZoom together with their current tools experienced
inconveniences [2]. They wanted to quickly move data
forward and backward between InfoZoom and their tools,
or even better be able to call InfoZoom functionality
within their own tools, but were unable to do either. The
system also did not provide any support to export their
findings, i.e. the discovered relationships, trends and
outliers as well as the steps taken to isolate them. Our
subjects would like to have an easy way to transfer these

findings to their current applications, where subsequent
processing and automation can be performed. Further
analysis may provide additional data to define the
characteristics of a visualization system that can achieve
such an integration.

7. References
[1] C. Chen and Y. Yu, “Empirical Studies of Information
Visualization: A Meta-Analysis”, International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 53, Academic Press, San Diego,
CA, 2000, 851-866.
[2] V. González and A. Kobsa, “User Adoption of Information
Visualization Systems”, I-KNOW'03 Workshop on Knowledge and Information Visualisation (KIV2003), Graz,
Austria, Springer-Verlag, 2003, to appear.
[3] A. Kobsa, “An Empirical Comparison of Three Commercial Information Visualization Systems”, IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization, San Diego, CA, IEEE Press,
Los Alamitos, CA, 2001, 123-130.
[4] Luff, P., J. Hidmarsh, and C. Heath, eds. Workplace
Studies: Recovering Work Practice and Informing Design.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2000.
[5] G. Mark, A. Kobsa, and V. González, “Do Four Eyes See
Better than Two? Collaborative versus Individual Discovery in Data Visualization Systems”, Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation. London, England, IEEE Press, Los Alamitos, CA,
2003, to appear.
[6] M. Spenke, C. Beilken, and T. Berlage, “The Interactive
Table for Product Comparison and Selection”, UIST-96
Ninth Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology, Seattle, WA, ACM Press, New York, NY,
1996, 41-50. http://fit.gmd.de/~cici/Focus/Paper/uist96.htm
[7] Spenke, M. and C. Beilken, “Discovery Challenge: Visual,
Interactive Data Mining with InfoZoom – the Financial
Data Set”, Workshop Notes on "Discovery Challenge", 3rd
European Conference on Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (PKDD'99), 1999, 33-38.
http://fit.gmd.de/~cici/InfoZoom/DiscoveryChallenge/Fina
ncial.ps
[8] Mark, G., K. Carpenter, and A. Kobsa (2003): “A Model
of Synchronous Collaborative Information Visualization”,
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Information Visualisation. London, England, IEEE Press,
Los Alamitos, CA, 2003, to appear.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

