Virtual reality for Neuropsychological diagnosis and rehabilitation:
A Survey.
Yasir Khan, Zhijie. Xu, Mark Stigant.
University of Huddersfield UK.
Abstract
Recently the considerable potential of virtual
reality has been recognized for the scientific study,
diagnosis and treatment in the field of mental healthcare.
It provides unique opportunity to provide natural interface
and to mimic actual challenges faced by impaired subjects
in their lives. In spite of certain limitations, some work
has emerged which provides guidelines for future
research efforts. Shortlist of such applications includes
assessment and treatment of phobias; obsessive
compulsive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorders and
hyperactive attention deficit syndromes. This paper is an
effort to highlights these recent and ongoing research
projects and compare this unique paradigm with
conventional non –VR techniques by discussion of
potential benefits and possible shortcomings. Due to the
nature of research, ethical and human factors cannot be
over emphasized. Paper also describes the limitations of
VR in the field of practical psychology as media hype has
over sold its potential. With recent advances in
technology, it is not unrealistic to hope that VR will soon
be a part of clinician’s armoury.

1. Introduction
Traumatic Brain injury and stroke are major
causes of disability. The were labelled as “silent
epidemic” by Klien[1]. Post-traumatic impairments appear
in a wide range of functions including arousal activation,
general level of activity, motivation, mood and cognition.
These impairments persist in combination indefinitely and
affect interpersonal relationships, social adjustment and
most importantly vocational status.
Persistent
impairments cause vicious circle of isolation, withdrawal
and sub-optimal physiological status.
Due to the sheer size of this problem,
rehabilitation of such patients has always been a hot
perused
area
of
research.
Neuropsychological
rehabilitation (NR) refers to therapeutic methodology that
retrains or minimizes problems caused by neurological
deficits. Individualized treatment programs help manage

specific problems with memory, thinking, attention,
perception, problem solving, reasoning, and executive
functions such as self-awareness of strengths and
weaknesses, goal setting, planning, self-initiation and selfmonitoring.
NR lacks a coherent theoretical basis. The
practice itself has seen little significant change for the
better since the turn of the century and there remains an
over scepticism of therapeutic efficacy. Despite of very
professional efforts of the staff involved substantial degree
of disability persists in many brain-injured people in long
term [2].
In their quest for meaningful relationship with
NR, researcher studied electrophysiological events [3],
tracked receptor binding [4], and the monitored brain
structure and function. These researches included
everything from the examination of histological
preparations to in vivo functional brain activation
measurements.
The informatics revolution of the second half of
the 20th century increased the diffusion of the computers
in psychology research. Although initially experimental
psychologists used the computer mainly for gathering and
processing experimental data, later it became an important
support of all phases of the experimental procedure, from
task presentation to on-line storage and recording of
subject’s responses [5]
Virtual reality can be viewed as advanced form
of computer interface that allows users to interact with and
become immersed in computer generated environment.
This technology has undergone a transition in the past few
years that has taken it out of the realm of expensive toy
and into that of functional technology [6]. While many
VR applications have emerged in the areas of
entertainment, education, military training, physical
rehabilitation, and medicine, only recently has the
considerable potential of VR for the study and
rehabilitation of human cognitive processes been
recognized [7,8].

2. Advantages for Using Virtual Reality for
Neuropsychological Therapy

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

employment in treatment of phobias, body image
disturbances and other examples (which will be referenced
later). We can deduce following advantages of these
technique over conventional one.

Virtual reality has proved to be a break through
in psychological rehabilitation. Looking at its successful
which can be withdrawn afterwards. For example patients
of Parkinson disease were benefited when they were
presented with stepping-stones in VR.[26] One of five
patients continued showing same improvement in reality.

2.1. Ecological Validity

2.5. Real time performance feedback

Accurate and comprehensive measurement of the
disability is the first step in any rehabilitation. The current
methodology is mature and well developed but there has
always been a debate about how best to assess cognitive
function such as reasoning, decision-making and attention.
There has always been a concern about how and what is
measured under these headings relates to practical skills in
real life settings. Laboratory based measures of cognitive
function which had been developed within the mainstream
of experimental psychology were increasingly seen as too
narrow or too artificial to give an accurate guide to
cognitive function in real life situations. [9]
It was suggested that possible solution to the
problem lies in measuring these functions in Virtual
environments. VR allows the measurement of cognitive
function to be made in the context of interaction with a
realistic everyday environment.

Computer-based systems provide results instantly.
VR takes this quality a little further to calculate
performance attributes in real time. Tasks are designed in
a way to give immediate feedback on performance. In
conventional techniques, patients are shown video
recording of their performance or used other techniques
for feedback such as showing their drawings after clock
drawing test in spatial neglect patients. This feedback is
believed to help them in appreciation of their disability.

2.2. Control and consistency
VR allows placing a neurological patient in a
variety of precisely controlled stimulated environments,
which are entirely safe and intentionally programmed to
address sensory or motor impairment.[10] As Virtual
environment absorb the patients attention due to
mutisensorial interactivity, so there is minimum chance of
distraction by any other stimuli present in physical
environment. Stimuli presented can be monitored and
ensured for their intensity and presentation e.g. quality
and quantity of audio or position and presentation of
objects.

2.3. Hierarchal and repetitive stimuli
VEs are highly flexible and programmable. They
enable the therapist to define the hierarchy of stimuli,
which can be varied from simple to complex, contingent
upon success. In other words, it is possible to introduce
the stimuli, which adapt to the responses by the user and
makes the task more complex or simpler depending upon
previous progress. [11]

2.6. Self guided exploration and testing
Due to the intuitive design of virtual
environments, it is possible that patient could be “left
alone” for self exploration and navigation. This freedom
of movement and behavior is believed to awaken the selfconfidence in these. This more natural pattern of their
exploration of the new environment gives a good insight
in their behavioral study.

2.7. Tailor made VR for individual requirement
Brain injury or stroke leaves individual with
highly varied symptoms. These depend on the area of
brain involved, type of injury and other factors such as age
and previous health status. Type and severity of resulting
disability is also highly varied. Both the synthetic
environment itself and the manner in which this
environment is modified by the user responses can be
tailored to the needs of each client and/or therapeutic
application.[12] For example, if sight is severed by
traumatic injury, VR experienced can be enhanced by
audio or tactile stimulus.

2.8. Complete performance monitoring
VR environment are constructed in a way that
performance of an individual can be monitored using any
specialized equipment such as body trackers. As VR
provides recreation of outdoor or less suitable
environment, it is easy to use sensitive and expensive
equipment in controlled environment.

2.4. Selective emphasis:
2.9. Safe learning environment
Disabilities resulting from brain injury are
complicated psychologically. Person enters the vicious
circle of disability, lost confidence, decreased motivation
and increased disability. User performance in a Virtual
environment can be tailored to give the impression of
success to build up their confidence. Certain cueing
stimuli can be designed to help in completing a task,

Presence of staff and other individuals in the
surrounding results in discomfort in rehabilitation
routines. Feeling of embarrassment has been noted
especially when the environment is shared by individuals
with more severe grade of disability.[13] VR is a tool that
provides self-paced learning environment. Person can

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

exercise as long as he likes only limited being the side
effects of VR. VR application mimicking street crossing
and chemistry Lab have already shown encouraging
results. [14]

2.10. Enhanced motivation
Depression resulting from the disability leads to a
low self-esteem and highly de-motivated individual. This
affects rehabilitation resulting in increased disability.
Research has proved the role of psychology in re-gaining
lost functions. VR are designed to incorporate some
gaming incentives, which increase the level of presence
and interactivity. Most importantly though they enhance
the motivation of the individual.[15,16]

3. The applications
Development of a VR system specifically
designed for the assessment and cognitive rehabilitation of
cognitive functions in persons with acquired brain injuries
began in Italy.[17,18,19]
Using a standard tool (Wisconsin Card Sorting
Test-WCST) of neuropsychological assessment as a
model, these researchers have created a virtual building
which requires the person to use environmental clues in
the selection of appropriate choices (doorways) to
navigate through the building. The doorway choices vary
according to the categories of shape, color, and number of
portholes. The patient is required to refer to the previous
doorway for clues to appropriately make his/her next
choice. After the choice criterion is changed, the patient
must shift the cognitive set, analyze clues, and devise a
new choice strategy. The parameters of this system are
fully adjustable so that training applications can follow
initial standardized assessments.
Although this VE is not regarded as a substitute
for diagnostic neuropsychological tests, it was used to
diagnose brain dysfunction in selected cases. For instance,
the VE was used to document failures in everyday life
coping in a patient with an anterior thalamic stroke [20].
In particular, it produced objective clinical evidence of a
persisting frontal dysfunction in spite of unremarkable
result in traditional neuropsychological tests tapping
frontal functions.
Kuhlen et al. [21] explored the possibility of
using VEs for improving the diagnosis and therapy of
sensorimotor disturbances. Usual examination of
sensorimotor disturbances is based on various functional
tests: patients must perform motor tasks, which are
subsequently analyzed for diagnostic purposes and
therapy planning. In clinical practice, the motor
disturbances resulting from cortical and sub cortical
lesions are distinguished, but quantitative comparisons are
scarce. Even if cortical and sub cortical brain areas
extensively exchange information, little is known about

this mutual interaction in the control of sensorimotor
integration. Therefore, as noted by Kuhlen et al,
”complex situations are necessary to examine this
sensorimotor network to bring out even subtle
impairments [involving] the use of 3D space information”.
This has become only recently possible by using VEs.
Attree et al. [22] developed VEs aimed at
attention/memory assessment and training These efforts
would be particularly informative as results using
traditional methods for memory rehabilitation have
been inconsistent due to the inability to maintain a
patient’s motivation when confronting them with a
repetitive series of memory training challenges.[23]
VR training could potentially address this problem by
providing environments which initially utilize gaming
incentives followed by the gradual fading in of functional
environments with the aim of developing domain-specific
memory [24].
When investigating the transfer of training from
a simple sensorimotor virtual task (a “steadiness tester”)
to performance on the real-world equivalent it was found
that final performance on the real-world task benefited as
much from virtual as from real practice. These preliminary
results [25] support the view that positive transfer can
occur between virtual and real environments. However, it
is not sufficient to simply demonstrate that training
transfers in a given situation. Researchers need to
understand the precise conditions (immersive versus nonimmersive; degree of similarity between virtual and real
tasks; temporal factors, etc.) which are necessary for
transfer to occur.
The Human Interface Technology Laboratory at
the University of Washington, Seattle, and the
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California are the two
leading VE research groups United Stated of America.
Researchers at HITL use a field-multiplexed head-up
video display to simulate an effect, called kinesia
paradoxia, to trigger near-normal walking in akinetic
Parkinson’s patients
[26,27]. In particular, normal
walking behavior could be elicited by presenting virtual
objects and abstract visual cues moving through the
patient’s visual field at speeds that emulate normal
walking. The research team is currently identifying the
most important design parameters of the physical display
and dynamic graphics presented.
Researchers at ADRC are working on a VE to be
used for the assessment and rehabilitation of visuospatial
cognitive functions. This VE is referred to as Mental
Rotation [23]. Mental rotation is designed to present,
within a VR environment, a target stimulus that consists
of a specific configuration of 3-D blocks. After
presentation of the target stimuli, the participant is
presented with the same set of blocks that need to be
rotated to the orientation of the target and then
superimposed upon it. This approach will supposedly

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

improve the reliability and validity of Mental Rotation
assessment, as well as provide an efficient training and
rehabilitation option for this aspect of cognition.

4. Limitation into the application of VR
Despite broad and promising clinical uses,
several factors currently limit how effectively VR can be
applied to neuropsychological research. These can be
divided into two groups. Firstly, limitation of the virtual
reality itself and secondly limitation due to nature of the
research involved.

4.1. Realism
To achieve optimum level of “ecological
validity”, degree of realism cannot be ignored. Even with
recent advances in the field, development of physics based
behaviors of 3D models in a cost effective way is still an
issue. Virtual Environments used for this research are
more cartoonish rather than “virtually real”. Optimum
degree of “presence” is required for validity of
experiments. Interactivity is increased to compensate for
poor realism to achieve Optimum degree of “presence”.

4.2 Technical Complexity
To simulate rich aspects of voice, inflection,
reactions to voice or physical actions, extensive
programming is needed. Enhanced graphics and natural
interface is directly proportional to technical complexity
of these environments. The details of Physical world that
we take for granted even as ordinary as gravity cannot be
easily generated by average VR software. This task
requires highly skilled individuals with experience and
knowledge of VR as well as NR.

4.3 Hardware Limitations
Head mounted displays are by far the most
promising devices. Built in head position tracker updates
computer graphics to give an immersive feeling. But they
are bulky and often have limited field of view. These
attributes provide distraction from the ideal auditory and
visual stimulus expected.
Tactile stimuli can be mimicked but limited to
small specific objects with restricted range of movements.
Other researcher are working on simulation of olfaction,
vibration etc. These systems are only developed as
prototypes and far from stable. Without these modalities
of experience limits the range of potential experiences that
mental health researchers might want to exploit.

4.4 Standardization

As all other emerging technologies, VR lacks
concrete standards. Protocols for building 3d environment
are borrowed from gaming industry. There are so many
software libraries and tools available which are diverse
enough to be learnt by single expert. It is the
standardization process that makes any system widely
recognized
because
standardization
improves
communication and creates sufficient stability of
terminology so that learning and comparative research can
occur. Lack of agreed criteria has created independent
groups of experts on different mental disorders with their
own culture and expectation about the acceptable level of
scientific rigor.

4.5. Lack of flexibility
Ironically, standardization process is also a major
barrier
in
application
of
such
research.
Neuropsychological
research
is
restricted
by
standardizations such as Diagnostic and Statistical
manual. These represent widely accepted criteria that are
advanced through a defined and recognized methodology.
Protocols are followed for making control and study
group. These protocols aren’t flexible enough to
incorporate something as alien as VR into the same field.
Researchers have tried to develop separate protocols such
as questionnaire for Motion sickness[28] and presence
[29].

4.6. Environment information for these disorders.
Virtual Therapy though in experimental stage, is
now offered for many psychological disorders, such as
agoraphobia, acrophobia. Straightforward nature of these
disorders helped a lot in agreeing upon the nature and
form of stimuli. For example, application developed for
treatment of fear of heights immerses patient into a scene
of a high-rise building. Success in the treatment of these
disorders gave major boost in this particular area of
research but unfortunately for most neuropsychological
disorders such straightforward environment influence
cannot be guessed. To construct an optimum therapeutic
environment fair amount of detail is needed. Lack of such
information is a major handicap in this research. For
example, for spatial neglect, what kind of light
arrangement will provoke and help an individual to scan
an area of inattention.

5.2. Ethical Issues:
Research methodology for psychology has been
evolved by continuous improvement and fine-tuned by
active research. Rules and protocols for involving subjects
in such research are worked out and agreed. Virtual reality
is known to have side effects like cyber sickness and
aggravation of abnormal EEG disorders due to flickering

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

of low quality head mounted devices or other VR
equipment. It has been reported that VR can be quite
disorienting for hearing impaired or deaf. Therefore, it is
empirical that set of rules should be worked out for such
research to meet the “ethical criteria”. VR therapy in
neuro-psychology can inherit most of the protocols from
general research in the area but development of specificity
is many years away.

6. Conclusion
Although a relatively young technology, the very
great potential of VR to improve the lives of those
suffering from neuropsychological disorders is not in
dispute. It has already been applied successfully for
certain disorders. In order to fulfill the full potential we
must investigate the “bottle necks” in application of this
virtual therapy. These include the lack of reference
standards, the non-interoperability of the VR systems and,
last but not least, the relative lack of familiarity with the
technology on the part of researchers in these fields.
Psychiatrists should put more effort to investigate
the environmental influence and form, shape and intensity
of stimuli. Due to highly varied nature of symptoms,
standardization of such application is not an easy task but
will provide basis for better communication and
comparative research. It is not unrealistic to hope that by
the end of decade VR therapy will be part of clinician’s
armory.

7. References
[1.] Klien, F.C. “Silent epidemic: Head injuries difficult to
diagnose, get rising attention, Wall Street Journal, 24th Nov
1982.
[2.] D. S Bell, Medicolegal aspects of Head injury, Springfield,
Illinois: Charles C. Thomas. 1992
[3.] Scott Makeig, Sigurd Enghoff, Tzyy-Ping Jung, A Natural
Basis for Efficient Brain-Actuated Control, Transactions on
rehabilitation engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, June 2000
[4.] W. Toga And Paul M. Thompson, The Anatomical Record
(New Anat.) 265:37–53, 2001.
[5.] Andrea GAGGIOLI, Using Virtual Reality in Experimental
Psychology, Towards CyberPsychology: Mind, Cognitions and
Society in the Internet Age Amsterdam, IOS Press, © 2001,
2002, 2003
[6.] Riva, G., From Toys to Brain: Virtual Reality Applications
in Neuroscience, Virtual Reality, 3 1998 pp. 259-266.
[7.] J. Psotka, Immersive training systems: Virtual reality and
education and training Instructional Science, 23 (1995) 405-431.

European Conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and
Associated Technology. (1996) 5-12.
[9.]
Neisser, U. (1978) Memory: what are the important
questions? In Practical Aspects of Memory. Edited by
Gruneberg, M.M, Morris, P.E. & Sykes, R.N. Academic Press,
London, 3-24.
[10.] Rose, F. D., Attree, E. A., & johnson, D. A. (1996).
Virtual reality: An assistive technology in neurological
rehabilitation. Current Opinion in Neurology, 9, 461-467.
[11.] Harborview Injury Prevention and Research Center
(1997). Child pedestrian injury interventions skills training
programs. Washington: University of Washington.
[12.] Bricken, M. (1990). Virtual worlds: No interface to
design. Technical Report R-90-2. Human Interface Technology
Lab: University of Washington.
[13.] Casey, J. A. (1995). Developmental issues for school
counselors using technology. Elementary School Guidance &
Counseling, 30, 26-34.
[14.] Inman, D. P., Loge, K., & Leavens, J. (1997). VR
education and rehabilitation. Communications of the ACM,
40(8), 53-58.
[15.] B Rizzo, A. A., Buckwalter, J. G., Neumann, U.,
Kesselman, C., & Thiebaux, M. (1998). Basic issues in the
application of virtual reality for the assessment and rehabilitation
of cognitive impairments and functional disabilities.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 1(1), 59-78.
[16.] C Pantelidis, V. S. (1995). Reasons to use virtual reality
in education. VR in the Schools, 1(1), 9.
[17.] Andrews,T.K. Rose F.D, The use of virtual reality in the
assessment of cognitive ability, European Context for assistive
Technology: Proceedings of 2nd TIDE Congress, 1995.
[18.] Pugnetti, L. Mendozzi, A. Motta, A. Cattaneo, E.
Barbieri, and A. Brancotti, ÒEvaluation and retraining of
adults’ cognitive impairment: “which role for virtual reality
technology?,” Comput BiolMed, vol. 25, pp. 213-27, 1995.
[19.] Pugnetti, L. Mendozzi, E. Barberi, F. D. Rose, and E. A.
Attree, “Nervous system correlates of virtual reality
experience,” presented at European Conference on isability,
Virtual Reality and Associated Technology, 1996.
[20.] L. Mendozzi, A. Motta, E. Barbieri, D. Alpini, and L.
Pugnetti, “The application of virtual reality to document coping
deficits after a stroke: report of a case,” CyberPsychology &
Behavior, vol. 1, pp.79-91, 1998.
[21.] T. Kuhlen, K. F. Kraiss, A. Szymanski, C. Dohle, H.
Hefter, and H. J. Freund, “Virtual holography in diagnosis and
therapy of sensorimotor disturbances,” in Health care in the
information age, H. Sieburg, S. Weghorst, and K. Morgan, Eds.
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 1996, pp. 184-193.

[8.] F.D. Rose, Virtual reality in rehabilitation following
traumatic brain injury. In: P. Sharkey, (ed.) Proceedings of the

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

[22.]
E. A. Attree, B. M. Brooks, F. D. Rose, T. K.
Andrews, A. G. Leadbetter, and B. R. Clifford, “Memory
processes and virtual environments: I can’t remember how I got
there. Implications for people with disabilities,” presented at
European Conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and
Associated Technology, 1996.

rehabilitation,” in Virtual reality in neuro-psycho-physiology, G.
Riva, Ed. Amsterdam: IOS Press, 1997, pp. 147-156.

[23.] Rizzo and J. G. Buckwalter, “Virtual reality and cognitive
assessment and rehabilitation: the state of the art,” in Virtual
reality in neuro-psycho-physiology, G. Riva, Ed. Amsterdam:
IOS Press, 1997, pp. 123-146.

[27.] S. J. Weghorst, J. D. Prothero, T. A. Furness, III, D.
Anson, and T. Reiss, “Virtual images in the treatment of
Parkinson’s Disease Akinesia,” presented at Medicine Meets
Virtual Reality II, 1994.

[24.] E. L. Glisky, “Computer-assisted instruction for patients
with traumatic brain injury: Teaching of domain-specific
knowledge,” Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, vol. 7, pp.
1-12, 1992.

[28.] Kennedy, R.S. (1975) Motion sickness questionnaire and
field independance scores as predictors of success in naval
aviation training. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine,
46, 1349-1352.

[25.] F. D. Rose, E. A. Attree, and B. B. M., “Virtual
Environments in neuropsychological assessment and

[29.] Paul de Greef & Wijnand IJsselsteijnIPO, Center for
User-System Interaction
Eindhoven University of Technology.

[26.] J. D. Prothero, “The treatment of akinesia using
virtual images, “ Human Interface Technology Laboratory,
Seattle, Internal Report 1993.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

