Interactive Virtual Reconstructions:
Visualization and User Interface Design for Installations in Public Venues
Alan Price
University of Maryland Baltimore County
price@umbc.edu
Abstract
This paper presents two case studies in which the
objective was to accurately reconstruct a historically
significant place no longer accessible to the public due to
complete or partial destruction of the original
environment. In both cases the desire was to present the
reconstructions in a public venue for the purpose of
enlightenment; to engage the audience in a deeper
understanding of the information being presented in a
museum environment and to put in context the artifacts
seen in a collection with the source in which they
originated.
1) A Virtual Reconstruction of the Cone Sisters
Marlborough Apartments, Baltimore Maryland, USA.
This installation is on permanent exhibit at the Baltimore
Museum of Art. It is a detailed reconstruction of the two
apartments in which Etta and Claribel Cone lived in the
1930s where they amassed a collection of over 3000
works of art by Henri Matisse, Gaugin, Picasso, and
others. This renowned Cone Collection now resides in the
Cone Wing of the BMA.
2) The Sun Dagger Interactive. Part of a permanent
exhibition on cultural astronomy at the Adler Planetarium
and Museum, Chicago Illinois, USA, this interactive
application reconstructs the solar and lunar calendar
construct discovered on top of Fajada Butte in Chaco
Canyon, New Mexico. Believed to be created by the
ancient Chacoans, or Anasazi, over one thousand years
ago, this assembly of three nine foot stone slabs
collimates sunlight into patterns of light and shadow onto
a spiral petroglyph in the cliff wall. The patterns mark the
year’s solstices and equinoxes, and are believed to track
the 19-year cycle of the moon.
In both cases extensive research was required to
accumulate the necessary data for an accurate
reconstruction, each with their own particular methods
and obstacles. The resulting datasets for each are very
large and could easily overpower the capacity for a

museum patron to absorb the information or for an
affordable computer system to manage a seamless 3D
display of the information. The objective was to build an
interactive application in which the viewer can intuitively
navigate the reconstructed space with an emphasis on
conveying the content of the work in a relatively short
amount of time.
The following two case studies present
perspectives on the stages of pre-production planning,
collection and management of data, interface design,
production and technology implementation.

1: A Virtual Reconstruction of the Cone
Sisters’ Apartments
1.1: Introduction
This real-time 3D interactive simulation
recreates the apartments of Etta and Claribel Cone as they
appeared in the late 1930s. The project was designed and
produced in collaboration between the Imaging Research
Center (IRC) at UMBC and the Baltimore Museum of Art
(BMA).

Original photograph of Etta Cone’s living room circa 1930s
(left) and a screen grab from the virtual reconstruction
(right).

1.2: Background and History

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Etta and Claribel Cone were two sisters who,
over a period of 30 years, amassed one of the world’s
most acclaimed collections of early 20th century French
art. This “Cone Collection”, with its incomparable
holdings of work by Henri Matisse and major examples of
Picasso, Cezanne, van Gogh, and Renoir, was donated to
The Baltimore Museum of Art along with most of the
sisters’ possessions and furniture in 1950. During their
lives, however, the Cone Sisters lived with and displayed
their collection in their apartments.
The project meticulously reconstructs the early
20th century apartments as they were and gives a glimpse
of how the sisters incorporated their collection into their
everyday life. This virtual rendition of these original
apartments allows viewers to “walk through” the
collection as the Cone Sisters did daily.
The Marlborough Apartment building no longer
exists as it did during the sisters’ lives. In the 1970’s the
building was entirely renovated to accommodate a center
for assisted living. None of the original interior walls
remained intact and what once were two apartments
owned by the sisters are now numerous rooms with
entirely different floor plans.

1.3: Technology and Process
The Virtual Tour of the Cone Sisters’
Apartments is presented at the Baltimore Museum of Art
as both a real-time interactive simulation and an
immersive stereoscopic experience. In each installation,
viewers navigate through a 3D model of the Cone Sisters’
apartments.
Students working at the Imaging Research
Center constructed the 3D model of the apartments and
the furnishings inside. Several months of research were
required for visiting the original building to take
measurements of exterior walls and window openings,
and to document small articles and furnishings that
remain in the BMA holdings after the collection was
bequeathed to the museum. Photographs were taken of
these items for both reference in modeling and detailed
texture map sources. Original floor plan drawings of the
apartment building were discovered through searching
city archives. Digital reproductions of the paintings and
sculptures were acquired through working with the
museum, resulting in an overall collection of thousands of
images and measurements. An extensive web site was
developed to manage the data and make it accessible to
any artist working on the various aspects of the project.
Comparable to the development of 3D games,
the models and textures had to be optimized for real-time
rendering. Light mapping techniques were used to project
shadow textures and lighting effects on the walls and
floors. Four channel spatialized audio playback tracks
viewers as they move about the apartments.
Approximately 15,000 polygons make up each
room. With a total of 14 rooms, the amount of data that

had to be processed for real time rendering had the
potential to overload the processing capabilities of the
computer. Many of the rooms in the apartments connected
with open archways rather than doors. This required the
need to be able to see from one room into as many as
three others simultaneously. To meet this challenge, a
technique was used for culling geometry not only by use
of the view frustum but by tracking the camera position
and hiding geometry determined to be occluded by walls
or other foreground objects.
The interactive navigation of the simulation was
developed for a 42” flat plasma display screen with a
touch sensitive overlay panel as the input device. The
display is wall-mounted for permanent display in the
Cone Wing of the Museum. Viewers explore and move
about the apartments intuitively by touching objects,
doors, and artworks. An interactive floor plan of the
building is available as a means to quickly move to a
specific room.
The second version was developed to give
viewers at the museum a more complete immersive
experience. Driven by a network of PCs, the apartments
were presented on a sixteen-foot wide by eight-foot high
rear projection screen using passive stereoscopic vision
and polarized glasses. Gallery visitors navigated through
the apartments by using a modified joystick.

BMA gallery visitors wearing 3D glasses to view the large
scale installation. Additional monitors displayed maps and
images networked to the main navigation.

The technical requirements included the need to
incorporate low-cost hardware and software solutions to
bring a virtual reality experience to a large public venue.
The Georgia Tech Virtual Environments Group’s
NAVE[1] was used as a starting point to develop our own
system of a networked cluster of PCs and rear-screen
passive stereo projection. The screens were constructed
in a curve to partially encompass the viewers but allowing
for a large standing room area. Four computers were
networked together to drive the simulation; two with dualhead graphics cards to render the stereo views, one to
operate as a master for positional information, audio, and
input devices, and the fourth to display a graphic
navigational mapping system of the apartments floor plan

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

giving the viewer’s location as well as showing the
original apartment photographs.

2: The Sun Dagger Interactive
2.1: Introduction
The Sun Dagger Interactive program is the first
phase of an ongoing research project in collaboration with
Anna Sofaer, Archeoastronomer and President of The
Solstice Project. The product of this work is an interactive
real-time computer simulation of the ancient Sun Dagger
site on Fajada Butte in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. The
interactive program is now part of a permanent exhibit on
cultural astronomy at the Adler Planetarium in Chicago.
The exhibit opened on March 20, 2002.

Ancient Indian societies occupied Chaco Canyon
from about A.D. 400 to 1300. These early inhabitants left
evidence of a skilled and highly organized society.
Between A.D. 850 and 1130 they constructed multistory
pueblos, large ceremonial centers, and built an extensive
system of roads. The Chacoan people also developed the
accurate calender on Fajada Butte, probably for
ceremonial purposes. This calender, now known as the
Sun Dagger, has been shown to also display the passage
of the 18.6 year cycle of the moon.
The first modern observations at the site were
made on June 29 1977 by Anna Sofaer of The Solstice
Project, who then initiated the studies of the patterns of
light on the spirals during the Sun’s annual cycle. The
computer simulation here shows how the combination of
the light patterns and the spirals were used by the ancient
people of Chaco to mark accurately the time of the
solstices and equinoxes

2.3: Technology and Process
The interactive program displays on screen a 3D
recreation of the stone slabs, petroglyphs and cliff wall
making up the Sun Dagger construct. The geometry
defining the stone slabs was derived from
photogrammetry of the site produced on glass plate
negatives in 1979. A polygonal mesh was constructed for
each stone slab based on the point cloud data provide by
the original combination of the plates. A small area of the
cliff wall behind the stones was also measured, but the
rest of the cliff wall rising overhead was modeled roughly
based on photographic reference.
A screen grab of the interactive. The shadow cast on the
cliff wall is nearing summer solstice.

2.2: Background and History
Fajada Butte stands prominently in the south
entrance of Chaco Canyon in New Mexico, rising 135
meters above the valley floor to an elevation of 2018
meters. The butte is difficult to climb, and there is neither
water nor soil on it. Yet from bottom to top there are
many examples of Indian rock art carved and painted on
the cliffs. The butte is a natural site for astronomical
observations, with its clear views to distant horizons.
Near the top of this isolated butte, three large
stone slabs collimate sunlight in vertical patterns of light
onto two spiral petroglyphs carved on the cliff behind
them. The light illuminates the spirals each day near noon
in a changing pattern throughout the year; marking the
solstices and equinoxes with particular images. Near noon
at summer solstice, a narrow vertical form of light moves
downward through the center of the larger spiral. At the
equinoxes and winter solstice, corresponding forms of
light mark the spirals.

A wireframe rendition of the mesh derived from the original
point cloud data and a drawing of the spiral patterns
etched into the cliff wall.

Users may interact with the scene by navigating
in 3D to explore the site and manipulate several controls
to adjust the time of year and time of day. Navigation is
achieved by means of a trackball and button. Rolling the
trackball allows the user to move in and around the stone
slabs to view it from multiple perspectives. The viewer is
able to move up close to the spiral petroglyph behind the
slabs. The stone slabs will fade to semi-transparent if the
viewer moves inside of them so that the viewer can see

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

the relationships between the spiral markings and the
stones.
Astronomically accurate positioning of the sun’s
light casts shadows of the stone slabs onto the petroglyph
to recreate the actual events marked by the ancient
calendar system. The viewer can explore these
relationships by interacting with several gauges on the
screen. Across the bottom of the screen is a slider
representing the days of the year. The user can drag an
icon representing the Sun horizontally along this slider
and see the changing light and angle of the Sun react in
real time. The Sun icon changes color when the user
moves across a day in which the equinoxes or solstices
occur.

A screen grab of the interactive. The shadow cast on the
cliff wall is nearing winter solstice.

In the right lower corner of the screen is disk
with a 3D model representation of the butte on which the
Sun Dagger site is found and the surrounding land. A
small marker on the butte indicates the location of the Sun
Dagger. Over the disk is an arc representing the path of
the Sun in the sky. A model of the Sun moves along the
path over the course of the day, casting a shadow on the
disk and synchronous with the shadow being cast by the
stone slabs on the cliff wall. The viewer can select the
Sun model on the arc and interactively slide the model
along the path to change the time of day, allowing
exploration of the interaction of shadows with the spiral
carvings. The altitude of the Sun’s arc changes with the
time of year. Below the disk is a traditional set of “VCR”

controls that allow the viewer to "play" time in fast
forward or reverse, and to pause.

3: Conclusion
In both cases, reconstructions were created of
places no longer accessible to the public. In the case of
the Cone Sisters’ apartments, the artwork had long since
been removed and the building interior demolished. As
for the Sun Dagger, in the 1980’s possible vandalism
occurred which caused one of the stone slabs to shift,
resulting in shadow markings that no longer operate in the
way they had for over a thousand years. The national park
service has since closed down access to the top of the
butte.
The most important aspect of these applications
is the user interface design. Over the time since they have
been on display in their respective venues they have been
successful in engaging visitors to learn more about the
subject matter and to prompt further dialogue between
one another and with museum docents.
The touch screen system of the Cone display is
the most successful. Visitors need only to “point” to a
place they want to investigate and the virtual camera will
be set in motion. There are no menus or buttons except for
a question mark and map icon in the bottom corners.
Visitors without any computer experience are able to
navigate the scene intuitively. The Sun Dagger interactive
is somewhat more complex in its interface, requiring the
use of a track ball (or mouse) is the first obstacle in
engaging every visitor. Interface elements in the display
have immediate and contextual feedback, accelerating the
learning process. In both cases, “timers” are built in to the
applications that initiate an “auto playback” mode if no
interaction is made for over a minute. This allows some
viewers to watch passively, but also functions to attract
others to interact with the display.

References
1) The NAVE: Design and Implementation of a Non-Expensive
Immersive Virtual Environment, Jarrell Pair, Georgia Te c h
Graphics Visualization, and Usability Center, Siggraph 200
2) Sofaer, A., Zinser, V., and Sinclair, R. M., 1979. A Unique
Solar Marking Construct. Science, 19 October 1979, Volume
206, Number 4416, pp. 283-291.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

