User Evaluation of Augmented Reality Systems
David J. Haniff and Chris Baber
The University of Birmingham
Edgbaston
Birmingham
B15 2TT
davejhaniff@hotmail.com
Abstract
Augmented Reality (AR) systems need to be
evaluated for their appropriateness for a given
task. Three approaches are used with this paper
to evaluate the Waterpump Augmented Reality
Tool (WART). The system is assessed using
verbal protocol, performance time and a
questionnaire. The WART system is compared
with a paper version of the assembly
instructions. The verbal protocol revealed that
there was more cognitive processing for the
paper version of task than WART, it took longer
to complete the task with WART than the paper
version and the questionnaire revealed the effect
on performance of problems associated with AR.
All of the participants in the evaluation,
however, were positive about WART, and
appreciated its usefulness.

1. Introduction
The evaluation of Augmented Reality (AR) can
take a variety of forms, for instance the
undertaking of usability engineering or system
prototyping. However, these techniques for
evaluation do not examine what the user is
thinking while using the AR system. All systems
require the user to ‘think’ to perform the task,
AR systems require the user to think in a specific
way due to the nature of the systems. AR
systems are usually implemented with a headmounted display (HMD) or portable display
device, there is also the issue of system lag
associated with the technology. These and other
factors make the use of AR systems unique,
moreover, the cognitive processing required to
use the systems differs from other technologies.
Its closest technological relation is virtual reality
(VR); the subject of system latency is also an
issue with VR [1].

A multi-disciplinary approach to system
development can be used to consider the internal
thought processes being carried out while using
AR technology with context-aware graphics.
Psychology is the study of how the mind works
and is suitable for gaining an idea of the internal
mechanisms functioning within the mind when
using these systems.
The psychological principle of verbal protocol
(thinking out loud while performing the task) is
used to evaluate Waterpump Augmented Reality
Tool (WART) to ascertain its effectiveness. The
cognitive processes can be examined by
analysing the words spoken when the user
‘thinks aloud’. For example ‘I am finding the
correct part’, the cognitive process executed is
the search for the part.
In order to support the use of verbal protocol
other evaluation techniques can be used. A
questionnaire specific to AR systems has been
developed and used to evaluate WART. A more
conventional approach of assessing systems is to
‘time’ the user while using the AR system. To
evaluate the performance of AR it needs to be
compared with another technology. The AR
system is compared with a standard paper-based
approach to the assembly of a waterpump. Paper
versus WART is presented within this paper.
WART is an AR system built using the AR
Toolkit and provides instructions in the
construction of a waterpump. The system uses
markers to identify parts of a waterpump and
superimposes graphics representing the parts that
need to be placed in the assembly. The AR
Toolkit has, however, not been fully evsluated.

2. User Evaluation of AR
Usability engineering techniques such as
‘heuristic evaluation’ have been used by
software developers to evaluate a set of criteria
for the system; evaluators for example, assess the

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

user control [2] and the help system of the
software. Verbal protocol analysis is more
lengthy than many usability engineering
techniques, however, more can be gained
through a detailed examination of the data.
The evaluation of AR systems and the
information that is presented on the display can
consist of a prototyping approach whereby the
user informs the design by actually using the
system. Feiner et al. [3] evaluate their touring
machine by prototyping the system. The system
was developed using mobile computers and
assessed by the users.
However, the cognitive processing is often
overlooked using this method. By analysing
what people are thinking about when using an
information presentation technique within an
application, we can understand the reasons for
human performance levels for that particular
information representation. AR representations
have distinct attributes, such as the combination
of rendered graphics with real world objects and
the effects of system latency in the registration of
the real objects. With the use of verbal protocol
these unique thought patterns can be extracted
using the technique. Verbal protocol has also
been supported by other evaluation techniques
such as the time taken to complete a task using
the AR system and the use of questionnaires to
gather the users’ response to the system. The
AR evaluation techniques can be defined
temporally according to the time of recording.
For example, the recording of data is continuous
for the verbal protocol, the ‘time’ is recorded at
the end of the activity and the questionnaire is
recorded after the activity.
End: Time measure
Time

Continuous:
Verbal protocol

After:
Questionnaire

Figure 1: Time of recording
The qualitative measures of verbal protocol and
the questionnaire are introspective and
retrospective respectively. The verbal protocol
requires the user to talk about their thought
processes as they happen and the questionnaire is
more reflective on the activity. The recording of
the time is a quantative measure.

3. Evaluating AR using Verbal
Protocol
AR research has not looked fully at the user
perspective of AR enabled activities. The user’s
cognitive function can be understood by the
verbalization of what they are thinking. This is
called verbal protocol. Verbal protocol is used to
ascertain the internal processing conducted by
the user while carrying out a task.
The verbal statements made by the individual
are recorded using a tape recorder or by hand and
then examined. There are many advantages to
using verbal protocol, for example getting access
to information otherwise unattainable and being
an unobtrusive method of extracting cognitive
and physical actions.
There are also
disadvantages such as the possible lack of ability
of the subject to express what they are thinking
and the view that thinking and verbalisation are
two separate processes. Verbal protocol is
however, an appropriate method for the
extraction of thoughts.
Ericsson and Norman
suggest:
“verbal reports, elicit with care and full
understanding of the circumstances under which
they were obtained, are a valuable and
thoroughly reliable source of information about
cognitive processes” pp. 247 [4].

4. WART: Waterpump Augmented
Reality Tool
Assembly requires the manipulation of objects
to construct a whole.
AR systems lend
themselves to the assembly process due to its
association with real world objects. Pertinent
information can be displayed in the appropriate
position within the construction. The user does
not have to look away at secondary information
for instructions, the information is within the
field of view.
For example, AR has been used for wirebundle assembly at Boeing [6], architectural
construction [7] and for evaluating assembly
sequences [8]. The WART system developed at
the University of Birmingham provides a
sequence of instructions attached to parts of an
assembly for a typical construction activity.
The context-aware system uses the AR Toolkit
2.11 libraries produced by Hiroshima City
University and the University of Washington.
The toolkit is written in Visual C++ and uses
Microsoft Vision C++ classes. The AR system
runs in Windows ’98 and uses the OpenGL glut

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

library to produce the virtual overlays. The
distance that the pattern can be recognized is
relative to the size of the pattern; the patterns in
figure 4 are 3x3 inches. The camera used is a
standard off-the-shelf Web cam. The system is
video-based capturing the scene and adding
rendered graphics to the image.
The pattern matching process consists of
storing a static bitmap representation of the
target object through the use of a make_ pattern
application. This pattern is then matched with an
object in the real world that has been identified
as having the basic structure of all patterns. The
camera position is then ascertained by examining
the size and orientation of the pattern. A virtual
object is associated with the pattern within a data
file and is then used on the AR display.

x

x

x

5. WART: Evaluation
5.1. Introduction
The following evaluation compares the AR
system, WART, with standard paper-based
instruction consisting of a 2D engineering
drawing. The context-aware AR technology
itself requires a specific type of interaction with
real world artefacts. For example, recognition
problems can occur if the markers are moved too
quickly, the system has problems catching up
with fast movement. This situation could be
improved with faster hardware. Nevertheless,
the AR technology needs to be assessed for its
usefulness despite these restrictions.
There are also further augmented reality
features that need to be addressed to assess its
usability, these features can consist of problems
associated with AR technology:
x

x

x

System lag/registration: The system lag
within the AR system is due to a low
frame rate display. What is displayed is
slower than what is happening in the
real world.
This is due to the
computational
intensity
of
the
processing. The frame rate for high-end
VR systems is approx. 30 frames per
second (fps).
Image Disparity: The camera’s view
used to provide video feedback may be
offset from the user’s view of the real
world. This may lead to disorientation.
Resolution:
The sharpness of the
display can affect the recognition of
objects within the scene. The higher the
resolution the more pixels need to be

processed for computer vision based
AR systems.
Rendering: The rendering of objects can
aid the recognition of virtual objects.
However, rendering adds computational
load on the computer and as a
consequence can contribute to system
lag.
Manoeuvrability: The manoeuvrability
of the objects receiving supplemental
information can be effected by the
sensors being used.
Tethered 3D
trackers limit the movement of objects
and system lag can lead to slow
movement of objects as the user tries to
match the slow frame-rate.
Environmental Conditions:
The
environmental conditions can influence
the input sensors such as with computer
vision based systems, the lighting can
effect the recognition of objects. In
addition, with 3Dtrackers electromagnetic disturbances can effect the
accuracy of the sensors.

Using these issues concerning AR a
questionnaire has been developed to encapsulate
these concerns. The AR specific questions
presented to the users after using the AR system,
which address some of these issues are:

1. The virtual objects swam as I moved the part
(system lag)…
1. Not at all… 7. Very Much So
2. This system lag was detrimental to my
performance…
1. Not at all… 7. Very Much So
3. The clarity of the display was….
1.Poor………7. Very Good
4. The clarity of the display affected my
performance….
1. Not at all... 7. Very Much So
5. My movements were….
1.Very Slow…7. Very Fast
6. I found the image displacement (camera view
separate to eye view) difficult to adjust to…
1. Not at all… 7. Very Much So
7. I had difficulty performing the task due to this
image displacement…
1. Not at all… 7. Very Much So
8. The virtual objects were appropriate for the
task…
1. Not at all… 7. Very Much So

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 2: AR questionnaire
The AR specific questions relate to finely
grained [9] graphically based AR systems.
Finely grained systems closely couple the virtual
objects to the real world object, coarsely grained
system are less accurate for example systems
using GPS sensors.
The aim of the study is to assess the
performance of context-aware AR technology for
an artefact-based activity by comparing AR with
paper-based instruction. The study differs from
the VR study presented in Boud et al. [10] by
addressing the ‘on-line’ use of instructions
(continual use of instruction) as opposed to
looking at the amount of learning facilitated by
the technology.

(see figure 3). The three main parts are placed
in the sequence of assembly, the other parts are
placed randomly, next to them. The three main
parts themselves were placed at an angle of 30
degrees in order for the camera to a full view of
the markers on the parts. The light was also
restricted above the camera with a piece of card
to avoid glare and consequent mis-recognition.
The participants were instructed that there were
three main parts with markers and instruction
associated with them in the form of virtual
graphical parts. The investigator also gave an
example of what to do with the part with the
marker on, in terms of positioning it within the
view of the camera. They were also instructed to
move onto the next main part once they had
constructed the current main part (see figure 3).

5.2. Equipment
A web-cam digital camera is mounted onto
tripod to provide the video feedback. The
camera is a standard web-cam running at
320x240 resolution. A Fujitsu Stylistic Pentium
(200 MHz) is used to run the AR software. The
lighting is restricted by closing the blinds to the
room used for the experiment this is to prevent
glare which effects the recognition of the system.
Three visual markers are placed on the waterpump parts. The visual markers themselves are
mounted on card to ensure that they remain flat.
Shapes are within the squares on the visual
markers. The water-pump parts are placed on a
large desk with the camera and tripod.

5.3. Participants
The study used ten postgraduate participants
aged 22-30 from the University of Birmingham
with no knowledge or experience of using
context-aware augmented reality systems and
constructing water-pumps. The participants had
no visual impairments that could not be resolved
with corrective lenses. There were 8 males and 2
females participating in the study.

5.4. Method
The water-pump parts are placed in front them
on a desk within a lab. They could either stand
or be seated throughout the experiment
whichever they felt comfortable with. Three of
the water-pump parts have visual markers on
them, these are the largest parts within the waterpump assembly. There are three virtual markers,
each with a number of parts associated with them

Figure 3: Sub-assemblies
The paper condition consisted of a 2D
engineering drawing of the assembly process.
The time taken for both the 2D condition and
the AR condition was recorded. In addition, the
participants are asked to think out loud while
doing the task. Ericsson and Simon [4] point out
that verbalization will not change the processes
involved in completing the task but it may slow
down the subject’s performance.
The
comparison of paper versus WART within this
paper both use verbal protocol, they are together
subject to the time delay, the comparison is
therefore fair.
The verbal protocol data was recorded by hand
due to the availability of equipment while
conducting the experiment. There was minimum
contact with the participants while conducting
the activities.
Following the AR condition they were then
asked to complete a questionnaire and asked to
comment on the technology for the AR system.
A questionnaire was not provided for the paper
condition.
The objective of the questionnaire was to
extract the opinion of the subjects on issues
concerned with the use of AR systems. Issues
such as those described earlier for instance image
disparity and resolution. These are specific

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

concerns for the use of the AR toolkit and the
hardware used on the AR system.

Verbal Protocol
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

stylistic &
camera
waterpump

AR
Paper

Mean Utterances

Figure 6: Mean Utterances

Figure 4: Water-pump AR Tool

5.5. Results
It took less time completing the task with the
paper-based instructions than the AR system (see
figure 5). The standard deviation for the AR
condition was 1.24 and the standard deviation for
the paper condition was 0.3. A student t-test was
performed on the data, the difference between
the two conditions is significant [t(4)=4.604,
p<0.01]. This difference maybe due to the
system lag where the subject has to match their
movement with the camera frame-rate and there
were also occasional mis-recognitions due to the
environmental conditions. The AR system also
required the user to manipulate the parts to gain
the virtual information presenting the
components needed for assembly. Nevertheless,
the verbal protocol revealed beneficial trends
when using the AR system.

The utterances by the users relate to the
cognitive processing being carried out. From the
utterances recorded from the verbal protocol it
was identified that the subjects described the
features of the parts for the paper condition more
than the AR system, possibly due to the abstract
nature of the diagram, with the participants
ensuring that the correct parts are used for the
instruction. The AR system provided accurately
modelled rendered parts on the display, this was
not available in the paper condition.
.
Features Utterances
50
40
30
20
10
0

Performance

AR

Paper
Technology

5
4
3

AR

2

Paper

1
0
Mean Times

Figure 5: Mean Performance Times
The paper-based instruction required more
utterances than the AR system (see figure 6). In
addition the paper-based instruction extracted
words describing the objects (see figure 7).

Figure 7: Features Utterances
With the AR specific questions (see figure 8)
the participants found the virtual objects swam
due to the registration (question 1) and system
lag as they moved the part, the virtual objects
were not closely tied to the marker and it
affected their performance (question 2). The
resolution of the display was not a problem
(questions 3 & 4). The movement of the objects
was slow (question 5) and there was not a major
issue with the image displacement (questions 6
& 7). In addition, the participants indicated that
the virtual objects were appropriate for the task
(question 8).

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Questionairre
1

8

2

6

3

4

4

2

5
6

0

7
Questions

Figure 8: Questionnaire Results from figure 2

5.6. Discussion
The paper instructions led to faster
performance than the AR system. Nevertheless,
there were more words spoken describing the
objects in the paper diagram condition than the
augmented reality condition, this maybe due to
the increased cognitive load. The diagram may
have required the participant to translate the
instructions
mentally
more
than
the
representation associated with the real world
objects in the augmented reality system. The
participants may have inferred the positioning
and objects from the diagram, the AR system
requires less inference as the objects are rendered
and directly positioned over the parts. The
features of objects were identified as being more
prominent for the diagram representation than
the AR system. In addition, there was less
positioning statements with the AR system. The
cognitive load is therefore reduced with the AR
system providing pertinent information regarding
the co-ordination of the activity.
All of the participants liked the idea of the
WART despite technological problems. A
participant said he liked “the way it provides all
of the information you need on the display”.
The questionnaire suggested that there was a
problem with the objects swimming as the
participants moved the parts this led to slow
movements to lessen the graphics moving about.
However, the use of a more powerful machine
and faster camera would reduce this problem.

6. Considerations
The experiment conducted comparing AR and
paper instruction revealed clear differences in the
time-based measure. AR systems, generally,
have not been compared with standard

8

approaches to the task using the measures carried
out within this experiment. The focus to date has
been on the technology and the algorithms used
to perform the tracking of objects. While this is
an important factor we also need to look at how
the users interact with the technology. The
verbal protocol examined what the user is
thinking while using the system and teased out
various features of AR systems besides the
system constraints. May be due to the ability of
AR systems to provide virtual information close
to objects, the inference of positioning of parts
within an assembly is made easier with the AR
system than the paper instruction. The paper
instruction required the user to match the
diagram subassemblies with the parts whereas
the AR system provided the subassemblies in the
real world with the real parts. The advantage of
providing information tied to the objects
therefore affected the cognitive load on the user.
The cognitive value of AR systems suggests
further research into the human information
processing facilitated by context-aware AR.

7. Conclusions
The utility of verbal protocol was discussed and
suggested as an appropriate way to evaluate AR
systems. Other methods were also applied to the
WART system: time and a questionnaire. The
results indicated that there was less cognitive
activity with the AR system in comparison with
the paper instructions. Nevertheless, the paper
instructions were faster than the AR condition
due the problems associated with the system, this
was verified by the questionnaire. The problems
with the AR system are indicative of the
technology, however, the accuracy of the
software and hardware are improving and this
will provide speed and robustness for many
applications in the future. The users of the AR
systems were all, however, positive about the
technology and could see its advantages.

References
[1] So, R. H. Y. and Griffin , M. J. (1995) Headcoupled virtual environment with display lag, In
Simulated and Virtual Realities (ed. Karen Carr and
Rupert England), Taylor and Francis, pp. 103-111.
[2] Nielsen, J. (1994) Usability Engineering, Morgan
Kaufmann.
[3] Feiner, S., Webster, A., Krueger, T., MacIntyre,
B., and Keller, E. Architectural anatomy (1995)
Presence, 4(3), Summer 1995, 318-325.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

[4] Ericsson, K. A. and Simon, H.A. (1980) Verbal
Reports as Data, Psychological Review, Vol. 87, No.
3, pp. 215-249.
[5] Bainbridge, L. (1980) Verbal Protocol Analysis,
In: Evaluation of Human Work, A practical
ergonomics methodology (ed. J.R. Wilson & E.M.
Corlett), pp. 170-179, Taylor and Francis.
[6] Curtis, D., Mizell, D., Gruenbaum, P., Janin, A.
(1998) Several devils in the details: Making an AR
application Work in the Airplane Factory, Proceeding
of IWAR ’98, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 47-60.
[7] Feiner, S., Webster, A., Krueger, T., MacIntyre, B.
and Keller, E. (1995) Architectural Anatomy, In
Presence, 4, (3), pp.318-325.
[8] Molineras, J. and Raghavan, V. and Sharma, R.
(1998) AREAS: Augmented Reality for Evaluating
Assembly Sequences, Proceeding of IWAR ’98, IEEE
Computer Society, pp. 91-99.
[9] Haniff, D.J., Baber, C. and Edmondson, W.H.
(2000) Categorising Augmented Reality Systems, The
Journal of Three Dimensional Images, Vol. 14, No 4.,
pp. 105-109.
[10] Boud, A. C. , Haniff, D. J., Baber, C. and Steiner,
S. J. (1999) Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality as
a Training Tool for Assembly Tasks, Proceedings
International Conference on Information Visualization
IV ’99, pp. 32 –36.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

