IMPLEMENTING UNDERSTANDING OF PHOTOGRAPHY
PRINCIPLES TO CREATE EFFECTIVE PHOTOREALISTIC
3D RENDERING
Mohd Izani Zainal Abidin&
Aishah Abd. Razak
Faculty of Creative Multimedia
Multimedia University
63100 Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia
e-mail: izani@mmu.edu.my
aishah@mmu.edu.my

Jong Sze Joon

Sharifah Nur Anthasha

Faculty of Creative Multimedia
Multimedia University
63100 Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia
e-mail: sjjong@mmu.edu.my

Faculty of Creative Multimedia
Multimedia University
63100 Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia
e-mail: anthasha@mmu.edu.my

ABSTRACT
There are a lot of common features that interrelate the
similarities between photography and photorealistic 3D
rendering. One is tied to the other in terms of principles
and technicalities. Both are technically related to the use of
a camera. This will involve understanding the properties of
space and the camera lens. Thus, the two important things
to take into consideration when merging a 3D object with a
still photographic image, vice versa, are lighting and
perspective.
One is prompted to conduct an experiment on the merging
of both photography and photorealistic 3D rendering, to
create a harmony between the two elements. Based on
recent analysis, the quantitative approach for this research
is conducted by comparing works produced by final year
students from 1997 to 2003. The findings indicate the
obvious difference in the understanding of basic design
fundamentals accustomed in photography. The second
phase of the research is targeted towards the students’
maturity in understanding the content of photorealistic 3D
in terms of model properties, textures, lighting and
rendering.
INTRODUCTION
Back in 1997, the government of Malaysia introduced a team
situated in Cyberjaya, to set up a multimedia flagship as a
foundation to achieve Vision 2020. This led to the launching of
the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC). The direction of MSC is
more towards digital content, which initiated the usage of 3D,
which has now become a great influence towards the advertising
and entertainment industries. To structure the backbone of
Cyberjaya, Multimedia University (MMU) is set up to facilitate
and educate the young minds and talents to venture into this field.
Of the four faculties that reside in MMU, the Faculty of Creative
Multimedia (FCM) is appointed to make manifest the delivery of
the application of digital content. Within the faculty, four majors

were established: Film and Animation, Digital Media, Interface
Design and Media Innovation.
The course Film and Animation covers the necessity to educate
students in the subject of photography and 3D photorealistic
rendering. Of course the course covers a lot of different aspects in
terms of concepts, language and technical skills, but it is the
instructor who has to play the role to guide the students’ mental
capability to digest these new media, and to produce technical
solutions to comprehend the analytical process of developing and
manipulating the flow of information. The initial plan did not
benefit the students as the concentration was directed more
towards software and buttons. The lack of the adaptation for basic
design skills, which comprises of principles and elements of
design and even visual communication understanding, affected the
structure of the program.
1.1. A Picture Speaks a Thousand Words
“To master the art of seeing you have to develop the ability to
become emotionally involved in what you are looking at and learn
to identify the harmonies of shapes and forms and colours that
contribute to your feelings.” – Finn [1]An idea can be expressed
through any continuum of medium and is usually governed by a
primary objective: to allow your viewer or target audience to
perceive the message being portrayed. This means that the visual
speaks for itself without the aid of additional explanation or any
elaboration from the creator. In this case, it can be said that the
elements of a photographic shot combined with the modifications
using photorealistic 3D rendered elements will enhance the visual
elements of its nature, thus altering the original message to tell
another story. The process is a phenomenal technique to virtually
bend the rules of reality.

The power of light (image by John Gavrilis) and orange
composition (image by Corbis)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

1.2. Photography elements
Since photography can conceal a hidden message in a visual, it
becomes one of the most effective approaches for fields like
advertising, press publication, entertainment as well as education.
In this case, one can observe its similarities to improve synthetic
image production - photorealistic 3D renderings. The miracle of
photography, of its so-called objective image, is that it reveals a
radically non-objective world. It is a paradox that the lack of
objectivity of the world is disclosed by the photographic lens
(objective). Through its unrealistic play of visual techniques, its
slicing of reality, its immobility, its silence, and its
phenomenological reduction of movements, photography affirms
itself as both the purest and the most artificial exposition of the
image. From our observation, we determine a few useful
principles, which are suitable to be applied in digital image
creation. The principles are stated below:
iDepth of field
iiMotion blur
iiiBasic design understanding
ivLighting arrangement
vShadows -artificial light and real light
viComposition: Rules of third
We expose these principles to the students to implement in their
project.
1.3. Photorealistic 3D rendering
Photorealistic 3D rendering involves a lot of technical
configuration and implementation in order to create convincing
visuals. Over the years we see clearly the role of photorealistic
3D rendering from motion pictures to personal art creations. The
basic process of photorealistic 3D rendering is illustrated in the
diagram below:

random experiences, happy accidents whose results you
want to keep, or as a last minute decision and modification.
Most often, your renderings will be produced when you are
in full control of your software and when you developed a
workflow to consistently achieve professionals results.” The
next segment in this research paper will cover the early works of
MMU students in 1997, which is purely concentrated in 3D
elements, but lack the knowledge of the application of design
fundamentals.
1.4. The Similarities
The photography principles stated earlier are also essential in
photorealistic 3D rendering project. In practical photography the
important elements to control the quality of the picture and light
are, among others, lens type, aperture and speed of the camera
iris. In 3D, besides technical skill, extensive observation and
awareness of visual communication are very important. Hence, in
creating a digital image students must have a basic understanding
of photography and design. Below are some comparative
elements based on the discussed principles.
iDepth of field (DOF): One of the most significant
photography elements to understand will be Depth
of Field (DOF). Its brief definition is the range
from object to the camera whereby the object will
appear to be in focus [3]. Other elements in the
foreground and background of the object will be
out of focus. DOF is very important to help people
visualize objects, and its relation to the
surrounding naturally. Usually to make it look
natural, a certain degree of blurriness around the
edges can convince a more natural impact (Figure
1).

DOF in real
photography

DOF in photorealistic 3D
rendering (image by Nick
Clark)
Fig. 1: DOF comparison

iiDiagram 1: Basic process of rendering

These steps require users to master some skills such as
modeling, texturing, lighting and rendering. To master
these skills, technical knowledge alone is insufficient to
produce good output. Hence, without understanding the
basic principles of design fundamentals and photography,
one is unable to produce a meaningful work. As Birns [2]
explains, “A great rendering can be generated through

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Motion blur: In photography, motion blur can
give certain meaningful impact to the object in
motion. As described by Potmesil and Chakravarty
[4], “Motion blur in photography or
cinematography is caused by the motion of objects
during the finite exposure time the camera shutter
remains open to record the image on film. In
computer graphics, the simulation of motion blur
is useful both in animated sequences where the
blurring tends to remove temporal aliasing effects
and in static images where it portrays the illusion

of speed or movement among the objects in the
scene.” To capture a motion blur image with a
camera, all that needs to be done is simply by
adjusting the shuttle speed to a lower level. As a
result, the illusion of movement will appear on the
captured image. In computer graphics, this effect
can be achieved with 3D software algorithms,
which can generate two types of motion blur, 3D
motion blur and 2D motion blur. 3D motion blur is
processed and rendered by the software where as
2D motion blur is added in to the rendered image
by the software after render. (Figure 2).

and lighting for video. To set up a basic lighting
for photography, reference from lighting for video
can be applied. This is the three-point lighting set
up consists of key light, fill light and rim light. In
general, the key light is used to define the
highlight of the object, the fill light is to define the
ambience of the object and the rim light or back
lighting is used to separate the ambiguous feeling
of the object from the background. The application
of three- point lighting for photography and for 3D
is constraint by the same rules and principles. This
also covers the usage of reflectors and filters. For
a 3D object, the successful simulation of materials
and textures are essential to determine the level of
realism. The shading model has two main
ingredients - properties of the surface and
properties of the illumination falling on it [7]
(Figure 4).

Motion blur in real
photography

Motion blur in
photorealistic 3D
rendering
Fig. 2: Motion blur comparison

iii-

Basic design understanding: This is applicable to
any form of art, either digital or traditional. In
general there are four basic design guidelines,
which are interconnected: contrast, repetition,
alignment and proximity [5]. Since the final output
for this project is in a form of an image, basic
design understanding plays an important role to
ensure that the image is well composed, with
proper lighting set up, contrast and proportion. In
3D, application of those guidelines will help to
produce a better output (Figure 3).

Basic 3-point lighting to light a simple object

Lighting arrangement in an enclosed studio shoot
Fig. 4: Lighting arrangement comparison
v-

Basic design understanding in
Basic design
photorealistic 3D rendering
understanding in real
photography
Fig. 3: Basic design understanding comparison
iv-

Lighting arrangement and shading: Lighting is
a dynamic and exciting synthesis of art and
science [6]. Working together with shape and
form, light brings life to the managed
environment. There are two types of lighting
setup. They can be categorized as lighting for film

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Shadow: In practical photography, shadow can be
cast based on two types of light: real light (eg:
sun) and artificial light (eg: neon light). Based on
that, there are two types of shadows generated,
cast shadow and drop shadow. Shadows are
advocated for improved comprehension and
enhanced realism in computer-synthesized images
[8]. The quality of the shadow is not fixed and
varies upon situation. In 3D, generally there are
two different settings for shadow, depth map
shadow and raytrace shadow. Those shadows are
based on different software algorithm to produce.
Both have their own adherent (Figure 5).

understanding the concept behind radiosity and how to come up
with the best rendering method given the duration for render.

Shadow in real
Shadow in photorealistic 3D
photography
rendering
Fig. 5: Shadow comparison
vi-

Compositing- Rule of third: This is also known
as staging or the way we frame our picture. This is
a very important element, which is related to basic
design understanding. A good composition will
navigate the viewer’s eyes to focus on your
subject matter in frame. There is no distinctive
feature
between
composition
in
actual
photography and 3D rendering. Both require a
good framing for better result (Figure 6).

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure 7: Figure B shows a good framing and contrast of the
subject matter, while figure A uses a symmetrical framing
and no depth of field

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure 8: Depth of field properly applied in figure B. In
figure A, a very flat figure with no depth.

Compositing in real
Compositing in photorealistic
photography
3D rendering
Fig. 6: Compositing comparison
2.0. CASE STUDIES
To back up the findings for this research paper, a case study is
conducted on Film and Animation students undertaking their final
project: Photorealistic 3D rendering. The main topic that will be
discussed here is radiosity. Included in this chapter are some of
the samples of past years students works before and after the
implementation of radionsity. The project requirements were to
use a photo and create a 3D rendered image as close to the photo
itself. Students are required to study the lighting configuration and
arrangement, surface characteristic, the mood of the ambience and
the entire composition for final submission. The models had to be
original, followed by texture mapping, placing and adjusting 3D
lighting, and choosing the rendering algorithm for final rendering,
either with radiosity or conventional method. As explained by
Giambruno [9], “Radiosity is the colouring and illumination of
objects by light reflecting off of other objects.” However,
according to the images shown below, the final rendered images
used conventional rendering method. This means the students do
not rely on the advantage of radiosity, although it is known that
radiosity is one of the key elements of photorealistic 3D
rendering. Generally, radiosity will enhance the look of the image
to be more realistic, but it requires a longer time to render
compared to conventional rendering. However, due to time
constraint, fake radiosity can be generated, for example, by using
dome lighting and surface texture projection. It is really

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure 9: Figure A does not has a strong focal point. Figure B
consists of good composition and proper colour combination.

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure 10: Figure A does not cast any shadow, hence the light
direction is uncertain. Figure B has good composition and
light arrangement which brings a good result.
2.1 Previous Works (before implementation)
At the early stages of the academic years, students are lack of the
knowledge of understanding the properties of 3D models and
materials and textures react to surface normals under a certain
angle of lighting. Besides that, students were also not tutored
sufficiently in principles of photography and they did not use
visual reference to relate to. Their design was purely from the
mind. Using reference is very crucial in any photorealistic 3D
rendering. Stahlberg [10] explains, “ALWAYS USE THE BEST
REFERENCE YOU CAN FIND when you model (and shade, and
animate)- and follow it faithfully. Why? Because NOTHING

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

BEATS REALITY for richness of detail, the organic balance
between chaos and patterns, variations on a theme, and
variations on the variations, etc. Even the best artists of all time
spent their lifetimes studying the world around them, most of
them using reality as their reference.” The result of the project
was not satisfying.

created a barrier, stifling their creativity in
producing outstanding works. With a new
perception and implementation, students have
more freedom to express their artistic expression.
iv-

A good exposure and refinement from previous
works
Students have the advantage of analyse and
referring to previous works. They have the
opportunity to analyse, and learn from previous
mistakes made towards improving themselves.
Students are also exposed to new approaches taken
by professionals via web and magazines. As a
result a better understanding of design will merge
with technical application.

v-

Balancing technical skills and fundamental
design
Technologies that rely on dimensional imagery are
improving. By looking at the importance of
technical skills and fundamental design, we
believe these elements must be balanced and
equal. Mastering technology without fundamental
design understanding will create an output without
essence of art and self-expression. In our case we
try to emphasise both elements.

vi-

Limited freedom
Dimensional imagery is most effective because it
provides perspective [14]. 3D graphics give users
the freedom, especially in controlling camera view
and perspective, which has 360 ° angle. But, this
does not mean students can position the framing in
any angle they like. One must remember that
fundamental rules are important to ensure the right
and well-presented final output. For instance,
using techniques like rule of thirds can help
visualize our shots properly. The rule of thirds is a
basic principle often used in photography, video
and film [15].

2.2 Present Works (after implementation)
As claimed by Warniers [11], “Photographs are achieving
similar importance in the field of computer graphics.” This is
proven by students work in the 2003 batch, which fully utilised
photography principles in their project. Understanding of the
elements has brought a new dimension to this photorealistic 3D
rendering project. Most of the works reflect good application of
basic design principles. Furthermore, the works are created with
highly detailed observation on aspects of surface characteristics
and its reaction towards light. As Flemming described [12],
“Creating photorealistic worlds requires a keen eye for detail.
Nothing is more important than detail when you are attempting to
re-create realities in 3D. The trademark of flaw of most 3D
images is lack of detail.” From the accomplished works, we
conclude that students have good understanding of solving
technical problems especially during render. We highlight
rendering because most of the visual characteristics of a
simulated three-dimensional environment are determined during
the rendering process. Kerlow [13] explained, “ The world of
rendering by computer is populated by most of the attributes of
our visual realm where the shapes of objects are revealed by light
and obscured by shadow, where colour creates mood of subtle
tranquillity or explosive happiness…”
3.0 ANALYSIS OF FACTORS
According to the simple survey conducted in the class, we have
determined a few factors that contribute to this study. These
factors are vital in changing the way students accomplish their
project, and in the way they observe the subject matter. We have
divided these aspects into categories as below.
i-

New features of 3D software
The advancement of 3D technology has made a
major contribution to increase more efficient
productivity. Inarguably, the flexibility of new
technology has simplified and shortened some of
the long previous approach to create photorealistic
3D rendering.

ii-

Exposure and emphasis on fundamental
principles
It is undeniable that the approach of giving
exposure and emphasis on fundamental principles
(basic design and photography understanding) has
given a fruitful result. From our comparison of
students’ works, the implementation of these
principles has changed the way students observe
and create digital art.

iii-

Change of mindset
Previously, students’ mentality in observing
subject matter is very rigid. This rigidity has

4.0 FINAL RENDERING
Enclosed are some examples successfully created and rendered
by students in the project. All works emphasised the technical
and fundamental solutions.

Figure 11: Raytracing approach
This is a study on the manipulation of light path through
translucent materials creating deformed patterns

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

5.0 REFERENCES
[1] D. Finn (1994), “How to Look at Photographs: Reflections
on the Art of Seeing,” Harry N Abrams, NY
[2] J. Birns (2000), “Digital: Lighting and rendering,” New
Riders Publishing, NY
[3] D. Thomas (2001), “A Primer on Depth of Field,”
http://www.keiko-ni.com/keiko/ArtoMonth/article.html
Figure 12: Compositing raytracing and optical light
This experiment is directed towards the study on caustic, taking
into consideration the overall design in terms of colour and
lighting to define a harmonious mood

[4] M. Potmesil and I. Chakravarty , “Modeling motion blur in
computer-generated images, ” in Proc. of International
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques, Michigan, pp. 389-399, 1983.
[5] R. Williams (1994), “The Non-Designer's Design Book,”

Peachpit Press, CA
[6] Thorn: Lighting People
thornlighting.com/light/

and

Places,

http://www.

[7] Tomoyuki Nishita , Isao Okamura and Eihachiro Nakamae,
“Shading models for point and linear sources, ” in Proc. Of
ACM Transactions on Graphics, New York, pp. 124 – 146,
1985.
Figure 13: Implementation of rule of thirds
Radiosity will give the objec a soft 360° shadow at the base of
the object. The higher values set for the photo will calculate a
cleaner image with less artifacts.

[8] F.Crow, “Shadow algorithms for computer graphics,” in
Proc. of the 4th annual conference on Computer graphics
and interactive techniques, New York, pp. 242 – 248, 1977.
[9] M. Giambruno (2002), “ 3D Graphics and Animation,” New
Riders Publishing, NY
[10] S. Stahlberg (1998), “General advice and miscellaneous
thoughts,”http://www.optidigit.com/stevens/tutorial/worksho
p2.html
[11] R. Warniers (1998), “Every Picture Tells a Story,”
Computer Graphics World
[12] B. Flemming (1999), “Advanced
Techniques,” John Wiley & Sons, NY

Figure 14: Strong volumetric lighting effects
By applying this effect, the light rays will be very dominant,
giving a very strong shadow
5.0 CONCLUSION

3D

Photorealism

[13] I. Kerlow (2000), “The art of 3D computer animation and
imaging,” John Wiley & Sons, NY
[14] M. Meadows (2003), “Pause and effect,” New Riders
Publishing, NY
[15] D. Ablan (2002), “ Digital Cinematography and Directing,”
New Riders Publishing, NY

From the completed study, we conclude that the design
fundamental elements are very important to create a successful
and outstanding photorealistic 3D rendering. Additionally,
technical understanding of surfaces and lighting will help create a
more effective rendering. We also found that technological
knowledge without a good understanding of design fundamental
will not help students/artists to produce remarkable rendering. It
will only produce technicians who know how to use the tools but
unable to develop good ideas or thoughts through art. Finally, we
hope that this study will help students understand and master both
fields (technical and fundamental). We also hope that this paper
will trigger better ideas and knowledge to improve digital and
traditional skills towards the growth and development of this
field.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

