Utilisation of computer visualisation in the study of public preference
and urban greenspace
Richard Laing, Anne-Marie Davies and Stephen Scott
The Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen
Abstract
This paper reports results from a project that
combined the visualisation of open public
greenspace with environmental economics. As
part of a methodology using contingent rating
which aimed to establish the values placed on
specific greenspace sites, three dimensional
computer models were used to produce
visualisations of particular environmental
conditions. Of particular importance to the
study was the influence of variables including
lighting, season, time of day and weather on
the perception of respondents. This study
followed previous work which established a
suitable approach to the modelling and testing
of entirely moveable physical variables within
the built environment. As such, the study has
further established that visualisation is
appropriate within environmental economic
surveys, and that there is potential for a
holistic range of attributes to be included in
such studies.

1: Introduction
The study reported in this paper was
undertaken as part of the EC Framework 5
project “Greenspace”. The overall project has
assessed how strategic planning can maximise
the contribution that different types of open
and greenspace make to quality of life. By
combining a planning, ecological and socioeconomic assessment, the project categorised
the existing provision of greenspace in sample
cities across Europe. Important factors
considered included the various uses for
greenspace, and an evaluation of the extent to
which existing greenspace meets existing and
future social need.
The research team based in Aberdeen had
a particular focus on the combined role played
by environmental economics and computer
visualisation in helping to establish the relative
importance of environmental greenspace

attributes and the combination of greenspace
types that maximise public welfare. Within the
study, ‘environmental’ has been understood in
its widest sense, incorporating social,
ecological and economic values. In addition,
the research has aimed to identify how
greenspace can maximise public utility while
contributing to economic prosperity, working
in collaboration with representatives from
municipal authorities.
An established methodology from
environmental economics, contingent rating,
was used to structure the main data collection
survey undertaken in Aberdeen. This method
provided a mechanism whereby a complex set
‘attributes’ could be included in a range of
computer models, and each scene then ‘rated’
by respondents against set questions and
scales. As with previously reported work [1],
attributes and overall sites were presented
using still images taken from photorealistic
computer models.
Environmental economics has been
regarded as an established field within
economics for a number of decades, but is true
that the awareness of such methods in many
countries, and particularly within the built
environment, is limited [2]. The research
clearly signals approaches which can be taken
by designers and planners of greenspace in the
future, to help ensure that the public space
provided will be socially sustainable, and
valued by the intended user groups.

2: Aims of visualisation
A key research question for this project
concerned the extent to which visual
representations
of
the
environmental
conditions within public open space could be
presented and used within a contingent rating
study. A series of focus group meetings, held
in connection with three case study sites in
Aberdeen. Those meetings established that
approaches previously taken by the research
team focussing on the arrangement and

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

modification of physical objects within a space
would require modification. That is, a number
of the most prominent and apparently
important reasons for respondents either liking
or disliking a space related to variable
environmental conditions, rather than to the
physical design of the space per se.

work undertaken by the team, it is clear that
the use of public space varies between time of
day, level of lighting and season. Work
reported in [1] and [4], for reasons of
methodological clarity, related mainly to the
physicality of space. It was judged for
Greenspace that a more appropriate focus
would be on:

3: Case studies and visualisation
The research team chose three case study
greenspaces within Aberdeen. These were:
x
x
x

Tillydrone (located within a large housing
estate in the city);
Aberdeen Links (a linear greenspace
located along the seafront);
Deeside River walk (a linear greenspace
locate in the city and next to one of the
city’s two rivers).

The rational for the selection of sites was
that they represented different kinds of
greenspace and therefore (in terms of planned
use) serve different purposes, and they are
located in different geographical (socioeconomic) parts of the city.
Focus groups were held with local
residents living near to these greenspaces1. The
aims of the focus groups were to discuss views
toward the particular greenspace under
discussion, to discuss any potential changes to
the site, and, to suggest possible choices that
might be faced by the designer and user alike.
In two of the study sites (Tillydrone and the
Links) paths cutting through each of the sites
to encourage use were discussed. For the
purposes of this study, a new path has been
added to the Tillydrone and Links areas, and
that located at the Deeside River walk has been
upgraded. Other physical observations and
suggestions during focus group discussions for
each site included:
x
x
x
x
x

the addition of trees to provide interest
and shelter;
adding/upgrading of paths;
adding/upgrading of lighting;
management and reduction of vehicular
traffic;
the importance of people being present for
reasons of socialising and safety.

As stated, a number of non-physical attributes
relevant to Aberdeen’s greenspaces were
included in the computer visualisations. As a
general comment, and as was noted in previous
1

x
x
x
x

season
weather
time of day
wind

Reference to figure 1, showing a range of
images taken from the study itself (left),
alongside photographs from the actual sites
(right) confirms that the results achieved were
acceptable in terms of ‘realism’.
For the visualisation process, results from
the focus groups suggested a number of
options for each site. Using the attribute ranges
outlined above, the resulting proposals were
modelled in AutoCAD, and rendered in 3D
Studio Max. The model for each site was
constructed using available ordnance survey
boundary and contour information, with
smaller structures (e.g. boat house, skateboard
ramp) modelled specifically for the project.
Textures for natural surfaces (e.g. grass,
snow), were taken from available ‘collections’,
in some cases purchased for use. Trees, bushes
and people shown in visualisations were
likewise taken from available object
collections. This stage of the visualisation
required a ‘visual’ match between the model
and the ‘real’ environment, and in the case of
the Aberdeen models a value judgement was
made that the tradeoff between render time and
ecological accuracy was acceptable. That is,
the time taken to ‘grow’ virtual versions of the
plants would have left insufficient time to
develop a suitably sophisticated survey, or to
even deal with more than one site.
Each model was closely controlled in
terms of the attributes contained within, and a
series of 4 ‘snapshot’ images used to represent
the site within experimental work. Unlike
some previously reported work [4], the
methodology for this project was less
concerned with use of the Internet to run
experiments. In fact, it was of sufficiently
great importance to the study that controls
were placed on information delivery that a
series of high quality printed survey forms
were used to disseminate questions.

Following work reported in [3].

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 1 - Images from the project
Images on the left are from the visualisation2, and images on the right are photographs.

Deeside case study - the visualisation shows an image from the study with a configuration during
winter. The site photograph was taken in late Spring.

Links case study - the visualisation illustrates the inclusion of both lighting and vehicular traffic in the
study. The Links is a very open space, with little ambient light after dark from the nearby city outskirts.

Tillydrone case study - the visualisation illustrates the openness of the Tillydrone site. This particular greenspace
is provided as general social and exercise space for the housing estate, but contains little in the way of vegetation
or facilities. It can also be noted that the site is bounded on 3 sides by a 9-12ft high wire fence.

2

Further examples from the study can be found via www.rgu.ac.uk/sss/ where details are available
under research ĺ projects ĺ greenspace.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

4: Experimental work
4.1: Contingent rating methodology
Issues addressed in the contingent rating
study arose mainly from focus group
discussions and partly from a preliminary
greenspace questionnaire distributed to a
random
sample
of
local
residents.
Predominant within the list of issues were
concerns over safety, regardless of any
particular greenspace. As a result, attributes
likely to affect perception of safety were
chosen for the contingent rating study.
In addition to attributes being selected for
their hypothesised effect on perceptions of
safety, it was decided that some of the
limitations of a previous study ‘streetscapes’3
[5] could attempt to be addressed through the
current project.
For example, within
‘streetscapes’ respondents commented that
images were shown under ideal weather
conditions, and only during the day. It was
thought that ideal (i.e. sunny, well lit, no rain)
weather conditions did not truly reflect what
the Castlegate area was actually like most of
the time, and the use and look of the space
changed significantly after dark.
Therefore, while the ‘streetscapes’ project
tested the effects of making physical changes
to urban space, the current project attempted to
assess the influence of non-physical changes
such as weather, season, and time of day.
Questions were posed in the survey and focus
groups to determine how changes to each of
these attributes affects perceptions of safety
and aesthetic quality, and also if respondents
would visit the greenspace shown under the
conditions presented.
Modelling the attributes
Table 1 shows each of the attributes and
levels included in the experimental design. All
of these attributes were represented visually in
the computer model, as described in the
preceding section.
The four basic weather conditions that
occur most commonly in Aberdeen include
showers, overcast skies, clear skies and local
fog. These types of weather therefore make up
the four ‘levels’ of the attribute weather. As an
example, for the attribute ‘time’, four periods

3

Streetscapes concerned the design of
contained urban public spaces, and
concentrated on the configuration of physical
objects, rather than environmental conditions.

through the day were modelled4. Various times
were modelled as the position of the sun varies
the amount of light and shadows displayed in
the images.
Table 1. Attributes and attribute levels for
the Greenspace study
Attribute
Site
Season
Weather
Time of day
Wind
Path
Lights
New trees
People
Traffic

Levels
Tillydrone, the Links, Deeside
River walk
Spring, summer, autumn,
winter
Clear, overcast, showers, local
fog
Morning, afternoon, evening,
night
Light to medium, medium to
strong
Sealed, unsealed
Present, not present
Present, not present
Present, not present
Light, heavy

Wind was included as an attribute since it
plays a quite a large role in Aberdeen’s
weather and could have an impact on how
people use greenspace. However, since this
attribute is difficult to describe in any detail,
only two levels were chosen including ‘light to
medium’ and ‘medium to strong’5.
Lights, new trees and people were
included as attributes, as these may also play a
role in safety perceptions. For example, lights
are important if greenspace is to be used in the
hours of darkness (particularly in winter when
it gets dark quite early). The presence of trees
can affect safety both during the day and at
night, as well as the presence of other people
in the greenspace. For simplicity, each of
these attributes are given two levels – ‘present’
or ‘not present’.
Traffic was raised as a safety concern in
each of the case study focus groups and is
therefore included as an attribute. Traffic is
represented in two levels ‘light’ and ‘heavy’,
although it should also be noted that vehicular
traffic does not actually pass through the case
study areas themselves, but is instead routed
along the periphery.
4
The actual times allocated to these are 10am,
3pm, 6pm and 10pm.
5
Wind was described using text, rather than as
part of the visual image. It is possible that the
use of sound could assist with such attributes,
and this it is suggested would be a suitable
topic for further research.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Methodology
As a total of 96 design alternatives were
generated
by
the
contingent
rating
experimental design6 it was decided that each
respondent would be asked to evaluate six
alternatives (i.e. two design alternatives from
each case study site). This meant that 16
surveys in total were needed7 to produce an
acceptable replicate sample for each
‘variation’.
Combining images from the models with a
contingent rating questionnaire
Once all 96 models displaying the
alternatives had been constructed within 3D
Studio Max, four snapshots (or views) from
each model were taken for use in the survey.
Four views of each alternative were presented
for several reasons.
x To provide respondents with alternative
views of each combination of attributes in a
scenario, which should help them make
better informed decisions.
x The contingent rating exercise was to be
conducted via a postal questionnaire
meaning computer models of the
greenspace sites could not be included.
Therefore snapshot images are needed in
the absence of a more intuitive interaction.
x For a possible proposed Internet based
questionnaire, problems with technology
could arise if data files (including
walkthroughs) were too large [1].
Questionnaire format and response rate
Due to the number of questionnaires
required to achieve an acceptable response
rate, it was decided that a paper-based version
of the questionnaire would be the primary
method of data collection. Based on previous
Internet studies undertaken by the Robert
Gordon University [4] [6] it was hypothesised
that only using computer based questionnaires
would not generate enough responses, quite
apart from any concerns over technological
difficulties.
Questionnaires were distributed in
February 2003 to 3000 Aberdeen households.
Of the 3000 questionnaires distributed, 46

6

Not discussed in this paper.
7
6 x 16 = 96

were returned ‘undelivered’8, 13 were returned
unanswered, and 6 returns were incomplete
and discarded. However, 586 were returned
and correctly filled in, giving a response rate
of 20%.
Findings in relation to visual images
As part of the study, several open- and
closed-ended questions were included in
addition to the contingent rating questions to
give respondents the opportunity to make
comments regarding the study, and provide
feedback. Questions were asked in relation to
image quality, ease of answering the questions,
the level of information provided comments
about the sites, influences, and ideas for
improving the questionnaire. Responses from
the paper-based questionnaire were categorised
and the results are discussed.
The first two questions were closed-ended
and ask respondents how realistic the images
looked, and how easy or difficult they found
the questionnaire.
Table 2. How realistic do the images look?
% respondents*
very realistic
12.2
realistic
67.7
neither realistic or unrealistic
11.7
unrealistic
7.5
very unrealistic
1.1
Total
100.0
* excluding missing data
From Table 2, the majority of respondents
(80%) felt that the images were either realistic
or very realistic. Respondents appeared to
have little difficulty with the questions, as the
majority (79%) stated the questionnaire was
easy or very easy. Interesting non-site specific
comments made by respondents concerned
lighting, where the majority of respondents
who mentioned this attribute felt that lighting
makes places feel safer. Only one respondent
commented that lighting could have a negative
effect on animals living in greenspace.
Responses were also collected concerning the
realism of the images. In addition to those
responses in Table 2, some commented that the
images made the sites appear far better than
they are in reality. Several respondents said

8
Of these surveys, 33 were returned in pristine
condition and were resent to newly selected
addresses.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

the sites looked too clean and tidy, as no litter
was incorporated.
Comments were also made concerning the
images of people (particularly where snow was
present). As people shown were kept constant
throughout the questionnaire, those portrayed
in the snow scenes were wearing inappropriate
clothing for the time of year. However, this is
recognised as a potential difficulty faced by the
methodology, and perhaps merits further
research in the future.

4: Discussion
This research was concerned with the use
of computer visualisation to provide a genuine
advancement in the presentation and delivery
of information within environmental economic
studies. This research was particularly
innovative in that it also attempted to move
from a position where the computer models
were used to manipulate the physical
configuration of public space, and towards a
much wider understanding of how a holistic
presentation of the environment could be
modelled. As modelling and rendering
packages have such capabilities must be
recognised, as the questions facing planners
and designers will often go beyond questions
of physical change, towards a requirement to
understand how space might be used,
perceived and regarded throughout the year.
The main findings of this study (as
presented here) focus mainly on the perception
of those visualisations, and the extent to which
they appear to have been accepted by
respondents as a valid foundation for stated
decisions and choices. In addition, it should be
noted that although the use of a paper based
format was extremely costly in financial terms,
the benefits in terms of the clarity of images
alone made the activity worthwhile.
This research has raised a number of
important issues which merit further
development. As with previous work in the
field, the results confirm that the use of
‘virtual’ environments holds potential for
greater use within environmental economic
studies. It is anticipated that research using
immersive technologies (e.g. the genuinely
three dimensional delivery of images) could be
used as a tool to more objectively identify key
aspects of an environment. In addition, it may
also be useful to consider the use of

technology to better study the extent to which
specific parts of an image influence choice,
perhaps using eye tracking equipment to
monitor respondent activity.
Future work should at least begin to
explore the extent to which more immersive
environments could be used, or ways in which
more interactive models could be used to
capture data. The experience of this project has
shown that advances in technology over a
relatively short time period have enabled great
advances in survey methodology and the range
of options open to the researcher. Pertinent
questions regarding the actual and relative
importance of realism, immersion and
cognition in themselves signpost what may be
vital routes for research concerning the use of
visualisation to assist decision making in the
design of built and natural environments.

5: References
[1] Laing, R., Davies, A., Hargreaves, A. & Scott,
S., 2002, ‘The Application of 3D Modelling
Techniques in Built Environment Evaluation’,
Studies in Urban and Regional Planning,
forthcoming.
[2] Chadwick, A. 2002, 'Socio-economic impacts:
Are they still the poor relations in UK
environmental
statements?,
Journal
of
Environmental Planning and Management, vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 3-24.
[3] Davies, A. & Laing, R. 2002, ‘Designing choice
experiments using focus groups: Results from an
Aberdeen case study’, Forum Qualitative
Sozialforschung /Forum: Qualitative Social
Research,
vol.3,
no.3.
Available
at:
http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs/fqs-eng.htm.
[4] Davies, A., Laing, R. & Scott, S., 2002,
Combining Visualisation and Choice Experiments
in Built Environment Research, Proceedings of 6th
International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV02), London, 10-12 July.
[5] Davies, A., Laing, R.A., 2002, Streetscapes:
Their contribution to wealth creation and quality of
life, Final research report to Scottish Enterprise.
[6] Craig, A., Abbott, L., Laing, R. & Edge, M.,
2002, Assessing the Acceptability of Alternative
Cladding Materials in Housing: Theoretical and
Methodological Challenges, Paper Presented at the
17th Conference of the International Association for
People-Environment Studies, La Coruna, Spain, 2327 July.

Acknowledgements
The work reported in this paper was undertaken as part of the European Union Framework 5 project
‘Greenspace’, details of which can be found at http://www.ucd.ie/~greensp

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

