Spike Train Correlation Visualization
Martin A. Walter*
mwalter@plymouth.ac.uk

Liz J. Stuart*
lstuart@plymouth.ac.uk

Roman Borisyuk*†
rborisyuk@plymouth.ac.uk

*

Centre for Neural and Adaptive Systems, School of Computing, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, Devon, UK
Institute of Mathematical Problems in Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region 142 290, Russia

†

Abstract
The current ability to record neural activity within the
brains of mammals has led to the production of a large
body of experimental data. The analysis and
comprehension of this data is key to the understanding of
many basic brains functions, for example learning and
memory.
The main constituent of this data is multi-dimensional
spike train recordings. As the analysis of these datasets, by
traditional means, becomes more complex and time
consuming the need for better methods of data analysis
increases.
This paper presents an innovative method for analysis of
the relationships within large multi-dimensional spike
train datasets. This method, called the ‘Correlation Grid,’
is based on the Information Visualisation principles;
overview the data, filter and zoom the data and obtain
details-on-demand [1]. The features of the Correlation
Grid are described, including filtering and statistical
sorting methods.

1 Introduction
Explanations to many questions in the field of
Neuroscience are dependent on the theoretical
understanding of a large body of experimental neural data.
Specifically, this understanding is fundamental to the
exploration of information processing within the nervous
system. A primary component of this data is
simultaneously recorded multi-dimensional spike trains.
Significant research in this area is steered towards the
principle of synchronisation of neural activity [2][3].
Further, in-depth, analysis of the available
experimental evidence is required in order to extract
inherent information. The analysis of neural data, such as
multi-dimensional spike trains, is increasingly complex
using traditional tools, like cross-correlograms, due to the

vast quantity of data involved. Consequently, new analysis
methods are required to deal with this data.
The specific computer science field of Information
Visualisation is focused on innovations in the
representation of vast quantities of data. A guiding
principle of Information Visualisation is that the
investigator should have control over the data
representation that they are using. Moreover, the
investigator should be able to manipulate the data by
applying relevant techniques, in order to steer that
direction of the analysis. For example, it may be
appropriate to use statistical or other mathematical
routines to sort and organise the data.
The “information–seeking mantra”, introduced by
Shneiderman [1] in 1996, highlighted user requirements in
this area. It proposed that users should have the ability to
overview data, zoom and filter this data and to obtain
details-on-demand. This mantra was widely adopted
throughout the Information Visualisation community as a
basis for defining user requirements. Frequently different
levels of detail are viewed using different visualizations.
Resulting in a number of different views of the data. For
consistency, these multiple views should be linked
[4][5][6].
In this paper, a method of dealing with the analysis of
relatively large numbers of spike trains, involving crosscorrelation, is proposed.

2 Neurophysiological data
Within the mammalian nervous system, there are
many different types of neurons, each of which performs a
different task. . These neurons communicate via small
electrical impulses.
A neuron accumulates electrical charge from other
neurons attached to it. When this accumulation reaches an
internal threshold, the neuron will initiate an action
potential. When a neuron initiates action potentials over
time, it is said that the neuron is firing. For example, the

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

application of pressure to the skin causes pressuresensitive neurons to fire.
Note that action potentials are often referred to as
spikes and a series of the spikes, over time, is called a
spike train.

2.1 Spike trains
Spike train data is the primary data recorded during
experimental Neurophysiology. This data is a record of the
spiking activity of a collection of neurons under
investigation. Figure 2-1 shows a section, from 200ms to
700ms, of a typical spike train recording for three neurons.
In this figure, a horizontal plot represents the spike train of
each neuron. Each horizontal plot denotes the occurrence
of spikes, at specific times, by a vertical line.

Figure 2-1: An example of a typical spike train
recording for three neurons over a period of
500ms.
It has been established that information is encoded in
this data. However, it has also been shown that spikes
from a single neuron are identical [7]. Thus, the form of
individual spikes is believed to carry little information.
Instead, it is the spiking frequency and thus, inter-spikeintervals that carry information. Moreover, the
synchronisation of spikes within this data is of prime
interest. Research [2] has shown that spike synchrony is
key to information processing within the brain.

2.2 Coupling
Connections between neurons fall into to general
groups; these are Direct Synaptic coupling and Common
Input coupling. In both cases the firing patterns of the
neurons will be synchronised.

Figure 2-2: An example of (i) direct synaptic
coupling and (ii) common input coupling
Figure 2-2 (i) illustrates Direct Synaptic coupling,
where neuron A is coupled so that it stimulates neuron B.

If neuron A fires, then neuron B has an increased
probability of firing. Figure 2-2 (ii) illustrates Common
Input coupling, where neuron A stimulates both neurons B
and C, resulting in the correlation of their input. Thus, if
neuron A fires then both neurons B and C have increased
probabilities of firing.

2.3 Multi-dimensional spike train data
Explanations to many questions in the field of
Neuroscience are dependent on the comprehension of
large sets of experimental data. For example, many
fundamental brain processes, such as memory, learning
and attention, are still unclear in many respects. One of the
central theories explaining how the brain processes
information is the synchronisation of neural activity.
Research [2] suggests that the synchronisation principle
may be useful in describing various brain systems.
Much experimental data has been recorded, from the
mammalian brain. The majority of this data is in the form
of multi-dimensional spike train recordings. Investigation
of this data centres on the synchronisation of spikes
between spike trains, to derive the coupling of the
underlying neurons.
Neurophysiologists still utilise traditional analysis
methods due to the absence of more substantial software
support. However, due to the quantity of data involved
these methods are both time consuming and complex.

3 Traditional methods of analysis
Currently there are a variety of methods to analyse
multi-dimensional spike train data. The cross-correlogram
is one of the most common and measures the temporal
correlation of one spike train with another. Like the crosscorrelogram, most current methods are designed for use
with only a pair of neurons, and these methods do not
scale-up to deal with larger assemblies.

3.1 Pair-wise correlation
The cross-correlogram [8][9] is used to measure the
synchronisation between the spike trains of two neurons.
One spike train is designated to be the reference train. The
other is known as the target. A time frame for correlation
must be specified, this is to account for the inherent delay
in neural circuits. The time frame, or correlation window,
consists of a number of equal time segments, called bins.
The correlation window is centred over the first spike
of the reference train. The number of target train spikes
that fall within each bin is calculated. This is repeated for
each subsequent spike in the reference train.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

The result of each comparison is added to the
previous to give the overall correlation; an example of this
is illustrated in Figure 3-1.

this large quantity of data. This is because all pair-wise
results must be analysed to understand any relationships
between the underlying neurons.

3.3 Peak significance

Figure 3-1 An example of a Cross Correlogram
calculation using a six-bin window
The overall correlation is then plotted using a crosscorrelogram.

3.2 The cross-correlogram
The resultant cross-correlation, plotted as the crosscorrelogram, shows the correlation of the target train with
respect to the reference train. This is illustrated in, Figure
3-2, for two spike trains recorded from neurons coupled as
shown in Figure 2-2(i).

Figure 3-2 Example cross-correlogram for two
connected neurons
Should a significant peak [10], as shown in Figure
3-2, be evident in this plot a correlation exists between the
two trains. In this case the two neurons are likely to be
connected. In contrast when no peaks are evident from the
cross-correlogram, see Figure 3-3, it is likely that the
neurons are not connected.

It is possible for a peak in the output of a crosscorrelogram to be ‘false’. These false peaks are random
occurrences and due to the high spike frequency of the
train.
A number of methods have been proposed to deal with this
problem including the Brillinger normalisation and
confidence interval [10].
The Brillinger method normalises the results of the
cross-correlogram, giving each bin, in the output, a mean
value of one. This normalisation supports the comparison
of cross-correlograms with different train lengths, as the
quantity of spikes on each train is taken into account. In
addition, a confidence interval, based on the data, is
calculated. Any peaks that are within this interval are
defined to be random. In contrast, peaks greater than this
interval are considered to show significant correlation.
Figure 3-4 illustrates a Brillinger normalised crosscorrelogram, for a pair of common input neurons. Note the
majority of bins have values around one, falling within the
Brillinger confidence interval. Thus, these bins do not
show statistically significant correlation. In contrast, the
central peak is much greater than the confidence interval,
showing a significant correlation between the input spike
trains. Thus indicating a high likelihood of the neuronal
coupling.

Figure 3-4 Example Brillinger normalised crosscorrelogram with confidence interval

4 Current methods of analysis

Figure 3-3 Example cross-correlogram for two
un-connected neurons
It takes one cross-correlogram to represent the
relationship between the spike trains of two neurons. Thus,
for any significantly sized neuronal assembly, numerous
cross-correlograms would be required to analyse the
connectivity of the assembly. New problems are posed by

A number of innovative methods exist for the analysis
of spike trains from large groups of interconnected
neurons, called assemblies. The ‘Gravity Transform’,
originally developed by Gerstein and Aertsen [11][12][13]
is one notable method. The Gravity Transform algorithm
can be used to study the firing dependencies of multidimensional spike trains. Recent work by Stuart et al. [14]
has enhanced the output of the original Gravity Transform
algorithm using visualisation techniques including parallel

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

coordinates to support the display of the Gravity
Transform output.
However, a great deal work is still necessary in this
area in order to fully support exploration of large multidimensional data sets. For this reason, the spike train
‘Correlation Grid’ has been developed.

5 Correlation grid
The Correlation Gird presents users with an overview
of cross-correlogram results, for a number of spike trains.
For a given dataset, of n spike trains, all unique crosscorrelograms are generated, where the user specifies the
bin and window size. Subsequently, the crosscorrelograms are normalised using the Brillinger method.
Finally, the results of these cross-correlograms are
displayed as an n-by-n grid of grey scale cells,
representing the individual correlations between all pairs
of spike trains.
The grid encodes the ‘height’ of the largest peak in
each cross-correlogram. The peaks are in coded from
white, representing no peak, to black, representing the
largest peak in the grid.
The user can select whether to view ‘all peaks’ or just
significant peaks. Significant peaks are those that fall
outside of the Brillinger confidence interval specified for
the grid. In addition, the individual cross-correlograms
can be view by selecting the corresponding cell in the grid.
To demonstrate the Correlation Grid, a dataset of ten
spike trains was generated, over 2000ms, for the assembly
of neurons shown in Figure 5-1.

Figure 5-1 Neuron assembly for test data set
In this assembly, the spike trains of neurons one,
three, five and seven will be correlated, as their
corresponding neurons are connected. Like wise the spike
trains of neurons two, four and six will correlate. In
contrast, the spike trains of neurons eight, nine and ten
will not correlate with any others as they are unconnected,
thus have a random firing pattern.
A Correlation Grid for this dataset was generated,
with a bin size of 2ms and window size of 100. The
resultant grid, showing al peaks, is shown in Figure 5-2.

Figure 5-2 Example Correlation Grid showing all
peaks (bin size 2ms, window size 100)
On close examination of this Grid, it is possible to
deduce that spike trains one, three, five and seven are
correlated. Note the higher peaks (represented by darker
greys) between these columns/rows. Likewise, it is
possible to conclude that a relationship exists between the
spike trains of neurons two, four and six.
The clarity of these relationships is greatly improved
by filtering the grid so it only containing significant peaks.
This filtered grid is shown in Figure 5-3. Recall the
correlation between spike trains one, three, five and seven
which is more prevalent in this filter Grid. Like wise the
correlation between train two, four and six.

Figure 5-3 Example Correlation Grid showing
only significant peaks (bin size 2ms, window size
100)
With the removal of the non-significant peaks the
grid is less cluttered. It is now easier to identify the
correlation between the connected neurons, shown in
Figure 5-1.
Moreover the lack of correlation between spike trains
is more apparent. From an examination of Figure 5-3 it is
possible to see that trains eight, nine and ten have
minimal, or no, correlation with other trains.

5.1 Cluster analysis
The identification of groups, or clusters, of
correlations is key to understanding the relationships
between the underlying neurons. It is possible to identify
these clusters visually, however this is not easily expanded
for problems with larger datasets.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

To aid with the identification of correlation clusters, a
statistical cluster analysis method has been implemented.
This method uses the height of the most significant peak,
if any exist, of each cross-correlogram to build a
dendrograph for the correlation gird. This in turn is used to
generate the initial display order of the spike trains.
The effect of clustering is shown in Figure 5-4. This
grid was generated from the same data as used to create
the grid in Figure 5-3, based on the neural assembly in
Figure 5-1. Cluster analysis was performed on the grid, to
determine the optimal sequence of spike trains in the grid.
This analysis was performed using significant peaks only.
With the aid of filtering and clustering it is possible to
clearly identify the groups in the neuronal assembly shown
in Figure 5-1.

Figure 5-4 Example Correlation Grid, showing
only significant peaks and clustered (bin size
2ms, window size 100)
From Figure 5-4 it is possible to identify the
correlations in the neuron ‘ring’; neurons one, three, five
and seven. They are shown in the top left portion of the
grid. Additionally, the common input group; neurons two,
four and six; are also grouped together in the centre of the
diagram. Finally, from the same figure, the independent
neurons, eight, nine and ten, are all in the lower right
portion of the grid.
From closer examination of the cross-correlograms of
the final cluster, of unconnected neurons, it is apparent
that the peaks are relatively small. See Figure 5-6 (i),
which shows the cross-correlation for neurons two and ten.

Figure 5-5 Cross-correlograms for (i) neurons
two and ten (ii) neurons two and four from the
previous Grid
From the display it is possible to see that the peaks
are relatively small, only slightly greater than the
confidence interval. In contrast the correlations of
connected neurons, shown in Figure 5-6 (ii) for neurons
two and four, show relatively large peaks. Thus, for
neurons eight, nine and ten, it would be possible to infer
that these peaks do not represent true correlation between
the spike trains. Hence, these neurons are not coupled to
any others in the assembly.
This overview of cross-correlograms facilitates
improved fine-tuning of the correlation parameters. This
fine-tuning is commonly needed to obtain the highest
clarity of result.
Increasing the bin size, for example, means more
spikes are taken into consideration. Thus, a peak must be
higher to be classed as significant. This principle is
illustrated in Figure 5-6 where the bin size for the grid has
been changed to 3ms. The same dataset and previous
window size were used to create this grid.

Figure 5-6 Example Correlation Grid showing
only significant peaks (bin size 3ms, window size
100)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

The grid in Figure 5-6 has been filtered to solely
show significant peaks and clusters. Note that correlation
only exists between the spike trains of the coupled
neurons. For example, spike trains eight, nine and ten
show no correlation with any other spike trains.

[3]

[4]

6 Future work
[5]

The work presented in this paper is part of an
Information Visualisation project, at the Centre for Neural
and Adaptive Systems, called Visualisation of Inter-Spike
Associations (VISA) [15]. Specifically, this paper has
presented work on an innovative method for analysis of
large neural assemblies using cross-correlation. However,
a number of areas still require attention.
Currently, users are unable to alter the order of the
spike trains. The ability to reorder the gird and to fine-tune
the display will be implemented.
Empirical testing is underway to evaluate the
usability of this visualization method. Subsequently, it is
likely that this tool will be integrated into the VISA
Toolbox [15].

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

7 Acknowledgments
[12]

This research is supported by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) grant
number GR/N04904. Additionally, the research of Roman
Borisyuk is supported in part by the Russian Foundation of
Basic Research (grant 99-04-49112) and by EPSRC (grant
GR/N63888/01).

[13]

[14]

8 References
[15]
[1]

[2]

Shneiderman B, 1996. The eyes have it: A task by data
type taxonomy for information visualizations. Proc. IEEE
Symposium Visual Language, VL, pages 336-343, 3-6.
Borisyuk R.M., Borisyuk G.N., 1997. Information coding
on the basis of synchronisation of neuronal activity.
BioSystems 40, 3-10

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Fries P., Neuenschwander S., Engel A.K., Goebel R. and
Singer W., 2001. Rapid feature selective neuronal
synchronization through correlated latency shifting. Nature
Neuroscience 4(2), 194-200.
North C, Multiple views and tight coupling in
visualization: A language, taxonomy, and system. Proc.
CSREA CISST 2001 Workshop of fundamental Issues in
Visualization, pages 626-632
Baldonado M. Q. W, Woodruff A., and Kuchinsky A 2000.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information
visualization. Advanced Visual Interfaces, pages 110-119.
Roberts J. C. 1998. On encouraging multiple views for
visualization. IV’98 – Proceedings International
Conference on Information Visualization, pages 8-14 IEEE
Computer Society, July 1998
Robinson D. editor 1998. Neurobiology. Springer, The
Open University. ISBN: 3-540-63546-7
Awiszus F 1997. Spike train analysis. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 74.
MuLab http://mulab.physiol.upenn.edu/index.html
Brillinger D. R. 1979. Confidence intervals for the
crosscovariance function. Selecta Statistica Canadiana, V,
pages 1-16.
Gerstein, G.L., Aertsen, A.M., 1985. Representation of
Cooperative Firing Activity Among Simultaneously
Recorded Neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology 54(6),
1513-1528
Gerstein, G.L., Perkel, D.H., Dayhoff, J.E., 1985.
Cooperative Firing Activity in Simultaneously Recorded
Populations of Neurons: Detection and Measurement.
Journal of Neuroscience 5(4), 881-889.
Baker, S.N., Gerstein, G.L., 2000. Improvements to the
Sensitivity of the Gravitational Clustering for Multiple
Neuron Recordings. Neural Computation 12, 2597 - 2620.
Stuart L., Walter M. and Borisyuk R. 2002. Visualization
of synchronous firing in multi-dimensional spike trains.
BioSystem 67:265-279
Visualization of Inter-spike Association (VISA) project
website
http://www.tech.plym.ac.uk/soc/research/neural/staff/lstuar
t/VISA/index.html

