The Argument-as Metaphor in Decision-making Visualisation
John McGinn

Richard Picking

j.mcginn@newi.ac.uk

r.picking@newi.ac.uk

Technology and Computer Science.
North East Wales Institute of Higher Education
Wrexham, WALES

Abstract

If you use that strategy, he’ll wipe you out.
He shot down all of my arguments.

In this paper, we describe ‘argument-as’ metaphors and
how they may be used as a vehicle to visualise decision
support information. We argue that our approach is particularly useful for users who may not have advanced computing skills, and who have little time to dedicate to indepth analysis of the information. We present an interface
which, as a result of using an argument-as metaphorical
approach, is simple to understand, easy to manipulate, and
transparent in its display of underlying reasoning.

Lakoff and Johnson also describe the argument-as-building
metaphor (if you don't support your argument with solid
facts, the whole thing will collapse), the argument-ascontainer metaphor (that argument has holes in it), and the
argument-as-journey metaphor (you're going around in
circles).

1. Introduction

Another common argument-as linguistic metaphor is the
argument-as-balance metaphor, where rational argument is
understood as a twin-pan balance of weights, where the
weight on either side represents the strength of the arguments on either side of a question, for example: the debater
built up a weighty argument; the jury weighed the merits of
both sides; more facts might tip the scale [8].

Anyone who has studied prose or poetry will be familiar
with the concept of linguistic metaphor. The principle of
metaphor has successfully been applied of course to help
people interact with computer technology [15, 3, 10].
Clearly, metaphors are very powerful tools which can facilitate dialogue and convey complex ideas. Indeed, metaphors are so engendered in our language that we use them
as a matter of course in everyday conversation [9, 6].
One application of linguistic metaphor is used in argumentation. For example, Lakoff and Johnson [9] describe the
conceptual metaphor of argument-as-war with the following expressions:
Your claims are indefensible.
He attacked every weak point in my argument.
His criticisms were right on target.
I demolished his argument.
I never won an argument with him.
You disagree? Okay, shoot!

The principle of using metaphor in the examples described
is to facilitate dialogue, to make it easier for parties in conversation to visualise abstract concepts. The same principle
applies to human-computer dialogue, where concepts that
are abstract to non-expert users such as directory structures,
memory management, and file handling are all clarified via
the veneer of the desktop metaphor. Of course, we use
computers to help us visualise information, from the simple
graphical representation of spreadsheet data to the visualisation of large, multi-dimensional datasets. Typically, we
use computer-generated visualisations to help us reach decisions. Increasingly, professional decision makers rely on
computers to assist them in their practice, for example in
the health sector [2, 4], the financial sector [16], and any
other discipline that requires relatively rapid risk assessment: process control, project management, resource allocation, logistics, and so forth. In most cases, we can assume
that these people are busy professionals, non-expert computer users, who need potentially to make many decisions
every day, and who need to be confident that any external

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

decision-making assistance is clear, coherent and transparent.
In this paper, we propose that using the argument-as metaphor to facilitate the human-computer dialogue in decisionmaking scenarios such as those described will provide a
stronger and more tangible connection between the communicating parties. To illustrate our proposal, we present
an example visualisation method called DAVE (Decision
and Argumentation Visualisation Explorer) which uses the
argument-as-balance metaphor.

2. Introducing DAVE
Our proposal leverages the common and well-understood
argument-as-balance metaphor to provide a visual
representation of the factors affecting a risk or a decision
(see Figure 1).

A problem with using the sizes of weights to represent the
magnitude of factors is that they may well require different
scales (age, weight, heartrate, etc.). We propose, therefore,
to use a standard sized container to represent the maximum
range for each factor, the range being the difference between a neutral value (one which does not affect the outcome one way or the other) and the maximum (or minimum) value that would be expected to influence the outcome. The weight is represented by how full that container
is. To accommodate factors which can have values capable
of affecting the outcome on both sides of the neutral value,
we propose a container that can be filled from either “end”.
The container also includes an indication of the normal
range of values that are not expected to have a significant
effect upon the outcome. Boolean values are represented by
a standard full container. In the example below (Figure 2),
the weight is (6.0 – 2.5)/(6.0-2.0) = 0.875.

Figure 1
We could consider the resultant indication to be analogous
to the clockwise overturning moment at the fulcrum – i.e.
the contribution of each factor (cf) is the product of its
magnitude and its importance (I). Ameliorating factors (af)
produce a contraindication in the same way. Thus:
n

Total indication =

m

¦ cf I ¦ af I
i i

i 1

Figure 2

i i

i 1

Various researchers [12, 11, 13, 14, 1, 5, 7] have demonstrated the advantages of direct manipulation and tight coupling of the interface components. The argument-asbalance metaphor lends itself to this approach. Individual
factors can be dragged along the balance bar to indicate
their relative importance and the size of a weight can be
adjusted with a slider to indicate the magnitude of that particular factor. The angle of rotation of the bar from the
horizontal then suggests the strength of argument in one
direction or the other. In this form, the model is a useful
argumentation tool.

The relative importance of a factor is typically not fixed
over the complete range of expected values. For example, a
weight may remain close to the fulcrum while its value
remains within the normal range but move into a position
of greater importance relative to other factors when the
value becomes exceptional.
Exceptional values of one factor will also frequently affect
the relative importance of one or more related factors.
Their weights will move along the scale of importance as
dictated by ratios of influence in the underlying algorithm.
The model can operate in three different modes:

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

1.

Expert mode

Experts use the system as an argumentation tool to enter
limit values, agree the relative importance of various factors arising from different data sets and edit parameters for
ratios of influence.
2.

User mode

Users move the sliders to represent recorded or hypothetical values. They are then able to instantly observe the overall effect, which factors are out of normal range and how
they are contributing to the total.
3.

Automatic mode

The system acquires data from an external source and triggers an alarm if a particular overall condition occurs. In
this mode, a user can monitor a large number of datasets
simultaneously by displaying only the resultant scales until
an unusual reading indicates that more detail is required.

4. Limitations
The first obvious limitation to this approach is that it will
only work if the underlying algorithm supports the identification of the contribution of each factor to the overall result. Artificial neural networks, for example, would not
support this. We would argue that DAVE’s usefulness lies
in applications where transparency is important and such
black-box approaches would be inappropriate.
Another limitation might be the number of factors that can
be simultaneously displayed. However, we consider DAVE
to be inherently scalable because the balance beam is of
arbitrary length. Very large numbers of factors can be accommodated by some combination of zooming, scrolling or
aggregation.

3. Example
The Framingham Heart Study [17] was started in 1948 to
identify the factors that contribute to coronary heart disease
(CHD). It is still running today. There are many programs
based upon this renowned research study that assist in estimating a patient’s risk of contracting CHD within the next
10 years.
A weakness of many of these programs is that they do not
give the user any indication of the relative importance of
the various risk factors. The identification of risk factors is
often well-publicised by the media but this can lead many
patients to worry unnecessarily.
Whereas relative importance can sometimes be deduced
from various charts and point-scoring formulae, these are
frequently difficult for the patient to understand. We provide a simple illustration of how DAVE can be used to
assist both patients and practitioners (Figure 3).

5. Conclusion and further work
The use of the argument-as-balance metaphor to facilitate
the visualisation of decision-making has been discussed. It
is a metaphor that is well-understood in western culture. It
is argued here that the types of users who are most likely to
use computer technology for decision-making assistance
are also those that will benefit from the metaphorical approach offered by DAVE.
Although the argument-as-balance metaphor appears visually appealing and applicable to the example described, it
may be the case that for alternative scenarios, other argument-as metaphors may be equally or perhaps even more
appropriate. An opportunity for further research in this area
is to consider factors such as the application domain, user
models, and cultural setting to select the optimal visualisation tool for the task at hand.

In the user mode, manipulating the sliders tilts the beam to
give instant notification of the effect that the change in any
factor has upon the overall risk. This is read from the scale
which shows the probability of contracting CHD within the
next ten years and is expressed as a percentage. Simultaneously, the underlying algorithm moves the weights along
the beam to indicate changes in their relative importance.
DAVE thereby enables a practitioner to demonstrate to a
patient which treatments or lifestyle changes are likely to
have the greatest effect upon their future health. Tight coupling between the components enables the relationship between cause and effect to be very easily understood and
marginal factors are put into their correct perspective.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 3

References

[8] Johnson, M. The Body in the Mind, University of Chicago
Press, (1987)

[9] Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. Metaphors we live by, University
[1] Ahlberg, C. and Shneiderman, B., Visual Information Seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query filters with starfield
displays, Proc. of ACM CHI’94 Conference (April 1994)

[2] Buckingham, C.D. & Adams, A.E. Classifying clinical decision making: a unifying approach. Journal of Advanced
Nursing, 32(4), 981-989, (2000)

of Chicago Press (1980)

[10] Laurel, B. Computers as Theatre, Addison-Wesley, (1993)
[11] Papert, S. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful
Ideas, New York:Basic Books, (1980)

[12] Piaget, J. Piaget’s theory, In Carmichael’s manual of child
psychology, 3rd ed, Wiley, (1970)

[3] Carroll, J.M., Mack, R.L. & Kellog W.A. Interface metaphors and user interface design. In Handbook of HumanComputer Interaction (Helander, M. ed.), 67-85, Amsterdam:North-Holland, (1988)

[4] Dugas, M., Schauer, R., Volk, A. & Rau, H. Interactive decision support in hepatic surgery, BMC Medical Informatics
and Decision Making, 2(5), (2002)

[13] Shneiderman, B, Designing the User Interface: strategies for
effective human-computer interaction, 2nd ed , AddisonWesley (1987)

[14] Shneiderman, B, Dynamic queries for visual information
seeking, IEEE Software 11, 6 (1994)

[15] Smith, D, Irby, C, Kimball, R, Verplank, B & Harslem, E.
Designing the Star user interface, Byte, 7(4), 242-82

[5] Eick, S.G., Data Visualization Sliders, ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology (November 1994)

[16] Wright, W. Information animation applications in the capital
markets, Proceedings of infoVIS ’95, IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, New York, pp 19-25 (1995)

[6] Erikson, T.D. Working with interface metaphors, In The Art
of Human-Computer Interface Design (Laurel, B. ed.), 6573, Addison-Wesley, (1990)

[17] The Framingham Heart Study.

[7] Fishkin, K. and Stone, M. C. Enhanced Dynamic Queries via
Movable Filters. In Proceedings of CHI'95, ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ACM Press,
pp. 415—420, (Denver, Colorado, 7--11 May 1995)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

http://www.framingham.com/heart/ (accessed 1st March
2003)

