Pointing the finger; a role for hybrid representations in VR and video?
John Counsell,
Faculty of the Built Environment
University of the West of England, Bristol. Frenchay Campus,
Coldharbour Lane, Bristol, BS16 1QY, U.K.
John.Counsell@uwe.ac.uk

Abstract
Experience gained in associating interpretative
VRML modelling with real-time video has demonstrated
that it is an effective technique for explaining the content
of the video image. However searching the VRML model
requires interactive exploration by the user. It is morbe
difficult for the viewer to quickly identify the location of an
object of interest in the video image, if a search is run in
the database to return the location of an object or objects
in the image. It is suggested that there are a number of
instances where it would be useful to distort a photo
realistic modelled scene to draw attention to specific
portions, ranging from the representation of uncertainty in
archaeological presentations or planning proposals, to the
identification of the location of an object of interest in a
video clip or live video frame. The advantages and
disadvantages of some possible approaches are discussed
in this paper.

1. Introduction
This paper is based upon the work of a team in
the Faculty of the Built Environment at the University of
the West of England (FBE/UWE) in developing 3D
computer models (more recently based on GIS) over a
period of years. Experience gained during the Valhalla
project (IST-2000-28541) in associating interpretative
Virtual Reality Modelling Language modelling (VRML)
with real-time video has demonstrated that it is an
effective technique for explaining the content of the video
image.[1]
The hyperlinked VRML model, generated from
GIS, has been located side by side with the real-time video
image, and slaved to the video camera controls, to set the
same field of view and focus in the VRML model. A
further simplification of this approach would be to
superimpose the VRML model view as a transparent
overlay on the video image to provide dynamic hotspot
information about the objects in the field of view, when

the user moves the cursor over or clicks on objects in the
video image.
However searching the VRML model requires
interactive exploration by the user in clicking on each
object that engages interest to invoke the active server
page of information associated with it. If the user is not
exploring the image, but searching for the location of a
specific known object within the field of view, the process
is to some extent ‘hit and miss’. It is thus more difficult to
quickly identify the location of an object of interest in the
video image, if a search is run in the database to return the
location of an object in the image. While the object in the
VRML model could be false coloured or otherwise
distorted to attract attention, this if overlaid would tend to
obscure the very portions of the image to which attention
is desirably drawn. It is argued that an outcome that
obscures would be undesirable, since a particular value of
such models is held to be the convincing sense of presence
that they convey.
It is suggested that there are a number of similar
instances where it would be useful to distort a photo
realistic image to draw attention to specific portions,
ranging from the representation of uncertainty in
archaeological presentations or planning proposals, to the
identification of the location of an object of interest in a
video clip or live video frame. There has been much
research and literature on the issues of navigation and

figure 1. Clicking on hyperlinked objects in
the synched VRML model on the left returns
ASPs of data below.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

wayfinding in virtual spaces. This paper is not seeking to
address these issues. It is focused on the real-time
interactive use of a realistic urban model as an urban
information system, based on an underlying database of
spatially referenced information. Some possible
approaches to this are presented in this paper.

2. 3D City Modelling for Memory
In 1995 FBE/UWE received a commission to
model part of Bristol to create a VR experience to
demonstrate the millennium proposals to the
Commissioners, in conjunction with Bristol 2000, Bristol
City, Division Ltd. and Aardman Animations. Two models
were created, one representing the existing area and one as
proposed. The models were based on a combination of UK
Ordnance Survey 1:1250 scale 2D map data with 1:10,000
scale 3D contour data, other data procured by Bristol City
such as 3D street survey data and drawings submitted for
planning approval, and bespoke photographic surveys. It
must be stressed that the available map data consists only
of polygonal building outlines measured at ground level
and substantial additional elevational and roof
morphological data is required to produce or maintain an
effective 3D model (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Bristol Harbourside CAD model
Keeping the models up to date, as an accurate
reflection of changes on the ground, has developed into a
major data management problem. Piecing in new CAAD
models received from Architectural Practices to visualise
them in context as part of the planning negotiation process
has often taken staff at Bristol City several days of work
for each instance. Because the model is so complex and so
proprietary the Bristol City staff operate as a specialist
visualisation bureau service.

3. 3D Urban Information Systems
Prototype city models having high levels of
realism and interactive navigation have been produced for
a variety of reasons. The original was probably that of
Aspen, Colorado, using software written to enable users to
choose ‘Moviemap’ alternative routes, which was created
at MIT in 1978 using videodisc[2]. This was probably the

first high-resolution surrogate travel program. (Surrogate
tourism is held to be likely to increase actual tourism!) The
'Moviemap' approach included a ‘Season Knob’ and a
‘Time Knob’ and the ability to invoke mini-documentaries
on many buildings. Its development was influenced by the
observation that people find it easier to remember things
related to actual locations. This observation originated
from the use of mind-maps[3] for memory training in
classical and Renaissance literature, which used
metaphysical devices such as the memory theatre[4],
walked through to retrieve the associated data. It addresses
the issue of remembering where things are that are already
known to the user/ observer. However it critically does not
address the issue raised here of how to draw the users’
attention (while absorbed by interaction with or immersed
in VR urban space) to unknown information, or to desired
information that is related to a place or location that is not
known but is in the neighbourhood.

4. 3D City Models as Interactive Interfaces to
Urban Information
As a result of the experience with the Bristol
model the team at FBE/UWE began to examine ways in
which the model could have been used more effectively,
had the VR experience of using the model worked. (This
has since led directly to a focus on the amalgamation of
GIS and VRML, using Pavan[5] software running inside
Mapinfo.) From this analysis came some conclusions
explored in a paper in 1996 on appropriate symbols and
their use in detailed 3D Cityscape models.[6] The paper in
1996 depended on the hypothesis that in due course 3D
cityscape models would become increasingly used as the
framework and the navigational interface to urban
information systems. Continuing appraisal of these issues
has led to this paper.
Work by the team in 1999, including the author
of Pavan, led to a prototype VRML model for a large
urban area of a capital city, where clicking on the links on
the buildings opened websites for the individual
businesses that occupied the buildings. The model was in
effect a demonstration of a 3D approach to digital ‘yellow
pages’. The model and process of modelling undertaken in
that case has since been bought by Multimap to explore
alternative methods of supplying a route finding service.
Navigation in the prototype was therefore by street,
address, and 'reading' the signboards or looking at the
shopfronts, before finding out more about the internal
organisation by examining the webpage. However this still
poses the same question about how attention is drawn to a
particular place as the result of a database search. Another
way of expressing this issue is to ask how can a realistic
urban model itself act as a navigational guide, drawing the
attention forward, without the insertion of avatars,
symbols, or labels in the scene?

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Avatars serve a useful purpose in acting as
surrogates or symbols for individuals in real-time
encounters in shared community spaces, but it may be
considered that this is a current compensation for the lack
of bandwidth to enable actual video or real-time 3D scans
of these individuals[7]. Avatars have also been extensively
used in recreating individuals from the past to serve as
‘natural’ guides in interpreting VR recreations of past
cities and environments. However avatars may also be
seen as a distraction from the use of the realistic urban
model as an information space, and as a limitation only
able to direct attention to one location in the geometric
model at a time in a sequential rather than a pattern
recognition process. Similarly in an approach at MIT to
the interactive direction of ‘synthetic movies’ eye-tracking
was used to the same effect. ‘CyberBELT uses the eye
gaze of the viewer at two phases of the interaction. When
the viewer is looking at a collage of icons to select the next
thread, the system reveals explanatory text under any icon
she is looking at. It explains how the thread will relate to
the previous clip and reveals a brief quote. The system
reveals text until the viewer selects a thread or until the
selection period times out and the story moves to the next
chapter. CyberBELT also uses eye tracking information to
gauge the viewer's level of attention while watching a clip.
If the viewer's gaze wonders outside the playing clip, she
is not attentively watching the clip; we assume she is not
interested.’[8]
It is argued here that there is a need to identify
other and potentially more effective means of drawing the
eye and the attention of the viewer simultaneously to
multiple objects of interest in the realistic urban scene,
without discarding that very realism in the process. It is
also argued that this is a complex problem without easy or
ready-made solutions.

5. Real and Virtual Architectural billboards
There is a convergence of the real and the digital in some
urban architecture. For example ‘one possibility that new
technology offers is the building with a virtual surface, a
moving kaleidoscope of images projected electronically
onto a glass wall or through LEDs in the wall surface. Jean
Nouvel’s Mediapark project in Cologne uses the exterior
walls as screens in this way’[9]. It is argued that this is a
natural extension in the digital age from traditional
signage. Real buildings or billboards of this nature might
be used for virtual information in their digital equivalent,
but these will still tend to be the exception rather than the
norm.
Equally there have been virtual spaces put forward as
more natural surrogates for flat text based digital
information spaces, such as the ‘City of News’ proposed at
MIT. ‘We have therefore undertaken the task to "escape
flatland"…, to design an information browser that
organizes information as it fetches it, in real-time, in a

virtual three-dimensional space which anchors our
perceptual flow of data to a cognitive map of a (virtual)
place. This place is a city… Following a link becomes
equivalent to a pursuit of possibility which determines a
change in the environment: the consequence of every
choice is amplified, causing a building to be raised or a
path to be followed.’[10] There has been much research on
the issues posed by real-time social interaction with large
datasets using the analogy of 3D urban like environments
for their more natural interface. ‘Their analogy to our real
world has lead reasonably to speculation that natural
human perceptual mechanisms may be exploited in more
abstract environments’.[11] In the ‘City of News’ and
similar VR information spaces there is no attempt to create
recognisable representations of actual urban settings, so
they do not serve the virtual or surrogate tour, or deliver
related abstract information in the context of real places,
based on database search, the issue that is posed here.

6. Hybrid Representation, Video & VRML
In the Valhalla EC funded research project[12]
just concluded, the hyperlinked VRML model was located
alongside the real-time video image on a web page for
public information in a virtual site tour. The real-time web
video images at 640 by 480 resolution were obtained from
conventional high-resolution colour security camera
technology using a specially developed web control
interface. There are thought to be now over 1.5 million
CCTV security cameras in use in largely urban settings in
the UK.[13] This project shows how such cameras could
be effectively enhanced to provide real-time visual
information linked to other data. (If the privacy issues can
be resolved.) Generation of the VRML from a GIS based
database of spatial information about the site enabled
hyperlinks to be associated with most of the objects that
are visible in the scene, providing active server page
access from the same underlying database (GIS) to pages
of abstract non-visual information about the objects.
This is what we have termed ‘hybrid
representation’ using real-time video synchronised with a
matching moving viewpoint in the VRML model. The
video serves to provide the sense of animation, life and
reality that is difficult to achieve in VR, while the
modelling provides a measurable 3D spatial framework
and a means of generating scale independent hotspot
access to more abstract information. A more natural
simplification of this approach would be to superimpose
the VRML model view as a transparent overlay on the
video image to provide dynamic hotspot information about
the objects in the field of view. However this was beyond
the scope of this one-year project.
Interaction by the user on the web in clicking on a
hyperlinked object in the model instigates a database query
that returns further information about or associated with
the object. In the Valhalla project this was related to plant

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

information, architectural history and the like. In an Urban
Modelling context, it might for example be related to
information about shops, businesses, goods for sale,
occupancy and contact details, or tourism and history.
However it was evident that searching the VRML
model requires interactive exploration by the user in
clicking on each object that visibly engages interest to
invoke the active server page of information associated
with it. If the user is not exploring the image, but
searching for the location of a known object but not
immediately visibly recognisable object within the field of
view the process is largely ‘hit and miss’. The basis of use
of the GIS was that it offered the potential to enhance the
modelling with the more conventional GIS spatial
analytical and database search tools. In the GIS based
Smartkom project, information has to date been
‘published’ from the database as voice prompts or text
labels. The voice prompts are in effect a sequential
approach to drawing attention and we would suggest are
not a complete substitute for visual cues. The text labels
are overlaid on the images derived from the 3D model
obscuring significant portions, which we suggest is
undesirable.[14]

7. Focusing on each instance in turn
In the Valhalla Project a VRML server
application was developed to search the spatial
information for instances of desired objects based on
search terms typed into the web interface. The application
used Microsoft Information Server (IIS) and Active
Server Pages (ASP). The 3D scene model was hosted on
the server using the Cortona VRML browser Active X
control from Parallel Graphics. The server application was
implemented by building two additional Active X controls
using Visual Basic 6.
The first active X control is an out of process server
executable (the 'VR Server') which remains in memory
continuously. It is a container for the 3D scene and uses
the Cortona VRML control object. The Cortona control
interface has a range of properties, which allow rendering
features (textures etc.) to be turned off to minimise
resources needed by the server. The second active X
control is a DLL. This application sits between the ASP
script and the VR Server application. It allows the
viewpoint and viewed point to be specified and returns the
visibility test result. It also allows batches of view
orientations be tested and returns the results as a HTML
page containing an expandable view tree.
Instigating a search in the database could
reference multiple instances of the same plant or other
object within the visible VRML scene. It was possible to
return search parameters that restricted the field of view to
a focus on each instance in turn. This we have referred to
as virtually ‘pointing a finger’ at the object of interest.
Similarly it would not have been difficult to ‘highlight’

multiple instances simultaneously in a wide-angle view for
more instant, less sequential, recognition. It was however
difficult to determine how most effectively to ‘highlight’
these instances for immediate recognition in a wide field
of view without further research. While the object(s) of
interest in the VRML model could be false coloured or
otherwise distorted to attract attention, this would tend to
obscure those very portions of the image to which
attention is desirably drawn, particularly if the VRML
were to be overlaid transparently on the video image, as
expressed above as a longer term goal. Nevertheless
portions of that model could be switched to visibility to act
as overlaid highlights.

8. What form should 3D pins have in 3D
Maps?
Various ways have been suggested to draw attention using
the analogy of 3D map pins in VR space. It has been
argued that ’Highlighting techniques, like blinking,
brightening, reverse video, can be used to focus the
attention to specific items among thousands of items.’[15]
However it is our contention that approaches like these are
less than satisfactory in that they tend to obscure either the
object of interest or its context.
‘Cuecons’ is a term coined in the 1980s to
describe icons that cue the user to further action. This
implies that a symbol appears to draw attention to requisite
information, but as discussed earlier symbols or labels that
are overlaid on the scene will partially obscure it. Clearly
senses other than the visual could be used in VR space, for
example hot for closer, cold for more remote, which might
effectively be linked to eye-tracking, however this still

Icons serve to explain which is an office and
which a house, but obscure. Image created in
exploration of Bristol Model in 1996.
seems a hit and miss approach to drawing attention.
Different perspective or scale or colour is a way
of drawing attention to information without masking the
appearance of a real place, and variants of this approach

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Images created in exploration of Bristol Model
in 1996. Beacons above (searchlights)
obscure all but the objects of interest, while
edge highlights (below) separate the object
from its immediate setting.

There is an implicit assumption in much VR that
movement is linear and corresponds with movement in the
real world. In the film world non linear conventions have
developed that tell effective stories and draw attention
using a filmic visual language that is now accepted by the
film and TV viewing public world wide. An example is
that of montage - the juxtaposition of shots as opposed to
sequential procession - through editing, authoring or
interaction.[16] Such a narrative juxtaposition may form
an acceptable alternative in those situations where a single
wide angle view cannot serve, however automating a
technique of generating a filmic and therefore ‘acceptable’
series of montage shots of an urban model in VRML
would be in itself a demanding task.
If one assumes that image recognition improves
in batch searching of digital film or real-time tracking in
digital video such as security, then more automated
searches may reveal many more correspondences between
the search description and the instances in the film or
video. There may in these circumstances need also to be a
more effective means of drawing attention to each instance
in the scene. Currently there seems to be an implicit
assumption that so few coincidences are discovered
between search pattern and match that the viewer will
recognise them.

9. Perceptual Artists

seem to be the most promising. Perspective projections or
orthographic projections, such as isometric, axonometric,
oblique, have all been used in 3D games. (The isometric
projection was used extensively in Roman, Byzantine,
Persian paintings and 18th C Japanese woodcuts). The
disadvantages of a wide-angle perspective view are that
objects in the foreground are more dominant since they
occupy a larger portion of the scene. Conversely the
advantages of an isometric projection are that objects in
the back or middle ground are given equal ‘weight’ to
those of the same size in the foreground, so a single wide
angle viewpoint could draw unbiased attention to a widely
distributed range of objects of interest. Although
orthographic projections are commonplace facilities within
many 3D CAD and modelling programs, they are not
standard within ISO VRML ’97, and can only be
approximated. Such techniques could well be combined
for greater effectiveness, for example with intensity depth
cueing, which creates an illusion of aerial perspective, an
atmospheric effect whereby distant objects appear to be
dimmer than those close to the observer, caused by dust,
water vapour etc. This has been used for photo-realism in
conjunction with motion parallax and interposition.

In addition to the suggested effective use of
isometric projections, perceptual artists have used
techniques in the last century that are now being shown to
be both readily understandable, an more closely related to
cognitive perception, than either perspective or
orthographic projections. Future development of computer
based tools to implement such techniques are now being
forecast. These may prove the most useful approach of all
to drawing attention to objects of interest without losing
meaning or obscuring parts of the image. Van Gogh for
example painted scenes in a manner which was not based
on true perspective, yet both very meaningful and with a
clear focus (such as his famous painting of the church of
Notre Dame at Auvers-sur-Oise).[17] The painting is not
fully based on euclidean perspective, but draws the
attention in a striking way. It may be argued that there is
much to learn from perceptual artists in how to draw and
capture the attention.
At a recent conference in Glasgow on visual
perception (ECVP 2002) an exhibition organised by an
artist, John Jupe, challenged orthodox views on
perception.[18] He presented a number of paintings based
on an analysis of perception in the works of great artists
such as Cezanne. In his paintings and analysis he
demonstrated images which contained a fixation area,
within which the representation was painted in a manner
which was three dimensional with greater detail and
enhanced colour; and the remainder of the painting was in

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

a manner which is flatter and less 3D and addresses
peripheral vision.[19] His claim was that such images
address the viewer in the manner the viewer perceives
reality, and so are closer to the normal manner of visual
perception. Such an approach if it could be effected in an
automated manner might be very appropriate in drawing
attention to the object or area of interest (in his terms the
fixation point) while rendering the remainder of the image
as a flatter less detailed but nevertheless meaningful
context.

10. Conclusion
This paper describes an investigation into an area
of visual information display that has not been greatly
explored. There is some evidence that large area models
are still not commonplace in VR. Much of the focus in VR
could be argued to be on the techniques and the realism
rather than on the database of information that could
underlie such a model and on expression of the results of
database searches in the model within the VR scene.
Generally speaking searching the VR model requires
interactive exploration by the user. It remains more
difficult to quickly identify the location of an object of
interest in the VR scene, if a search is run in the database
to return the location of objects in the scene. This paper
suggests that there are a number of instances where it
would be useful to distort a photo realistic image to draw
attention to specific portions, ranging from the
representation
of
uncertainty
in
archaeological
presentations or planning proposals, to the identification of
the location of an object of interest in a video clip or live
video frame. If the VRML ‘hotspot’ model were overlaid
transparently on the Video image, as is the goal of the next
stage of the Valhalla project, then these techniques will be
required to ‘point the finger’ at objects of interest in the
underlying video. The approaches indicated in this paper
require more exploration to determine ease of use and
speedy absorption of data without changing the scene
beyond recognition.

References
[1] COUNSELL,J. 2000.Recording and Retrieving Spatial
Information with Video and Images. In E Banissi, M Banatyne,
C Chen, F Khosrowshahi, M Sarfraz, and A. Ursyn Editors,
IEEE Information Visualisation IV 2000. IEEE. Pp 589-596.
ISSN 1093-9547.
[2] http://www.naimark.net/projects/aspen.html
http://www.naimark.net/writing/spie97.html
[3] Flavia Sparacino, Alex Pentland, Glorianna Davenport,
Michal Hlavac, Mary Obelnicki, ‘City of News’, From the Ars
Electronica Catalogue 1997, Exhibition Catalogue. copyright
MIT
Media
Lab.

http://ic.media.mit.edu/Publications/Conferences/CityOfNewsArs
/HTML/
[4] http://www.digital-brilliance.com/kab/theatre/theatre.htm
[5] PAVAN at http://www.pavan.co.uk
[6] Counsell, J., Phillips, R. Appropriate Symbols and their use
in Detailed 3D Cityscape Models, In JEC-GI'96 Proceedings,
Second Joint European Conference & Exhibition on Geographic
Information, published by IOS Press Amsterdam, March 1996.
[7] Wilcox, S.K. 'Web Developer.com Guide to 3D Avatars - a
complete guide to creating and using 3D avatars in virtual
worlds', John Wiley & Sons Inc, New York, 1998.
[8] Joshua Bers, Sara Elo, Sherry Lassiter, and David Tames,
‘Cyberbelt -Multi-Modal Interaction with a Multi-Threaded
Documentary’,
in
CHI
’95
proceedings.
http://www.acm.org/sigchi/chi95/Electronic/documnts/shortppr/e
lo_bdy.htm
[9] Zampi, and Morgan, C.L. ‘ Virtual Architecture’, Batsford,
London, 1995.
[10] Flavia Sparacino, Alex Pentland, Glorianna Davenport,
Michal Hlavac, Mary Obelnicki, ‘City of News’, From the Ars
Electronica Catalogue, cite: Ars Electronica 1997, Exhibition
Catalogue. copyright MIT Media Lab.
[11] Steve Pettifer, Jon Cook, John Mariani, Towards Real-Time
Interactive Visualisation in Virtual Environments: A Case
Study of Q-SPACE, in VRIC,Virtual Reality International
Conference,
Laval
Virtual
2001.
http://aig.cs.man.ac.uk/publications/papers/qspace.pdf
[12] The Valhalla Project EC - IST-2000-28541.
http://environment.uwe.ac.uk/valhalla
[13] http://www.spy.org.uk/cctv5.htm
[14] Rainer Malaka and Alexander Zipf
Deep Map Challenging IT research in the framework of a tourist
information system, proceedings of ENTER 2000: 7th
International Congress on Tourism and Communications
Technologies in Tourism, Barcelona (Spain) Springer Computer
Science,
Wien,
New
York,
pp.
15-27,
2000
http://smartkom.dfki.de/Vortraege/EML/Challenging_IT_Researc
h.pdf
[15] Maria Francesca Costabile and Giovanni Semeraro
‘Information Visualization In The Interaction With IDL’ in
proceedings of the Eighth Delos Workshop on User Interface in
Digital Libraries - Stockholm, Sweden, 21-23 October 1998
http://www.ercim.org/publication/wsproceedings/DELOS8/costabile.pdf
[16] Sergei Eisenstein. The Film Sense. 1946
[17] Van GOGH, Vincent, famous painting of church
http://www.janetomlinson.com/churchatauvers.shtml
[18] Jupe John, exhibition at ECVP 2002. JUPE, John
http://ecvp.psy.gla.ac.uk/events.asp
See also website http://www.ateliervision.co.uk/
[19] Rainer Wolf ‘3-D paintings on a flat canvas - Novel
techniques developed by painters John Jupe and Dorle Wolf,
and their significance for human stereopsis’ in paper to be
published in proceedings of ECVP 2003, Paris.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

