4D Visualization of Highway Construction Projects
Katherine A. Liapi
Assistant Professor, Civil Engr. Dept., University of Texas at Austin
E-mail: kliapi@mail.utexas.edu
Abstract
Visualization of transportation projects has been
shown to be a very effective way of communicating
information between interested project parties [1]. In
reviewed applications, visualization has been used
primarily for communicating information on the
geometric design, or as photorealistic representations
that place trasportation projects within their existing or
envisioned built or natural context. A review of examples
of transportation visualization also indicates that
visualization methods are mostly application specific.
This paper focuses on the use of visualization during the
construction process of highway projects to facilitate
collaborative
decision-making
on
construction
scheduling and traffic planning. For the visualization of
construction scheduling and traffic planning a 4D
technology that makes use of a comprehensive 3D
project database is proposed. The same 3D database can
be also used for the development of photo-realistic
animations that can facilitate the dissemination of traffic
measures information to the traveling public during
construction. This approach has been used during the
construction of a section of a large-scale highway
interchange project in Dallas, Texas.
.
Keywords:
Visualization, 4D Modeling, Construction Animation,
Traffic Planning Visualization, Traffic Measures
Visualization, Highway Interchange Geometry.

1. Visualization of Transportation Projects
Transportation projects often involve complex
geometric configurations
which render the
communication of project information between
interesting parties very difficult and prone to errors.
Visualization has been often used by trasportation
professionals to facilitate decision making during the
design development and implementation of a project.
A review of visualization applications in

transportation projects has shown that most commonly
used visualization techniques and methods are:
illustration, photo-simulation, 3-D CAD images,
animations, multimedia and virtual reality. These
methods, which have been extensively used in urban
planning and building visualization, are also being
adopted by transportation professionals, primarily
because they allow them to effectively communicate
project information to the public. Reference to these
methods is made in a recent U.S. Transportation
Research Board (TRB) News report [1], which includes
a brief description and examples of successful
applications in the USA of each visualization method.
The report also makes reference to methods used for
integrating graphical information with GIS data for
communicating and querring geo-spatial information,
and visualization systems
designed to facilitate the
process of soliciting the public involvement in decision
making [2].
A review of transportation project visualization
examples also indicates that such methods are mostly
application driven, and the pictorial or geometric data
utilized for a certain application, are seldomly useful
for applications that address different stages of a project
or multiple groups of prospective users. For example,
illustrations and photo-simulation visualizations,
generated during an early stage of a project can be
hardly of any use once a more detailed geometric
configuration of the project is developed. For this
reason, the most common use of visualization in
transportation projects is for placing them within their
existing or envisioned built or natural context by means
of photorealistic representations.
It can be argued that, 3-D modeling, as a
graphical representation and visualization method, is
closer to the representation of the physical reality of a
structure than methods based on 2D data and can, in
principle, provide a better understanding of the aspects
of a project that depend on spatial constraints. This is
particularly true for highway projects, which are often
characterized by a high level of geometric complexity
and are thus particularly hard to visualize and
understand. For their construction, as with any
construction project, project teams rely mostly on

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

geometric information graphically communicated via 2D
plans, and schedule related information organized in bar
charts and network diagrams. 2D plans alone do not
adequately communicate the 3D geometry of the
structure and rarely provide the details of the various
components indicated in the design and in the
accompanying construction schedule to be used by the
construction personnel [3]. Due to difficulties in
understanding and visualizing the different phases of the
construction schedule, unexpected delays or conflicts
that undermine the success of the project often occur.
In addition, during its construction, a highway project
is often characterized by continuously changing
geometric configurations that affect traffic planning
decisions and complicate the overall project
management. Without a good understanding of the
changing 3D geometry of the structure during its
construction, traffic control strategies are difficult to
optimize and implement.
To facilitate decision making regarding both
construction sequencing and traffic planning, a
visualization method is needed that can display the
progression of construction and changes in traffic
planning over time.

2. Construction Planning Visualization
The term 4D visualization is often used to
indicate a digital animation. Within the context of
construction management, however, the term 4D
visualization is used to indicate the animated display of
stages in the geometry of a building that reflect
consecutive activities in its construction schedule.
Visualization is a significant component of 4D
technology, or 4D CAD, which, in its most common
applications, involves linking 3D digital models with
construction activities. 4D CAD is intended to be used
by planners, designers, and engineers, to analyze and
visualize several phases of a project, from design related
decisions, to construction planning, to cost and
resources availability [3]. Most 4D software allow for
the automatic generation of a computer animation file
for the visualization of project planning. The
visualization of construction operations is also possible.
The usefulness of 4D models has been tested in
planning the construction of various large scale public
and commercial projects. Several 4D case studies,
conducted by CIFE (Stanford Center for Facility
Engineering), Georgia Institute of Tehnology, and other
academic research centers have already been published
[4].
Yet, although 4-D modeling has become the focus
of significant research in the last decade [5,6,7], to the
best of the author’s knowledge no application of 4D

technology and associated visualizations for the
construction of highway projects has been published.
This paper discusses how 4D modeling and
visualization can be used during the construction phase
of highway projects. This approach has been applied
during the construction of a section of a large-scale
highway interchange project in Dallas, Texas.

3. A
3D Graphical Modeling
Framework for Visualization
For visualization purposes, a geometric database
is the basic feature of any 4D CAD system. This
database allows for the development of images of a
2D or 3D digital model to be used in animations.
Before any digital model is developed, .a detailed
analysis of the geometric information that will be
required
during the entire construction process
must be conducted.
A general concept of a geometric database to be
used during the construction of highway projects for
the purpose of visualization should include the
following:

3.1. Site Modeling
For an accurate geometric model that places the
highway structure within its geographic location and
topography, a site model, in which original and
proposed contour lines are indicated, is required. More
specifically the development of the following is
needed:
a) A 3D terrain model of the existing and
proposed highway conditions that includes additional
highway installations, such as bankings, etc. Typically
this information is included in the construction
documents. A combination of surface and solid
modeling can be used for the development of this
database.
b) A 3D terrain model of the area surrounding
the highway project. This model should include the
precise location of the footprints of buildings in the
area neighbouring the project. Since, in most instances,
relevant information is not included in the project
database, GIS data can be used for retrieving
information required for the development of site
models of the broader context of a highway project.
Aero-photography can be also used for determining the
footprints of buildings in this area with substantial
accuracy.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3.2. Existing and Proposed Highway Structures

3.5.

For the planning and construction of new highway
projects three distinct levels of geometric configuration
are usually required: a) current as built, b) intermediate
planned/as built (including temporary structures), and c)
final as designed.
3D models of several classes of graphical entities
that represent construction objects such as girders, piers,
etc, must be developed. Parametric solid modeling is the
preferred approach, since it allows for easy
modifications in object geometry that may occur from
changes in their design during the construction process.
3D modeling also allows for selective display of
object information in the form of 2D or 3D
representations. A modeling environment that allows for
linking non graphical information to graphical objects
(3D models) is also needed for retrieving cost related
information.

Geometric information of
traffic control
elements placed on a highway during its construction is
also needed:
More specifically:
a) Permanent traffic control elements such as
light posts and permanent signage installations.
b) Temporary traffic signage installations and
devices
This database should include work zone signage
and devices (barricades, barrels, cones etc). All
permanent and non-permanent traffic elements can be
modeled as 3D solids. Special attention needs to be
placed to traffic code specifications for size, letter type,
etc. If any of these elements/devices exists in traffic
codes with more than one functional configurations,
needs to be modeled as a parametric solid.
Since traffic elements are not project specific,
they can be also stored in a digital library and
interactively placed in a project’s 3D environment.
Additional traffic related features, such as lane
markings, can be generated as surface elements and
also stored in a digital library.

3.3.

Library of Highway Elements

In almost all highway projects, the completion of
the structure includes the construction or placement of
permanent highway elements which may not be specific
to the project, but also apply to similar projects. Traffic
barriers, railings, mediens, curbs etc, are some examples.
Since most of these elements are not project
specific, they can be organized as independent graphical
cells in a digital library. The library can be linked to a
project graphical file and the cells can be placed
interactively. Parametric modeling of each cell is
required to enable geometric adjustment before of after
placement.

3.4. Highway Context
For a complete 3D model that will allow viewers to
place the highway project in its built and natural context,
the following are also required:
a) 3D models of buildings in close proximity to the
existing and proposed highway structures.
b) Images of distant buildings that fall within the
cone of vision of drivers that move along or across the
highway.
c) Other natural elements or man-made constructions
in the highways’ context, such as trees, telephone
booths, etc.

Library of Traffic Elements

4. Visualization Applications
The 3D graphical framework, as described in the
previous section, should allow for the following
applications of visualization during the construction of
highway projects

4.1. Construction and Traffic Planning
Visualization
The effective communication of project planning
and scheduling information for visual evaluation is the
main advantage of 4D CAD models.
Transforming graphical CAD entities to intelligent
objects, and linking classes of intelligent objects with
the activities of a construction schedule is an
intermediate necessary step, before an animation of the
construction process can be generated. Commercially
available software, or software, developed mostly in
academic centers, can be used for transforming regular
CAD graphical entities to intelligent objects and for
linking classes of objects with construction activities.
In most software applications, the animation runs
in a virtual reality environment that allows for viewing
the construction process from different points of view.
Animations that run outside the software environment

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

are also required, to allow project participants to have
access to animations by using standard video viewing
software.

displayed in Figure 2.

Figure 1.
Linking Graphical Objects with
Construction Schedule Activities
A significant difference between construction
scheduling for standard projects and highway
interchange projects, is that the construction phasing of
the latter is directly related to traffic planning. Therefore
it is of critical importance that the animation of the
construction process also displays traffic planning
measures such as open or closed lanes, lane markings,
exits etc. Including the animation of traffic planning
measures into the animation of the construction schedule
will allow for the visual evaluation of various traffic
control options during project construction.
The approach proposed herein, that will allow for
the integration of traffic planning visualization into the
construction schedule animation, is to device a new
concept of schedule that will integrate traffic planning
measures within the list of activities and critical path. In
addition lane indications and other measures can be
represented by some form of graphical object, and linked
to the activities of the combined Construction
Management and Traffic Planning schedule. In this
manner, the 4D animation will allow for the visualization
of the both construction and traffic schedules.
Since the visualization is expected to communicate
project information to traffic engineers and contractors, it
does not need to display buildings and other context info
in the vicinity of the highway, neither it requires
elaborate rendering which could significantly increase
the size of the animation file. Snapshots of the animation
of the combined construction and traffic schedule for a
section of an Interchange project in Dallas Texas is

Figure 2:
Integrated Construction Schedule and
Traffic Planning Animation of the First Phase of
the Dallas High Five Construction Project

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

4.2

Visualization of Traffic Measures

3D model in which a red/blue color code is used to
indicate sections of the geometry to be demolished or
constructed at each stage.

The objective of this visualization is to disseminate
information to the traveling public related to changing
traffic control measures during the construction of a
highway project.
A photo-realistic animation along the driver’s
path is deemed as the most appropriate approach to this
objective. The 3D model to be used needs to include
all traffic control traffic signage and devices that are
indicated on construction and traffic planning documents.
Accordingly digital models of traffic signage, mostly
work-zone signage and devices such as barricades,
barrels, cones etc, need to be selected from the respective
library and placed in the 3D model of the highway
structure in the locations indicated on the plans. Traffic
elements that correspond to a specific construction stage
need to be saved in separate file linked to the file of the
respective phase of the construction. All context
information regarding buildings and other forms of
structures in the vicinity of the project, as well as models
of natural objects, such as trees, need to be included in
the 3D model. Views of distant buildings, hills, etc are
also needed in the model. All geometric elements need to
be rendered with accuracy in terms of texture and color
and with the highest level of resolution. Environmental
conditions, such as fog, and accuracy in the direction
of sunlight are important, since drivers are usually
familiar with the area.
For the development of the animations, the speed
limit and drivers’ cone of vision need to be considered.
Figure 3 shows snapshots of the animations that
were created for providing information regarding
changes in lane closure, exits, speed limits, etc. to the
public during the construction of the Dallas High Five
project.

4.3. Interactive Access to Visualization
An interactive environment that will allow all
interested parties to access visualization information
related to any stage of the construction is needed. The
environment should allow access to: a) 3D geometry
after the completion of construction stage, b) 4D
animation that displays construction process and
changing traffic plans between the time of completion of
previous and current phase, c) 4D animations that
communicate information about traffic measures for the
traveling public.
Figure 4 shows an interactive tool that provides
links to all phases of the construction of the Interchange
project in Dallas. Visualization files are accessed through
a simple schematic representation of the plan view of the

Figure 3:
4D
Photorealistic Animation for
Communicating Traffic Measures during the Dallas
High Five Construction

5. Conclusions
This paper discussed a very general framework of
geometric information necessary for visualization
purposes throughout the construction process of
highway projects.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Acknowledgements
The author gratefully acknowledges the financial
support of the Texas Department of Transportation
throughout this study. In addition the author wants to
thank Nabeel Kwaja, transportation engineer of the
Center for Transportation Research at Austin, Texas, as
well as Shane Tanner, Steven Bell, Zack Pannier,
Richard Liu and Peter Coats, undergraduate students at
the University of Texas at Austin, for their contribution
to this study.

References
Figure 4: Interactive Tool for Accessing Construction
and Traffic Planning Visualization files for the Dallas
High Five Project
Depending on the nature of the information that
needs to be communicated and the prospective
interested parties, two distinct categories of visualization
are proposed: a) 4D CAD based animations that involve
linking geometry with construction schedule and traffic
planning and b) 4D digital animations that simulate the
perception of the traveling public.
A significant difference of the proposed
visualization approach from current methods for
developing 4D animations of the construction process, is
that it integrates traffic planning visualization into the
animation of the construction schedule. This has been
possible by inserting traffic planning steps, in the form
of “dummy activities” into the time management
software, and respectively by inserting a class of traffic
measure related objects, into the database of graphical
classes of construction objects. In this way the resulting
animations allow for the visual evaluation of both
construction schedule and traffic planning.
The development of the comprehensive database at
the beginning of the construction of a highway project,
allows for the utilization of different classes of objects
and different levels of detail for any form of
visualization that can be developed throughout the
construction of a highway project.
The implementation of the proposed approach for
collaborative decision making among project engineers
and contractors during an early stage in the construction
of the Dallas High Five Interchange project has proven
its validity. In addition, the 4D digital animations that
simulate the perception of the traveling public will be
soon uploaded on the Department of Transportation
Dallas High Five web site. The response of the public
will provide a measure to the effectiveness of this type
of visualization.

[1] Keister, M. and Moreno, Dan (2002) Cutting edge
Visualization Tools: Graphic Simulations that
Stimulate project Understanding and Decision
Making, Transportation News, 220, May June 2002,
pp 9-15:
[2] Bailey, K., Grossardt, T., and Brumm, J., (2002):
Integrating Visualization into Structural Public
Involvement: A case study of Highway improvement
in Central Kentucky. Transportation Research Record,
Journal of the Transportation Research Record, TRB,
National Research Council, Washington DC, 2002.
[3] McKinney, K., and Fischer, M. (1998)
"Generating, evaluating and visualizing construction
schedules with 4D-CAD tools." Automation in
Construction, 7(6), 433-447.
[4] Koo, B., and Fischer, M. A. (2000). "Feasibility
Study of 4D CAD in Commercial Construction."
Journal of Construction Engineering and Management,
ASCE, 126(4), 251-260.
[5] Williams M. (1996) “Graphical Simulation for
Project Planning: 4D Planner” Computing in Civil
Engineering”. 1996, pp 404-409.
[6] Adjei-Kumi T., Retik A. (1997) , “A Library based
4Dv Visuaization
of Construction Processes”,
Proceedings of the Information Visualization
Conference, 1997, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ , USA,
977b100165, pp 315-321
[7] Luiten, G.T., Tolman, F.P., and Fischer, M.A. (1998).
"Project -modeling in AEC to integrate design and
construction." Computers in Industry, Special Issue on
IT in Construction, 35(1), 13-29.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

