Applied Visual User Interface Technique in Knowledge Management
Robert Treloar,
Unilever's Port Sunlight Laboratory

Mikael Jern
Linköping University Sweden
mikael.jern@telia.com

Abstract
Extracting actionable insight from large high
dimensional data sets, and its use for more effective
decision-making, has become a pervasive problem
across many application fields in both research and
industry. The objective of our presentation is to
report on some investigations of this problem
covering both these areas. Taking as the problem
domain the area of "unsupervised learning" we show
that by tightly coupling statistical analysis technique
with combinations of visualization components and
techniques for interactivity, real-time analysis of
multidimensional data can be efficiently made. We
give particular attention to the ways in which
dynamic visual representations can be used in these
contexts to facilitate shared understanding. Our
system is implemented and validated in the context of
3D medical imaging knowledge construction,
knowledge management and geovisualisation.
Dr Rob Treloar is a project leader within the
exploratory science group at Unilever's Port Sunlight
Laboratory. He is responsible for a research group
focused on the application and development of
graphics applications and leads an internal research
project, which aims to identify and internalise
valuable new directions and applications for
visualisation within the business. In this context the
group has grown over the last few years to
encompass virtual environment and information
visualisation activities in addition to traditional
scientific visualisation problems and funds a number
of external activities in visualisation and image
processing. On behalf of Unilever he has participated
in several EU projects in the visualisation area
including ObjectVR, VIVRE, CONTENTS and
SmartDoc, presented externally in the subject area
and has contributed visualisation applications to
several publications.

Professor Mikael Jern
Dept of Science and Technology (ITN), Linkoping
University
Mikael Jern is professor at Linkoping University,
Sweden. Jern, who also is a founder of UNIRAS,
developed the UNIRAS fundamental raster
technology. During 1970-1976, Jern worked with
Professor Hertz at the University of Lund. Together
they invented the Color Graphics System based on
the first ink jet plotter for raster based visualization
software in the world. In 1976, Jern and Prof Hertz
sold the right to manufacture and distribute the Color
Graphics Plotting Systems to the U.S.-based CAD
company Applicon. In 1980 Jern founded UNIRAS
to address the industry with a more general-purpose
graphics approach. During 1990-93 he served as the
leader of the UNIRAS research team in the USA,
concentrating on VUI technology customized
visualization widgets and advanced real-time
interactive 3D technology. Since 1997, Prof Jern is
managing several large EC projects (INDEX,
NOVICE, CONTENTS and SmartDoc) in the domain
of visualization. These projects have developed
innovative Web-based visualization technology based
on both VRML and downloadable Web components.
He has also consulted with the EC Commission as a
technical expert in visualization. His recent areas of
research interest include Information Visualization,
Medical Visualization and 3D collaborative
visualization on the Web and particular the use of
visualization component technology in visual data
mining. He has published more than 150 technical
papers and several books in visual computing and
visualization application areas. At SIGGRAPH 93, he
was elected "pioneer of computer graphics".

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

