Bimodal Visualisation: A Financial Trading Case Study
Tugba Taskaya and Khurshid Ahmad
Department of Computing
University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey. GU2 7XH. UK
{ t.taskaya, k.ahmad }@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
A visualisation system that deals with two modalities of
information – numerical and textual – is presented.
The current application domain is that of prediction in
financial trading. The system synthesises news stories
and time series data to generate buy/sell signals for
financial instruments.

1. Introduction
Data and information visualisation systems are used
in noisy environments that typically involve data
streams encoded in a single modality of
communication. Numerical data, organised as timeserial data, is used to study the behaviour of mobile
phone owners or that of purchasing decisions of
consumers; textual data is used to create the so-called
knowledge maps, thematic maps and semantic maps
showing preferential citation patterns and/or patterns of
(key) word usages amongst scientists and technologists.
Image data streams, whether still or video images, are
analysed purely on the visual content of the images, to
categorise and identify events or objects.
Usually, the analysis of the unimodal data helps in
creating categories of people using mobile phones,
buying one soap powder brand in preference to another,
or categories of scientists focused on one scientific
endeavour rather than another [1].
The data and information visualisation systems,
working typically on one mode of communication
modality, facilitate decision making for the human users
of such systems. The human users then use other data
sources, perhaps encoded in modalities of
communication other than those used by the systems, to
actually make their final decision. A good example is
that of a financial trader dealing in financial
instruments.
The instruments includes shares,
currencies, derivatives; the aggregate values of share
within a national stock exchange or within an

industrial/service/commercial sector is frequently used
as a measure of the financial health and economic
robustness of a national economy or that of the sector.
The financial trader usually has access to a high-volume
data stream that tells the trader how many shares were
traded at a certain value, for example in intervals as
small as a few seconds. The aggregates, like the
Financial Times-Stock Exchange Indices, DowJones
Industrial Averages, are displayed simultaneously.
Essentially, the trader has access to a time series of
numbers, which is analysed using well-established
statistical techniques that project the quantity and value
of the instrument at some future time.
Trend analysis is a critical task in financial-trading.
A mixture of empirical and theory-based techniques has
been developed to display the behaviour of financial
(instrument) time series. Empirically, the behaviour of
the time series is studied over a period of time (few
hours, days or months), some of these patterns have a
characteristic shape; a shape associated with a
predictable behaviour at the end of the window.
Patterns are called head and shoulders (two minima
comprising a peak) or harami patterns [3]. Theoretical
techniques are based on statistical properties of time
series:
autoregression,
Fourier
decomposition,
underlying randomness, modelled by established
statistical distributions. Many of these techniques
originate in digital signal processing.
The trader makes his or her buy/sell decision based
on the behaviour of the instrument over a certain period
of time and consults other sources of information
directly or indirectly connected with the instrument:
these sources include news about the national economy
or economies, about the sector and wider issues that
may have catastrophic or beneficial effect on the on the
instrument.
A range of data and information visualisation
techniques have been developed to display the high
volume series: data visualisation includes the so-called
Japanese candle stick patterns where for each point in
time the candle stick shows high/low and current value

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

1

of the instrument together with information as to
whether the instrument is falling or rising in value.
The display of news streams has been made very
user friendly and the emergence of an XML-based
standard, called newsML, means that each news report
can be marked up almost at the content level [4]. News
streams can be according to the user profiles. This
makes it easier filtered in or out for the end user to
selectively receive what he or she wants from 2000 or
so daily news stories typically sent by a single news
agency like Reuters. However, the financial trader is
expected to read literally hundreds of stories, either by
just reading the headline, or by skimming or reading in
detail.
Surveys of financial traders showed that rather than
using informative, complex techniques, simple
visualisation techniques were always preferred [2].
News agency also facilitate search for past news
reports literally over decades. The indexing of news
items is generally good but it is largely manual indexing
by keywords and categories available to the human subeditor who in effect processes the news for it to go on
the news wire. The marked-up news, for keywords and
categories (relating to different instrument and market
sector) is in principle, an attempt to visualise the
content of the individual news reports.
To summarise then, the financial trader receives
market information in at least two modalities:
numerical, as in time serial data related to one or more
instruments, and textual, as in news wires about the
instrument directly or indirectly. The trader then
synthesises the information in the time series and the
news stream before making the buy and sell decision.
The above scenario, in which the financial traders find
themselves in on a daily basis, can benefit from a
system that can simultaneously deal with the two
principal modalities, numeric and textual. Each of the
modalities can be processed separately, and the results
of the analysis then be synthesised to generate a buy
and sell decision. It is the prototype of such a system
that we describe briefly. This prototype demonstrates
how news reports can be organised and analysed in
order to assess and quantify the general mood of the
trading market. The assessment is about the sentiment,
which is conveyed in individual news item: does the
news item express a positive sentiment or a negative
sentiment? Such expression is deeply embedded in
language. Nevertheless, one can argue that the
preponderance of words related to progress, profits,
rising share prices may boost traders’ confidence and
the opposite, traumatic accidents, losses, falling share
prices, will dent the traders’ confidence.
Section 2 is analysing visualisation methods used in
financial information.
Section 3 comprises an outline of a prototype
system being developed for an EU 5th Framework

project, GIDA. The prototype can manage a collection
of news stories – called a corpus of texts – and
historical time series; can analyse the news stories for
the market sentiment (boost/depression); can correlate
financial time series with a time series of keywords
describing the positive mood of the market and other
time series describing the negative mood.
Section 4 describes the system in operation where it
correlates a time series of an instrument (FTSE – 100)
with mainly UK-related news to generate a buy and sell
signal. Section 5 concludes the paper.

2. Visualisation for Financial Markets
The available information in financial markets
mainly comprises market instruments’ indices, market
reports, market news and announcements. Two main
modalities are used in communication related to the
financial markets. First, there are sequences of
numerical data indexed by time, including volumes of
shares traded, their values, and the values of the
aggregates, e.g. overall market aggregates (FTSE, Dow
Jones), or differences in the aggregates (derivative).
The second modality is that of (written) language:
financial reports, including market sentiment, other
stories affected by and affecting the financial markets.
This data is not as discretely time indexed.
Charting is a standard technique used in financial
decision-making. The set of techniques used in
technical analysis helps to plot price movements,
volume, settlement prices, open interest, and other
indicators, in order to anticipate future price movements
[5]. A financial time series is often visualised in three
formats: Line Chart, Bar Chart, and Candle Chart [see
Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3].
These charts are used by a number of financial web
sites such as “Yahoo Finance”[6], “Prophet.Net”[7],
“Financial Times” [8]. These websites also comprise:
(a) Financial news related to selected instrument;
(b) Fundamentals such as dividend, market
capitalization;
(c) Statistical tools for analysis such as moving
averages, bollinger bands, RSI; and,
(d) Options like time frames, historical prices.
The time intervals can also be changed by the end
user. In addition to the charts used for displaying
historic and current numerical values of an instrument,
the financial news vendors provide access to the socalled fundamental financial details including
dividends, market capitalisation and so on.
Data visualisation methods are used quite
extensively by the vendors of financial news: Methods
like Inselberg ‘s parallel coordinates [9], scatter plots
are used to explore the relationships between prices for
example sectors versus sector values such as net
income, total assets. Different techniques were also

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

2

developed for the same purpose like breakdown
visualisation, which is a visual spreadsheet format for
comparison of adjacent visualizations [10].
4370.00
4360.00
4350.00
4340.00
4330.00
4320.00
4310.00

21/02/1997

20/02/1997

19/02/1997

18/02/1997

17/02/1997

4300.00

Figure 1. Line Chart uses dots versus time in which
dots represents generally closing price.
4370.00
4360.00
4350.00
4340.00
4330.00
4320.00
4310.00

21/02/1997

20/02/1997

19/02/1997

18/02/1997

17/02/1997

4300.00

Figure 2. A three prolonged bar: right represents
opening price; top the highest price and bottom is the
lowest.
4370.00
4360.00
4350.00
4340.00
4330.00
4320.00
4310.00

21/02/1997

20/02/1997

19/02/1997

18/02/1997

17/02/1997

4300.00

Figure 3. This chart can be used to display the high and
the low value of the price along the vertical axis. The
horizontal axis is used for time information and also to
display whether or not the opening price at the
beginning of the trading period was higher or lower
than the closing price. A higher opening price and lower
closing price is displayed by a solid rectangle and the
opposite by a hollow rectangle.
Topographic financial maps generally consist of
regions, which indicate sectors or funds. Companies
that belong to either stock index or user’s portfolio are
browsed from the corresponding region. The area that
the sector and company occupy is proportional to the
sector price and the company price respectively [11],
[12], [13]. User interaction with the map is supported
generally in two ways. First a tool tip text with a
summary of company information pops up whenever
the mouse points to the area where that company is

represented. And secondly, company information is
browsed in detail whenever a mouse clicking action is
performed.
Visualisation techniques discussed so far depend on
only one modality of information, which is numeric. A
new problem arises when a different modality like
textual information is introduced.
Text usually displayed as a ‘ticker tape’ that is
stream of characters running under the time series
display, for much of the financial news is about change
the value of instruments. Equally important is the
‘indefinable’ market sentiment: The potential change in
the mood of the market –how is this to be visualised?

3. Visualising Market Sentiment
Reports about the financial markets sometimes use
metaphorical terms to indicate how the traders feel
about the market: terms like ‘bear’ and ‘bull’ markets
are used to describe that traders are shy and reticent
about buying stocks and bull suggest that their mood is
to buy aggressively. There are a number of metaphors
in addition to bear and bull. News report contains
simpler expressions like:
FTSE set to fall
Royal and Sun hit by asbestos suit
Energy tax hurts business
Each of the underlined verbs fall, hit, hurts conveys
a negative sentiment. On the other hand, verbs like
rise, jump, and climb may convey a positive sentiment.
It is true that a word in natural language may have a
range of meanings: the token rose may mean the flower
rose; it can be a name, as in Mr/Ms Rose in addition to
meaning ‘increase in the value of a share or currency’.
However, in financial texts tokens like rose, fall have a
restricted meaning [14]. This is particularly true when
these words are used in the following contexts:
{Shares, currencies} rose/fell {by} X percent
{Shares, currency} rose/fell {to} X percent
One heuristic will be to use the frequency of these
two verbs if and only if they occur in the context
described above. The use of this heuristic allows us to
quantify the market sentiment in as much as a computer
system can ever evaluate any sentiment.
We have analysed a 2 million word corpus of text
comprising financial news supplied by the Reuters
News Agency for the calendar year 2000. These texts
were analysed by our text analysis system, System
Quirk (which performs text analysis for our prototype)
and we extracted the frequency of the verbs rose and
fell. These frequencies were then plotted together with
the FTSE 100 index. Figure 1 shows how the sentiment
time series correlate with FTSE.
We have performed the analysis over a larger corpus
of Financial News by Reuters over 3-year period (2000-

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3

2002), comprising over 10 million words, and found
that the heuristics mentioned above to hold as well. In
addition, many other sentiment verbs and prepositions
(up, down, adrift) have been identified and used to
compute the market sentiment. The extraction
methodology is described in detail in [14].
1.1

rose

fell
1

FTSE100

0.9

Normalised Value

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Month

Figure 4. The sentiment time series correlate with
the FTSE

4. A System for Visualising and Correlating
Time Ordered Market Data

Figure 5. The visualisation system on the web shows
weekly news. The system displays content of individual
news items together with the keywords associated with
the content.

4.2. System SATISFI-Visualising Correlation
between Sentiment and Market Indices

4.1. Visualising a News Corpus
Typically, a news agency like Reuters or Bloomberg
will supply over 2000 stories per day comprising
between 300-800 words. Reuters news stories are
XML-formatted which give amongst other information,
industry sector and country information.
Queries against a database of news stories can be
handled provided the stories have been pre-indexed on
to the date of publication, keywords characterising the
content of the news, and, in our case, key verbs and
prepositions characterising the sentiments, with positive
and negative, expressed in and by each of news stories.
Once a query has been successfully matched, it is
important that the news story be displayed in full
together with the frequency of the keyword, key verbs
and prepositions.
A visualisation system for viewing a text corpus,
queried according to the various attributes of its
constituent texts, has been developed in Java as a key
component to our financial trading prototype (SATISFI:
“Sentiment and Time Series: Financial Analysis
System”). The system is written in Java and is
accessible on the world-wide web (see Figure 5).
Our visualisation system can work with Reuters
country and industry sector categories together with
Reuters supplied keywords. The user can view news
about a particular country of sector, see the distribution
of number of news stories over time soon (see Figure
6).

Figure 6. The visualisation system can work with
Reuters news categorisation.
SATISFI was developed to show the correlation
between a time series of an instrument and market
sentiment. The time series of an instrument is seldom
used in its raw form rather derived forms are used:
return and volatility. The index return is the logarithmic
difference between two consecutive values and

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

4

volatility is a measure of how fast or slowly the
instrument moves up or down in terms of its value.
Figure 7 shows how the prototype system works in
terms of its four components: each helping to visualise
either the market sentiment or an instrument’s time
variation. The value of the correlation helps the user to
make a buy/sell decision.

II. Time Series Correlation: Correlation is a measure
of the degree of linear relationship between two
time series. SATISFI provides the user the facility
of cross correlating two series in any form (raw,
return, volatility). Any series can be shifted
forward or backward and cross correlation
recalculated to determine whether the market is
followed by the news or vice versa.
III. Document Display: This comprises two parts:
a.

b.

Document Titles: Clicking a dot (date) on any
of the time series, displays the corresponding
date’s news titles.
Document Content: The content of any
document title can be viewed by clicking that
news title.

IV. Document Analysis: Whenever a document title is
selected from the news list, the extracted sentiment
keywords along with the frequencies are displayed
in “Document Keywords” area. Positive sentiment
keyword analysis details appear under the title of
“Upward Movement Indicators” and negative
sentiment keyword analysis details appear under
the title of “Downward Movement Indicators”.
Figure 7. SATISFI prototype
SATISFI has four major components that have been
fully integrated as shown in Figure 7.
I. Time Series Display: SATISFI can display three
time series at a time. These time series comprise
FTSE-100 close index values, upward movement
indicators and downward movement indicators. As
discussed above, upward and downward movement
indicators are the quantification of the market
sentiment expressed in financial news. Over 70
terms each have been identified for conveying
‘good’ and ‘bad’ news. For example upward
movement indicators would contain terms like ‘up,
rise, growth’ etc. while downward movement
indicators would contain terms like ‘down, fall’ etc.
The movement indicator time series are
synthesized by counting these movement indicator
terms within the financial news published for a
particular day. Each time series is normalised for
proper display purposes. SATISFI is capable of
displaying the above time series in three forms:

4.3. Case Study
In order to investigate the effectiveness of the
SATISFI system a real-life case study was identified
for us by a capital management and research
consultancy, JRC1 Berlin. According to JRC market
experts, there is a well-recorded turning point, from a
low position on a day before to a high on the day
followed by a low on the day after, in the European
Stock Markets. Two of the major stock exchanges are
the London Stock Exchange (with the FTSE100 index
of 100 leading UK companies) and its German
counterpart (the DAX 100 GDX). The high point of
FTSE100 (and DAX 100) in the recorded turning point
case study is that of the 11th March 1997 and two low
points are on the 10th and 12th March 1997: a week of
changing
indices
(see
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

a. Raw form denotes the original time series.
b. Return form refers to the logarithmic
difference between two consecutive values.
c. Volatility (historical volatility) is the relative
rate at which the time series moves up or
down.

0.2
0
10/03/97

11/03/97

12/03/97

FTSE100

13/03/97

14/03/97

DAX

1
JRC is the lead partner in EU 5th Framework sponsored GIDA
project.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

5

Figure 8)
In order to see whether there was a corresponding
change in the sentiment related to the UK markets to the
FTSE100’s behaviour, we selected a week’s financial
news from Reuters (10th to 14th March 1997) and
extracted the potential sentiment expressing words
according to our heuristic (see Section 3). There were
15,387 news items (45 MB) produced by Reuters News
during that week. Figure 9 shows the correlation
between the FTSE100 and the upward movement
indicator: the Pearson correlation moment is 0.88;
visually the change in FTSE100 and the upward
movement indicator appears to be almost identical. We
have also plotted the downward movement indicator,
which is anti correlated with both the FTSE100 and the
upward movement indicator (correlation moments of 0.85 and –0.57 respectively).
Two major feedbacks were received from JRC. One
feedback was to see the positive news when ‘positive
sentiment time series’ was clicked and to show negative
news when ‘negative sentiment time series’ was
clicked. The other feedback was to show the major
news that caused the turning points.

5. Afterword
System SATISFI shows how it is possible to
visualise the data and information contents in two
different modalities. The system is currently under
evaluation by JRC Berlin and by the reviewers of the
GIDA project appointed by the EU’s Fifth Framework
Programme for Information Sciences and Technologies.
The initial results are interesting. The end-users have
suggested that instead of using SATISFI as a prediction
system, it should be used in investigating past
behaviour of the market. For instance, using the
visualisation system to find out which of the turning
points in the value of an instrument (from down to up or
up to down) were caused by a specific news item.
SATISFI provides a simple visualisation technique
for identifying and displaying a complex feature of the
news it receives. Furthermore, its ability to receive and
display a numerical time series of financial data, and its
ability to correlate the series with an index of market
sentiment should be its notable feature.

6. References:

1.2

[1] C.Chen, Information Visualisation and Virtual
Environments,Springer Verlag, London, 1999.

1
0.8
0.6

[2] J.Saltz, J.Steinbach. “Wayfinding in Layered Information
Worlds”, CODATA Euro-American Workshop Visualization
of Information and Data: Where We Are and Where Do We
Go From Here?, 24-25 June 1997, pp. 6-7.

0.4
0.2
0
10/03/97

11/03/97

12/03/97

FTSE100

13/03/97

14/03/97

DAX

Figure 8. The chart displays normalised DAX and
FTSE100 index between 10-14.03.2002.
According to JRC: Rather than displaying news
headlines, visualisation of the sentiment of the news is
much more beneficial in terms of providing a general
overview of the news with respect to stock market in a
quick way.
Down
ward
M.I.

Upward
M.I.

FTSE100

Figure 9. The SATISFI interface depicts three time
series together: FTSE index (blue), upward movement
indicators series (green) and downward movement
indicators (red) series.

[3] T.N. Bulkowski, Encyclopedia of Chart Patterns, John
Wiley&Sons, New York, 2000.
[4] Reuters NewsML Showcase:
http://about.reuters.com/newsml (accessed 30.04.2003)
[5] Investorwords Financial Glossary:
http://www.investorwords.com (accessed 30.04.2003)
[6] Yahoo Finance: http://finance.yahoo.com (accessed
30.04.2003)
[7] Prophet.Net.: http://www.prophet.net (accessed
30.04.2003)
[8] Financial Times: http://www.ft.com (accessed 30.04.2003)
[9] A.Inselberg, “Multidimensional Detective”, Proc. of
IEEE Information Visualization ’97, Phoenix, AZ, 1997, pp.
100-107.
[10] Conklin, N., Prabhakar, S., and North, C., "Breakdown
Visualization: Multiple Foci Polyarchies of Tuples and
Attributes", Proceedings of ACM CHI, March 2002.
[11] Teletrader: http://www.teletrader.com (accessed
30.04.2003)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

6

[12] Smartmoney: http://www.smartmoney.com/ (accessed
30.04.2003)
[13] Neovision Tradermaps:
http://www.neovision.com/solutions/tradermaps/ (accessed
30.04.2003)
[14] K. Ahmad, D. Cheng, T. Taskaya, S. Ahmad, L. Gillam,
P. Manomaisupat, H. Traboulsi, A. Hippisley, “The mood of
the (financial) markets: In a corpus of words and of pictures”,
Proceedings of Corpus Linguistic 2003. Lancaster University,
UK
http://www.computing.surrey.ac.uk/iemmg/publications.html

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

7

