Rapid prototyping for the substantiation of architectural design interaction
Naai-Jung Shih
Department of Architecture, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology
shihnj@mail.ntust.edu.tw
Abstract
This study presents a 3D design visualization system
that is used for substantiating design annotation
behavior in a 3D world through physical models. As an
experiment and development work, the visualization of
3D data is conducted through the application of a
commercially available 3D printer that outputs design
models with graphic instruction notes left on surfaces.
Content-specific images are also left on models as a kind
of physical record in a construction case.
Keywords--- 3D printer, RP, architecture

1. Introduction
Visualization helps to clarify design concepts during
the development process. A clear visualization or a
feasible visual representation may offer a totally different
perspective. Patterns of application will be determined
by the purposes and issues described by each subject.
Visualization illustrates physically presented objects or
void spaces. Instead of an analysis presented only in
terms of computer diagram, scientific data substantiation
substantiates or materializes the diagram and directly
attaches the diagram in an object form to the related
member as a manner of representation or visualization.
Examples can be seen in stress distribution for structural
analysis. In architectural studies, the fabrication of forms
needs to be extended to a contextual level that can also
be shown in physical form.
A rapid prototyping (RP) machine can fabricate 3D
models for visual inspection. Its development represents
a long-term effort [1,3,7,15]. Related applications for
architecture are made in the fabrication of building parts
and design concepts [5,9,11-13,16,19]. RP in architecture
is limited by the restrictions of size and time required to
output a model. Footage of the model is another limit of
an ordinary RP machine. A large model has to be
separated into parts and reassembled afterward. Another
drawback is that it is time-consuming. Normally, an
industrial part the size of a cell phone cover may take up
to 10-20 hours. Ordinary RP materials like polymer can
create a thin cover with the strength of plastic. Most RP

models are made in plain or white color. Color-keyed
components could not be created until recently so that a
uniform color can be assigned to a part [4,8,10]. But the
variety of colors still cannot provide surface attributes
such as the texture that is needed in architecture
visualization, whether it is procedure texture (texture
allowing for parameter change) or direct image mapping
(texture using a predefined image as content).
The data used for RP do not have to be the final
results of visualization; instead, the stage of application
can go back to the early design stages [6,15]. Similar RP
applications in the field of art can be seen in the creation
of cartoon character and visual arts [2,18]. RP data can
even be distributed through the Internet [17]. It seems RP
has been adaptable to current modeling processes in a
specific and purposely integrated manner. But how
useful is it in architecture? It is still to be seen whether a
direct connection with a modeling database can be
established.
VR is commonly applied to architectural design
visualization. Sometimes the visual experience of VR
objects is not sufficient to deliver the real sense or
“touch” of forms. In design pedagogy, instructors would
find it helpful for students to allow data transfer freely
between a virtual world and a real world.

2. Purpose
This study attempts to establish a process for
substantiating design annotation behavior in a 3D world
for context-oriented visualization. The visualization of
3D data is conducted through the application of a 3D
printer of a design visualization system. The process is to
be exemplified by design cases.
Substantiating a VR model means to generate the
physical body of the model, i.e., to convert a virtual
model from digital world to real world. Now the digital
model along with the graphic notes has to be made in
real form. Marking graphic notes on model surfaces is
applicable in texture mode but uncommonly used as
notes to a digital model. This experiment is to tested
what was common in marking a cardboard model is now
made to digital model and can be generated in real form
as a design-related proof or record.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3. Image-configuration interaction in the
design process
The variety of methods for reconstructing spatial
relationships from images is now enlarged by being able to
selectively choose the image contents for substantiation.
The application of photogrammetry usually involves
retrieving geometries based on reference points and lines
appearing simultaneously on several images. The image
contents are strongly related to how the target objects are
defined. In contrast, the close relationship existing
between an image and the implied configuration may not
fulfill the need for creating alternatives from configuration
sampling of images. The presence of objects is used as a
container for the under-layering images to be mapped. The
object surface polygons, which are mapped with
background images, represent a beyond-context spatial
structure for two purposes:
z Form abstraction: This is a pilot study done to check
the feasibility of RP in design representation. The
design is made of primitive-like objects which are
pasted with texts as texture to verify the level of
detail (LOD) that an RP machine can deliver. The
texture, which is also used to make uniform the
appearance of surfaces, is mapped before and after
the models are created. The former applies spherical
and cube mapping to objects before they are
transformed (see Fig. 1 top right). The latter applies
texture to a whole design from several orientations
after they are transformed (see the 2nd and 3rd rows of
Fig. 1). In this way, all the surfaces facing the same
direction will receive different parts of the same
image.
A unity of appearance is realized through texturemapping. The differentiation of forms or shape
boundaries is made by RP substantiation. The
object’s dimensions are represented through
topological allocation of the physically presented

geometries. The objects of the two approaches thus
carry the images as a way to unify and differentiate
shapes even during transformation, such as in
extrusion, union, subtraction, overlapping, scaling,
translation, rotation, etc. The operation is conducted
based on a combination of context and geometric
boundaries.
z Re-creation from photos: A practical use of RP is
extended to the management of construction
information through its specific form of
representation. While the sources of the data are too
complicated to be represented to match an existing
situation in any appropriate form, a user defined
shape is always welcomed to meet a specific need.
The VRML models and the pre-defined specifications
of a database make it easier to manipulate and
simplify the representation of a complicated
construction site in a customized format to meet
archival needs. Exemplifications of the geometries
are working ground and heavy construction
machinery. The geometries show a volumetric study
of different types of machinery at a construction site.
The volume and allocation of machines and offices
are represented in rectangular shapes (see Fig. 2). The
two-story office shack is used as a size reference for
other objects.
The images of the machine are pasted on the surfaces of
rectangles. All the geometries (cubes and ground) are
computer models and are exported in VRML format.
Although only one direction is mapped and the wraparound effect causes distortion from other viewpoints,
the model helps combine the construction contents in
terms of images with geometric objects as a way to
record site occurrences. The models are exported to
other 3D formats to accommodate the manipulation
from other supporting applications, in which both
transformation or addition of objects can be conducted
afterward.

Figure 1 Image-configuration study of abstraction

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 2 Image-configuration sampling of machinery in a construction site

Figure 3 A detailed comparison of models from different angles

Figure 4 Path made on the same level of surface

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3. Annotation in a 3D environment
Architectural design interaction is usually presented
in words or graphic forms between students and
instructors. The contents of interaction are important
records for design development. Words can be put down
as notes for future reference. Graphic marks can be made
directly to drawings on layers of tracing paper. This
hands-on design instruction in a real world is now
replaced by browsing digital models along with verbal or
printed comments. Questions occur that traditional
graphic marks on cardboard models are still a valuable
pedagogical aid to improve student’s comprehension.
But the notes or marks are seldom made directly on digit
models. The visual and hands-on experiences to
manipulate a real model are disappearing. It would be
helpful to have a marked digital model in real to enhance
design communication.
Annotation in a 3D environment involves putting
graphic notes on the surfaces of 3D objects as a way of
proofing. This procedure would be convenient if it could
be conducted in the same environment, instead of using
marks on rendering output in a paper format.
Traditionally, the difference between VR and physical
cardboard-like models comes from the level of
interaction that a user can apply to objects as well as the
parameters that define them. But by looking from other
orientations, the efficiency of interaction does not make
it any easier to annotate a VR model with a pen than a
cardboard one. The technology base that makes the
difference also exists in the availability of “marking
tools” for both environments. It is apparent that it is
much easier to annotate in a traditional modeling
environment.
It is the marking tool that differentiates the
annotation experience between a VR and a cardboard
world of modeling. The first logical solution is to create
a connection between both worlds by applying a RP
machine to “print” the VR model in reality to support the
following note-taking task. The RP output can be used
for other studies, such as ones involving visualization or
volumetric analysis. The second logical solution takes a
direct approach by conducting annotation by marking on
the surfaces of objects right in the VR world. For now in
the category of 3D application, modeling is different
from surface painting. Only a small number of
applications provide both functions. 3D surface paint
would be a perfect tool for annotation to indicate a point
of interest, to put text notes next to parts, or even to mark
an “X” on an area where changes should be made.
A design study was conducted using a model that
was wrapped in two images of text. The form was
marked at five places: at one vertex, two joints, and two
pavements (see Fig. 3). The text image was mapped in
Canoma and marked by DeepPaint 3D.

4. Exploration and substantiation of design
alternatives
The second practice in RP design is called
“Blockland,” taught in the second semester of
architectural design (II). In the first part, students are
asked to design a route and a place with five types of
elements, such as a colonnade, a platform, a door, a
block, and a sail. This four-week exercise encourages
students to use the computer as the primary design tool.
The practice of the first part, a path, must be created by
only using each of the basic elements once. This
assignment did not preclude that all the elements be
placed at the same level. However, first year students
showed a strong tendency to arrange elements along a
horizontal level. Until a platform element is encountered,
the route is consistently at eye level, a fixed height and
horizontally extended. An exemplification of a similar
design operation is shown in Fig. 4.
To challenge this layout tendency, I developed a
route that originated from a totally different base for the
design. The presumption for development is that all
elements exist in an environment other than a horizontal
plane. A cube type of arrangement is proposed. A
person, or an ant, can travel on the surface or inside of it
(see Fig. 5). He first passes the gate that is attached to a
vertical wall. The route is extended to the top of the cube
where a colonnade leads to another element, the sail, on
the vertical wall on the other side. He must jump to the
top of the sail. From there, another jump is needed to
reach a block beneath. This block is located partially
inside the cube where it can be walked through to the
platform on the other end. Along this route, the person
keeps changing his line of sight and the relation to the
cube surface. The movement is not a consistent type of
action.
A rapid prototyping (RP) model is created to
substantiate the conceptual design model. A design
alternative is presented (see Fig. 6). Most first-year
architecture students used traditional CAAD media such
as renderings and animation clips to present the design
experience of path and place. Although some of the
students did cardboard models, physical models were not
required as computer-aided study was the emphasis of
this practice. It seems some of the models featured more
like a planar replication of a cardboard form. To
illustrate a different relationship between a designer and
a design, the RP model of the new design was created as
an alternative for interaction and visualization, and for
the most important of all, a pedagogical illustration of
the manipulation of digital data.
The cube, which represents the environment, is
purposely mapped with images made by texts to
illustrate the difference between it and the other five
element types. In addition, the image mapping
differentiates the RP process from an ordinary modelmaking process, as a way to explore the usage of digital
data and tools.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 5 A series of views perceived along the path on the cube

Figure 6 RP models were created to substantiate design concept

Figure 7 3D scanner, display, and printer (from left to right)

RP

Stereo
display

Stereo
display

Stereo
display

scan

RP

scan

RP

scan

Figure 8 Interrelationship between the three parties of design visualization system

5. System Structure
The associated procedures needed to deal with data
retrieval and verification. The latter includes data
visualization that may come from a simply display device
and its geometry in a solid form. The design visualization
system is able to input 3D data directly and to re-produce
them correspondingly from either a visual or a physical
form. For example, 3D objects can be scanned,

stereographically displayed, and printed simultaneously or
consequently. The data supplier and illustrator interact
coherently in a 3D environment. The visualization system
consists of three main devices to fulfill the two kinds of
needs (see Fig. 7 and 8). A 3D long-range scanner is
available for data retrieval and semi-automatic attribute
additive manipulation for a range of up to 100 meters;
1.
A 3D printer, a rapid prototype machine: A model
406 RP machine from Z-Corp. is used for object
output as a manner of direct substantiation;

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

2.

A 3D LCD auto-stereographic display (ASD):
Synthagram 18.1” display and DTI Model 2018XLQ
are used for HMD-free visual review of 3D scenes;
3.
A 3D scanner: A Cyrax 2500 long-range laser
scanner was used.
The design cases mentioned in this paper are
exemplifications of the right diagram in Fig. 8. It is a
digital model inspected by ASD. When design-related
content is already physically present, a 3D scanner is used
to retrieve the existing 3D data and transfer it into a design
world.
This study shows an application of an RP machine for
architectural model-making. In addition to commonly used
modeling functions, the color image mapping and
modeling tools are two features particularly distinguished
from others. What is different from an ordinary RP process
is that now a model can be applied with a color image
mapped in JPG or PNG format. A model can thus be
created with more visual details that are very helpful in
showing the materials to be used for building parts. The
process is rather straightforward. Instead of choosing a
commonly used STL format, a model is exported in
VRML 1.0/2.0 format and is sent to an RP machine along
with the images to be mapped. The process is almost
application independent, as long as the corresponding
format can be translated. The study used Canoma to create
the models and Deep Exploration to translate the files. The
VRML format enabled a direct connection between a
virtual world and a real world. All the operations were
done on a Pentium III 850 MHz PC with 512 MB of RAM.
A Z-Corp. model 406, also called a 3D printer, was used.
The resolution of textures on models is not as sharp as
paper printouts or as clear as those viewed in a browser
mode, but some texts can still be identified. The models
presented in previous figures are between 5-10 cm. The
size of each text image is about the width of a sheet of
normal A4 paper. This small model size also limits the
contents that can be shown clearly. Since the models are
used for conceptual studies, further output in a larger size
was not generated.

6. Conclusion

References
[1].
[2].

[3].
[4].

[5].

[6].

[7].
[8].

[9].
[10].

[11].

[12].

[13].

[14].
[15].

[16].
[17].

Being able to carry out hands-on experience in graphic
annotation of 3D models makes the design process in a
virtual world intuitive. To transfer the annotated data into
substantiated models afterward is an even more important
experience involves the data being worked on. The
ambiguous representation of context now can be
substantiated not only in terms of digital geometric forms,
but also in a physical shape. The design visualization
system, which currently enables the substantiation of
abstraction, can be extended to similar domains in design
to improve the designer’s ability to critique at a more
detailed level.

[18].

[19].

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Cederquist, S.C., Lasers Sculpt World’s Smallest Bull,
Laser Focus World, October, 2001.
Connolly, J., RP Becomes An Important Tool for One
Artist’s Work, Magazine - Time Compression
Technologies, Oct. 2001.
Grimm, T., and Wohlers, T., Lessons From Guttenberg’s
Legacy, Time Compression Technologies, March, 2001.
Karapatis, N.P.; van Griethuysen; J.-P.S. and Glardon, R.,
Direct rapid tooling: a review of current research. Rapid
Prototyping Journal, vol. 4, is. 2, pp. 77¯89, 1998.
Krishnamurti, R. and Earl, C.F., Shape recognition in three
dimensions. In: Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design, vol. 19, Pion, London, pp. 585¯603, 1992.
Kvan, T. and Kolarevic, B., Rapid prototyping and its
application in architectural design, Automation in
Construction, Volume 11, Issue 3, pp. 277-278, 2002.
Mahoney, D.P., Volume Visualization Gets Physical,
Computer Graphics World, November, 2000.
Ming, L. W. and Gibson, I., Specification of VRML in
Color Rapid Prototyping. International Journal of
CAD/CAM, vol. 1, paper no. 1, pp. 1598-1800, 2001.
Novitski, B.J., Rapid prototyping. Architecture Record,
November 1999.
Pham, D.T. and Gault, R.S., A comparison of rapid
prototyping technologies. International Journal of Machine
Tools and Manufacture, vol. 38, pp. 1257¯1287, 1998.
Rotheroe, K. C., Manufacturing Freeform Architecture,
ArchitectureWeek – Tools 2000_0927.files, p T1.2, Sept.
27 2000.
Ryder, G.; Ion, B.; Green, G.; Harrison, D. and Wood, B.,
Rapid design and manufacture tools in architecture,
Automation in Construction, vol. 11, is. 3, pp. 279-290,
2002.
Ryder, G.J.; McGown, A.; Ion, W.; Green, G.; Harrison,
D.; Wood, B., Rapid Prototyping Feasibility Report, Rapid
Prototyping Group, Glasgow School of Art, 1998.
Shankar, N., Design, prototype via reverse engineering,
Tooling & Production, May, 1999.
Simondetti, A., Computer-generated physical modelling in
the early stages of the design process, Automation in
Construction, vol. 11, is. 3, pp. 303-311, 2002.
Streich, B. and Weisgerber, W., Computergestützter
Architekturmodellbau. Birkhauser, 1996.
Tay, FE.H.; Khanal, Y.P.; Kwok, K.K.; Kim, C.T.,
“Distributed rapid prototyping-a framework for Internet
prototyping and manufacturing,” Integrated Manufacturing
Systems, vol.12, no.6, 2001, pp.409-15, 2002.
Tome, C. Designers spice up a miniature set by using RP
technology to generate physical pepper models, Computer
Graphics World - graphics, 3d modeling, cad and visual
computing.htm, Computer Graphics World, June, 2001.
Wang, Y. and Duarte, J. P., Automatic generation and
fabrication of designs, Automation in Construction, vol.
11, is. 3, pp. 291-302, 2002.

