Mimar Sinan Project Site
Visual Reference System Model for Architectural Heritage
Burcu ùenyapılı
Assistant Professor, Ph.D.
burcu@bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract
This paper introduces a matrix based ‘visual
reference system model’ for architectural heritage. The
system consists of multi-layered web pages containing
visual and textual data about architectural periods, styles
and elements.
The structure of the system may be adapted to various
architectural concepts and periods. Yet, it is flexible
enough to be limited down to a specific period or architect
only. The matrix-based structure of the system allows for
adding new information at any time.
For demonstrational purposes, the system model is
applied to a specific domain of Classical Ottoman
architectural heritage and the site is called as the Mimar
Sinan Project Site (MSPS). MSPS is designed to serve
scholars, researchers, architects, designers, and historians
for specific, comparative and/or complex research
criteria.

1. Introduction
This paper introduces the Mimar Sinan Project Site
(MSPS), a demonstrational web site for a matrix based
visual reference tool for architectural heritage.
The idea of establishing such a reference system [1]
was presented to the Digital Design Lab (DDL) of
Columbia University, GSAP in March 2001. Upon the
invitation from DDL, a working model of the project was
realized during the summer term 2001. At this phase, to
illustrate the general purpose and the overall methodology
of the project, twenty unique mosques of the great
Claasical Ottoman architect Sinan have been selected. Yet,
due to the limited time frame, only the drawings (plan,

section, elevations), some printed images of the mosques
and related texts were organized in interrelated matrices.
The project has been further developed at the Media
Center for Art History, Archaeology and Historic
Preservation (MCAH) during Summer 2002. This stage
was funded by the Turkish Academy of Sciences. At this
phase, interior and exterior photos of a particular Mosque
(Sehzade) were placed into the site and the site was
integrated with the MCAH database.
MSPS introduces the concept of ‘visual reference
system’ for architectural heritage. The system model is
based on the power and need of visual data in learning and
analyzing architectural precedents. Visual materials
convey information more effectively than verbal or textual
data [2]. For architectural education and research, visual
information is indispensable and irreplaceable.
The idea of building computer models, websites or
multi/hyper-media sources for storing information about
architectural heritage is not new [3]. There are numerous
studies that concentrate on storing, displaying and
organizing architectural data such as DOORS [4],
ADMIRE [5] and Columbia University’s MCAH web site
[6]. However, MSPS introduces the idea of a visual
reference system based on inter-related matrices. This
structure introduces two major advantages. First, the user
can have a general picture of the bulk of information at
first glance. That is to say, instead of going through the
pages of a book or a multimedia source in order to get the
plans of two different buildings, she is introduced with all
plans together, side by side. This of course, aids in
comparative analysis as well (Figure 1).

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 1. Matrix of plans (MSPS Phase I)
Secondly, the organizational capacity of a matrix is
powerful (Figure 2). For instance, it is possible to display
the mosques in chronological order and in the order of
total floor area simultaneously on the matrix.

Figure 2. Matrix of plans (re-)organized to
display typological groups (MSPS Phase I)

2. The topic
MSPS is a demonstrational site for showing how the
proposed system structure will be formed and how it will
operate. Classical Ottoman Architecture (in relation with
its contemporary 16th Century Western styles and its
precedent Early Islamic Period) is chosen as the topic for
this demonstrational site.
Mimar Sinan (Architect Sinan) was the chief architect
of the Ottoman Empire between 1538 –1588. He has built
most of the Classical Ottoman mosques that survive today.
There are almost 500 edifices attributed to the architect, in
Istanbul and in Anatolia, including madrasas, mosques,
caravanserais, bridges, baths, and tombs. However, it is
Sinan’s mosque architecture that has developed into a
unique style within the history of Islamic architecture
because of his innovative designs and ingenious structural
solutions. That puts his architecture in a comparative
position with its precedents in Islamic architecture and his
Western contemporaries.

However, Sinan’s mosque architecture evolved in
time as well. In order to study Sinan’s architecture in
comparison to the Early Islamic and contemporary
Western examples and in order to study his later mosques
in comparison to his earlier works, the idea of inter-related
matrices is developed.
The characteristics of Sinan’s architecture, such as
the play of the masses, transformation from human to
monumental scale, centrality of form, symbolism of form
and delicacy of the structure, can be better studied with
cross-references from plan to elevation, from site to
section. Clayton et al. [7] assert that switching in between
plan, section and axonometric views aid the students in
comprehending drawing conventions.
For instance, MSPS is able to display the plans of
Hagia Sophia Mosque and Suleymaniye Mosque
simultaneously on the same screen for comparison. While
analyzing the two mosques, it is possible to bring up the
plan of Selimiye Mosque as well, with one click. Or,
similarly one can look at the sections of the selected
mosques side by side for comparative purposes.
The resources on Sinan’s architecture are too
diverse and dispersed. MSPS brings together the dispersed
and extensive information about Classical Ottoman
architecture. Therefore, a visual reference system for
Sinan’s mosques is formed. The system comprises textual
and visual data about the mosques and incorporates means
of analyzing the data specifically and comparatively.
MSPS displays visual information accompanied with
texts. From the main matrix it is possible to be linked to
the 2D drawings such as plans, sections, and photographs
of the buildings or to the related textual information. The
acquired information can be organized in any sequence
wished by the user.
Hence, an instructor who is going to lecture on
Islamic architecture will not go through the tiring task of
organizing slides one by one. Instead, she will pick the
necessary views from the system and put them in the
sequence she wishes. She may then save the lecture
material for further and repeated use. As such, she will
come to class, open up the system reflected onto the big
screen from the computer, retrieve her file and start
lecturing on the subject. The system also allows her to
retrieve extra information during the lecture. For instance,
while answering a question, she may need to display plans
of two mosques on the screen side by side for comparative
purposes. Then, she will simply click on the plan buttons
and have the plans displayed, instead of having to make a
trip to the slide archive.
As MSPS is integrated with the MCAH database, all
the visual material that is contained in the system can be
retrieved separately from the database. The retrieved

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

material can be saved into individual files (or profiles) for
further and repeated use. As such, instructors may prepare
their lecture material into their individual files (profiles)
and use them each time they lecture. Furthermore, they
may allow their students access to those files.

3. Structure
MSPS comprises the following main sections:
Preface, Site Resources, Visual Resources and Library
and Related Links. All these sections can be accessed
from the MSPS main page.
Preface, introduces the project and the contents.
More detailed information is available on geographical
context, architect Sinan and selected mosques through
specified links:
i. Maps of Ottoman lands and Istanbul: Istanbul
map (Figure 3) is interactive, i.e. as the user moves the
mouse over the location of the mosques on the map, a
general view of the corresponding mosque appears. It is
possible to be linked to the main page of any of the
mosques by clicking on the name of the mosque.

Figure 4. Interactive mosque list
iv. Comparative matrix: (Figure 5) displays the
plans, sections, elevations and the site plans of the selected
mosques side by side. It is possible to have any of the
drawings in a seperate window by clicking on the
corresponding cell.

Figure 5. Comparative matrix composed of
plans, sections, elevations and site plans of the
selected mosques
Figure 3. Interactive map of Istanbul
ii. Mimar Sinan: This page gives biographical
information about the architect and his life.
iii. List of the mosques: The interactive list (Figure
4) displays a general view of the mosque as the user
moves the mouse over the names of the mosques in the
list. By clicking on the name of the mosque the user can
access to the main page of a specific mosque.

Site Resources, (Figure 6) introduces the general
sections of the MSPS for specific, comparative or complex
criteria of research. These researches can be handled either
by using the general comparative matrix or the submatrices of the sections such as ‘structure’ or ‘heritage’.
Further research can be carried on at the ‘glossary’ section.

Figure 6. Visual Resources main page

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Visual Resources page links to:
i. Comparative Matrix
ii. Structure: is for analyzing structural elements of
Islamic architecture in detail. On an interactive table the
user selects the name of the structural element and in a
window at the side the image of that element appears.
iii. Heritage: is for comparing buildings of Early
Islam and contemporary Renaissance architecture with
Sinan’s works. The plans, sections and views of the major
Early Islamic mosques and some selected Renaissance
buildings are displayed on matrices.
iv. Glossary: lists the architectural elements and
features alphabetically, accompanied by images. The user
selects the name of the element from the alphabetical list
and a window with the view and a brief description of the
selected element appears.
Visual Resources is a collection of all the images
of the mosques, architectural elements and features used
through out the site. Links are available to the MCAH
database files from this page. The requested views are
opened up in a separate window. For each requested view,
medium size or large size options are available.
i.
MSPS Maps
ii.
Mosques
a. Exterior views of the mosques
b. Interior view of the mosques
c. Drawings of the mosque
d. Views of the building complex (kulliye)
where the mosque is located
Library and Related Links lists the bibliography and
other online resources on the subject matter (temporarily
inactive).
MSPS also allows the user to access specific
information about one mosque. The mosque can be
selected either from the interactive map, the mosque list or
the comparative matrix. First, the user accesses the main
page about the mosque where textual information is
accompanied by a general view of the mosque (Figure 7).

More detailed information is requested by selecting
either of the following options on the main page of the
mosque: historical context (explains the story of the
mosque construction, sociological structure of the time),
urban context (the geographical conditions of the site and
discusses its position within the city context) (Figure 8) or
architectural context (gives detailed information about the
building and its surroundings).

Figure 8. Sample page for urban context
option (Sehzade Mosque)
Visual information about each specific mosque is
grouped under the headings of: axonometry, plan, section
and animation. Each heading is represented by a button
under the mosque view. Axonometry displays exterior
views of the mosque, taken from specified points around
the buildings (Figure 9). These points are represented by
red regions on an axonometric drawing of the mosque.

Figure 9. Sample page for axonometry option
(Sehzade Mosque)
Plan displays a QTVR of the interior of the mosque
along with views taken from specific points of the interior
(Figure 9). These points are indicated as red patches on the
plan view.
Figure 7. Sample main page for a specific mosque
(Sehzade Mosque)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 10. Sample page for plan option (Sehzade
Mosque)
Section displays interior views from indicated areas
on the section (Figure 11). Also by clicking on different
levels on the section, it is possible to display a plan view
taken at that altitude. These thumbnail plans illustrate how
the rectangular body transforms into the dome. It is also
possible to get these plan views in a separate and
adjustable window for further and independent use.
Animation is temporarily inactive, yet it should display the
animation of construction of a 3d model of the selected
mosque.

for her lecture in any sequence she wishes. She may
always add more or dismiss some of the material during
the lecture.
MSPS displays the “concept in operation” for the
introduced matrix based visual reference system model.
This model can be applied to various architectural styles,
periods or architects. For researchers, such the system will
put together information, which could otherwise be found
in a variety of sources, after a long and tiresome research.
More importantly, it organizes the information on different
levels:
1. Specific (one subject, one criterion)
2. Comparative (more than one subject, one criterion)
3. Complex (more than one subject, more than one
criterion).
The idea of organizing the information in matrix
format saves time and aids in switching in between search
results.
The system can be accessed from the Internet,
allowing students, instructors, historians, architects,
designers, and scholars from any geographical location to
have access. Moreover, the system may be used for
different researches at the same time. For instance, both an
art historian and an architecture student may use the
system simultaneously for completely different research
purposes.

5. References

Figure 11. Sample page for section option
(Sehzade Mosque)

4. Conclusion: uses and ramifications
The system organizes visual and textual data about
Classical Ottoman mosques and related Islamic,
Renaissance and Gothic buildings in multi layered
matrices. MSPS is a tool for both architectural history in
general, and a tool for Islamic architecture in particular.
As such, the system lends itself to research, analysis,
learning and teaching purposes. For instance, a scholar
may utilize the system to learn about the Classical
Ottoman mosques, seek answers to her questions or learn
about the definitions and descriptions of architectural
concepts. Or, an instructor may prepare the visual material

[1] B. Senyapili, “Visualization of Virtual Architecture”,
Proceedings of 1997 IEEE Conference on Information
Visualization, IEEE Computer Society, 1997, pp. 260- 266.
[2] M. Herada, and M. Miskiewicz-Bugajski, “Knowledge
Territory”. Bits and Spaces, edited by M. Engeli, Birkhauser,
2001, pp. 140- 146.
[3] M. Allegra, , G. Fulantelli, and G. Mangiarotti, “A New
Methodology to Develop Hypermedia Systems for Architecture
History”, Multimedia and Architectural Disciplines Proceedings
of the 13th European Conference on Education in Computer
Aided Architectural Design in Europe, 1995, pp. 43-52.
[4] H. F. Sklar, “Opening DOORS: Online Access to
Design Resources”. Visual Databases in Architecture, edited by
A. Koutamanis, Hants: Avebury Ashgate, 1995, pp. 161-183..
[5] Y. Mishima, and P. Szalapaj, “ADMIRE: An
Architectural Design Multimedia Interaction Resource for
Education”, Architectural Computing from Turing to 2000
eCAADe Conference Proceedings, 1999, pp. 201-209.
[6]http://www.learn.columbia.edu/mcah2/html/mcah_proje
cts.html
[7] M.J. Clayton, R.B. Warden, and T.W. Parker, “Virtual
Construction of Architecture Using 3D CAD and Simulation”,
Automation in Construction 11, 2002, pp. 227- 235.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

