Art in the Informational Mode
Dr. Glenda Nalder
Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia
g.nalder@griffith.edu.au
Abstract
This paper provides a brief overview of significant
developments in new media arts practice and
theory during the period 1996-2001. It draws
from a web-based hypermedia doctoral
dissertation entitled 'Realising the virtual: the
internet as a space for transformatory art
practice' which incorporates creative works
undertaken as research and praxis. The
dissertation addressed the question of the
potential of internet-based new media arts
practice, as a form of cultural activism, to effect
positive social change. The paper traces shifts in
art's orientation, through computer and
telecommunications mediation, from that of 'a
work' to that of 'media'' (from materiality to
temporality); and in its operational mode, from
that of the tele-visual to the tele-matic (from vision
at a distance to data-banking at a distance). A key
focus is the evolution of a new genre, 'netArt', the
basis for which is critical engagement 'in the
mode of information'.[1]

Key words: netArt, new media arts, internet art,
living systems, cyberculture

Introduction.
The aim of my doctoral study was to gauge
the potential of internet-based new media arts
practice, as a form of cultural activism, to effect
positive social change. My starting point was the
assumption
that
new
information
and
communications technologies and systems
(NICTS) could facilitate a critical (deconstructive)
art practice. This assumption was based on the
view that, once captured in digital format, existing
still and moving images, text and sound could be
more easily manipulated and re-presented in such
a way as to problematise or alter meaning (a
strategy known in the field as 're-mediation'). The
study was shaped by such influences as the speed
of technological change, the limitations on access
to NICTS and tech-know-how, the complexity of
the global context, and the diversity of disciplines
contributing to the debates surrounding NICTS.
Assessment of the transformatory potential of

internet-based art practice was found to be
contingent upon an understanding of the
specificities of the informational mode, as well as
complex models of culture and society, and the
place and ‘work’ of art within them
At the outset of the study, access to
hardware, software and know-how was highly
inequitable across sex, class, race ethnicity and
cultural divides. With the growth of private
internet service provision during subsequent years,
these issues tended to be subsumed under the neoliberalist banner of internet democracy. While the
subsequent creation of the world-wide-web and
graphical web browsers encouraged some artists
to exhibit reproductions of artworks created in
traditional (or ‘old’) media in a new context that
would liberate them from the gallery system,
others using computers to generate (rather than
merely digitise) art, in an off-line context,
expanded their repertoires of practice to
incorporate the informational mode. At first this
meant either collaborating with computer
programmers, or mastering new (computer)
languages and information systems.
But
ultimately it was to mean a whole new way of
thinking about the world and the place of art
within it.
This new way of thinking evolved through a
process whereby my object of study – the internet
- was treated as a series of parallel, evolving
‘worlds’, ‘spheres’, or ‘spaces’ – each with its
attendant problems, promises and politics –
simultaneously constructed through interactions
between artists and between artists and other
aggregations. It resulted from a deeper and
broader inquiry into the network of relations of
power underpinning technics (the human use of
technology in the world) - or, to use Harraway’s
catch-all phrase: ‘the kinship of the chip, gene,
seed, bomb, lineage, ecosystem, and database.’[2]

Art and technics.
Intellectuals examining the impact of
technics on the practice, mediation and reception
of art have typically begun with Walter
Benjamin's analysis, between the two World
Wars, of the aesthetic, social and political
implications of art in the age of technological

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

1

reproducibility. [3] A sustainable feature of this
work is its emphasis on the means by which the
artwork ‘takes place’ and ‘takes its place’. A
single viewer of a painting hanging on the wall of
a gallery stood before the work and experienced
its aura - its olfactory and other qualities of
originality - in a revered setting. Once mediated
by technology, this aura was lost. For example, as
cinema, art became actualised at the moment of its
reproduction by a mass audience, thereby
providing a significantly different experience.
Artists quickly grasped the revolutionary potential
of the photographic technique of montage as a
distinctive experimental film editing technique,
and the power of the dissolve to collapse space
and time. In his critical readings of such filmic
spectacles as the rallies of the Third Reich, and the
1936 Berlin Olympics, Benjamin asserted that the
masses, seeing themselves face-to-face in the
cinema, were able to be organised and mobilised
'at a distance'.
Benjamin’s foundational work provided a
language and a lens through which late 20th
century theorists of art and media were able to
begin to describe the aesthetic, cultural and social
transformations taking place with the proliferation
of NICTS. Weber [4], for example, proposed that
art’s auratic qualities did not disappear, but were
reproduced as ‘mediaura’ in and by the very
media responsible for its decline. And, like
Virilio, [5] he argued that machine or artificial
vision in the form of the digital scan (or the virtual
gaze) constituted sight without the look. Poster [6]
urged us to consider the liberatory potential of the
informational mode, which he believed reversed
the old (one-to-many) order of communication,
un-massing the audience, making senders
receivers, producers consumers, and rulers ruled.
While media and cultural theorists placed NICTS
and the activities they supported under scrutiny
using processes drawn from post-structuralist and
post-modern critical theories, artists searched for
new metaphors and new mythologies through
which our place in this politically-invested,
layered web of scientific, social, commercial, and
cultural worlds might be understood.

seemed ironic when they were working in a nonnatural (synthetic, silicon-based) format. However
this interest arose in the context of high-end
parallel computing, which not only fast-tracked
the study of natural processes but produced
unexpected and exciting insights that fuelled
computing scientists' belief in their capacity to
create artificial intelligence and artificial life by
mimicking natural processes. Artists, too, were
seduced by the idea that a ‘second’ nature could
be created through the generation of gene pools
from which they might grow worlds of endless
variety. Using computer algorithms to generate
complex forms that took on the appearance of
exotic plant life growing and evolving in a virtual
garden was more exciting and challenging than
merely manipulating scanned images. Thus by the
early 1990s artists working in this ‘second nature’
genre introduced audiences to notions of living
systems, and feedback as a mechanism for
evolutionary change. Responding to this new
work, which treated audiences not as external
observers, but participants whose behaviour was
integral to the evolution of the work, shifted art
discourses onto the territory of physicists, and the
corporate psychologists and socio-biologists,
whose attempts to model behaviour were based on
Weiner’s ‘science’ of cybernetics and Darwinian
evolutionary theories.

From the televisual to the telematic.
By 1996, cooperative and altruistic
exchanges between computing scientists, systems
engineers and information technologists resulted
in crucial new developments such as the WWW, a
graphical information browser (Mosaic), and new
conventions for dynamic 3-D virtual reality
modelling language (VRML) which gave artists a
system able to support a convincing representation
of spatiality.

From realism to algorithm.
Laurel [7] observed in the early 1990s that
artists working at the cutting edge of digital media
had moved on from constructing images that
deployed realism as style, to using computers and
new knowledge bases to create intricate models of
objects. That artists sought new knowledge about
natural phenomena from the domain of the
physical and biological sciences, for example,

2

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3D ‘fly through’ Navigation screen from the
website “Asteria” (1996), scripted in Virtual
Reality Modelling Language (VRML) in Nalder,
G. (2001) Realising the Virtual: the internet as a
space for transformatory art practice. [8]

These and other new tools developed in the same
cooperative spirit and distributed via the internet
as ‘free-ware’and ‘share-ware’ for graphics,
animation and sound editing and compression
enabled artists to experiment and create low-cost
virtual environments - not merely as repositories
or exhibiting spaces for art that challenged the art
institution, but as art.
Once ‘@ home’ in cyberspace, we joined
web communities, exchanged information, and
engaged with the discourses of cyberculture.
Adopting the informational mode of praxis
enabled personal and local issues to be brought to
global attention, and support to be rallied for local
issues of global concern. However it was equally
apparent that the informational mode facilitated
tele-matics - the linking together of formerly
discrete data-bases into data-banks – that, in the
minds of many, constituted the ‘superpanoptican’
of the late twentieth century, Not only were our
habits of consumption recorded, but also our
physical location, health, employment and legal
statuses. Rather than merely presenting us with
visions from afar (tele-vision), NICTS constructed
us as subjects in particular ways. Impoverished
database languages reduced or omitted qualifying
information so as to achieve the required nonambiguous grammatical structure, and used norms
to constitute individuals and define deviants.
Databases were not merely ‘... an invasion of
privacy ... a threat to a centered individual, but ...
the multiplication of the individual, the
constitution of an additional self, one that may be
acted upon to the detriment of the 'real' self

without that “real” self ever being aware of what
is happening.’[9] Whilst positing the existence of
some ‘real’ or essential self is highly problematic,
Poster’s assertions did give expression to a
collective anxiety about the intrusion of NICTS
into our daily lives, and loss of a unified sense of
self.
Kroker and others described the phenomenon
as ‘an ideology of panic … linked to the rise of a
new right’ and based in ‘the nihilism of a middleclass gone authoritarian’, fuelled by ‘(f)ear of loss
of privilege, impotence in the face of
overwhelming power and despair over the failure
of the liberal consensus to produce a
psychological readiness for the therapeutic of the
authoritarian state’.[10] However rather than
accept our ‘terminal condition’, Goodall proposed
that we re-think our response to excessive
aesthesia (the epidemic of stress) through recourse
to the work on aesthetics as a practice of the self,
to question ‘whether hypochondria, … disguised
as moral responsibililty’ might be ‘insulating us
against the intellectual effort of interrogating the
notion of adaptation itself.’ [11]

netArt.
Visual artists/programmers, Starrs and
Cmielewski's tongue-in-cheek Diagnostic Tools
for the New Millennium enabled users to gauge
their level of paranoia by completing web-form
questionnaires. During the task the browser
information bar began displaying information
apparently gleaned from the user’s computer by
'intelligent' client tools. Users not only became
confused about whether their personal information
was being hacked by the artists or by some smart
programming within the browser itself, but
became even more anxious about how far that
personal information would travel and to what
sinister uses it might be put.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3

Screen from Diagnostic Tools for the New
Millennium by artists Starrs and Cmielewski
(1997) an interactive web-site playing on the
growing paranoia of users by displaying their
personal details in its information bars.[12].

Although semiotic and psycho-analyses of
computer culture focused our attention on the
irrationalities of a so-called rational and
rationalising science and tools and pushed
critiques of technics beyond simplistic good/evil
polarisations, research into consciousness such as
that by neuro-biologist, Maturana [13] brought
new understandings and insights into the
relationship between languaging and self-creation.
Maturana’s explanations also reinforced what
psychoanalysis and art have always maintained:
that it is only through access to the so-called
irrational (or unconscious) forms of languaging
that an understanding of the nature of
consciousness (or 'soul') can be reached. This
perspective reversed the 'top down', logicalrationalist approach originally favoured in
artificial intelligence (AI) and artificial life (AL)
research. On the basis of these new
understandings, tele-matic culture could be
conceptualised in terms of a self-organising, living
system, made up of humans and artefacts in
relation. Thus transformatory potential could be
seen to reside in the ability to adopt the stance of
an 'information-processing entity, able to change
nature according to the information flows it
receives and the various media to which it
connects'.[14]
A living systems model that did not place
responsibility for adaptation to changed conditions
solely on any entity appeared an effective way of
personalising complexity. In this model, netArtists
create patterns of thought by dispersing ideas in
the feedback loop of the narrowcast (many-tomany) informational mode. A networked model
of communication is not subjected to the same
kinds of controls and delays as hierarchical
models.
Within the relatively short space of the five years
from the mid to the end of the 1990s, netArtists
had initiated, historicised, and noted the demise of
their genre. The dominant feature of netArt in its
‘high’ or ‘heroic’ period was the artists’ treatment
of NICTS not merely as the tool of
communication, but as the subject of their art.

4

Screen
from
ArtTeleportacia
Exhibition
Miniatures of the Heroic Period featuring the
work of Lialinas, Bunting, Shulgin, Jodi, and
Cosic, each altering their site visitor’s desktop
or browser appearance in different ways [15]

The definitive statement on netArt was
published in a self-conducted interview by Mark
Amerika
(with
his
ideal
reader)
as
‘instantaneously distributed mindshare’ … ‘a
footprint in the electrosphere before the dot.coms
came to the scene’ (that) ‘… died before the
dot.com market crash.’[16] This strategy
underscores the immediacy of what Amerika calls
netArt’s ‘surf-sample-manipulate’ properties. In
this manifestation, netArt is the life-practice of not
only making history, but of making history up.
Bypassing the institution, netArtists decided for
themselves that they were artists and that their
work was significant in the history of the internet.
netArtists are still writing the history of netArt as
if it has reached its end, whilst at the same time
perpetuating the practice, in the act of writing its
history.

References.
[1] Poster, M., The Mode of Information, Polity,
Cambridge, 1990.
[2] Haraway, D.J., Modest_Witness@Second
_Millenniu:FemaleMan©_Meets_OncoMouse™
Routledge, London and New York, 1997, p2.
[3] Benjamin, W., “The Work of Art in the Age of
Mechanical Reproduction”, 1936, (trans. H. Zohn) in
Illuminations, Schocken, NY, 1968, pp 217-251.
[4] Weber, S., Mass Mediauras: form, technics, media,
Power Press, Sydney, 1996.
[5] Virilio, P., Open Sky, Verso, London, 1997
[6] Poster, 1990, op. cit.
[7] Laurel, B., “Art and Activism in VR”, Wide Angle
15:4, October 1993, p 17.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

[8] Nalder, G. (2001) Realising the Virtual: the internet
as a space for transformatory art practice Doctoral
Dissertation: URL: http://www.glendanalder.id.au
[9] Poster, M. Postmodern Virtualities
URL: http://www.hnet.uic.edu/mposter/
writings/internet.html Accessed 6.4.1998.
[10] Kroker, A, Kroker, M, and Cook, D. (eds) Panic
Encyclopedia: The Definitive Guide to the Postmodern
Scene, URL:http://www.freedonia.com/panic/ Accessed
2.2.1997.
[11] Goodall, J., “General Adaptation Syndrome:
Hypochondrias of the Fin de Siecle” in Grace, H.
Aesthesia and the Economy of the Senses, Nepean,
UWS, 1996, p 81.
[12] Starrs, J. and Cmielewski, Diagnostic Tools for the
New Millennium URL: http://www.studioxx.org/maid
encore/intros/starrs.html Accessed 7.3.1999.
[13] Maturana, H. The Biology of Self-Consciousness
(unpublished manuscript) c1993.
[14] Ascott, R., “The Shamanic Web: art and mind in
emergence” in Galloway, A., and M. Amerika, Digital
Studies: being in cyberspace URL:
http://www.altx.com Accessed 15.3.1999.
[15] Lialinas, O., Art Teleportacia URL:
http://art.teleportacia.org/ Accessed 2.5.1998.
[16] Amerika, M., “Making History Up: A Serial
Question Mark”, Amerika On-line # 17, Telepolis:
URL:http://www.heise.de/tp/english/kolumnen/ame/447
5/1.html Accessed 19.12.2000.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

5

