Computer Animation and Visualisation Techniques of Mechanical Products
for Assembly Analysis

Pellicanò N. Marco, Santoro Esamuele
Department of Mechanical Design and Industrial Management
University of Naples Fed. II
p.le Tecchio 80- 80187 Naples ( ITALY) E-mail : esantoro@unina.it

Abstract
The computer animation and visualisation techniques
allow the acquisition of important information which
can aid the designer in correcting and controlling the
product from early conceptual design phase to the final
assembly design stage.
In this paper the computer assembly animation of a
mechanical product is shown utilising a commercial
CAD system.
By utilising appropriately some features of the CAD
system, a general trajectory can be assigned for each
mating product component that allows us to analyse
either
the
local
and
global
product
assemblability/disassemblability or to analyze feasible
disassembling trajectories which guarantee that no
collisions happen.
An application regarding a mechanical assembly
product is illustrated here below.

1. Introduction
Computer animation and visualisation techniques have
deeply changed the classical product development
process, from the early conceptual design phase to the
final assembly design stage. These techniques provide
designers with methods to evaluate virtual prototypes
and permit modifications which result in a reduction of
cost and time-to-market.
During the conceptual design stage, the generation of
geometrical 3-D product models as the assumption of
preliminary shapes, features and locations of physical
forms require a careful analysis of functional design
requirements. The geometrical product model can also
be utilised in all successive stages of product
development.

Of course, the generation and possible geometrical
modifications of product models can be facilitated and
improved enormously when the designer operates in an
interactive computer environment.
At the assembly design stage, each part of a product
model has been sufficiently detailed making it possible
to define the mating conditions between the parts. This
allows us to analyse different virtual assembly processes
and to perform several assembly analysis evaluations
[1,2,3] such as interference checking, accessibility
analysis of parts, collision detection between the parts
during the assembly motion, local and global
assemblability and also permits us to determine feasible
disassembling trajectories that guarantee that collision do
not take place.
Such information may aid the designer in the
evaluation and selection of efficient product and process
assembly or to redesign the product in order to obtain a
better assemblability. It may also prove useful to
analyse feasible assembly sequences [4,5].
The animation and visualisation techniques allow the
creation of a realistic environment so that the designer
can see and move in real time each part of product under
various perspectives and colour combinations [6,7]. He
can also determine feasible trajectories so that no
collisions happen between parts and gripping tools
during the assembly process.
In a such realistic environment the designer can make
important decisions based upon information obtained
directly from assembly product animation and
visualisation.
In fact, some assembly product criteria are partly
subjective with regards to the accessibility of parts, the
reduction of the assembly complexity [8,9,10], etc.
therefore, the animation and visualisation techniques

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

may aid the designer in making evaluations and
decisions regarding the assembly/disassembly process.
This paper describes the use of animation techniques in a
commercial CAD system to simulate the assembly and
disassembly processes of a mechanical product. In order
to create complex animations, a general trajectory will
be assigned to each mating product component.

2. Assembly Modelling
The assembly model defines and manipulates the
spatial positions and hierarchical relationships among the
individual parts.
Three step are necessary to create an assembly model:
a) modelling of individual part by a 3-D geometric
modeller;
b) specifying the hierarchical relationship between parts;
c) specifying the spatial relationship between parts by
defining their location and orientation in their
assembled position.
One way to present the hierarchical relationship of the
assembly model is the assembly tree, whereby the root
represents the product, the nodes are the subassemblies
and the leaves are the parts.
It is possible to define the spatial relationships either by
4x4 homogeneous transformation matrices or by
specifying the mating conditions. For example, a coaxiality condition between the axes of a hole-part and a
shaft-part implies that axes of individual parts must be
coincident in the assembly model.
Generally, the designer simulates the assembly process
when he specifies the
hierarchical and spatial
relationships. Therefore one part is often chosen as a
base and other parts are merged into it.
In this study we use the commercial software CATIA V5
to create the assembly model.
The Assembly Design of CATIA V5 is the module
dedicated to obtaining the assembly model. At “father”
product level it is possible to define the hierarchical
organization based upon the relationship between the
parts with a top-down or bottom-up approach. At any
given time existing components, parts or products can be
introduced or new parts or products can be designed
directly into the assembly model. Fig. 1 shows an
example of an assembly dependency tree obtained by
CATIA V5.
A complete set of topological assembly tools
(coincidence, contact, offset, angle, fix, flexible/rigid
constraints) allows the easy definition of mating
conditions and constraints between the parts and
products of a mechanical assembly thereby positioning
them with an automatic or manual update.
The modifications of a part/product are updated
automatically into the assembly model. Moreover, when
the parts/products are created directly into the Assembly
Model module, the usage of assembly features allows us

to utilise some geometric elements as external
references.
These geometric elements, belonging to parts/products
already present in the assembly model, are preserved
even if subsequent modifications intervene.
In a subsequent step, the use of a manipulator allows us
to verify the congruence of the assembly model. This
means that it is possible to move the parts/products
within the parameters of assigned constraints and in such
a way, to visualize the cinematic chain of the assembly.
The parts/products can be copied and utilized in various
assemblies without requiring database duplication.
Ulterior functions allow us to obtain the bill of materials,
the exploded views, warnings about interferences or
insufficient clearance between two or more parts, and the
dependency’s graph. At "father" product level, a subassembly having one or more degrees of freedom, is
necessarily defined as rigid sub-assembly. Through an
opportune function it is possible to make this subassembly "flexible". In other words, its degrees of
freedom is activated making congruent the movement of
all the others parts/products.

3. Motion Modelling
To better analyse the problems concerning the local
and global assemblability/disassemblability of products,
it is necessary to check the collisions, accessibility and
minimum space requirements between the parts and
gripping tools. This can be performed by generating a
computer animation of the assembly model
and
assigning to each part feasible trajectories.
In CATIA V5, this is possible using the Digital Mock
Up (DMU) Fitting Simulator module.
To enhance the attention towards collisions, users can
select the “Stop on collision” option during trajectory
simulation. This function is especially useful when it is
applied to assemblies whose dimensions exceed those of
the video’s.
Several movements at once can be simulated and
synchronized by means of a “Shuttle” (in other words, a
Cartesian Coordinate System), allowing us to group
different parts together. This gives us the possibility to
define limitations on the angular movements of the parts.
In a trajectory analysis, the swept volume, generated
by a part during its simulated movement, can be
memorized and used as a solid part in the accessibility
and collision analyses, even in different environments
such as DMU Kinematics.
DMU Fittings can be used to obtain automatically
collision free trajectories. Their definition is interactively
obtained frame-by-frame or merely by imposing start
and finish points for the part.
In the latter instance, the possibility of simplifying the
trajectory through interpolation of its points becomes
especially useful.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

The trajectories thus created can easily be edited and
revised through the utilization of
intuitive VCR
commands. The computer animation can be recorded
frame-by-frame thereby creating a video movie.
In this study, an implementation of the simulation
techniques pertaining to the assembly/disassembly
phases by the DMU Fitting Module has been analyzed
in order to introduce some interesting implications.
Currently, the generating method for trajectory relies
on the preventive selection of one interested part and its
coupling with the manipulator (“Shuttle”) whose origin
coincides by default with the geometric barycentre of the
part and proceeds to record the geometric points of the
positions occupied by the part during its movement.
Each point generates an animation frame. Their
subsequent interpolation with a broken curve or spline
results in the creation of the definitive trajectory. The
control of the point’s coordinates is obtained through the
use of a window in which it is possible to precisely
characterize the current
“Shuttle‘s” position and
orientation. Since Shuttle and part coincide, this also
determines the part’s position (x, y, z) and its spin
angles (TxTyTz which refer to a reference coordinate
system defined in the context of Assembly Design
It also allows us to assign relative translational
increments ('x'y'z as well as angular ones
measurable
('Tx'Ty'Tzwhich are preventively
between remarkable geometric elements.
In our implementation there existed the necessity to
analyse
the
local
and
global
product
assemblability/disassemblability and then to determine a
method which allowed us to assign to a part a general
trajectory that could be obtained by the wireframe
geometry module.
This enabled us to define the trajectory “a priori”. The
limitations of this operation were soon made clear upon
direct application. While the trajectory’s parameter of
the geometric wireframe module is the geometric type
inside the algorithms in a DMU environment,
conversely, the time is the descriptive characteristic
parameter of the trajectory. From here stems the real
difficulty in associating in an interactive way one general
parametric curve with one trajectory.

4. Illustrative example
In our application the problem of assigning the
trajectories of assembly/disassembly to the connecting
rod component has been analyzed. This is a part of a
mechanical system with a butterfly flow variation unit
( Fig. 2). In Fig. 3, the exploded view of assembled
product is shown. Previously, in Wireframe and Surface
Modules, some traces/trajectories have been created
which, later on, will be assigned in a DMU Fitting
Module to order to define the trajectories of the
connecting rod component. Three traces/trajectories are

created: piecewise linear curve, linear and circular
piecewise curve, linear and cubic spline piecewise curve.
The original position of the aforementioned traces is
not accidental but coincides with the geometric
barycentre of the part, i.e. the point in which the origins
of the trajectories created in DMU Fitting Module
coincide. In such a Module, it is necessary to select the
interested component in a phase of the trajectories’s
development. In our illustrative example this is the
connecting rod component. This operation allows us to
visualize the manipulator, whose origin coincides with
geometric barycentre of the parts associated with it. At
this step, after having chosen the interpolation type
(Spline, Linear or Composite Curve) it is possible to
compose the trajectory by successive frames assigning to
each of them the relative geometric position of the
component in 3D space thus making it possible to do it
with precision using the window of the manipulator ( see
Fig. 7).
In our experiment, we have created a correspondence
between any given frame and a precise position in the
space identified by one point of the wireframe trace
previously defined. It is therefore indispensable to move
the manipulator (and therefore the component with
which it is coupled) while pressing the Ctrl key, and to
position it, for every frame, to correspond to a notable
point of the trace under examination (control point for
spline curve trace or intersection point for mixed and
linear spline curves). The choice of the interpolation type
for the successive positions, characterizes univocally the
type of selected geometric curve that us allows to obtain
the intended trajectory of the component.
Figures 4-7 show the three traces previously defined
and assigned as trajectories to the connecting rod
component and some of their positions during the visual
assembly animation.

5. Conclusion
This paper presented the utilization of a
commercial CAD system for visualisation of virtual
assembly for a mechanical product. The animation and
visualisation techniques can be very useful in analying
global and local assemblability and to identify
assembling and disassembling directions. In this way
collision can be avoided between parts, and between
parts and gripping tools.
Many benefits would be forthcoming through the above
techniques such as:
a) reduced product development time;
b) improved local and global product assemblability.
Of course, much of the future research on visualization
and animation techniques will be within virtual reality
techniques, however these are very expensive when
compared to the virtual techniques illustrated in this
paper, which only require a personal computer.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

6. References
[1] J.K. Gui, M. Mantyla (1994); “Functional
understanding of assembly modelling”, CAD ,26 ,
pp. 435-451
[2] T.L. Calton (1999) ; “Advancing Design-for
Assembly : The next generation in Assembly
Planning”. Proc. IEEE Inter. Sym. On Assembly and
Task Planning, Porto ( Portugal), pp. 57-62
3] T.L. De Fazio,S.J. Rhee, D.E. Whitney; ” DesignSpecific Approach to Design for Assembly (DFA)
for Complex Mechanical Assemblies”. IEEE Trans.
On Robotics and Automation, Vol. 15, 1999, pp.
869-881
[4] S. Bae, K.Lee ; “Automatic Generation of Assembly
Sequences with Feasible Trajectory”. Ed. S.Y. Shin,
T.L. Kunii, Computer Graphics and Application,
World Scientific Pub., 1995
[5] L.S.H. de Mello, S. Lee ; Computer-Aided
Mechanical Assembly Planning, Kluwer Academic
Press, 1991.
[6] S. Jayaram, H.I. Connacher, K. W. Lyons; “Virtual
assembly using virtual reality techniques”. CAD,
Vol. 29, N. 8, pp. 575-584
[7] P.C. Stadzisz, J.M. Henrioud; “An integrated
approach for design of multi-product assembly
system”. Computer in Industry, 36 , pp. 21-29
[8] E. Santoro (2001); “A Fuzzy Product Analysis in
Design for Robotic Assembly”. CIMM’01,
Vancouver (Canada) 2001
[9] S. Motovalli, A.-Ul Islam (1997); “Multi-criteria
assembly sequencing”. Computer Ind. Eng. , 32 ,
pp. 743-751.
[10] A.M. Daabub ed Col (1999) ; “A Computer-based
Intelligent System for Design for Assembly”.
Computer & Industrial Engineering , 37 , pp. 111115

Fig. 2 : Butterfly flow variation unit

Fig. 1 : Assembly dependencies tree

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Fig. 3 : Exploded view

Fig. 4 : Mixed linear trajectory curve

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Fig. 5 : A frame along mixed (linear and circular) trajectory

Fig. 6 : A frame along mixed (linear and spline)e trajectory

Fig. 7 : A frame along mixed curve trajectory with rotation and “parameters for manipulator” window

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

