Tools for Visual Comparison of Spatial Development Scenarios
Natalia Andrienko, Gennady Andrienko, and Peter Gatalsky
Spatial Decision Support Team
Fraunhofer Institute AIS
Schloss Birlinghoven, 53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
http://ww.ais.fraunhofer.de/SPADE
gennady.andrienko@ais.fraunhofer.de
Abstract
In the paper, we suggest a set of visualization-based
exploratory tools to support analysis and comparison of
different spatial development scenarios, such as results of
simulation of various spatially related processes. We
have applied a task-analytical approach to tool selection
and design, that is, we have first considered what
analytical tasks may potentially emerge in the course of
investigating and comparing scenarios. We have revealed
a set of multifarious tasks, which can be grouped into
four categories: 1) analysis in the attribute dimension; 2)
analysis in the spatial dimension; 3) analysis in the
temporal dimension; 4) spatio-temporal analysis. Then
we have evaluated the techniques typically used for
visualization of spatial and temporal data, such as
(animated) maps or time graphs, from the perspective of
supporting different task types. We have extended these
techniques, mostly in the direction of increasing
interactivity, and combined them for providing a better
coverage of the task space. Using examples from the
domains of forest management and agriculture, we
illustrate how the resulting software tools help in
fulfilling various tasks in the course of exploring and
comparing scenarios. At the end, we set an explicit
correspondence between the task types and the
appropriate tools.

1. Introduction
Simulation is often used for prediction of development
of some processes under certain human-controlled
conditions. The processes may not only develop in time
but also be spread in space. When there is more or less
freedom in setting conditions for the development, the
question typically arises how to do this in an optimal way.
In other words, a decision-maker needs to find among
several possible strategies for managing a process such a
strategy that maximizes benefit, or minimizes expenses,
or decreases ecological damage, etc., or, more often,

provides an acceptable trade-off between multiple
conflicting goals. For example, in agriculture there is a
problem of selection of an appropriate strategy for
pesticide application: where, what pesticide, at what time
moments, and in what amounts should be applied in order
to increase the yield while protecting the soils from
dangerous pollution? In forest management, one needs to
decide when, where, what tree species, in what age, and
in what amount to cut for getting good profit without
destroying the forest.
In order to make an informed, well-grounded choice, a
decision-maker must have an opportunity to compare
results of several simulations. In this paper we consider
what visualizations and interactive techniques could be
useful for the task of scenario comparison.
Results of spatial process simulation are examples of
spatio-temporal data, which may be distinguished on the
basis of the character of the changes these data reflect [5]:
x existential
changes,
i.e.
appearance
and
disappearance of (spatial) objects;
x spatial changes, including changes of position, shape,
size, and orientation;
x attribute changes, i.e. changes of non-spatial
characteristics of spatial objects.
In this paper, we focus on attribute changes. More
specifically, we consider applications where a territory is
divided into fixed compartments, and some characteristics
of these compartments change over time as a result of
human’s activities. Thus, in the forest management there
are forest compartments with such varying characteristics
as the total amount of wood and the structure of the tree
mass by species and age categories. In the pesticide
application problem, a territory may be divided into
parcels according to land use or soil properties, and an
analyst is interested in the average pesticide amounts
accumulated in the soil and ground waters in each parcel.
From the techniques currently being suggested for
visualization of spatio-temporal data, map animation is
the most popular [4][8][10][11][13][14]. However, we
find that this technique in its “classical” form (i.e. playing
a sequence of snapshots representing states of a

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

phenomenon at successive moments of time) does not
work as well for arbitrary data as it does in demonstrating
evident trends like urban growth [15]. The main problem
is that animation, in general, is inconvenient for
comparing states at different moments in time. In order to
detect and evaluate changes, an analyst has to compare
the state viewed at the current moment with mental
images of earlier states, which need to be kept in mind.
Only coherent changes on sufficiently large parts of a
territory are well perceived without much cognitive load.
Other techniques suggested for the visualization of
spatio-temporal data are map series [14] and change maps
[13][14][2]. Spatial and temporal aggregation [9]
provides useful summaries of characteristics, but cannot
be used alone due to significant information losses
involved. In [8] and [12] maps may be complemented by
graphs representing changes of individual user-selected
spatial objects.
For supporting comparison of development of several
spatial phenomena, [8] and [4] suggest simultaneous
running of several animations. Animations may be
combined in three basic ways [4]: shown in multiple
juxtaposed maps, overlaid in the same map, or alternating
in the same map. However, to our knowledge, no tests of
users’ perception of such combined animations have been
made yet.
In order to find out which techniques could best
support comparison of different spatial development
scenarios, let us consider first what basic tasks the
process of comparison may consist of.

2. Possible Tasks in Comparing Scenarios
Results of a single simulation are values of one or
more attributes referring to different territory
compartments and time moments, that is, for each
compartment there is a temporally ordered series of
values of each attribute. In order to compare several
simulated scenarios, an analyst needs to derive from this
mass of individual values an integral vision of the
characteristics of each scenario as a whole. Integration of
individual characteristics into an “overall view” [3]
occurs in three dimensions: attributive, spatial, and
temporal.
In the attributive dimension, when considered
separately from the two others, the analyst is interested in
properties of the statistical distribution of attribute values:
the range of variation, mean or median, dispersion, etc.
Often it is important to know the distribution of the
values among particular classes, for example, what
proportions of the values correspond to low, medium, and
high ecological risk.
Integration in the spatial and temporal dimensions is
also applied to attribute values but involves also space
and time, respectively. In the spatial dimension,

characteristics of individual territory compartments need
to be integrated into an overall image (pattern) of the
spatial distribution of these characteristics. For example,
one may observe that attribute values increase from the
north to the south, or from the center to the periphery, or
that there is a distinct cluster of high values in some part
of the territory. When some classes of the characteristics
are defined, the analyst is interested whether
compartments fitting in the same class are spatially close
and form contiguous regions.
In the temporal dimension, the analyst considers
sequences of characteristics of each territory compartment
as they occur over time. We shall further call such
sequences “behaviors”. Analyzing a collection of
behaviors, one looks whether they are coherent or
inconsistent and what patterns/trends prevail. When there
are classes of characteristics, an important overall
property of a scenario is how the distribution of the
values among the classes changes over time. The analyst
may be interested in an even higher degree of
aggregation, that is, in averaged or summarized values
over the whole time period. For example, this may be the
total yield in an agricultural scenario or the total costs in
an ecological restoration scenario.
In all dimensions, particular attention needs to be paid
to so-called outliers. In the attribute dimension, these are
occurrences of extremely high or extremely low attribute
values standing far apart from the bulk of the values.
“Spatial outliers” are compartments considerably
differing from the neighborhood by their characteristics.
Outliers in the temporal dimension are unusual behaviors,
such as abrupt changes of characteristics, or changes that
substantially differ from those occurring to the majority
of the objects. Typically, outliers not only need to be
detected but also explained.
While independent consideration of the spatial and
temporal dimensions is a useful part of data analysis, a
comprehensive overall view of a scenario requires also
their combination. There are two complementary tasks in
exploring the evolution of a process in space and time.
First, it should be investigated how the pattern of the
spatial distribution of the characteristics evolves over
time. For example, the analyst might make an observation
that the difference between the north and the south
increases (decreases) over time, or that a cluster of high
values gradually moves in some direction, or spreads, or
shrinks. Second, it is important to know how different
behavioral patterns are distributed over the territory. For
example, it might be found that growing trends prevail in
one part of the territory while in the other parts the values
tend to decrease or remain relatively stable.
Here is a synopsis of the general characteristics of a
scenario an analyst strives to derive:

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

1.

Time- and space-irrelevant properties characterizing
situations at selected time moments: distribution of
the individual characteristics in the space of
characteristics; various statistical summaries (mean,
median, dispersion, variance, etc.); distribution
among classes; statistical outliers.
2. Time-irrelevant spatial properties (referring to
selected time moments): patterns of spatial
distribution of individual characteristics, presence of
clusters of compartments with close characteristics,
existence of spatial directional trends; spatial
distribution of classes; spatial outliers.
3. Space-irrelevant temporal (behavioral) properties:
prevailing behavioral pattern or groups of similar
behaviors; existence of trends or periodicity;
dynamics of value distribution among classes;
behavioral outliers; averaged and cumulative values
over the period.
4. Spatio-temporal properties:
x Evolution of spatial patterns over time.
x Distribution of behavioral patterns over the
territory.
In each particular case, some of these properties may
be more relevant than the others, but in any case scenarios
are assessed and compared on the basis of general,
integrated characteristics rather than attribute values in
individual territory compartments at individual time
moments. This should be properly taken into account in
design or selection of tools for such a kind of analysis. It
should be also noted that the initial and final moments of
a simulation may play a special role in analyzing
simulation results. Usually, the evolution of
characteristics is considered in relation to the initial
situation. The degree of success or appropriateness of a
scenario is often judged from comparing the initial and
the final states (although it may be also important that the
intermediate states satisfy certain conditions of
acceptability). When several scenarios are compared, it is
typical that they have the same starting conditions,
whereas the further dynamics of the characteristics and,
consequently, the final states differ.
Comparison of scenarios requires such tools that could
support derivation and comparison of the above-listed
integral characteristics. Since it is hardly possible to
invent a visualization that would be sufficiently good for
all analysis tasks, displays and tools of different types
need to be combined. Below we suggest a possible
combination of tools. The tools described are
implemented
in
the
system
CommonGIS
(http://www.CommonGIS.de/).

3. Tools to Analyze and Compare Scenarios
3.1. Maps
Since the processes we deal with develop in space,
visualization of their spatial properties is necessary. Maps
are suitable media for these purposes. CommonGIS
currently offers 16 different techniques for visualization
of spatially referenced attribute data on maps. For timedependent data, it is possible to build maps manipulated
through time controls, which allow a user to select time
moments and view situations at these moments. Hence,
for any selected time moment, the user has an opportunity
to investigate the corresponding spatial distribution of
attribute values. From the cartographic representation
methods available in the system, unclassified choropleth
map and various classification-based maps are the most
suitable for the investigation of spatial patterns: as is
recognized in cartography, these techniques promote the
perception of a whole territory as a single image, i.e. the
required overall view.
The time controls used for the selection of time
moments allow the user also to run map animation for
observing the evolution of spatial patterns over time.
Alternatively, this may be done by visualizing states at
different time moments on a series of maps displayed
simultaneously. Such maps use the same scheme of
graphical encoding of attribute values (e.g. the same color
scale). They always have the same size and are zoomed
and panned simultaneously. However, when time series
are long, the maps may become too small for the patterns
to be visible. It may be more reasonable to consider states
at selected moments, for example, each fifth or tenth step
of the simulation.
The technique of a coherent display of multiple maps
(often referred to as “small multiples” [16]) is also good
for comparison of several scenarios. The maps can be
synchronously manipulated through a common set of time
controls. In this way, the user can easily compare states
ofifferent scenarios at selected time moments Figure 1).
Another way of representing numeric results of several
simulations at selected time moments is showing them on
a single map by bar charts, where each bar corresponds to
one scenario (see Figure 2). The bars can represent either
the original values in the compartments at the
corresponding time moments, or differences (ratios) to the
initial state, or to the previous time moment. Although
such a map cannot support comparison of spatial patterns,
it is good for estimating the degree of divergence of the
individual characteristics across the scenarios and
comparing the amounts of change. By animating the map,
one may see whether the characteristics tend to diverge or
converge over time. Bar charts can be especially useful in
comparing final results of several simulations.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 1. Two choropleth maps, corresponding to different
scenarios of forest management, are shown in a common
panel and use a common color scale to facilitate
comparison. The maps are synchronously manipulated
through the time controls, which are superimposed on the
lower map, for illustration purposes.

3.2. Time Graph
A time graph (Figure 3, top) can be used for visual
exploration of numeric data in the temporal dimension. In
a time graph, the horizontal axis represents time, and the
vertical axis corresponds to values of a numeric attribute.
For each spatial object (compartment) the graph contains
a line (“value path”) built by connecting the positions
corresponding to the attribute values attained at
consecutive time moments. This line, which can be
perceived as a single entity, is a good representation of an
individual behavior. For mitigating fluctuations and
revealing general patterns and trends, the lines may be
smoothed by averaging values over small time intervals.
Since all data displays in CommonGIS are linked
through synchronous highlighting of corresponding
objects, it is easy to identify which spatial object a
particular line belongs to. The work of this dynamic link
is illustrated in Figure 3. The possibility to interactively

Figure 2. Results of simulation of four different forest
management scenarios are represented on a map by bar
charts. Shown are states at two time moments, which
have been selected using the time controls (superimposed
on the maps, for illustration purposes).

select objects in any display allows the user, in particular,
to investigate the spatial distribution of behavioral
patterns. For this purpose, the user may select groups of
neighboring compartments in a map and check on a time
graph whether the corresponding behaviors are coherent
or diverging. An additional convenience for such an
analysis is provided by the possibility to make the time
graph show only lines representing selected objects.
Other ways of display linking in CommonGIS are
reaction of all displays to changing conditions in a
dynamic query and propagation of object colors from a
map with some classification of objects to all plots and
graphs. Both instruments can be useful in analysis of a set
of behaviors.
With a time graph, it is also possible to investigate the
statistical distribution of attribute values at each moment
and compare distributions at different moments. For this
purpose, one needs to look at the crossing positions of the
lines representing the behaviors with the vertical grid

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

lines (see Figure 3, top). It is easy to see the ranges of
variation at each time moment, to estimate the degree of
variance, and to detect outliers in the attribute space.
However, unusual behaviors may be hard to notice among
the multitude of lines, unless they reach extreme values at
some moments.

step 7 of the simulation followed by a steep rise on step 8.
Hence, graph transformation helped us detect a
behavioral outlier.

Figure 4. The upper time graph is the result of turning the
lower time plot to the mode of comparison with the
previous time moments. The highlighted lines in both
graphs correspond to the same object.

Figure 3. An example time graph represents results of
simulation of pesticide concentration in soil compartments.
The lines reaching extremely high values on the second
step of simulation are selected on the graph using the
mouse. As a result, the corresponding soil compartments
are highlighted in the map.

Transformations of a time graph help solve this
problem and provide additional opportunities for analysis
of behaviors. Thus, the user can switch the time graph to
the mode of comparison with the previous time moments.
In this mode, the graph represents differences or ratios
with values for the previous moments rather than the
original attribute values (Figure 4). Other possibilities are
comparison with values for a fixed, user-selected moment
(in particular, with the initial state in a simulation),
comparison with a selected object, with average or
median values at each time moment, and with a fixed,
user-selected value. Transformations of a time graph are
discussed in more detail in [2].
In our example shown in Figure 4, a transformed time
plot (top) exposes an unusual behavior (the line is
highlighted), which is not immediately noticed in the
initial variant of the plot (bottom) due to line overlapping.
Its unusualness is a sudden drop of the attribute value on

Figure 5. Four juxtaposed time graphs correspond to
different forest management scenarios. For a better
visibility of the differences in the behaviors, several lines
representing the same set of forest compartments are
highlighted in all graphs.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Juxtaposition of several time graphs supports
comparing multiple scenarios in the temporal dimension.
Thus, Figure 5 demonstrates quite different behavioral
patterns of the same attribute in four scenarios of forest
management. Besides the patterns, the ranges within
which the attribute values vary also differ much.

3.3. Time Aggregator
A time aggregator allows the user to divide the value
range of a time-dependent numeric attribute into classes
(subintervals) and represents graphically the distribution
of attribute values among the classes at each time
moment. For this purpose, it uses segmented bars (Figure
6). The whole height of a bar corresponds to the total
number of objects. The heights of the segments are
proportional to the numbers of objects with the values
fitting in the respective classes. Such bars are drawn for
each time moment. The resulting chart provides an
aggregated view of the dynamics of value distribution.
The user can easily redefine the classes, for example, for
getting a more detailed view with a bigger number of
classes.

Class aggregation charts are convenient for comparing
scenarios. For example, in Figure 6, the same division
into classes (below 50, 50 to 100, and 100 or more) has
been applied to the same attribute in four forest
management scenarios. The lower, light bar segments
correspond to values below 50, the segments in the
middle to the class 50 to 100, and the upper, dark
segments to the class 100 and more. The differences
between the scenarios are very well visible. While a
detailed consideration of the meaning of these differences
is beyond the scope of the paper, we would like to give
here a brief clarification. The attribute approximately
represents the available amount of wood. The first
scenario corresponds to a natural forest growth, i.e.
without forest cuts, the three others simulate different
strategies of cutting. From Figure 6 it may be seen that
the first strategy (i.e. the second scenario) is the closest to
the idea of a sustainable forest management while the
third strategy significantly reduces the wood reserve (at
some moments there are almost no compartments with
values 100 and more) and can eventually completely
destroy the forest.

3.4. Other Tools

Figure 6. The segmented bars show distribution of
attribute values among 3 classes (below 50, 50 to 100,
and 100 or more) for each time moment. Charts for four
different forest management scenarios are juxtaposed for
comparison. The charts represent the same attribute as
the time graphs shown in Figure 5.

Additionally to the visual tools described above,
CommonGIS provides a variety of other instruments that
may be also useful in analysis of spatio-temporal data
and, in particular, in comparing scenarios. Thus, various
types of graphical displays (dot plots, histograms, scatter
plots, parallel coordinate plots) may be helpful in
comparing results of several simulations at selected time
moments, for example, the final results. Investigations in
the attribute dimension can be also supported by
computational tools, which derive various statistics such
as mean, median, and other percentiles, including
statistics for any user-defined classes of objects. An
analyst can also apply the dynamic query tool for
focusing the investigation process on data subsets with
particular characteristics. For example, the analyst may
wish to see what will happen to forest compartments
having high initial reserve of wood in different scenarios
of forest management. For this purpose, the analyst needs
to set appropriate conditions in the dynamic query. In
response, all displays currently present on the screen will
hide objects that do not satisfy these conditions. In
particular, the time graphs corresponding to the different
scenarios will represent attribute dynamics only in the
forest compartments satisfying the query thus making the
comparison more convenient.

4. Task-Tool Correspondence
In Section 2 we gave an overview of analytical tasks
that may potentially arise in analysis and comparison of

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

spatial development scenarios. The tasks were grouped
into four categories: 1) analysis in the attribute
dimension, i.e. investigation of space- and time-irrelevant
properties; 2) analysis in the spatial dimension, i.e.
investigation of spatial distribution of attribute values
irrespective of time; 3) analysis in the temporal
dimension, i.e. analysis of behaviors with no regard to
space; 4) spatio-temporal analysis, i.e. development of
spatial patterns over time and spatial distribution of
behaviors. In Section 3 we introduced a number of tools
suggested to support these kinds of analysis. Here we
would like to state explicitly which tools are appropriate
for which tasks.
Analysis in the attribute dimension. For any
particular time moment, distribution of individual
characteristics in the space of characteristics can be
investigated using various graphical displays. For a single
numeric attribute, an analyst can apply the dot plot,
stacked dot plot, or histogram. The scatterplot display is
appropriate for two numeric attributes while the
scatterplot matrix and the parallel coordinate plot could
be used for multiple attributes. The histogram display
provides the most aggregated view of a distribution. Due
to the dynamic linking of the displays in CommonGIS,
several histograms may be used for simultaneous analysis
of multiple attributes. Analysis in the attribute dimension
is also supported by statistical computations, which
include, among others, techniques suitable for qualitative
data. CommonGIS supports various methods of
classification, can propagate resulting classes to all
displays (the objects in the displays are colored according
to the classes they belong to), and computes statistics for
the classes.
Spatial analysis. The primary tools for exploring and
comparing patterns of spatial distribution of attribute
values are maps. However, patterns can be well perceived
when data are represented by means of area coloring
rather than by using charts or other symbols, but almost
all coloring-based visualization techniques are only
suitable for a single attribute, except for the crossclassification applied to two numeric attributes [6][1].
When it is necessary to investigate the distribution of
complex characteristics expressed by multiple attributes,
it can be recommended to use the opportunities provided
by the dynamic link between displays. Thus, the user can
select regions on a map and see where the corresponding
objects are on a matrix of scatterplots or on a parallel
coordinate plot. The user can also select dots or lines in a
plot or bars in a histogram and see how the corresponding
objects are located spatially. The dynamic query tool also
allows the user to locate particular characteristics in
space. Comparison of different scenarios at selected time
moments is best supported by the coordinated display of
multiple maps in a common panel.

Temporal analysis. Analysis in the temporal
dimension can be done using time graphs and time
aggregation charts, as was described in §§3.2 and 3.3.
The time aggregation chart provides a more general view
of a scenario but conceals important information about
existing behavioral patterns. For better understanding of
the patterns it is recommended to apply transformations
of the time graph, i.e. the different modes of visual
comparison. Averaged and cumulative values over time
period can be obtained using the computational facilities
of CommonGIS.
Spatio-temporal analysis. Evolution of spatial
patterns over time may be investigated by applying usercontrolled map animation. It is also possible to visualize
states at several moments on a series of maps.
Comparison of pattern development in different scenarios
is supported by synchronous animation of several maps.
An animated barchart map with bars corresponding to the
scenarios allows the user to estimate local differences and
their variation over time.
The complementary task of the spatio-temporal
analysis, investigation of spatial distribution of behavioral
patterns, is supported by the dynamic link between maps
and time graphs. The user may select regions on a map
and see the corresponding patterns on a time graphs or on
several time graphs corresponding to different scenarios.
The user may also select lines on a graph representing
similar behaviors and see on a map whether the
corresponding compartments are spatially close.

5. Conclusion
We have applied a task-analytical approach in order to
create an appropriate collection of tools for supporting
visual investigation and comparison of spatial
development scenarios, such as results of simulation of
spatially related processes. There is an experience of
applying this tool collection to analysis of forest
management scenarios. The domain experts who did this
comparative study expressed their high appreciation of
the tools. Some results of this analysis are described in
[7]. The experts continue using the tools in combination
with their simulation models within the EU-funded
INTAS project Silvics. It is also planned to apply the
exploratory tools of CommonGIS in another EU-funded
project, GIMMI (IST-2001-34245, 2002-2004), for
analysis of simulation results concerning application of
various pesticides in agriculture and the resulting
environmental impact.
We realize that it is necessary to conduct usability
studies in order to check whether the tools are
understandable and convenient for users and whether they
effectively support the tasks they are designed for. We
intend to do such studies in the future and would be

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

happy to cooperate in these activities with interested
researchers and organizations.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported within the EU-funded
project GIMMI. The simulation results used in this paper
for illustration purposes were provided by our partners in
the projects Silvics (http://www.efi.fi/projects/silvics/)
and GIMMI (http://services.txt.it/gimmi/).

References
[1] G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko, Interactive maps for
visual data exploration. International Journal Geographical
Information Science 13, 1999, pp.355-374
[2] N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and P. Gatalsky, “Exploring
Changes in Census Time Series with Interactive Dynamic Maps
and Graphics”. Computational statistics, 16 (3), 2001, pp.417433.
[3] J. Bertin, Semiology of Graphics. Diagrams, Networks,
Maps, The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1983.
[4] C. Blok, B. Koebben, T. Cheng, and A.A. Kuterema,
“Visualization of Relationships Between Spatial Patterns in
Time by Cartographic Animation”. Cartography and
Geographic Information Science 26 (2), 1999, pp 139-151
[5] C. Blok, “Monitoring Change: Characteristics of Dynamic
Geo-spatial Phenomena for Visual Exploration”. In Freksa Ch et
al. (eds) Spatial Cognition II, LNAI 1849, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin/Heidelberg, 2000, pp 16-30
[6] C.A. Brewer, “Color use guidelines for mapping and
visualization”, In Visualisation in Modern Cartography (New
York: Elsevier Science Inc.), 1994, 123-147.
[7] O. Chertov, A. Komarov, G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko,
and P. Gatalsky, “Integrating forest simulation models and
spatial-temporal interactive visualization for decision making at

landscape level”, Ecological Modelling, v.148 (1), 2002, pp.4765
[8] R. Edsall and D. Peuquet, “A Graphical User Interface for
the Integration of Time into GIS”. Proceedings of the 1997
American Congress of Surveying and Mapping Annual
Convention and Exhibition, Seattle, WA, 1997, pp.182-189.
[9] A. Fredrikson, C. North, C. Plaisant, and B. Shneiderman
“Temporal, geographic and categorical aggregations viewed
through coordinated displays: a case study with highway
incident data”. In Proceedings of Workshop on New Paradigms
in Information Visualization and Manipulation (NPIVM’99),
New York: ACM Press, 1999, pp 26-34
[10] M. Harrower, A.M. MacEachren, and A.L. Griffin,
“Developing a Geographic Visualization Tool to Support Earth
Science Learning”. Cartography and Geographic Information
Science 27 (4), 2000, pp 279-2
[11] M.-J. Kraak, R. Edsall, and A.M. MacEachren,
“Cartographic animation and legends for temporal maps:
exploration and/or interaction”. In Proceedings 18th
International Cartographic Conference, Vol 1, 1997, pp 253261
[12] K. Morris, D. Hill, and T. Moore, “Integrated data
management and visualization through space and time”. In K.
Fullerton (ed.): Proceedings of 5th EC-GIS Workshop, Stresa,
Italy, 28-30 June 1999, EUR 19018 EN, European
Communities, pp. 460-473
[13] C. Oberholzer and L. Hurni, “Visualization of change in
the Interactive Multimedia Atlas of Switzerland”, Computers &
Geosciences, 26 (1), 2000, pp 423-435
[14] T. Slocum, S. Yoder, F. Kessler, and R. Sluter “MapTime:
Software for Exploring Spatiotemporal Data Associated with
Point Locations”, Cartographica 37 (1), 2000, pp 15-31
[15] W. Tobler, “Computer movie simulating urban growth in
the Detroit region”. Economic Geography, 46 (2), 1970, pp 234240
[16] E.R Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,
Cheshire: Graphics Press, 1983.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

