Focal Points and Intuitive 3D Controls for
Human Kinematics Visualisation
M A Krokos, H Lin, G J Clapworthy, F Dong
Department of Computer & Information Sciences, De Montfort University,
Milton Keynes MK7 6HP, United Kingdom
{melk, hlin, gc, fdong} @dmu.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper gives a brief overview of a new source of
data on human anatomy and kinematics created by the
EC-funded project VAKHUM. The motivation was to
provide support for education at various levels through
animated 3D models and finite element meshes of human
joints, while making original high-quality raw data
available for industrial users. We outline some identified
user demands. We further describe the data types and
relevant software components employed for accessing
and visualising VAKHUM models. The emphasis is on a
novel user interface based on focal points and intuitive
3D controls for viewing anatomy that is appropriately
registered with kinematics captured by local e.g.
electrogoniometry or global e.g. stereophotogrammetry
means. The operating scenario for accessing models in
the VAKHUM database is outlined. We close with a
summary of the work and pointers to future development.

1. Introduction
Accurate knowledge of human functional anatomy is of
great importance in a multitude of disciplines e.g.
medical education, basic training and retraining of
medical professionals, clinical research, biomedical
engineering and related industrial areas, sport and
entertainment.
Although the 3D aspects of functional anatomy are
particularly important, there has been a tendency to
neglect or oversimplify them, mainly because extensive,
reliable and well-structured sources of human kinematics
data linked to normal and/or pathological anatomy have
not been readily available. As a result, the development
of generic visualisation tools for producing appropriate
3D simulations has progressed very slowly so far.
Approaches to anatomical data have been re-appraised
over recent years due to the Visible Human Project of
the National Institute of Health (NIH) [1]. This rich

source has motivated a considerable "industry" of
projects using the data in widely-varying ways. The
available data relates however to only one male and one
female subject, neither of which contains specific
pathologies; furthermore, motion data is not stored.
An alternative data source is that of the IAEVA
project [2]. A large set of 3D models of pathological
organs, together with clinically-important information
such as radiological slices, commentaries from
clinicians, and animated "fly-throughs", were stored in a
distributed database, mainly to support medical
education. While this project demonstrated clearly that
modern tools can provide new insights into 3D anatomy,
only static situations were considered.
This paper gives an overview of VAKHUM [3], an
EC-funded project under the IST Programme, that has
produced a source of high-quality morphology and
kinematics data of human joints. This source is
accessible via the WWW allowing prospective users to
gain new insights into functional anatomy.
We focus on the components developed for accessing
and visualising the VAKHUM source. We describe a
novel user interface employing focal points and intuitive
3D controls for viewing combinations of morphology
and kinematics. This interface is employed for the
production of multimedia tutorials in functional
anatomy.
Section 2 outlines the background to the VAKHUM
project. Section 3 describes the identified user demands
while the fundamental data types and core software
components are presented in Section 4. Sections 5 and 6
introduce the user interface and the operating scenario.
Finally, Section 7 contains a summary of the work so far.

2. Background
Users with a primary interest (educational, clinical or
industrial) in functional anatomy have limited use for
either the NIH or the IAEVA project as they contain no
information on kinematics.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

As joint behaviour and pathology are widely
acknowledged to be strongly related to joint kinematics,
a greater understanding of this area will inevitably lead
to improvements in treatment of joint disease and in
related industrial developments (e.g. joint prostheses).
In addition, neither project includes finite-element
models, which are extremely useful for bioengineering
simulation.
Some projects, e.g. CHARM [4], have used the NIH
data with simplified or artificially-created kinematics,
but little attention was paid to combined motions despite
the fact that such motions are fundamental to joint
physiology. The results produced are thus indicative
rather than functionally accurate.
The motivation for VAKHUM was to construct a
system to support education at different levels (ranging
from undergraduates to experienced practitioners) while
making original raw datasets available for industrial
users and academic researchers.
Medical education and training is supported via a
range of models generated from the data and tutorials on
functional anatomy. The availability of raw data supports
the innovation of improved anatomical or ergonomic
products, e.g. body contouring products or implantable
medical devices.
Models of joints are available in both geometrical and
finite element mesh (FEM) forms. Surface models are
useful for 3D animations and/or education. Finite
elements meshes are used for simulating deformation
and mechanical stresses induced within various living
tissues by different motor tasks.
The tutorials on functional anatomy illustrate
kinematics using the knowledge brought by the data
collection methods employed.
For illustration, 3D models of joint motions are
integrated into a multimedia environment that
incorporates a novel user interface - described below employing focal points and intuitive 3D controls for
visualisation.

3. User Demands
The driving force behind the organisation of the
VAKHUM database was the accommodation of a
number of conflicting demands between the prospective
user groups.
Users may access the database purely to download
data (Group A) or to use the applications available on the
site (Group B). Group A typically encompasses
researchers (in academia or industry) who already are in
possession of specialised software capable of analysing
the data downloaded. Group B is far less homogeneous;
it includes professionals from a wide variety of
backgrounds, ranging from early undergraduates to

experienced practitioners. Their interest lies on
informative tutorials and/or interesting applications
using the data.
The quality of the data will be of the utmost
importance to Group A. They are likely to be familiar
with, even insistent on, the use of “standard” file
formats, and to have very clear requirements in terms of
the specification of the attributes of the particular subject
whose data is to be received. They will probably have
permanent Internet access.
Some users in Group B will have permanent Internet
access, others will be working at home and will access
the Internet via a standard modem. Download speed is
imperative for users with low bandwidth. The slow rollout of broadband communication in Western Europe and
the lack of it in Eastern Europe means that a significant
number of users are likely to be using 56Kb modems for
some time to come. This presents the major bottleneck
for such users; it is thus worthwhile to pre-process the
data into a suitable form for transmission, even if the
transmitted data has subsequently to be re-processed
locally on the user's machine before the application can
start.
Speed of interaction is highly significant for Group B
users. Also, the quality of the available data must be
sufficient to illustrate fully what is required. However,
there is no necessity for the data to be retained by the
users on completion of their interaction.
A critical issue is how supportive the interface
functionality is; a balance must be struck between
reducing the range and complexity of the available
controls and the level of constraint this imposes on the
functionality provided. Sections 5 and 6 describe the
interaction functionality and the current front-end
interface employed in VAKHUM.

4. Data and Software Components
Based on the user demands outlined in Section 3, the
data on the VAKHUM database is stored in two distinct
forms:
(a) a full form, retaining all details, in universally
accepted formats and
(b) a reduced form in proprietary formats specifically
designed to support rapid downloading.
The VAKHUM project dealt with three types of
reduced-form data: morphological, kinematics and finite
element analysis. The morphological data were acquired
for bones (including joints), and also for muscles and
ligaments. Analysis was made of a large number of
musculo-skeletal structures and a variety of individual
morphologies, including female and male subjects of
different ages. CT imaging was employed for the
construction of very accurate 3D bone models based on

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

standard visualisation algorithms e.g. marching cubes
Lorensen & Cline [5].
Kinematics data were collected experimentally in
parallel with the morphological data. The human lower
limb was studied during a variety of normal activities
e.g. walking, running, stair climbing. Two techniques
were used: electrogoniometry for local capture of
accurate kinematics at joint level, in vivo or in vitro, [6];
and stereophotogrammetry for a global study of the
relative angular displacement of joints of a particular
limb by tracking skin markers attached to volunteers
during various activities.
Finite-element meshes were also produced to simulate
the deformation and the mechanical stresses induced in
living tissues by different motor tasks. An FEM model is
typically a sequence of polyhedral surfaces with colour
information attached to their vertices.
The data related to each subject is encapsulated by a
metafile to enable easy access to all aspects of an
individual’s data. The metafile includes names of a
model’s components (e.g. bone names for an anatomy),
pre-determined focus/virtual camera points for viewing,
or landmark/registration information for kinematics
models.
To deal with the reduced form data, two software
modules have been developed:
(a) the Compression Factory (CF) that produces
metafiles and enables compression of the original
data into a form suited to efficient storage and rapid
downloading and
(b) the Visualisation Laboratory (VL) that allows
interactive visualisation of the reduced form data on
the user's machine.
The remainder of this paper concentrates on VL and
its currently used front-end interface.

5. Visualisation Laboratory
The Visualisation Laboratory is employed for rapid
downloading of morphological, kinematics or finite
element models (encoded in an appropriate CF
proprietary format) from the database for interactive
display.
The core functionality includes an array of tools for
interaction, display adjustments and relevant model
information.
One of the initial demands of our biomechanics
partners was that interaction must be as “full” as
possible, that is for translation/rotation of a virtual
camera three degrees of freedom should be available for
viewing.
Nevertheless, as a great deal of prospective
VAKHUM database users will almost certainly be
unfamiliar with controlling objects in 3D, difficulties

may arise in manipulating models whenever such
freedom is utilised; in fact, it may be fairly easy to lose
the model from view. This is particularly the case with a
slow CPU because considerable time delays are
normally introduced in response to user actions; standard
VRML viewers e.g. Cosmo Player or others [7],
typically suffer from this problem.
The challenge is, therefore, to maintain “as full as
possible” interactivity while retaining simple and
intuitive controls.
The solution adopted incorporates the idea of a focal
point; this concept is similar to the VRML Viewpoint
node, but as far as we are aware, it has not previously
been implemented as described below in other similar
software.
The user controls a virtual camera, moving it around
an object as required. The camera points always to the
point in the model defined as the focus. This is initially
at the centre of the model, but it can be changed
interactively to allow the user to focus on specific areas
of interest, e.g. the joints of an anatomy.
Focal points are defined in advance by the model
creator and stored in the metafile. Some, such as the
centre and end points of a limb are provided
automatically by the system; further points specific to
the particular model can be added and stored in the
database. Based on this scenario of manipulation, it is
impossible for the user to lose the model during
interaction.
By using the focal point, the virtual camera can be
directed to track an object during motion. Moreover, it is
possible to fix the virtual camera to a particular anatomy
segment, e.g. focus on a knee while the camera is
attached to the tibia; this is a very useful feature for
investigating relative motions.
The camera x-axis is maintained horizontal at all times
to avoid disorienting the user, so no rotation about the
viewing axis is possible, that is, no rolling is allowed.
The controls are thus reduced to rotation of the virtual
camera in vertical and horizontal directions (pitch and
yaw) and a zoom in/out functionality. Horizontal and
vertical translations are only realised through changing
the focal point, as the default viewing position of any
focal point places the initial position of that point at the
centre of the viewing area, with the camera horizontal.
The camera can be considered to lie on a sphere which
has its centre at the focal point. The camera can move on
the surface of the sphere using right-left (0-360º) and updown (0-90º) controls. The radius of the sphere is
controlled by the zoom function.
Kinematic and finite element sequences are controlled
through “standard” video style panels as provided in
many software packages: play, stop, pause and a slider
so that users can display animations manually in a

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

forward or backward fashion. For gait analysis, the
trajectories of particular joints can also be displayed as
desired, thus offering an enhanced understanding of a
motion.
To adjust the rendering display, various tools are
provided, e.g. for setting the background colour or the
colour and visibility of a selected anatomical segment.
This latter tool allows better illustration of the
information contained in a morphological model – a
useful feature for functional anatomy tutorials.
Global axes of coordinates and local axes of motion
can also be displayed on demand. For the local axes of
motion, a choice is offered between the Joint Coordinate
System and the Instantaneous Helical Axis.
Another tool allows the display of textual information
associated with a particular model, e.g. subject name,
height, weight, motion type (gait analysis or
electrogoniometry), parameters of morphology / motion
capturing.
Finally a tool is provided for exporting the geometry
of any segment of an anatomy at a particular frame of an
associated motion (selected by using the slider) into
industry-standard formats.

displayed. For an FEM model a polyhedral surface is
displayed with vertex colours blended over triangles to
demonstrate the results of the FEM analysis.

Embedded
Control

(8)
(1)
Download
embedded control
and register it

(14)

Submit Request
Form

HTML pages
(text, sound, image,..)

(4)
CGI, request

(9) ASP,PHP…

(3)

(7)

(16)

FTP

HTTP Server

(2)
Distribution of
Embedded control

(5)

(6)

Web Pages

(10)

(11)

Data Base

(12)

(13)

Data Storage

Figure 1. Overall data flow between Web server,
browser and VL control

6. Operating Scenario
The first time a user connects with the VAKHUM
Internet service he/she must download and install the
Visualisation Laboratory, as rendering and interaction
will take place locally.
This imposes the restriction on the VL software to be
“light” so that downloading does not seem to carry an
excessive cost (time, connection costs, etc.). VL is thus
implemented on standard OpenGL rather than being
wrapped around a freely available visualisation toolkit
such as VTK [8].
Once VL is installed, to view and interact with a
model, a user first needs to download the relevant files.
The overall data flow is outlined in Figure 1.
Download and registration of the VL corresponds to
steps (1)-(3). Normal browsing of the web pages is
described by steps (4)-(7). Typically, steps (8)-(15) are
followed after a request to fetch a model. The VL is
realised either as an on-line model (Internet connection
is alive during user interaction - step 16) or as an off-line
model (interaction occurs only after connection
terminates) to avoid unnecessary connection costs.
A different procedure is followed depending upon the
type of the downloaded data. If only a morphological
model is present, a static rendering of the morphology is
displayed. If only a kinematics model is present then an
animation of a stick figure with or without the associated
landmarks is displayed. Finally, if both a morphological
and a kinematics model are present a full animation is

(15)

Interaction with models

Set Connection
http://…….

As the implementation is COM based, the VL can be
either embedded into a browser e.g. Internet Explorer, or
executed as a stand-alone application. COM also allows
the provided functionality to be kept separate from the
front-end interface. Consequently, not only the “look”
but also the “feel” of the front-end interface can be
modified, for example by different implementations
exposing different VL functionality, e.g. for novice and
advanced users.
The current front-end interface for VL is shown in
Figure 2. The overall display has been designed to be
uncluttered and offer a large viewing area.
Control is provided by a set of buttons (top left), and
two panels in the lower part of the screen. The leftmost
panel is concerned with the “virtual camera” and
controls the viewing position. The panel on the right
relates to kinematics files and controls the animation.
Buttons are activated by a mouse click. Below the
main display screen is a status line that indicates
progress when downloading files.
The direction of the camera is defined by the focus
drop-down list. This indicates the position at which the
camera points. If the camera is moved using the controls
provided, it will continue to be directed towards the focal
point – in this way, the focus chosen will always be
portrayed in the centre of the screen.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

The speed of animation can be controlled by the slider
in the bottom right; the precise animation speed will
depend upon the processing capacity of the user’s
computer.

7. Conclusions

Figure 2. A front-end interface for
the Visualisation Laboratory
The buttons on the left panel control rotations
left/right and up/down as indicated by the arrows. The
buttons alongside allow zooming in/out. Reset takes the
user back to the default settings from which the
interaction started.
The rotations and zooms are incremental, that is, for a
single click, the camera is moved by a fixed amount (in
the case of rotations, a fixed angle). The angular
increments have default values of 5 degrees, but they can
be adjusted by the user.
By positioning the cursor over a control button and
keeping the mouse button pressed, a continuous virtual
camera movement is obtained; this is useful for intuitive
large modifications.
The user can choose to follow a focal point by
selecting the Follow Focus box. Then, as the focal point
moves, the camera will track it; if the box is unselected,
the camera will remain pointing in a fixed direction and
the focal point will appear to move across the screen. If
the Bounding Box checkbox is selected, a wire-frame
box will appear around the object corresponding to the
current focus point – this may be useful if a user is
unsure about what the current focus is.
A kinematic file may contain data from several
different types of motion. The one to be displayed can be
selected from the Motions drop-down list.
The buttons on the right panel are the standard Play,
Pause, Stop familiar from video players; progress
through the animated sequence is indicated on the slider
beneath, and the precise frame number is indicated in the
Frame box.

This paper gives a brief overview of the VAKHUM
project, concentrating on the functionality of the user
interface employed for visualising simulated human joint
motions.
The idea of focal points provided intuitive 3D control
of a virtual camera for viewing anatomy that is
appropriately registered with kinematics data captured
either via local (electrogoniometry) or global
(stereophotogrammetry) methods.
We feel that the interface has struck an appropriate
balance between satisfying the need of end-users for as
“full” an interaction as possible and retaining simple and
intuitive 3D control for visualisation purposes.
Accurate modelling and illustration of joint kinematics
allows a better understanding of joint behaviour to be
gained. Control tests of the use of this dynamic 3D data
compared to conventional static 2D data, as in standard
text books, suggests that students acquire the knowledge
more fully and in a shorter time.
However, a formal evaluation will be necessary for
this to be stated categorically.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Information Society
Technologies Programme of the European Commission
under the project VAKHUM (IST-1999-10954), and the
Chinese National Natural Science Fund (No. 60003009).

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible
http://www.ehto.org/vds/projects/iaeva.html
http://www.vakhum.com
http://www.emn.fr/info/recherche/equipes/image/Themes/
CHARM/CHARM.html
W. Lorensen and H. Cline, “Marching Cubes: a High
Resolution 3D Surface Construction Algorithm”, Computer
Graphics 21(4), pp. 163-169, 1987
S Van Sint Jan, P Salvia, I Hilal, V Choloukha, M Rooze
and G J Clapworthy, “Registration of 6-DoF Electrogoniometry and CT Medical Images for 3D Joint
Modelling”, Journal of Biomechanics, Vol 35, pp 14751484, 2002
http://www.web3d.org/vrml/browpi.htm
http://public.kitware.com/VTK/index.php

