CREATIVE PERFORMANCE:
DOES THE COMPUTER RETARD ARTISTIC DEVELOPMENT?
Tammy Knipp
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida
TKNIPP@FAU.EDU

ABSTRACT
Over the last decade, there have been several debates concerning the dominance of technology in academic disciplines such as fine arts and graphic design. Advanced
imaging devices, such as fMRI and PET scans, have provided researchers with visual information in the field of
brain science that may settle these debates.
This paper outlines a research study conducted among
undergraduate art students to investigate the level of visual perception and creative development. The purpose is to
gather basic information that would merit further scientific investigation.
Among the groups studied, the research concluded that
artistic traits such as visual memory, perception and a
critical eye for detail declined 80% as compared to
research studies conducted in 1944. This paper presents
scientific research in the field of cognition and brain science, suggesting dominant use of technology in the arts
retards intellectual and perceptual-motor skills.

THEORY
As Associate Professor of Graphic Design, I noticed a
definite decline in creative performances among design
students over the past several years. It was my observation that some students lacked a critical eye for detail, perceptual organizational skills, visual memory and conceptual development. I theorized that the use of the computer as a the dominant working tool for the design student
retards artistic performance and conceptual development.

RESEARCH GUIDELINES
In January 2003, I conducted a study to determine
whether my theory merited advanced scientific research.
The voluntary subjects in the study consisted of three separate groups of students who declared art as their major of
concentration. These students were all enrolled in a BFA
Program at the same university in Florida.

PHASE ONE: QUESTIONNAIRE
Each student was first given a questionnaire to complete, similar to the example above:

D/O/T (date of test)_________
Sex
_________
Age
_________
Check the appropriate answer below regarding your
knowledge or skills with computer art software packages
such as Quark Express, Page Maker, Adobe Illustrator,
Photoshop or any other paint package.
No knowledge:
Very little knowledge:
Average knowledge:
Competent:
Very competent:

_________
_________
_________
_________
_________

The first group of artists (Group A) consisted of 13
beginning artists: 2-D designers, 11 females and 2 males;
the ages ranged between 21 and 24. This group indicated
average and above indicated average knowledge of
designer/painter software packages. Additionally, Group
A was not exposed to haptic (combining tactile and kinesthetic stimulation) and visual exercises prior to using the
computer for assigned projects.
The second group of artists (Group B) consisted of 13
intermidate artists: 2-D designers, 8 females and 5 males;
ages ranged between 21 and 25. This group indicated
average and above knowledge of designer/painter software packages. However, Group B was exposed to visual/haptic exercises prior to using the computer for
assigned projects.
The third group (Group C) consisted of 12 advanced
artists: 10 females and 2 males (4 3-D artists and 8 2-D
artists); the ages ranged from the mid-20s to 50 and above.
It was unknown if this group was exposed to visual/haptic
exercises prior to using the computer for assigned projects. Additionally, Group C revealed a large range from
no knowledge to very competent skills with designer
/painter software packages.

PHASE TWO: THE REY TEST
The second phase of the study references the Rey
Test. In 1941, Rey devised a complex visual figure to
investigate both perceptual organization and visual mem-

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

ory in brain damaged subjects (Lezak, 1983, p 395).
Osterrieth (Lezak, 1983, p 395) standardized Rey's procedure in 1944 and obtained normative data. The Rey Test is
currently used for neuropsychological evaluations. The
Rey Test was used to investigate the level of perceptual
performance in all three groups. The subjects (students)
were instructed to view the complex figure below and then
draw the figure from memory.

The results in Group B (intermediate 2-D artists with
visual/haptic exercises, average and above knowledge of
software) revealed the following data:
Each subject scored 18 points or above.
45% scored 27 points or above (5 females, 1 male).

The highest score was obtained by a female, age 21, who
indicated average knowledge of software packages.
The results in Group C (advanced 2-D and 3-D artists,
visual/haptic exercises unknown, ranging from none to
above knowledge of software) revealed the following
data:
10% scored 36 points--perfect score (female sculptor, age
22, very little knowledge of software).
40% scored 27 points or above (5 females, 1 male:
3 3-D artists; 3 2-D artists).
30% scored 18 points or above.

Fig. 1. Rey Test
Each student was given a white sheet of 8.5 x 11
paper face-down with a copy of the figure. The students
were told to turn over the sheet of paper and view the figure for 1 minute. After this minute, subjects were instructed to turn the image over (face-down) and wait 1 minute
before drawing the figure. Then, they were instructed to
draw in 1 minute the figure from memory on the reverse
of their individual questionnaires. It is important to note
that the 1-minute interval between viewing and drawing
the figure may have influenced the performance scores.
The interval was purposely inserted as an attempt to challenge short-term visual memory.
The tests were collected. Evaluations were determined by the scoring system devised by E. M. Taylor in
1959 (Lezak, 1983, p. 400). The highest possible point
score on the Rey Test is 36. The average adult score was
32 points in 1944 (Lezak, 1983 p. 401).

PHASE THREE: EVALUATION
The results in Group A (beginning 2-D artists, no
visual/haptic exercises, average and above knowledge of
software) revealed the following data:
Each subject scored 18 points or above.
30% scored 27 points or above (2 females, 1 male).

The highest score was obtained by a female, age 26, who
indicated average knowledge of software packages.

20% scored below 18 points (2 females, age 50 and above,
1 indicating average and above knowledge of software, 1
indicating no knowlege).

The highest scores were obtained by 3 students with very
little knowledge of software packages; 2 with average
knowledge; and the lowest score was obtained by 1 with
average knowledge of software.

SUGGESTIVE CONCLUSIONS
Group B scored 15% higher than Group A. I credit
this increased performance to the visual/haptic exercises
required of Group B. Students in all three groups who
indicated very little knowledge of designer/painter software packages scored the highest on the Rey Test. These
students' ages ranged from early to mid-20s. It was also
noted that the 3-D artists outperformed the 2-D artists. The
scores revealed signs of visual memory loss beginning at
age 40. This may be due to the effects of aging and/or
sight degeneration as the eyes begin to change between
the ages of 40 and 45.
In 1944, the standard norm was 32 points compared
with this study with the standard norm of 18 points. This
study indicated 80% scored below the standard norm (32
points) reported in 1944. This massive decline in perceptual organization and visual memory may be due to the
fact that in 1944 computers and televisions were not available to the general public. Additionally, it would appear
the scores of art students, due to the nature of their field,

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

would excel in a visual performance test. Is it possible that
modern technology is affecting our perceptual intelligence?
Another observation made from this study was that
female artists scored higher than male artists. This confirms research conducted between the sexes whereby
more females provide directions based on visual landmarks (visual memory) than males, who identify directions by street names and the number of left and right
turns.
As stated, there are several factors and variables to
consider in this study that may have influenced the performance scores; however, the study provided plausible
data that deserve serious attention.

among art students that traditional techniques (visual/haptic exercises) are annoying, unnecessary, tedious and nonbeneficial with regard to time and effort. Thus, these students define their artistic talent by the level of proficiency
with software packages. In other words, the computer provides a false sense of security, confidence and redefines
creative talent among design students. In fact, it has been
my experience that design students become extremely
defensive and argumentative when projects are assigned
with computer restrictions. This discussion addresses one
principal question: The computer is designed to eliminate
several tedious hand skills, however are these
tactile/kinesthetic skills necessary for human cognitive
development and for greater neural organization?

PERCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT

INTELLECTUAL AND PERCEPTUAL
MOTOR SKILLS

The findings of this study reflect the experiment of
Richard Held and Alan Hein in 1963 (Bourne and
Ekstrand, 1976, p.92). Held and Hein raised kittens in
darkness to prevent them from having any visual experiences until they were old enough to walk then, kittens
were placed in an apparatus (kitten carousel, fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Kitten Carousel
The device was designed to force one kitten to initiate all the movement while the the other kitten became the
rider. The experiment revealed that the active kitten
developed extensive perceptual abilities, while the passive
kitten became perceptually retarded. Held and Hein suggest that "the crucial kind of experience for perception is
active, self-initiated movement in the environment
(Bourne and Ekstrand, 1976, p.92).
It is my observation that technology (such as the
artist's design tool, the computer) creates a similar
carousel whereby design students are continuously passive riders, limited to the same scenic view, re-mediating
passive works of art. This practice among design students
of using the computer encourages a carousel for passive
riders and discourages self-initiated movements such as
visual/haptic activities.
In the context of the visual arts, the computer was
designed to eliminate tedious, hand-rendering skills with a
degree of immediacy. This view produces an illusion

David Rosenbaum, a researcher in the field of brain
mechanisms, addresses both intellectual and perceptual
skills in his paper "Acquisition of Intellectual and
Perceptual-Motor Skills" (Rosenbaum, 2001). Perceptualmotor skills appear more primitive than intellectual skills-many design students share this same view. According to
Rosenbaum, perceptual-motor skills develop before intellectual skills are manifested. Traditional views suggested
that intellectual and perceptual-motor skills are represented in different parts of the brain, depending on distinct
brain circuits (Rosenbaum, 2001). This view has been
challenged by recent findings in brain science research.
Advanced brain imaging has shown that the cerebellum (a
portion of the brain that controls balance, muscle tone and
motor coordination in general) is active during performance tasks such as word generation, tactile discrimination, and maintenance of information in working memory.
Thus, the cerebellum plays a role in intellectual as well as
perceptual motor performance. Research also suggests
that the motor cortex (part of the cerebral cortex from
which messages leading to bodily movement originate) is
involved in a higher level of planning (Rosenbaum, 2001).
From the perspective of the "identical elements theory" of Thorndike (an American psychologist who studied
the why and the how of the mind, 1874-1949)
(Rosenbaum, 2001) transfer of skills depends on having
shared elements in acquisition. The larger the number of
shared elements, the greater the likelihood that transfer
will occur. In the context of this paper, perceptual-motor
skills (visual/haptic exercises) performed prior to the use
of the computer increases the likelihood that the transfer
of intellectual skills will occur. Both perceptual-motor and
intellectual skills generate activity in the cerebellum and
the motor cortex and thus develop greataer neural organization.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Rosenbaum's conclusion is that both intellectual and
perceptual-motor skills may be distinct in their forms of
expression however, their means of acquisition are strikingly similar. As observed by Piaget (Swiss psychologist
who studied human development), perceptual-motor and
intellectual skills have closely related developmental origins (Rosenbaum, 2001). Rosenbaum discusses that
“Diamond's [1990] neurological perspective illustrates the
. . inseparable links between intellectual and perceptualmotor substrates of a wide range of concepts”
(Rosenbaum, 2001). Rosenbaum states:
A class of findings that supports the view that intellectual skills are [active performances] that coordination and
timing seem to be required for intellectual as well as perceptual-motor skills. Mental skills in a number of
domains depend on the use of the external environment
to maintain information for immediate performance,
requiring real-time coordination of mental activity with
externally available information . . . Thus, coordination,
which has long been viewed as crucial for skills of perception and movement, turns out to be needed as well for
skills of the intellect (2001).

It is the support of these findings that visual/haptic
exercises executed by the designer's hand, fosters perceptual-motor skills which are crucial for the development of
intellectual skills and conceptual thinking.

COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT AND
LEARNING
Researchers suggest that both intellectual and perceptual-motor skills go through similar stages with regard to
long-term learning. James Craig in "Somestheis," (Craig,
1999) cites researchers Jones (1994) and Matthews (1988)
as stating that kinesthetic receptors in muscles play the
major role for the contribution of perceptual aspects
(Craig, 1999). Roberta Klatzky, professor and head of the
department of psychology at Carnegie Mellon University,
supports the view that the sense of touch gives rise to
implicit and explicit forms of memory (Klatzky and
Lederman, 2002).
These views suggest that perceptual-motor skills,
such as visual/haptic exercises, are stored in memory, a
gateway to long-term learning. A supporter of haptic exercises is Dr. Goldberg, professor of education in the area of
cognitive development and learning. Goldberg reports
that learning is based on what the student experiences

himself/herself, citing research claiming "people tend to
remember 10 percent of what they hear, 50 percent of
what they see, and fully 90 percent of what they do”
(2000, p. 8).
Dr. Tak Cheung and Dr. Garth F. Petrie, authors of the
article "The Brain Learns Better in Well-Designed School
Environments, " state:
As we learn, our brain cells--neurons--pass information
along at speeds of up to 200 miles an hour. A single neuron can receive thousands of signals from other neuronal
sources even though they do not make physical contact
with one another. Rather, our neurons send and receive
chemical messages (Jensen 1998). Constantly firing with
electrical and chemical energy, our neurons gain strength
through use. . . By learning and practicing in the visual
and performing arts, the human brain actually rewires
itself to make more and stronger connections (Kolb and
Whishaw, 1990, in Cheung and Garth F. Petrie,1998).

Neurodegeneration is the slow death of neurons of
brain cells. Susan Greenfield, researcher in the area of
neurodegeneration, suggests that the lack of environmental stimuli reduces the level of neuron activity and thus,
initiates neurodegeneration, a link to Alzheimer’s disease.
Greenfield's research references a study conducted by
McGuire and his colleagues whereby they selected subjects having the same specific profession (London taxi drivers--a profession that requires extensive spatial memory). The subjects' brains were scanned, examining the hippocampus (an area related to memory). Amazingly, the
hippocampus of each subject was larger compared with
the brain scans of people of a similar age. Greenfield
states the more a trade is practiced, the more knowledge to
obtained, thus reducing the level of neurodegeneration
(2001).

CONCLUSION
The research outlined in this paper supports my theory insofar as the importance of initiating visual/haptic
exercises prior to the use of the computer among design
students. The collection of research not only addresses the
topic of technology and the arts, more so, the data raise
prime questions: In a techno-driven culture, is perceptual
intelligence and human development degenerating?
Technology extends the life of our bodies, but does it foster and extend the growth of our minds?

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

REFERENCES
[1] Bourne, Lylee, Jr., & Ekstrand, Bruce R. (1976). Psychology: Its Principles and Meanings (2nd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
[2] Chan, Tak Cheung, & Garth F. Petrie. (1998). The Brain Learns Better in Well-Designed School Environmets. ASCD 2(3).
Retrieved March 17, 2003, from http://www.ascsd.org/readingroom/classlead/9811/2nov98.html
[3] Craig, James C. (1999). Somesthesis. Annual Review of Psychology. 50: pp. 305-331 [Electronic version] from
http://www.psych.AnnualReviews.org.html
[4] Goldberg, Sally R. (2000). Baby and Toddler Learning Fun. Perseus Publishing.
[5] Greenfield, Susan. (2000, November 6) The Brain: a Lecture by Susan Greenfield. [Television boardcast on the Science Show] The
2000 Andrew Olle Memorial Lecture from http://www.abc.net.au/rn/deakin/stories/s296994.html
[6] Klatzky, Roberta L., & Lederman, S.J. (2002). Touch. In A. F. Healy and R. W. Proctor (eds.), Experimental Psychology (pp.147176). Volume 4 in I. B. Weiner (Editor-in-Chief) Handbook of Psychology. New York: Wiley [Electronic version] from
http://www.psy.cmu.edu/faculty/klatzky/index.html
[7] Lezak, Muriel D. (1983). Neuropsychological Assessment (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
[8] Rosenbaum, David A. (2001). Acquisition of Intellectual and Perceptual-Motor Skills. Annual Review of Psychology. 52: pp. 453470 [Electronic version] from http:www.psych.AnnualReviews.org.html

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

