A UK Perspective on E-Learning: An Overview of the “Workflow” and
“Reusable Learning Object” Approach in the UK eUniversities Project
Dr Mohammad Dastbaz, Dr Ray Stoneham
Department of Information Systems and Multimedia
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences
University of Greenwich
Greenwich SE10 9LS
M.Dastbaz@gre.ac.uk, R.J.Stoneham@gre.ac.uk

Abstract
The UK government started the UK eUniversities
project in order to create a virtual campus for online
education provisions, competing in a global market.
The UKeU (www.ukeu.com) claims to “have created
a new approach to eLearning” which “opens up a
range of exciting opportunities for students, business
and industry worldwide” to obtain both postgraduate
and undergraduate qualifications.
Although there has been many promises about the
e-learning
revolution
using
state-of-the-art
multimedia technology, closer scrutiny of what is
being delivered reveals that many of the eLearning
models currently being used are little more than the
old text based computer aided learning running on a
global network. As part of the UKeU project a
consortium of universities have been involved in
developing a two year foundation degree from 2004.
This paper looks at the approach taken by the
consortium in developing global e-learning
provisions and the problems and the pitfalls that lay
ahead.

1. What is e-learning?
Exploring the extant literature, it soon becomes
clear that terms like web-based learning, e-learning,
hypermedia aided learning … etc are still fuzzy and
do not have a standardised definition. While one
author may describe online learning as a subset of elearning, another will consider it to be synonymous of
e-learning. Computer Aided Instruction can be an allencompassing term used to describe any computerdelivered instruction including CD-ROM and the
World Wide Web. However, it can also be seen as a
more restrictive term used to describe the old-time,

text only computer based training. It has been point
out that the various definitions that exist show a great
depth of interdependence among themselves. Rather
than one term being a subset of another, eLearning
could be considered as an all encompassing circle
with all other terms overlapping at different times and
extents [1]. This form of learning currently depends
on networks and computers but will likely evolve into
systems consisting of a variety of channels (e.g.
wireless, satellite), and technologies (e.g. cellular
phones, PDAs) as they are developed and adopted.
E-learning can take the form of courses as well as
modules and smaller learning objects. E-learning
may incorporate synchronous and asynchronous
access and may be distributed geographically with
varied limits of time.
This study is concerned with the web-based
learning (WBL) circle within the all-encompassing elearning circle. When attempting to define web-based
training (WBT), some people limit WBT to take place
entirely within a web-browser, without the need of
other software or learning resources. This restriction,
however, leaves out many of the truly effective uses
of web technologies for learning [2]. Other scholars
assert that web-based learning environments are the
result of educators’ attempts to wrap together webtechnology features (e.g. information manipulation,
communication and creation tools) according to their
educational and pedagogical beliefs and pursued
learning goals [3].
What is clear is that e-learning or web-based
learning has its roots in computer aided learning as
well as models of distant and open learning. As far as
this study is concerned web-based or e-learning is
defined as:

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

“Web-based learning is the acquisition of knowledge
and use of knowledge distributed and facilitated
primarily by web technologies and based on
educational and pedagogical beliefs and pursued
learning goals. Web-based learning can take the
form of courses as well as modules and smaller
learning objects. Web-based learning implies a
geographically distributed learning environment
linked by the Internet and may incorporate
synchronous and asynchronous access.”

2. University Online Educational Models outside
the UK
Cloete defines an Electronic Educational System
model (EES model) which breaks down the different
components of an e-learning setting into layers as a
means of facilitating the construction of practicable,
strategic e-learning models suitable for their
individual learning environment [4].

prove or disprove an online instructional method, it is
important that the technology employed is intended
for a possible sound course and for an online course
to achieve at the very minimum the ‘no significant
difference phenomenon’’ [5]. It is essential that it is
backed by robust pedagogy. Therefore, three case
studies of Universities conducting research on elearning and providing sample online courses have
been chosen in order to establish their learning
models and determine if there are any. In all three
cases, the sample courses offered represent a unit in a
course or a short course rather than a full degree
course. Also, as the courses are sample courses and
no enrolment has taken place, some areas may be
restricted and some information is unavailable.
However, the aim is to obtain a general structure of
real courses provided by these universities and the
information available should supply this. To put the
courses in context, the URLs of the departments
providing the courses are provided:
1.

Summative

2.

Evaluation Plane

Formative

Instructional
Layer

Educational
Middleware
Layer
E-paradigm Layer

Physical Layer

FIGURE 2 FOUR-TIER MODEL FOR ELECTRONIC
EDUCATION SYSTEM

Two different methods are possible when building
a model based on the EES system: a top-down and a
bottom-up approach. As the aim of this paper is to
test the technology that may deliver a sound
pedagogical course, it is more appropriate to use a
top-down approach, where the instructional layer is
established and the underlying layers provide
whatever services are required by the top layer.
Furthermore, though this paper does not attempt to

3.

UC Berkeley Extension Online,
http://learn.berkeley.edu/
University of Illinois at Springfield Online,
http://online.uis.edu/
San Diego State University, Department of
Educational Technology,
http://edweb.sdsu.edu/EDTEC/

It is worth noting that the various layers in the EES
model consist of a set of objects defined by a series of
functions they are able to perform within a layer (e.g.
course communication object, assignment object etc).
An object will have a collection of methods, which
describe the strategy used to accomplish the service
being offered by the object (e.g. in the case of the
course communication object, the methods could be
e-mail, videoconferencing, chat rooms, discussion
boards etc). While our study looked and compared all
three learning models of the three universities layerby-layer, in the interest of brevity we will only be
presenting the instructional layer here.
Instructional Layer
The instructional layer acts as a window between
the learning process and the underlying strategies
used to create a learning environment. The pedagogic
paradigm is an object within this layer and it deals
with how students are exposed to the contents of the
online course and how they acquire skills such as
critical thinking, deeper understanding, problem
solving etc.
Other objects include course
communication, study materials, assignments and

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

assessments. If we examine the online courses
researched, we can identify the various methods used:
Table 1 – Instructional Layer Classification for online courses at University of Illinois at Springfield, UC
Berkeley Extension Online and San Diego State University
Object
Instructional Layer Methods
Berkeley
Illinois
San Diego
Learn-by-Reading lectures and
Pedagogic
Learn-by-reading lectures and Learn-by-reading slides
and internal and external
internal and external
Paradigm
internal and external
hyperlinks
hyperlinks
hyperlinks
Learn-by-listening to audio Learn-by-listening with audio
Collaborative learning (case
with slides
interviews
study discussions with peer
Collaborative learning
Collaborative learning (project
and expert participation)
work and two weekly
(weekly discussions with
Learn-by-doing (interactive
peer and expert
discussion board discussions)
lectures with rollovers and
participation and review by Learn-by-doing
simple activities – e.g.
Assignments and (discussions)
peers of final assignment)
dragging marketing terms to
Learn-by-doing (weekly
the correct group. Case study
discussions, assignments)
discussions and assignments)
Course
Chat
Chat (for online office
Chat
communication
E-mail (assignments &
hours)
E-mail
discussion)
Discussion board (for
Discussion Board (twoDiscussion Board
weekly assignments and to weekly discussions)
(assignments & coursework)
post research report)
E-mail (assignments)
Lecture Slides (text,
Study materials
Lectures with up to 10 topics
Modules with topics in 100%
graphics and audio
text
with graphics and animation
including interactive activities Weekly discussion
Group project exercises with
Case studies with questions to exercises based on slides
questions and hyperlinks
and hyperlinks
be answered every week
Newsgroup questions for
“Instructor insight” – text pop External hyperlinks
postings on board
Internal Hyperlinks
up windows with special
Internal hyperlinks
points from instructor
External hyperlinks
Internal hyperlinks
Textbooks
External hyperlinks
Textbooks
Assignments
Answers to case study and
Weekly discussions
Project work (Attachments as
critique of peer work posted
(posted on discussion
word or HTML doc to be
on discussion board
board)
posted on site)
Course work essays (posted
Research project (posted
Newsgroup participation
on discussion board or eon discussion board)
(posting on discussion board)
mailed)
Review of web sites (web
form e-mailed to
instructor)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Assessment

Quizzes for personal
evaluation with automatic
feedback
Proctored examination (tutor
feedback)
Coursework (tutor feedback)
Weekly participation in
discussions (tutor and peer
feedback)

The assessment used by the online courses
researched presented a mixture of both approaches,
with courses largely based on coursework posted on
the web for peer review but also containing standard
examinations. For a web-based course, expecting
students to have to travel to take exams, when one of
the advantages of web-based learning is precisely the
flexibility of not having to physically be at a
particular place at a certain time, seems to be against
the nature of this paradigm. The assessment methods
for the MIS course should reflect, I believe, a more
constructivist approach and include group work,
essay-type assignments and practical work posted on
the site. By using the discussion board, progress of
the students could be assessed continuously and peer
reviewing could be a means of dealing with
subjectivity. Only one course (UC Berkeley
Extension) offers a form of self-assessment by means
of a quiz with feedback. Chickering and Ehrman
explain that ‘knowing what you know and don’t know
focuses your learning’. Students need help in
assessing their existing knowledge and competence.
They also need frequent opportunities to perform and
receive feedback on their performance. Objective
quizzes allow students to self-assess their knowledge
and can point students to useful information if they do
not answer a question correctly and it would,
therefore, be appropriate to include this means of selfassessment to the new model [6].
3. The UK eUniversities Worldwide Project
This ambitious project is promoted as a “new kind
of enterprise” to deliver courses “using a
sophisticated new eLearning platform, based on
robust open-standards technology” that “has the
potential to move the eLearning market to the next
stage in its evolution” [7]. The project involves a
number of UK universities (including The Open
University, Sheffield Hallam University, York

100% course work
Class participation in
weekly discussions
Assignments

80% Coursework and 20%
exam
Exam multiple choice and two
essay questions
Assignments 65%
Participation 15% (including
compulsory 6 postings on
board and 6 answers to other
postings, peer evaluation of
other students’ assignments
and how well do in group
work)

University and the University of Cambridge) and an
eLearning platform architecture that has been
designed by UKeU, working with Sun Microsystems.
The UK Government has backed the initiative with an
investment of £62m and UKeU claims that they have
“created a new eLearning platform and architecture
that dramatically exceeds the capabilities of any
previous system” [8]
The power of the new platform is claimed to be in
a workflow-driven approach to the production of both
online and traditional learning material to support
“blended learning” [9]. A meta-data language aids
flexible course specification and the workflow model
is aimed to support course specification and author
peer review of the learning programme.
The
Learning Management Service (or Instructional layer)
for course delivery is claimed to be distinguished
from a typical LMS by its flexible support for
multiple pedagogic models through static and
adaptive Reusable Learning Object sequences.
The University of Greenwich in collaboration
with South Bank University and Middlesex
University are planning to use the platform to develop
a foundation computing degree for approximately a
thousand overseas students from January 2004. This
will be a severe test of the new platform as existing
UKeU offering have been much more modest in their
aims and have focussed on niche markets (eg
specialist masters courses). In the early stages of the
London Universities collaborative project the
workflow system within the Learning Content
Management Service will be used to enable
individual modules to be specified, authored and
reviewed by a number of staff at each institution. The
adaptive Reusable Learning Object sequences within
the Learning Management Service will be fully tested
by online tutors and students using the delivery and
assessment elements of the platform. At present no

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

decisions have been taken on how students will be
supported in their studies (although call centre have
been suggested) or their assessments monitored
(perhaps at local centres) and it is unclear what the
actual student experience would entail. The benefits
of reusability of the learning objects will be evaluated
as the course evolves and other courses are developed
using generic elements, both subject based (eg
programming skills) and support-oriented (eg online
study skills). This evaluation would be expected to
take place within the workflow system of the LCMS,
but its details are not yet decided.

[8] UK eUniversities Worldwide (2002) eLearning
That Really Works, Available at
http://www.ukeu.com/docs/UKeU%20brochure%20fi
nal%20-%20January%202003.pdf
[9] Valiathan, Purnima (2002), Blended Learning
Models, Available at
http://www.learningcircuits.com/2002/aug2002/valiat
han.html

At the current time (May 2003) the London
Universities Collaborative project has had no direct
access to the new platform and their plans are still to
be confirmed. As with all major projects of this
nature that involve a number of stakeholders it is not
clear how it will develop over time. There are many
strategic decisions remaining to be taken. However,
if the experiences of previous WBL platforms are
drawn upon then this new system may finally deliver
what has often been promised for e-learning. Only
time will tell whether this is the dawning of a new era
in e-learning, or just another false dawn.
References
[1] Wentling, Waight, Gallaher, La Fleur, Wang and Kanfer
(2000) E-Learning – A Review of Literature. Available at
http://learning.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Publications.html
[2] Horton W. (2000) Designing Web-based Training. New
York, John Wiley & Sons Inc.
[3] Mioduser D., Nachmias R., Oren A., Lahav O. (1999)
Web-based learning environments (WBLE): Current
Implementation and Evolving Trends, Journal of Network
and Computer Applications. No.22, pp. 233-247
[4] Cloete E. (2001) Electronic Education System Model,
Computers & Education.
No 36, pp.171-182
[5] Russel T. L. (1999) The No Significant Difference
Phenomenon, Chapel Hill, NC: Office of Instructional
Telecommunications, North Carolina University (see also
http://teleeducation.nb.ca/nosignificantdifference/ )
[6] Chickering A.W. and Ehrmann S.C. (1996)
Implementing the Seven Principles: Technology as Lever,
AAHE Bulletin, October, pp. 3-6 - Available at
http://www.tltgroup.org/programs/seven.html
[7] UK eUniversities Worldwide (2002) Principles and
Practice in eLearning Platform Architecture, Available at
http://www.ukeu.com/docs/Platform%20-%20Final%20%20November%202002.pdf

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

