The Development of a Method to Inform CMC Design for Visual Communication
C. D. Chen1, A. Woodcock2 and S.A.R. Scrivener2
Industrial Design Department, Chang-Gung University, Taiwan
2
Design Institute, Coventry School of Art and Design, Coventry University, UK
A.Woodcock@coventry.ac.uk
1

Abstract
An essential characteristic of design communication is the
need to talk about things (objects and concepts). This
paper concerns the development of a practical method to
assist the iterative development of computer-mediated
communication (CMC) systems that support talk by
designers working co-operatively over distance. Previous
approaches to the study of CMC systems limit the extent
to which the value of new media and mechanisms can be
explored. We have developed an alternative method to
exploring CMCs based on shifts between communication
resources during design activity, based on Scrivener’s
(2000) postulate that users in a communication
environment satisfy their communication purposes by
selecting from the available resources those most
appropriate for their communication purpose. Such shifts
reveal insights into the relative strengths and weaknesses
of the communication channels. The paper outlines the
rationale behind shift analysis, provides examples of the
analysis and concludes by reviewing the steps needed to
use this method in iterative CMC development.

1. Introduction
With an increase in multi-national working and the
adoption of systems supporting real-time communication
(verbal and graphical), design teams are able to work cooperatively, separated by distance. We are interested in
how designers in these circumstances use communication
resources to discuss, for example, concepts, objects and
drawings when the talking, showing and seeing is
mediated by a computer in real-time. The overall aim is
not just to gain further understanding of co-operative
design but to develop ways to design efficient and
effective computer-mediated communication (CMC)
systems to support collaborative work.
[1] has argued that previous approaches to
understanding mediated communication environments
based on replicating face-to-face working or comparative

studies, have not provided reliable design requirements or
methods for enhancing the performance of CMC systems.
Instead, he argues that we should take a more direct
approach by exploring how users communicate in a given
CMC environment with a view to understanding how the
performance of that system might be improved. He goes
on to postulate that in a multimedia communication
environment:
1.

2.

3.

Only the resources that are sufficient for the
communication purpose at that moment will be
selected.
Only those resources that are needed for the
communication purpose at that moment will be
employed.
Given a set of redundant resources, each of which is
sufficient and needed for the communication purpose
at a given moment, a user will select what is most
appropriate for the communication purpose at that
moment.

This being the case, active selection of one
communication resource in preference to others implies
that the selected resource provides some benefit over
those not selected. [2] has argued that the analysis of this
selection can provide insights into how a system might be
modified by reducing the weaknesses and enhancing the
strengths of the available communication resources. In
this paper, we describe the evolution of a redesign method
to enhance the communication resources for visualisation,
in CMCs based on the analysis of communication
resource selection.

2. Design communication requirements
Previous researchers have taken face-to-face working
as the starting point for determining the requirements of
computer-mediated design communication systems. For
example, [3 and 4] studied designers working in face-toface settings, describing the role of gaze, gesture and
drawing in design communication. Later studies
addressed other design communicative materials and [5]

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

showed how objects at hand are used pervasively in
communication as self-referents, stand-ins for other
objects, and in combination with utterances or
representations of the objects being designed. Moreover,
[6] have argued that the persuasiveness and motivational
impact of design communication can be enhanced by the
selective use of virtual (i.e., CAD), graphical and physical
design models. In a similar vein, [7] examined the role of
what she calls ‘persuasive artefacts’, both digital and
tangible, in architectural design co-operation.
These researchers regard the communicative media
and behaviour of face-to-face working as necessary to
effective design communication, leading to often highly
novel CMC environments designed to replicate face-toface working. For example, [8]’s ClearBoard enables
users separated by distance to see each other’s face as
well as the drawing at the same window frame.
However such studies do not allow us to conclude
that the behaviour observed in face-to-face working is
necessary for a successful CMC system. Consequently,
the question of which media are needed to support which
behaviour in CMCs has been explored by comparing
different CMC environments to each other and to face-toface working. [1] argues against such an approach,
suggesting that the real issue is how do we get the best out
of the communication media available in a particular
context. Focusing on visually-supported communication,
we take forward these ideas to consider:
x
x
x

How designers talk about things in a given computermediated communication environment.
What this tells us about how the performance of that
system might be improved.
And, whether the answers to these questions provide
the basis for CMC system re-design.

design
At each location, a workspace was arranged
resembling a typical studio environment that included a
desktop PC equipped with colour monitor and an A3 size
digital tablet. Design information included the design
brief, assignment, schedule, and design data, such as
market research, backpack usage and user evaluation
reports. Three reference products relevant to the task were
located in the junior designer’s workspace: a mountain
bike, a rear carrier, and a backpack and a colour ink-jet
printer to allow the junior designer to print off whiteboard
pages to work on designs between sessions.
A proprietary system, PictureTel Live100, Vsn 1.6,
was used for synchronous CMC between the two sites via
a basic rate ISDN line. This was equipped with full
duplex audio and a camera with manually adjustable
zoom, brightness, and focus control. The stand-mounted
camera could be adjusted to capture the desired scene,
such as documents on the desk and detached to capture
objects in the workspace.
LiveShare Plus (Vsn 3.00), an integrated
collaboration application, was installed on each desktop
PC. The main tool for on-line work was a whiteboard - a
shared drawing tool enabling participants to
simultaneously see and edit a drawing. The basic
whiteboard drawing tools included a pen whose colour
and size could be modified, text entry, and an eraser.
Participants could also paste camera-captured images into
the whiteboard. Thus LiveShare Plus supported
communication over three media: video, whiteboard, and
audio.

In the following sections we describe how we explored
these questions and the outcomes that emerged.

3. Mediated design communication
Our work began by observing how industrial
designers talk about things in a CMC environment during
concept design. We used this stage because of the wide
range of visual information types and media used, the
number of tasks undertaken and different levels of detail
exhibited. Consequently, talk about things is likely to be
intense and diverse during concept development.
Data was derived from studying the concept design
sessions of three design dyads undertaking a task based on
the Delft Protocol Workshop [9], i.e. the design a
fastening device for attaching a backpack to a mountain
bike. The study involved synchronous CMC between two
parties (acting as senior and junior designer) separated by
a distance of around twenty miles.

Figure 1: The designer (top-left window) shifts
from drawing to gesturing
This particular CMC system enabled visual
communication via the medium of whiteboard or video
(see Figure 1). The whiteboard supported two
mechanisms of communication, drawing and gesture,
while video supported three, namely drawing, gesture and

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

object reference. This yields five media-mechanism
combinations, i.e., whiteboard-drawing and -gesture,
video-drawing, -gesture and -object manipulation.
The three dyads undertook the task over a four-week
period during which weekly, one-hour synchronous CMC
sessions took place (eleven in total). Following each
session, the video recordings were analysed to identify
communication that involved talk about visible things. At
the first opportunity the session tapes were reviewed with
the designers who were asked to reflect on what was
being communicated and why their talk was coupled with
visualisation. These debriefing sessions were also video
recorded for later analysis.
The primary data for analysis comprised the video
and audio recordings of the on-line CMC sessions. The
discourse was transcribed, organised and labelled in terms
of turns by individual speakers. These were further subdivided into utterances that included reference to a real or
imagined object and those that did not. The former group
provided the ‘talking about things’ data. These artefactrelated turns, were then categorised as to whether or not
they were accompanied by any form of visualisation. In
other words, any turn having at least one instance of
visually-coupled speech (where a word co-occurred with
visualisation) was categorised as ‘visualised speech’,
otherwise, as ‘non visualised speech’.

verbalisation in video in a different way to that on the
whiteboard. Furthermore, the relative use of the different
medium-mechanism combinations varies markedly over
the task. From our analysis we concluded that the pattern
of visual coupling determines the pattern of mediummechanism combination usage.
During design communication it is helpful, perhaps
even essential, to couple talk with visualisation. This need
is almost certainly determined by the nature of the task
(there is some evidence in our study that the structure of
the discourse in Session 4 was beginning to take a
different shape to the earlier sessions). At any moment,
the designers satisfy their communication intent as best as
they can by selecting the most appropriate visual mediummechanism combination from those available to them.
Given this interpretation, the differences in visually
coupled parts of speech between medium-mechanism
combinations is the consequence of designers selecting
the most appropriate combination at a given moment to
satisfy communication need. Hence, these data support
the postulate that, when using a multimedia
communication environment, designers employ the
available communication resources to satisfy visualisation
need by selecting that resource which is most efficient
and/or effective at that moment for the task in hand [cf.
13]

4. Results

5. Visual Coupling in Design Communication

Space does not allow us to discuss our results in
detail. Instead, we will focus on the findings that led to a
postulate about user behaviour in multimedia
environments. In the eleven CMC sessions, a total of
26,962 parts-of-speech were coded as artefact-related
terms of which 14,803 were coded as visualised speech
(i.e., 55%). This indicates that talking about things is a
significant element of computer-mediated concept design
communication. Of this visualised speech, 4,220 parts-ofspeech (i.e., 29%) were coupled with visualisation. For
example, analysis of an event where, while pointing to the
bike in the studio, a designer uttered the words, ‘and then
down the back to the top tube across here’, identified the
terms top, tube, across and here as being visually-coupled.
These instances of visually-coupled speech are important
because they provide the clearest indication that
visualisation is an intentional component of
communication.
The data were analysed to determine whether the
pattern of visual coupling was an artefact of the task, the
medium, i.e., whiteboard or video, or the mechanism, i.e.,
drawing, gesture or object [12]. In fact, the pattern of
visual coupling does not vary markedly with task or
medium. In contrast, the pattern of visual coupling does
vary with mechanism, e.g., drawing is coupled with

The purpose of an utterance is different to the
purpose served by visual coupling. The former is what
motivates the communication while the latter concerns the
way that specific visual information contributes to the
communication. Based on previous research concerning
the function of visual information in design
communication [10 and 5], five purposes of visual
coupling in design discourse were identified as follows:
1.

Clarify: to ‘make more comprehensible, usually by
explaining it in more detail’. Using this definition,
visualisation coupled with a term was termed
clarification if the designer used a mediummechanism combination to communicate an attribute
of a thing, such as its shape, or a relation between
two things.

2.

Specify: to ‘identify clearly and definitely’ and to
‘give information about what is required or should
happen in a certain situation’. In visual coupling, ‘to
specify’, means to clearly and definitely identify what
is being discussed, thus isolating it from the other
drawings or objects present. What distinguishes it
from clarification is that no new information is
introduced.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3.

Emphasise: means to, ‘give emphasis to’, emphasis
being defined as the, ‘special importance, value, or
prominence given to something’. Again what
distinguishes emphasis from clarification is that no
new information is introduced. Nor is emphasis
simply specification as it draws special attention to
what is being discussed.

4.

Annotate: to ‘add notes to (a text or diagram) giving
explanation or comment’. Annotation adds nothing to
what is being said merely echoing verbalisation, by
storing information for later reference.

5.

Identify: means ‘to associate someone or something
closely’, and, ‘if you identify someone or something,
you name them or say who or what they are’. In
visual coupling, the distinction between identification
and clarification or specification is subtle. Like
specification it does not involve the introduction of
new information, but unlike specification it relates
one visualisation to another.

Having identified the purposes served by
visualisation in supporting verbalisation, each instance
where a word was coupled with visualisation was
assigned to a purpose. Table 1 shows the distribution of
visual coupling purposes to medium-mechanism
combinations.
Video (VD)

Whiteboard (WB)

VD-D VD-G VD-O
Emphasise
Annotate

4

353

2

WB-D

WB-G Total

40

2

401

0

84

0

0

0

83

244

386

118

1836

Identify

8

9

7

12

Specify

159

29

69

848

1 1106

Total

415

777

196

2820

13 4221

Clarify

10 2594
0

36

Table 1: Visual coupling frequency against
purpose in medium-mechanism
It should be noted that in this CMC system,
whiteboard-drawing is the resource most used. Second,
across medium-mechanism combinations the distribution
of visual coupling to purpose differs. Some combinations
show strong dominance for particular purposes, e.g.,
video-gesture for amplification. Finally, we can see that
visualisation serves primarily to clarify and to specify in
design communication.

6. Development of a practical method
In the previous section we have shown that it is
possible to identify the purpose of visual coupling. During

interviews the designers explained or verified why a
particular medium-mechanism combination was chosen.
This can reveal the relative strengths and weaknesses of
particular medium-mechanism combinations. For CMC
re-design, a goal could be to remove these differences and
to build on strengths. For example, we found that at a
particular moment, video-drawing was used rather than
the other combinations because paper drawings had been
produced between sessions. Video-drawing might be
more efficient but less effective than whiteboard-drawing,
say, because of the camera’s lower resolution than that of
the display. Whiteboard-drawing could be improved by
making it easier for designers to capture and transfer
paper drawings, and video-drawing could be improved by
using a higher resolution camera, thus enhancing the
performance of each medium-mechanism combination.
However, the analysis of all visual couplings (i.e.,
4221 in this study) is time consuming and so unlikely to
be of practical value in CMC system design. A method
based just on the detection and analysis of shifts between
medium-mechanism combinations is likely to offer a more
viable option (i.e., in this study, 527 shifts occurred).

7. Shift analysis: efficiency and effectiveness
Using the video, transcription and interviews it is
possible to determine the media mechanism used for each
purpose and also when and why a shift changed in the
communication channel. Below is an example of the
coding in which a shift from whiteboard-drawing to
video-object for the purpose of identification occurred at
the term ‘here’ (underlined in Turn 155) , when Designer
R affirmed his understanding of his remote partner’s
thinking by pointing to the relevant physical object.
154

155 R

D

at the bottom of your leg (WD-D) there's some sort of
circle (WD-D) that sits over (WD-D) the pole (WD-D),
sits over the pole (WD-D), right, ...and has a strap
(WD-D) that goes around there (WD-D), right, ... and
onto a spike (WD-D) which is actually part of the, you
know ...the member (WD-D)
oh, right, I'm with you. So on the bike...it goes on this
part here (VD-O)

In this instance, video-object is likely to have been
more effective than whiteboard-drawing for identification
of the relevant parts because it is visible in the context of
other associated parts which would have helped to
disambiguate the part referenced by the term ‘here’.
Video-object was also more efficient as only slight
camera adjustments were required to achieve a
satisfactory view of the object. In contrast, whiteboarddrawing would have required the designer to draw these
components.
In terms of CMC redesign the efficiency of
whiteboard-drawing could be improved by enabling

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

drawings to be produced more fluently while the
effectiveness of whiteboard-drawing might be enhanced
by enabling more accurate drawings. Finally, the
effectiveness and efficiency of the video-object could be
improved by the use of higher quality video and more
sophisticated camera control.
Examination
of
the
recommendations
for
improvement associated with each shift in terms of gains
in efficiency effectiveness reveals inconsistencies. For
example, some shift instances lead to recommendations
that whiteboard-drawing could be improved by making
the image fuzzier. For example, at Turn 322 of one dyad’s
first session, Designer D shifted from whiteboard-drawing
to video-gesture at the term ‘piece’ for the purpose of
‘clarification’.
322 D

…I‘m just moving back, so you can see me on, right,
on the front of this thing, we've got a piece (VD-G) of
stiff plastic, right

Here the shifted-to combination, i.e., video-gesture, was
judged to be more effective and efficient as it allowed a
conceptually ill-defined shape to be conveyed in a nonspecific way. Consequently, the recommendation made in
this instance was that whiteboard-drawing could be
enhanced to support this need by equipping the
whiteboard with, say, a drawing layer or tool where the
specificity of strokes would be automatically dampened
down.
In other instances where a shift was made from
whiteboard-drawing to video-object at the term ‘here’, in
Turn 170, for the purpose of ‘clarification’, the opposite
was recommended:
168 R
169 D
170 R

that could link up onto the frame here (WD-D), so the
frame of the erm...
yeah
so that perhaps they could link up here on (VD-O) the
back of (VD-O) the rack (VD-O)

Analysis of the data suggested that video-object was
more effective than whiteboard drawing as its spatial and
structural reality communicated the designer’s intended
meaning more clearly than whiteboard drawing would
have done, and also more efficient because showing the
visual information was quicker than drawing it. Here, it
was recommended that whiteboard-drawing could be
made more efficient and effective for this purpose by
enabling high-resolution images of objects to be readily
transferred onto the drawing surface.
Clearly, there is potential inconsistency here as
whiteboard images are required to be both vague and
resolved in detail. Thus further consideration is necessary
to consolidate the recommendations in such a way that
conflicts are resolved. A potential solution in this case
might be, for example a mechanism that allows designers
to choose either fuzzy or detailed images according to the
requirements of a given moment.

8. Summarising the shift method
In this paper we have shown that the analysis of
shifts between medium-mechanism combinations can be
used to uncover the relative strengths and weaknesses of
medium-mechanism combinations. The identification of
the purpose served by the coupling of talk and visual
representation around a shift, and the determination of
why the medium-mechanism was selected can contribute
to redesign as this reveals the relative strengths and
weaknesses of each combination for a given purpose at a
particular time. In redesigning the CMC system the goal
is to ameliorate the weaknesses in the shifted-from,
medium-mechanism combination and to build on
strengths of the shifted-to combination.
This has led to the following design method that can
be applied to assess and enhance given CMC
environments without limiting the potential for exploiting
the latent opportunities of new telecommunication
technology. Indeed, we believe that the method may
stimulate recognition of these possibilities. The method
may be summarised as follows:
1.
x
x
x
x

Assess medium-mechanism combination strengths
and weaknesses
Define possible medium-mechanism combinations
Record the systems use over a period of time
Identify
shifts
between
medium-mechanism
combinations
Assess the gains in efficiency and/or effectiveness of
the combination shifted-to over that shifted-from.

2.

Formulate redesign recommendations for each shift
based on enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness
of both the shifted-from and shifted-to combinations.

3.

Resolve inconsistent recommendations

4.

Redesign the system to satisfy the recommendations
made in Stage 3.

5.

Test the performance of the refined system against
that of the old.

8. Conclusions
We have described a CMC design method that uses
the interpretation of shifts between communication
resources as a foundation for design improvements.
Because the method focuses on user behaviour in a
particular communication environment it is open to the
discovery of the latent communication possibilities
offered by that environment. Thus, for example, the
application of the method to both face-to-face and
mediated environments will enable us to uncover the
affordances and limitations of both. Additionally the

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

method yields statements that describe communication
needs independently of the particular environment
studied. If [11] are correct that communication needs are
independent of communication media and mechanisms,
then we should find that the communication needs
uncovered by using the method are characteristic of visual
design communication contexts.

[7] Wagner, I. “Persuasive artefacts in architectural design and
planning”. In Collaborative Design, edited by S.A.R. Scrivener,
L.J. Ball and A. Woodcock, London: Springer-Verlag, 2000,
pp.379-390.

9. References

[9] Cross, N., Christiaans, H., and Dorst, K. “Introduction: the
Delft protocols workshop”. In Analysing Design Activity, edited
by N. Cross, H. Christiaans and K. Dorst, England: Wiley, 1996,
pp. 1-16.

[1] Scrivener, S.A.R., Chen, C.D., and Woodcock, A. “Using
media-mechanism shifts to uncover design communication
needs.” In Collaborative design, edited by S.A.R. Scrivener, L.J.
Ball and A. Woodcock. London: Springer-Verlag, 2000, pp.
349-358.
[2] Chen, C.D., Woodcock, A., and Scrivener, S. A. R.
“Effectiveness and efficiency in the selection of communication
methods by designers”, in Proceedings of Fifth Asian Design
Conference, 11-13, October, Seoul, CD-ROM version,
2001,TW-049.
[3] Tang, J.C. “Listing, drawing and gesturing in design: a study
of the use of shared workspaces by design teams”. PhD Thesis.
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University,
1989.
[4] Bly, S.A. “A use of drawing surfaces in different
collaborative settings”. In Proceedings of CSCW 88, Portland,
USA., 1988, pp. 250-256.
[5] Harrison, S., and Minneman, S. “A bike in hand: a study of
3-D objects in design”. In Analysing design activity, edited by
N. Cross, H. Christiaans and K. Dorst, England:Wiley, 1996,
pp. 417-436

[8] Ishii, H., and Kobayashi, M. “ClearBoard: a seamless
medium for shared drawing and conversation with eye contact”.
In Proceedings of CHI’92. New York: ACM, 1992.pp. 525-532

[10] Tang, J.C..“Findings from observational studies of
collaborative work”. In Readings in Group and ComputerSupported Cooperative Work, edited by R.M. Baecker, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1993, pp. 251-270.
[11] Hollan, J., and Stornetta, S. “Beyond being there”. In
Proceedings of CHI’92, New York: ACM Press. 1992, pp. 119125.
[12] Chen, C.D., Scrivener, S.A.R., and Woodcock, A.
“Visualisation in collaborative computer mediated dialogue”. In
H. Bullinger & J. Ziegler (Eds.), Human Computer Interaction,
Volume 2 Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1999, pp.
226-231.
[13] Scrivener, S.A.R., and Clark, S.M. “Experiences in
computer-mediated communication”. Proceedings of the ISAT
School/IFIP TC 8/WC 8.5 Workshop, Poland: Biblioteka
Informatyki Szkol Wyzszych, 1994, pp122-154.

[6] Lindemann, U., Assmann, G., and Stetter, R. “The
development of a mountain-bike frame”. In Visual and spatial
reasoning in design, edited by J.S. Gero and B. Tversky,
Australia: University of Sydney. 1999, pp. 257-261.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

