Developing an Internet Oriented Platform for Earthquake Engineering
Application and Web-based Simulation System for Seismic Hazards: Towards
Disaster Mitigation in Metropolises

Ali Alaghehbandian a), Ping ZHU b), Masato ABE c), Junji KIYONO d)

a) PhD Student, the University of Tokyo Email: ali-a@bridge.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
b) Research Institute of Science and Technology for Society, Email: zhu@bridge.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
a) Associate Professor, , the University of Tokyo, Email: masato@bridge.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
c) Professor, Kyoto University, Email: kiyono@quake.kuciv.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Rapid growth computer technologies, especially the
Internet provide human beings new measures to deal with
engineering and social problems which were hard to solve
in traditional ways. This paper presents a prototype of an
application platform based on the Internet for civil
engineering considering building an information system
of risk communication and disaster mitigation for
metropolises.
Keywords: Information system, Risk communication,
Disaster mitigation, Internet, Virtual Reality, VRML,
XML.

infrastructures. No doubt computer technology has been
promoting productivities in the engineering aspect, but
few successful efforts have been made in solving social
and human related problems, such as disaster mitigation
in cases of earthquakes, fires etc.. As computer
technology is changing rapidly, people have more
opportunities to cope with more complicated issues. On
reviewing state-of-the-art computer techniques and
relative applications, this paper discusses problems and
challenges concerning implementing an information
system of disaster mitigation for metropolises. Then, the
paper presents a prototype of an Internet oriented platform
with an initial implementation using Virtual Reality (VR).

2. A brief review
1. Introduction
Traditional computer applications in civil engineering are
mainly for analysis, design and construction of buildings
and other structures, which are basic components of social

In addition to conduct numerical computations, one of
the most important and exciting technology for
engineering application might be man-machine interface,
or most commonly called user interface (UI) or graphical
user interface (GUI). Tremendous efforts have been made
to achieve good communication between human beings
and computers since the initial work of computer graphics

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

from later ’60. Virtual Reality (VR), which becomes more
popular recently, is one of the most important
technologies [1]. VR through the Internet has been
noticed as an important technique for human-computer
interaction [2]. Efforts have been made to promote human
interactions with computer based systems more effective
and smooth using techniques including VR [3].
Engineering oriented applications have also employed VR
technique for presentations and interactions. Reference [4]
used a CAVE (CAVE Automatic Virtual Environment) to
implement an interactive finite element analysis (FEA)
system, which can provide an easy way to access
numerical results visually. Reference [5] implemented a
virtual wind tunnel for dynamic visualization of CFD
(Computational Fluid Dynamics) using immersive virtual
environments. VR utilized in landscape visualization has
great potential to generate practical panorama
representation to serve architects [6]. Reference [7]
introduced a system for landscape design using Virtual
Reality Modeling Language (VRML) on the web. To
combine with web based Geographic Information
Systems (GIS), Reference [8] discussed about to build
virtual cities on the web with a project of Virtual London.
While virtual reality aims to create pure artificial world,
another useful technique named augmented reality (AR)
supplements the real world with coexisted computergenerated virtual objects [9]. Reference [10] showed an
interesting application, the Magic Book, which has
potentials in education as well as engineering applications.
Some techniques for refining the user interface of mobile
augmented reality systems were presented in Reference
[11]. As the VR technology becomes mature, especially
with the promotion of the Internet based technologies
such as VRML, which allows navigation and simple
interaction with 3D world on general PCs, people are
thinking more about simulations of the real world and
society. Reference [12] examined a multi-user virtual
environment over the Internet, the Active worlds, which
allows people to build their own world and can simulate
geographic and social interactions in a simple level that
reflects to the real world. As an example of engineering
applications, Reference [13] described concepts of the
virtual building from design, construction and
maintenance perspectives. The virtual building was
defined as "a formalized digital description of an existing
or planned building which can be used to fully simulate
and communicate the behavior of the real building in its
expected contexts". It can be seen that continuous
endeavors are needed to achieve the target.
In a brief, techniques for user interface, such as VR, are
more popular, powerful and affordable. On the other hand,
the popularity of the Internet makes unprecedented
opportunities for distributed communications between
men and machines.

Traditional applications in civil engineering, such as
structure analysis and design systems take GUI technique
from Computer Aided Design (CAD) as core parts of
applications [14]. Though a lot of details from analysis,
design and construction are involved in applications, it is
difficult to reuse and share the data resource as it is
expected by implementing the virtual building. To
separate data resource from applications based on web
environment and techniques might be a good attempt to
promote both a versatile data resource and flexible
applications.
To build an application platform for disaster mitigation in
metropolises, state-of-the-art computer techniques,
notably the Internet and VR technologies, as it can be
seen from the above review, provide more opportunities
for making a complex system which is capable to solve
both engineering and social problems.

3. Towards disaster mitigation in
metropolises
Computer applications in civil engineering are relatively
less advanced comparing with other areas, such as
mechanics. This does not mean that problems in civil
engineering are simple. In fact, engineering codes, which
design and construction works base on, ‘filter’ excessive
complexities from nature and structures by statistics and
past experiences and simplify design procedures. But
natural disasters, such as earthquakes, fires, floods etc.,
again and again teach people more that their experiences
and efforts are insufficient to protect social properties and
human lives.
To take severe earthquakes as an example, catastrophic
economic losses around the world are huge and increasing
in last decade. The 1995 earthquake in Kobe, Japan (Fig.
1) and the 1999 earthquake in Chi Chi, Taiwan, for
instance, caused losses about $120 and $10 billion
respectively. Loss estimates for a repeat of the 1923
Tokyo earthquake exceed $1 trillion [15]. Metropolises
are vulnerable under attacks of severe earthquakes. The
disaster causes not only damage to buildings, structures
but problems in society.
Earthquakes, as a kind of natural catastrophe, are of low
frequency but high consequence. It is difficult to
accumulate experiences. Though proper handling of
seismic behavior of a building or a structure is essential, it
is still quite a local issue on concerning disaster
mitigation for metropolises. During the 1995 Kobe
earthquake, the traffic service system in the emergency
situation experienced substantial difficulties as
considerable damage happened in elevated bridges (Fig. 1)
[16]. Collapsed buildings can also block roads. Fires

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

during the earthquake may ruin several areas within a city
for lack of emergent rescue (Fig. 2).
All the above-mentioned issues will cause losses of lives
directly or indirectly. During an earthquake, city
infrastructures such as power supply, electronic
communication etc. might be out of their functions.
Communication with the public becomes quite important
for saving lives and keeping order of the society. To find
efficient ways for communication should be a problem.

On conducting an information system of risk
communication and disaster mitigation for metropolises,
following basic targets are set so far as concerned for the
application platform:
1) High precise simulation for natural disasters (such as
earthquake generator according to faults) and structures
(such as recreation of damage and collapses of structures)
2) Integrated applications and data which can represent
major factors of infrastructures for a living metropolis
3) Be capable of providing and distributing information,
which is useful to and can be easily accessed by estate
owners, city administrators and the public, establishing
mechanism to communicate with the public reciprocally

The platform is targeted to provide information for all
the stages of before, during and after disaster happenings
in metropolises.

4. Prototype of the application platform

'JH. 1 $PMMBQTF PG FMFWBUFE CSJEHFT JO 1995 ,PCF
FBSUIRVBLF

To achieve targets of the application platform for
disaster mitigation, nowadays advanced computer
technologies, as reviewed in previous part of this paper,
can help people to cope with engineering and social
problems which were hard to solve in traditional ways. A
distributed application platform based on the Internet is a
reasonable solution for hosting such a complex system
with versatile resources. Furthermore, the Virtual Reality
(VR) technology, which becomes more mature, can play
an important role on performing 3D detailed presentation
for various purposes.
It can be seen, to establish an information system of risk
communication and disaster mitigation for metropolises, a
complex system is needed. To meet targets set for the
application platform, following functions are concerned
for implementation:
1) Data management, to collect and to keep updating
data (geographical, structural data etc.) with unified
format.
2) Precise simulation of physical phenomena and
consequences, including ground motion, structure seismic
response, fire etc. in both macro and micro levels.

'JH. 2 "SFBT EBµBHFE CZ GJSFT EVSJOH UIF ,PCF

3) Evaluation of damage and economic losses based on
simulations from scenarios.

FBSUIRVBLF

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

4) Presentation and communication, to show results to
different audiences (such as professionals, governors,
estate owners and the public) with different methods; to
collect information from the public.
5) Integration of the system, to bring all the above
together for a living system.
6) Robustness, performance of the system and ways of
communication during occurrences of disasters
Fig. 3 illustrates concepts of this platform. Each
functional parts are liked together without considering
their physical locations. General audiences have their
entry point at a web server with web browsers and clientend applets and applications; while professionals can
utilize resources along with the platform, such as to
access databases, to invoke dense computations and to
cooperate with others.

This makes it possible for people to access applications
from the web.
In a complex system, no single application can
complete the task for final solutions. Fig. 5 shows a
distributed environment based on the web. For
communications between applications at server’s part and
also between client-end applets/applications and server
applications, XML (Extensible Markup Language) will
play an important role. XML has been claimed the most
exciting and significant thing to hit the Internet since
HTML. XML is a metamarkup language by providing
arbitrary structures for one to make his/her own markup
language. For sharing data among applications for seismic
analysis, a special XML, which might be called Structure
XML or StructureML, can be initiated for purposes of
structure analyses, damage evaluation, result presentation
etc..

'JH. 3 " QFSTQFDUJWF WJFX PG UIF EJTUSJCVUFE QMBUG

'JH. 4 " TJµQMJGJFE BQQMJDBUJPO QSPUPUZQF

PSµ

The above picture shows still simple and basic ideas for
conducting the system. To introduce the Internet into the
system is not only for it can integrate resources and
applications for a collaborative solution but also for it can
be an effective way of reciprocal communication in a
society. Traditional applications (such as a seismic
analysis program) provide solutions, as shown in the
upper part of Fig. 4, by local computation, which means
both user and machine are in a same physical location. To
shift traditional applications into a web-oriented
environment, generally speaking, interfaces should be
separated from the main applications and the interface for
output should be able to perform on the client end (Fig. 4).

5. Simple implementations with VR
As a first step towards developing this platform, a postprocessor of a dynamic structure analysis program has
been implemented with VR based on simple web
application.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

'JH. 6 73.- BVUIPSJOH  µPEFMJOH PG B DBCMFTUB
ZFE
CSJEHF

'JH. 5 %JTUSJCVUFE BQQMJDBUJPOT PO XFC

The term of Virtual Reality originally referred to
Immersive Virtual Reality, which means that users
become fully immersed in an artificial 3D world that is
completed generated by computers. Nowadays, the term
VR is also used for applications without fully immersive.
The boundaries are becoming blurred.

More practice of VR has been made based on a work of
a general-purpose 3D dynamic analysis program for
bridges. The program performs seismic analysis of
elevated bridges based on precise 3D modeling [19]. Fig.
7 shows a three-span steel bridge analyzed by the
program. A new output interface of this program has been
added to convert results of dynamic response of the
bridge into VRML. Animations of vibration can be seen
through a VRML viewing tool, such as a web browser
with VRML plug-in (Fig. 8 and 9). Good results are
obtained on promoting seismic response presentations
using VRML. Users can navigate through the scene to
find more details of seismic response of the bridge, which
are difficult to be acquainted by traditional 2D charts.

A practical way to perform VR, especially along the
Internet, is to use VRML, which stands for Virtual Reality
Modeling Language [17], [18]. VRML is an open
standard for 3D multimedia and shared virtual worlds on
the Internet (ISO/IEC 14772-1: 1997). It is the de facto
standard for sharing data between CAD (3D modeling)
and animation programs. VRML is a text based scene
description language. It is not a programming language
but can have scripts, like JavaScript.
VRML can be used to present structures and to convey
3D scene from the Internet. Fig. 6 shows a suspension
bridge authored with VRML. The model bridge can be
displayed interactively using a web browser with a
VRML plug-in.

PC-2 PC-1 PC-3 PC-4 42.5m 49.0m 42.5m 20.1m 15.0m XYZ

'JH. 7 4FJTµJD BOBMZTJT PG B TUFFM FMFWBUFE CSJEHF

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

'JH. 8 4FJTµJD SFTQPOTF QSFTFOUFE VTJOH 73.- UISP
VHI
*OUFSOFU &YQMPSFS

[3] A. Agah, “Human interactions with intelligent systems:
research taxonomy”, Computers & Electrical Engineering, Vol.
27, No. 1, 2000, pp. 71-107.

[4] M.J. Ryken and J.M. Vance, “Applying virtual reality
techniques to the interactive stress analysis of a tractor lift arm”,
Finite Elements in Analysis and Design, Vol. 35, No. 2, May
2000, pp.141-155.

6. Conclusions
Upon reviewing relative computer techniques and
discussing demands on conducting an information system
of risk communication and disaster mitigation for
metropolises, this paper depicts challenges faced by
engineering professionals to solve not only engineering
but economic and social problems. To meet this
multidisciplinary task, the paper presents a perspective of
solutions with a distributed application platform based on
the Internet and VR technologies. Techniques to shift
traditional engineering applications to web environment
and to share data according to XML have been discussed.
As a first step towards this platform, simple
implementations with VR have also been demonstrated.

[5] T.M. Wasfy and A.K. Noor, “Visualization of CFD results in
immersive virtual environments”, Advances in Engineering
Software, Vol. 32, No. 9, 2001, pp. 717-730.

[6] J.W. Danahy, “Technology for dynamic viewing and
peripheral vision in landscape visualization”, Landscape and
Urban Planning, Vol. 54, No. 1, 2001, pp. 125-137.

[7] T. Honjo and E.M. Lim, “Visualization of landscape by
VRML system”, Landscape and Urban Planning, Vol. 55, No. 3,
2001, pp. 175-183.

[8] M. Dodge, S. Doyle, A. Smith, & S. Fleetwood, "Towards
the Virtual City: VR & Internet GIS for Urban Planning", the
Virtual Reality and Geographical Information Systems
Workshop, May 1998, Birkbeck College, London. 1998.

[9] R. Azuma, Y. Baillot, R. Behringer, S. Feiner, S. Julier and
B. MacIntyre, “Recent advances in augmented reality”, IEEE
Computer Graphics & Applications, Nov./Dec. 2001, Vol. 21,
No. 6, pp. 34-47.

[10] M. Billinghurst, H. Kato and I. Poupyrev, “The MagicBook:
a transitional AR interface”, Computers & Graphics, Vol. 25,
Issue 5, October 2001, pp. 745-753.

'JH. 9 73 µPEFM PG B SFBM CSJEHF (50%" #SJEHF) BOE
JUT TFJTµJD SFTQPOTF EVSJOH ,0#& FBSUIRVBLF BOE I
VµBO
CFIBWJPS EVSJOH FBSUIRVBLF

7. References
[1] H. Donale and M.P. Baker, Computer Graphics C Version
(Second Edition), New York: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1997.

[2] B. Shackel, “People and computers - some recent highlights”,
Applied Ergonomics, Vol. 31, No. 6, 2000, pp. 595-608.

[11] T. Höllerer, S. Feiner, D. Hallaway, B. Bell, M.
Lanzagorta, D. Brown, S. Julier, Y. Baillot and L. Rosenblum,
“User interface management techniques for collaborative mobile
augmented reality”, Computers & Graphics, Vol. 25, No. 5,
October 2001, pp. 799-810.

[12] R. Schroeder, A. Huxor and A. Smith, “Activeworlds:
geography and social interaction in virtual reality”, Futures, Vol.
33, No. 7, September 2001, pp. 569-587.

[13] P. Christiansson, 1999, "Properties of the Virtual Building",
8th International Conference on Durability of Building Materials
and Components. 1999, pp. 2909-2919.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

[14] P. Zhu, “An Integrated Developing Platform in Civil
Engineering Design & CSCW”, International Workshop on
CSCW in Design, 1996, pp. 365-370.

[15] EERI Endowment Fund White Paper. “Financial
Management of Earthquake Risk”, Earthquake Engineering
Research Institute, Oakland, CA. 2000.

[16] Committee on highway bridge damage caused by the
hyogo-ken nanbu earthquake. Report on highway bridge damage
caused by the hyogo-ken nanbu earthquake of 1995.

[17] A.L. Ames, D.R. Nadeau and J.L. Moreland. VRML 2.0
Sourcebook, Second Edition, New York: John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 1997.
[18] M. McCarthy, A. Descartes. Reality Architecture Building
3D worlds with Java and VRML, Great Britain: Prentice Hall
Europe, 1998.
[19] P. Zhu, M. Abe and Y. Fujino, “Modeling Three
Dimensional Non-linear Seismic Performance of Elevated
Bridges with Emphasis on Pounding of Girders.” Earthquake
Engineering and Structural Dynamics, (under publication).

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

