Mental Representations and Visualization Processes in Organizational Memories
Stefan Smolnik – Ludwig Nastansky – Torsten Knieps
Department of Business Computing 2, University of Paderborn, Germany
{Stefan.Smolnik|Ludwig.Nastansky|Torsten-Rupert.Knieps}@notes.upb.de

Abstract
Visual metaphors describe cognitive processes in every
part of life and function as a connection between what
we see and what we think. Mental activities and
perceptional interactions of the real world are often
interdependent and occur mutually. Cognition is
enhanced by the use of the real world, in particular the
use of cognitive artifacts or physical inventions [1]. In
our contribution, we describe the process from
perception to information, explain different models of
mental representations, and introduce Chi’s visualization
process. We use these theories and models to introduce
and evaluate different visualization tools, which are
positioned to explore and navigate a groupware-based
organizational memory that is presented as a small case.
We point out how the different characteristics and
functionalities of theses visualization tools contribute to
a synergetic match of visual metaphors and cognitive
processes.

1. Introduction and overview
“Humans understand information by forming a mental
model which captures only the gist of the information.”
[2] With this statement, Niggemann explains the human
information processing. He argues that visualization
approaches are efficient if representations of data support
a transformation to the human mental model. Such
visualization approaches combine the advantages of
computer-supported analytical methods with human
apprehension. Intrinsic coherences of complex data
structures are partitioned and represented by analytical
methods. Niggemann calls this process visual data mining.
Users identify visual patterns and form a mental model for
the information processing.
The human apprehension is based on structure
recognition [2]. A visual system reduces presented
information through abstraction [3]. Known patterns are
identified and indexed. These filter mechanisms should be
computer-supported to prepare the visualization of

information.
The purpose of this paper is to give insight in mental
representations of information and knowledge and to
describe how information can be transformed into
visualizations. By means of a small case of a groupwarebased organizational memory system, we illustrate this
visualization process and evaluate different visualization
approaches. These support users’ cognitive processes in
the daily work with this organizational memory system.
Our contribution is structured as followed: In section 2,
we briefly describe the process from perception to
information, the visual information gathering, the role of
eye fixation, and the information gathering by visual
motion perception. Four approaches how knowledge and
information is mentally represented are shortly introduced
in section 3. In section 4, we present the visualization
process following Chi. This visualization process can be
subdivided into three transformation stages: filtering,
mapping, and rendering. In section 5, we shortly introduce
the GCC K-Pool as a small case to evaluate three
visualization approaches, which we have implemented to
explore and navigate the GCC K-Pool. The evaluation of
these visualization tools is the main part of this section.
Section 6 outlines concluding remarks, the current state of
the project and the future opportunities.

2. From perception to information
The perception of an information-transmitting stimulus
is a prerequisite for processing presented information. The
human visual perception system is the most important
transmission channel for the human-computer interface;
75% of real world information is gathered by visual
impressions [4]. In this context, Kalawsky points out that
without an understanding of the underlying visual
perception processes, compatibility between users and
visualizations cannot be provided [5].
The visual information gathering is not an ongoing
process. While reading, eyes do not glide over the text;
they leap from one group of words to another. The leaps
are called saccades. During a saccade no information is

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

gathered. Gathering and processing of information only
occurs during an eye fixation: The eyes rest on a point of
the stimulus while the focused information is visually
gathered and processed. The human eye is capable to
perform two up to five fixations per second [6]. Groups of
words form fixation points while gathering information
from text. In case of images, fast identified or known
patterns form fixation points.
Quantity and order of information, which are
successively fixed by eyes to gather and process the
corresponding information, are the decisive factor for the
quality of visual information gathering. The more
information is provided the longer the processing of these
information takes. Similarly, a lack of order makes the
gathering and processing of information difficult.
The human eye differentiates and processes different
characteristics of stimuli in a different speed. Colors can
be peripherally perceived, i.e. eyes are not focused on the
colored object. Shapes and contours cannot be
differentiated from the corner of one’s eye; a
differentiation requires a longer eye fixation [7].
Therefore, the right use of colors facilitates information
gathering and thus, results in a faster and more facile
processing. An intrinsic differentiation by means of
different shapes makes the information gathering difficult.
During evolution, the perception of motion has
developed into an important prerequisite to survive. A
motion in the human visual field periphery causes an eye
reflex by which an observer focuses a moving object.
Jesse differentiates three basic categories of motions in the
three-dimensional space [8]:
Translation describes the change of an object’s
position. In the spatial space, the object is relocated
parallel to the three dimensions.
Rotation describes the rotation of an object around a
rotation axis. Normally, a motion of an object is a
combination of translation and rotation. The dimension
between axes remains unchanged during a rotation.
Rotations are cognitive weak and assume a high
perception capacity of users.
Change of an object’s shape describes the scaling and
change of shape of an object. The spatial reference
between objects is not affected by a change of shape.
Users receive varied information by the perception of
single or a combination of motion types. Goldstein
identifies information aspects among others [9]:
- The motion of an object in relation to an observer
gives information about the three-dimensional
shape of the object.
- Motion provides information, which enable users
to delimit object and background.
- Motion provides information to interact with the
environment.

Furmanski ascribes another information aspect to the
perception of motion: The perception of motion results in
structure-from-motion, which provides information about
order and structure of visualized objects even if this
structure is not displayed in a static visualization [10].
This structure-from-motion facilitates the recognition of
similar motion patterns as analogy for concrete subject
matters. Thus, causal relationships and correlations of data
are represented and more easily gathered by motion
patterns [8].

3. Mental representations
Cognitive theories deal with the analysis of
information processing. Therefore, identifying human
cognitive processes is the main subject of cognitive
psychology. It states that human behavior does neither
stem from environmental influences nor from human
drives but from cognitive processes constituting a series of
information processing as a reaction to a stimulus [11].
A core field of research within cognitive psychology is
mental representation of knowledge and information [12].
In particular, the following four approaches offer answers
to this question:
Semantic network model
The semantic network model by Collins and Quillian
assumes that information is filed into a hierarchical
classification model [12]. According to its degree of
abstraction, information is ordered into an appropriate
level within this hierarchy, i.e. the more general an
information the higher the level it is assigned to.
Attributes and characteristics are saved along with
information as nodes of the semantic network model being
also valid for all lower levels. Decisions are made along
distinctions between the hierarchy levels. Semantic
networks are mainly used for representations of
conceptual knowledge [13].
For instance, the paradigms of the topic map standard
support the representation of information as a semantic
network [14][15]. Topic types as more general concepts
are filed into upper levels, whereas a concrete instance of
a topic type is filed into a lower level of the hierarchy.
Traversing associations between topics supports human
information processing in creating new levels and filing
concepts into the network.
Schema
The schema model is a semantic network model
related approach for representing and filing information
and knowledge. It states that human beings process newly
acquired knowledge with regard to already filed
knowledge [13]. Nodes and characteristics of the semantic
network model are all together represented as a structured
schema [13]. General information is filed as a prototype

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

with default qualities, which is finally instantiated by
concrete objects.
Schemata are smoothly and constantly modified. The
changing environmental information availability is
constantly patterned and certain information aspects lead
to an expansion of already existing schemata after having
been effectively selected [12].
Jean Piaget distinguishes two kinds of schema
developments: On the one hand, the assimilation extends
the sphere of activity of a schema to a larger amount of
objects without changing the relevant schema. On the
other hand, the accommodation splits up already existing
schemata and new information is filed into new schemata,
if it sufficiently differs from already filed information
[12].
The schema model is mainly used for the
representation of factual knowledge and acting
instructions [12][13].
Propositional representations and mental models
Latest psychological theories assume that the
comprehension of certain facts is based on a combination
of propositional representations and mental models.
Propositional representations consist of mental
symbols describing the represented subject in a mental
language. Those representations are compositions of
simple symbols being composed following syntactical
rules [16].
Mental models can be put down to Johnson-Laird,
conceptualized in 1983. This approach states that mental
scenes spatially represent personally experienced or
adapted situations and facts [12][13].
Mental models belong to the group of analogous
representations. These representations have in common
that topological and physical qualities of the represented
phenomenon like size, color, and location are maintained
[13]. Mental models are structure and function correlated
to the represented subject [16].
Connectionism based representation
“Connectionism is neither a theory nor an ideological
approach, but contains a group of theories and approaches
[..]” [17]. This group of theories and approaches states
that the representation of information and knowledge is
describable as a certain wiring diagram and the resulting
state of a neuronal network [17]. These neuronal networks
consist of nodes and connections between the nodes. So
called feedforward networks arrange nodes in several
levels [13]. The top level consists of input-nodes; further
levels are built up by processing-nodes and finally, a last
level by output-nodes. The nodes within each level are
completely connected with each other [13]. Perceptions
meet the input-nodes, which are passed to the nodes
within the lower levels and processed by certain patterns
and finally reach the output-nodes. In- and outputs are not

principally symbolical in contrast to the semantic network
model, but can also be numerical [13][17]. Therefore,
representations are not automatically equated with
symbols [17]. Connectionism based representations are
mainly used for modeling cognitive processing, which is
hardly describable within pure symbolical approaches
[13].
Next to these shortly introduced approaches there are
further theories of mental representations of information
and knowledge. A definite generally acknowledged
explanation of information and knowledge representations
has not been proved up to now. E.g. Banyard does not
exclude a combinatory use of the models [12]. Schmid
states that symbolical as well as neuronal approaches are
established for modeling cognitive processing in the
meanwhile [13]. Paivios justifies the easily remembered
information transmitting effect of visualizations
establishing a dual coding theory. Therefore, images are
processed in a verbal as well as in a visual system [16].
Based on this dual coding theory, Kulhavy argues that
information is remembered best if it is encoded verbally as
well as visually [16]. Though this multi-modal
information encoding must not be too extensive according
to Rickheit, Barattelli and Sichelschmidt, the verbal
encoding only has to have a supporting effect [7].

4. Visualization processes
The encoding of information into visualizations passes
through several stages, which are layered in a ‘pipeline’.
Such a visualization pipeline can be identified within
almost every visualization technique.

Figure 1. Visualization process following Chi [18]
The visualization process following Chi can be
subdivided into three transformation stages (v. fig. 1) [18]:
Initial data is transformed into analytical abstractions by
analytical computations within a first stage. The resulting
analytical abstraction is transformed into a visual
abstraction within a second stage. Within a third stage, the
resulting geometry data is transformed into scenes, which
are finally projected onto a display.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Filtering: data transformation
Data transformation is the first stage of the
visualization pipeline. Appropriate analytical processes
like interpolation, reduction, or filter techniques generate
an empirical model on the basis of raw data describing the
structure of the addressed phenomenon. Among others,
the raw data preparation process consists of the
determination of decisive qualities, the diminution to a
presentable complexity, or the interpolation of insufficient
data in dependence of the visualization intention.
Mapping: visualization transformation
The visualization transformation is the crucial stage of
the visualization process. The prepared data is translated
into abstract geometrical objects. The selection of a
suitable geometrical form of representation for the
empirical model is decisive at this stage of the
visualization process. Based on abstract mostly nonspatial data, the visualization of information cannot be
reduced to spatial coordinates. Therefore, this stage is
marked by a translation from n dimensions into
geometrical and topological qualities of visual objects like
color, form, and texture.
Rendering: viewing transformation
The viewing transformation is the last stage of the
visualization pipeline. The rendering process translates the
resulting geometrical abstraction into a two dimensional
visual form of representation, which is finally projected
onto a display.
The modular design of the visualization pipeline
neither presupposes a sequential nor a stiff execution.
Several operations are executed at each transformation
stage to translate the data from one stage into data of the
following stage. Users can manipulate operators of the
transformation processes and therefore, take influence on
the next data stage to a certain degree.
Chi and Riedl formalize the approach of taking
influence within their Data-State-Reference-Model (v. fig.
2) [18]. At each transformation stage users can affect a
certain amount of authorized operators. Chi and Riedl
differentiate four stages corresponding to the relevant
transformation stages of the visualization pipeline: value,
analytical abstraction, visualization abstraction, and view
[18]. A certain class of Within Stage Operators is assigned
to each of these four stages that do not change the
underlying data structure [18]. The transformation from
one data stage to the following stage is called Data
Transformation Operator in the context of this approach
[18].
Users can generate different views on the data or
different visual representations by influencing the
appropriate transformation operator. E.g., they can make
use of certain filter techniques to generate a modified
analytical abstraction out of the raw data. Generally, user

interactions are possible at each of the different data
transformation stages.

Figure 2. Data-State-Reference-Model [18]

5. Small case: GCC K-Pool
As pointed out in [15] and [19], groupware-based
office systems provide an excellent environment for
organizational knowledge management. Within the
Groupware Competence Center (GCC) of the University
of Paderborn, the GCC K-Pool is used in almost every
part of operative work. It is a groupware-based repository
for several kinds of information objects. In particular,
books, conference information, links, media objects,
contributions and articles, and software information are
maintained in the GCC K-Pool. The different information
objects are enriched with numerous meta descriptors:
categories are used to set information objects in different
contexts, keywords describe the information objects in
detail, publishing information give further explanations.
The web front-end provides basic functionalities and
mechanisms to search, find, and navigate information
objects: alphabetical navigation about authors and themes,
full text search, categorizations with categories for
information object types, keywords, and user-defined
categories (v. fig. 3). In particular, these user-defined
categories form a simple semantic network model with
hierarchical organized attributes und characteristics. So
far, the advanced concepts of the schema model, of a
combination of propositional representations and mental

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

models, and of connectionism-based representation are not
implemented or supported in the current version of the
GCC K-Pool.

Figure 3. Web front-end of the GCC K-Pool
We have developed three different visualization tools
to explore the complete information space and to create
additional value, contexts, and knowledge. In [19] we
have defined several requirements of an efficient
navigation tool for structured data.
In our first approach, we use the HyperbolicTree
concept to visualize and to modify categories in the GCC
K-Pool (v. fig. 4). A key functionality of the
HyperbolicModeler is the use of Focus + Context
technologies. Focus + Context is a graphical navigation
concept that enables users to browse large amounts of
hierarchically arranged data while drawing items of
interest into focus without losing their context. It makes
the structure of complex trees transparent and intuitive to
navigate. Supporting mechanisms are cut and paste, drag
and drop, and the search for text in category structures.
Such technologies make maintaining a hierarchical
structure very efficient [19].

Figure 4. HyperbolicTree front-end of the GCC
K-Pool

The first step of the visualizing process, the data
transformation, takes place manually. The relevant
information objects are set in the intended context by
choosing the proper categories. An implication is an
implicit diminution to a presentable complexity. In the
visualization transformation process selected information
objects are translated into geometrical objects using
hyperbolic geometry algorithms (v. [19] and [20]). Further
transformations, like the projection of semantic link
network structures into trees described in [19], are not
necessary because categories are already structured
hierarchically. The viewing transformation into a two
dimensional visual form is part of the visualization
transformation; it is a functionality of the HyperbolicTree
(v. fig. 4).
The K-Viewer, our second visualization approach for
the GCC K-Pool, is based on graphs and graph-based resp.
visual languages (v. fig. 5 and 6). We have implemented
the K-Viewer using the extensive Java class library yFiles
that provides algorithms and components for analysing,
viewing, and layouting graphs, diagrams, and networks
[21]. This graphic engine provides essential building
blocks for Java applications that need to analyze,
visualize, edit, or automatically layout graphs, diagrams or
networks. Graphs are specified by definitions of graphbased languages; nodes represent topics resp. occurrences
to information objects and relations between topics, edges
represent connections between topics and relations. A
topic map forms the underlying data structure. [15] and
[19] describe how to create and maintain topic maps in
groupware-based environments. The topic map based on
the GCC K-Pool specifies decisive characteristics and the
complexity of visualizations within the K-Viewer. Thus,
the data transformation process takes place as part of the
configuration of the topic map. As mentioned above,
nodes and edges form geometrical objects. During the
visualization transformation, the used graphic engine
assigns geometrical and topological properties to nodes
and edges like different formed and colored objects for
nodes (v. fig. 5 and 6) [21]. Further, thumbnails represent
nodes to emphasize the individual characteristics of
information objects. Again, the viewing transformation
process translates the topic map structure into a two
dimensional visualization. The K-Viewer provides several
functionalities to reduce complexity of the visualization.
Particularly, different graph layout algorithms are
implemented, which offer diverse layout styles like
hierarchic, orthogonal, or circular (v. fig. 5 and 6). In
addition, functionalities like search for requested
information objects, a hierarchical tree view, and a graph
overview support users in navigating and searching the
visualized information objects of the GCC K-Pool.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 5. K-Viewer – organic
Our third visualization approach for the GCC K-Pool,
called Sky Surfer, is a web-based application that makes
extensive use of the former standard Virtual Reality
Modeling Language (VRML), now X3D, to render a
semantic linked network of information objects (v. fig. 7
and 8). In this context, information comprehended in the
underlying data structure is identified, analyzed, and
finally clustered to semantic fragments. This clustering
operation is accomplished by a Java servlet, parameterized
by a knowledge worker. The knowledge worker can state
a density interval applied to the resulting fragments, from
which users can finally choose appropriate values for the
visual representation. Each semantic fragment is
represented by a graph-based three-dimensional
visualization technique, called context tree. The Sky
Surfer’s user interface is divided into two parts: the
VRML engine renders the scene and depicts the resulting
visualization on the left side of the display. A Java applet
on the right side acts as a control panel. It provides
different interactive manipulating options to operate the

Figure 6. K-Viewer – circular
visual presentation.
The underlying data structure is a topic map similar to
the K-Viewer. Thus, the data transformation process is a
part of the topic map maintenance. Again, nodes and
thumbnails with different geometrical and topological
properties represent topics. Compared to the K-Viewer, in
the process of visualization transformation relations
between topics are represented by edges. Another
significant difference is the reduction of the data structure
to three dimensions in contrast to the reduction of the data
structure to two dimensions in the K-Viewer. This
provides several advantages for the navigation of the
visualized data structure (v. above). In the viewing
transformation process, the VRML engine translates the
geometrical abstraction of the data structure into a two
dimensional representation for the output on a display.
Users endue the same movements like in real threedimensional environments. They can move along each of
the three axes. Furthermore, visual objects can be selected
and users can zoom to the area of the selections. Another

Figure 7. Sky Surfer

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 8. Sky Surfer

way of directly zooming to objects is a more ‘semantic
based’ way: users can search for certain topics using their
identifiers, i.e. their base names, and zoom to accordingly
found topics. Besides to movements concerning users
themselves, they can also move visual objects within the
visual scene to a certain degree. Furthermore, the Sky
Surfer provides functionalities to rotate the whole visual
scene, to extract certain context trees, and to make a
topic’s context tree rotate, so that each topic located in a
context tree is rotated to the user’s visual fixation area.
All three visualization tools provide capabilities to
support structure recognition and therefore, to enhance
human apprehension. The HyperbolicModeler achieves
this using Focus + Context, landmarks, hyperbolic
geometry, hierarchy and a kind of fisheye display, and the
use of colors and thumbnails. Representations of
information objects are positioned in the hierarchical order
analogous to their occurrence in the information object’s
categories and they are differentiated by individual visual
metaphors. This differentiation by varying geometrical
and topological characteristics of visual metaphors is also
realized in the K-Viewer. In particular, the different
implemented layout styles, which can be easily assigned
to underlying data structures, increase the quality of visual
information gathering. Further functionalities like a
hierarchical tree view, an overview of the complete
visualized data structure, and functions to show or hide
parts of this structure support the diminution of
complexity and therefore, contribute to cognitive
processes of users. The most advantages of the first two
visualization tools are also provided by the Sky Surfer like
different kinds of user interactions on visualized data
structures and the use of individual visual metaphors. A
unique and decisive characteristic of this tool is the
support of motion perception. Users can manually move
through the visualized data structure; also, automatic
flight tours lead users through the complete visualized
scene. The positions of the visual objects in the threedimensional space are static but users can navigate freely
through this space. One challenge for further
developments of the Sky Surfer is the motion of visual
objects; translations and rotations have to be implemented
as well as context-sensitive changes of visual object’s
properties (cf. section 6).
The described visualization tools both amplify and
accomplish cognition by using external representations of
the real world. In addition, the human brain always
remembers memorized things in a specific context. The
basic way of thinking is the association. The data
structures, which underlie the K-Viewer and Sky Surfer,
support this way of thinking by pointing to related
information objects while users look at a specific
information object.

6. Conclusions and future areas of research
Four approaches of mental representations of
knowledge and information as well as Chi’s visualization
process have been presented. Based on this, we have
introduced three visualization tools for the groupwarebased organizational memory system GCC K-Pool. Each
approach provides different functionalities to explore and
navigate the GCC K-Pool. A combined use leads to
substantial synergies in finding relevant information
objects in the GCC K-Pool, creating new contexts, and
linking visual metaphors with cognitive processes. In
addition, the findings are of high practical relevance
because the growing flood of available information
objects increases the need for efficient mechanisms and
tools to exploit this extensive information offer.
Prototypes of the visualization tools have been
implemented and can be used in the daily work.
Moreover, we will continue the work on these tools to
refine their functionalities in terms of the theories and
models presented in this contribution. Specifically, issues
of collaborative visualization, i.e. users can explore and
navigate shared visualizations, will be addressed.
Eventually, we will conduct an empirical evaluation to
discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each
prototype in a broader context.

References
[1] Card, Stuart K.; Mackinlay, Jock D. and Shneiderman, Ben
(1999), “Readings in Information Visualization - Using Vision to
think”; Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Francisco.
[2] Niggemann, Oliver (2001), “Visual data mining of graph
based data”; Ph.D. thesis, University of Paderborn.
[3] Hendee, William R. (1997), “The perception of visual
information”; Springer, New York.
[4] Däßler, Rolf (1999), “Informationsvisualisierung: Stand,
Kritik
und
Perspektiven“;
http://fabdp.fhpotsdam.de/daessler/daessler/paper/InfoVispp.pdf.
[5] Kawalsky, Roy S. (1993), “The science of Virtual Reality
and Virtual Environments”; Addison-Wesley Verlag,
Workingham.
[6] Ware, Colin (2000), “Information visualization: perception
for design”; Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.
[7] Barattelli, Stefan; Sichelschmidt, Lorenz and Rickheit, Gert
(1998), „Blickbewegungen vor dem Bildschirm“; in: Forschung
an der Universität Bielefeld, 17, 15-19.
[8] Jesse, Roland and Strothotte, Thomas (2001); “Motion
Enhanced Visualization in Support of Information Fusion”; in:

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

ARABNIA, Hamid R. (Publ.), Proceedings of International
Conference on Imaging Science, Systems, and Technology
(CISST’2001), CSREA Press, Las Vegas, June 2001, pp. 492–
497.
[9] Goldstein,
Eugene
“Wahrnehmungspsychologie: eine
Akademischer Verlag, Heidelberg.

Bruce
Einführung”;

(1997),
Spektrum,

[10] Furmanski, Chris; Azuma, Ronald and Daily, Mike (2002),
“Augmented-Reality
Visualizations
Guided
by
Cognition:Perceptual Heuristics for Combining Visible and
Obscured Information”; in: Proceedings of International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR'02),
Darmstadt, September 2002, p. 215.
[11] Sämmer, Günter (1999), “Paradigmen der Psychologie –
Eine wissenschaftstheoretische Rekonstruktion paradigmatischer
Strukturen im Wissenschaftssystem der Psychologie“;
Dissertation Universität Halle-Wittenberg.
[12] Banyard, Philip et al. (1995), “Einführung in die
Kognitionspsychologie“; Ernst Reinhardt Verlag München,
Basel.
[13] Schmid, Ute and Kindsmüller, Martin Christof (1996),
“Kognitive Modellierung“; Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
[14] Rath, Dr. Hans Holger and Pepper, Steve (1999), “Topic
Maps: Introduction and Allegro”; in: Proceedings of the Markup
Technologies 99, Philadelphia, USA.

[15] Smolnik, Stefan; Nastansky, Ludwig (2002), “K-Discovery:
Using Topic Maps to Identify Distributed Knowledge Structures
in Groupware-based Organizational Memories”, accepted for:
Thirty-fifth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, (CD-ROM), January 2002, Computer Society Press.
[16] Weidenmann, Bernd (1994), “Wissenserwerb mit Bildern“;
Verlag Hans Huber.
[17] Hildebrandt, Helmut and Scheerer, Eckart (1993),
”Interdisziplinäre Perspektiven der Kognitionsforschung“;
Verlag Peter Lang GmbH.
[18] Chi, Ed H. (2000), “A Taxonomy of Visualization
Techniques using the Data State Reference Model”;
http://www2.parc.com/istl/groups/uir/pubs/items/UIR-2000-09Chi-ChiInfoVis2000-Taxonomy/Visualization.pdf.
[19] Smolnik, Stefan and Erdmann, Ingo (2002), “Visual
Navigation of Distributed Knowledge Structures in Groupwarebased Organizational Memories”; in: Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV02) International Symposium on Knowledge Domain Visualization
(IV02-KDViz), IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos
CA, Washington, Brussels, Tokyo, pp. 8.
[20] Inxight Software, Inc. (2001), “Inxight Star Tree”;
http://startree.inxight.com/, Santa Clara, CA, USA.
[21] yWorks GmbH (2002), “yFiles”; http://www.yworks.de,
Tübingen.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

