Metadata Visualisation with VisMeB
Peter Klein, Harald Reiterer, Frank M¨uller, Tobias Limbach
University of Constance
Faculty of Computer and Information Science
Universit¨atsstr. 10, 78467 Konstanz, Germany
Peter.Klein, Harald.Reiterer, Frank.Mueller, Tobias.Limbach @uni-konstanz.de

Abstract
This paper presents a new framework for Metadata
Visualisation Systems called VisMeB (Visual Metadata
Browser). It is based upon redesign ideas from the INSYDER1 System that were come under extensive evaluations. The aim of our approach is to improve the process
of ﬁnding relevant information in an intuitive yet multifunctional way. We use a ScatterPlot in combination with a so
called SuperTable for visualisation. The two techniques are
tightly coupled and present unique possibilities of interaction through the use of visual ﬁlters.

1. Introduction
In the ﬁeld of Information Visualisation and Visual Data
Mining a lot of effort has been spent on inventing new visualisations that utilize the human visual capabilities [9], [18].
The goals of the research project VisMeB (Visual Metadata Browser) presented in this paper are to support users
in ﬁnding relevant data and to enhance the possibilities of
browsing and ﬁltering an information space. To achieve
these goals, our system makes use of different visualisations. Our thesis is that users will beneﬁt in terms of effectiveness, efﬁciency and satisfaction[8] from our Visual
Metadata Browser compared with common list or tablebased presentations.
This thesis is not undisputed, as our own work has shown.
The preceeding visual information seeking system INSYDER has been evaluated with an usability test (n=40) see[13]. As a main result the traditional result list presentation has beaten the visualisations (e.g. bar charts, tile
bars, scatterplot). In the these tests the different visualisations that were offered turned out to confuse the user. The
users were overwhelmed by the presentation of the different alternative views. Thus, they frequently decided to use
1 Internet

Systeme de Recherche; ESPRIT project #29232

the simple table, which is the intuitively most easily understandable, but also the least elaborated view. In the user
study measures of user satisfaction and measures of effectiveness and efﬁciency did not correlate. It therefore seems
to be appropriate, to integrate the more effective and efﬁcient visualisation into the table structure. The aim of this
integration is to dissolve the distinctiveness of the several
visualisations and to provide the impression of one single
visualisation with different levels of detail. This newly created table is called SuperTable, because it offers a variety
of possibilities that a conventional table does not offer. As
an alternative we still offer an improved version of the ScatterPlot. The user tests showed that a considerable number
of participants preferred this to the table based visualisations. We have also developed a new visualisation called
CircleSegmentView that could be used for query preview
purposes during the formulation of the query as well as a
kind of visual ﬁlter on the result set. We assume that users
will use our system on a regular basis and therefore a training period for the visualisations will be expected to them. In
the end our visualisations will cover the whole information
retrieval process beginning at the query stage and ending at
the relevance feedback.
VisMeB is engineered in the framework of the EC-funded
project INVISIP2 . After this introduction, section 2 will
give a short overview of the system. Section 3 summarizes former evaluations. The query stage with a Query
Preview[19] will be presented in section 4. We will focus on the different visualisation and interaction techniques
we used, combining the two visualisations SuperTable and
ScatterPlot in section 5 and 6. The related work that has
inﬂuenced our own will be presented in section 7. Conclusions and outlook are given in section 8.

2 INVISIP - Information Visualisation for Site Planning, funded by EC,
Project No. IST-2000-29640, www.invisip.de

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

2. Architecture of VisMeB

VisMeB has a client-server architecture implemented in
Java (see Fig. 1). The client consists of the query processor / query preview and our result visualisations. Every visualisation is tightly coupled [2] to the other. The visual
metadata browser can work as an application or an applet
within a Web browser. The system provides a dedicated
server for storing user-, session- and conﬁguration data. So
it shares all advantages of a classic terminal application (e.g.
stop your work on your laptop and continue with the same
session at your workstation in the ofﬁce). A visual assistance to formulate the query is given with a domain speciﬁc
query form with query preview functionality. Access to different metadata bases leads to the display of search results
in table and plot based visualisations. Both visualisations
have their interactions synchronized. Another important as-

Figure 1. Architecture of VisMeB.

pect of the redesign process was to make VisMeB available
for different application domains and not be constrained to
web search like the original INSYDER search tool. We implemented a visual conﬁguration editor to easily adopt VisMeB to different data sources. This conﬁguration tool is
able to access a database with its tables and to map different columns to different visualisations. It can deﬁne interactions between visualisations, ﬁlter behaviour and will
be able to adapt to different clients, like PDA, TabletPC or
Workstations.

3. Formative Evaluations
The evaluation results of the predecessor of VisMeB
(INSYDER System [13]) suggested a table based visualisation enriched with various visualisations. Following of
an usability engineering lifecycle we started with a paper
mock-up and 8 test users from the computer and information science department. The results from this ﬁrst evaluation were encouraging: All participants thought that visualizing search results is more effective than the mere textual
display. Seven from eight stated, they could imagine working with the visualizations on a regular basis and all participants stated they could work with the prototype again after
a longer break.
Based on these ﬁndings a ﬁrst HTML prototype was created. This mock-up served as a click through prototype and
was successfully used in the context of the INVISIP project.
Two formative evaluations (n=8; user tests with expert users
from the expected INVISIP target user group and n=31; using an online questionnaire) were made in October 2002
with two design variants of the SuperTable. Our intention
was to compare the different interaction schemes, layouts
and visualisations against each other. Overall feedback was
very positive, but the limited synchronisation between SuperTable and ScatterPlot (partially dependent on using an
html-mockup) was one major criticism, that led us to the
interaction techniques described in the following sections.
The next step was an implementation of VisMeB in Java.
This ﬁrst Java Prototype is fully operational and serves as
the test bed for our latest study. The test scenario was developed using a search with three query terms on a database
containing crawled WebPages on geographical information
systems (GIS). The participants (n=8) worked with the SuperTable in both design variants. They were project members of the INVISIP project and therefore from the user domain of spatial planners. It is important to notice that all
had considerable computer literacy, but none of them had
detailed experience with visual information retrieval. The
results of this study showed minor usability ﬂaws within
the GranularityTable (second design variant). We address
these issues in section 5.
In further test sessions with information retrieval experts
we want to evaluate the efﬁciency of VisMeB with the two
SuperTable design variants compared to a traditional result
list. We will use these tests as well to evaluate our idea of a
query preview versus a form based interface. Additionally
we plan to evaluate 2D vs. 3D ScatterPlot variants.

4. The Circle Segment View
To further improve the smooth change of modalities
from the textual input of the query to the visualisation of
the result set, the idea of Query Previews [19] was adapted.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Additionally the users beneﬁt from this because of the prevention of zero-hit or mega-hit queries. The evaluation results [12] for the INVISIP domain show a clear tendency
towards ﬁltering out irrelevant data based on some metadata attributes as early as possible.
We introduced a visualisation called Circle Segment View
(CSV) (see Fig. 2), which emphasizes the distribution of
the data. This visualisation also gives continuous feedback
about the size of the result set. The effectiveness of control
depends on the data type and on the cardinality of the values. So it should be carefully considered which data from
our databases matches the requirements of the query preview.
The CSV primary consists of two circles (pie charts). The
whole circle represents the information space. The different segments show the distribution of the data concerning
one type of metadata. For each circle the user can choose
this attribute by a drop-down list. The size of each segment
hints at the distribution of the data. A legend on top provides an overview of the different categories. Dots on the
circle represent documents. This works up to a few thousand documents. For more documents the dots will vanish
until the user has ﬁltered out some of them. The dots are
placed using two other numeric metadata. One metadata is
mapped on the radius (e.g. rank) and another one on the angle (e.g. release date). The metadata mapped on the angle
is supported by a colour gradient to gain easy access to that
information (e.g. the older documents lay in the brighter
drawn area). To inﬂuence this visualisation and ﬁlter out
some documents we use two AlphaSliders [1]. The ﬁrst
one (vertically orientated) speciﬁes a range for the radius
(e.g. rank from 50..100), the second (horizontally orientated) a range for the angle (e.g. a range from 1982..2002
is mapped to 10 degrees). By clicking on the AlphaSliders
a popup window appears and let us change the assignment
for the radius or the angle. Users have the possibility to link

Figure 2. Circle Segment View connected to
our Movie database, showing the ﬁlter criteria: Genre(left) and language(right) for the
segments, rank and year on the axes and angles

both circles through Boolean expression chosen in a dropdown menu. They can select the documents of a segment by
simply clicking on it. The dots will change their colours (selected documents are rendered in red) for feedback and the
size of the result set will be altered. A typical scenario for a
search in a movie database looks like this: The user wants to
see a new science ﬁction movie with a good ranking in the
English language. He chooses ’Genre’ for the category of
the ﬁrst circle and ’Language’ for the second. After clicking
on the segments representing ’English’ and ’Science Fiction’ he adjusts the sliders to a range of [1995..2002] for
’Release Date’ and [70..100] for ’Rank’. He uses the predeﬁned Boolean ’AND’ operator on both circles. The user
now adjusts the sliders until the result set reaches an appropriate size. After that he will continue to examine the documents with the SuperTable, ScatterPlot or BrowserView.
The CircleSegmentView acts also as a visual ﬁlter in conjunction with the ScatterPlots and the SuperTable.

5. The SuperTable
Two visualisations dominate the global appearance of
the result presentation: The SuperTable and the ScatterPlot.
They unify the typically used result list with unique combinations of visualisations. The user has the opportunity to
obtain a quick overview of the result set as a whole and explores relevant objects step by step. Through brushing and
linking we can achieve synchronized visualisations. The
SuperTable itself consists of a combination of different visualisations. BarCharts, TileBars, and highlighted texts are
examples of such.
The idea behind those versions is a granularity concept,
which enables the user to change the depth of information
he is interested in. For the redesign three decisions were
made: The visualisations are to be integrated in a way that
clearly indicates the nature of the visualisations as several
views on the same data. The visualisations should range
from a very low detailed version, which allows the display
of a large data set, to a very high detailed version, which
allows thorough examination of single data. We called this
granularity concept. Granularity is a term used in photography to describe the accuracy of pictorial presentations on
ﬁlm. The higher the granularity, the more details can be
seen on a picture. Exposures of high granularity ﬁlms can
be very large and still show a smooth and detailed picture.
Exposures of low granularity ﬁlms appear grainy even on
small sizes.
The result set is aligned in a tabular form where each row
presents visual and textual information to one single element. The user has the possibility to change the degree of
detail for the whole table or for single rows. If he chooses
to change a single row the table becomes distorted embedding the focused row into the context of the unchanged

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

rows. Changing several rows, which are not neighboring
even leads to multiple distorted views.
Even if the user accepts the concept of the different visualisations being only different views on the same data, one
major problem remains: How to interact with these different
views? How can the user switch from one view to another?
There are many possibilities that can be thought of in order
to solve this problem, but none suggests itself. We therefore decided to realize two different design variants of the
SuperTable and await the user tests before deciding
The ﬁrst of the design variants is called LevelTable (see Fig.
3). Because the change from one level of detail to another
is only possible for the whole result set shown in the table,
we called it LevelTable
The ﬁrst level offers an overview of all documents; the last
level shows the document itself. In between you ﬁnd different levels increasing their amount of information from the
ﬁrst to the last level. This drill-down functionality is named
”Focus of Interest”.

Figure 4. GranularityTable connected to a
WWW Database, visualising the results for
the query ”New York City travel guide”. From
top to bottom: Level 1 through Level 6

6. The Scatterplot

Figure 3. LevelTable in ”Level 3” with BarCharts, Relevance Curve, Date and Abstract
acting on the same setting as in Fig. 4

Every metadata has its own column, but not all metadata
are visible in every level. One special example is the ”Relevance Curve” (Fig. 3, fourth column from the right). It
represents the document as a whole, whereas the length of
the visualisation reﬂects the document’s length. Important
text passages are marked by vertical bars whose height illustrates the factor of importance. This metadata can only
be seen in level 3. In return the ”Language” or ”Doc. Type”
columns (which were visible in the former levels) disappear
in this stage. In the LevelTable, buttons are used to change
levels on the whole document corpus. Pressing a button
moves the documents in a body to the corresponding level.
The second design variant named GranularityTable (see
Fig. 4) differs slightly from the LevelTable. Instead of buttons for level altering sliders are used to change from one
level to another. The number of levels differs (now you can
choose between six). Only four columns are used to show
all the information: selection, visualisation, text, and granularity. The visualisation as well as the text column change
their display from level to level, always giving more information than the previous level. In this version it is possible
to move single rows to another stage, not only the documents in a body.

The ScatterPlot (see Fig. 5) is a two-dimensional coordinate system enhanced by the possibility to allocate the xand y-axis with every kind of metadata used in the current
context. It eases a comparison of document properties, for
example document date, size or relevance. Using different
colours for the data points adds another dimension that allows a faster perception of important facts.

Figure 5. Cutting of the ScatterPlot with Moveable Filters ﬁltering for German Language and
a tool tip

A standard technique to provide additional information
of visualisations is the use of tool tips. Moving the mouse
over an object shows the characterizing properties. All
available information can be retrieved without using the table. Using a combination of SuperTable+Scatterplot enables the user to get a general idea of the entire result set
as well as the possibility to explore interesting documents
in detail. To reach this goal both visualisations are synchronized, using brushing and linking. As a result, for example

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

ﬁltering out objects in the ScatterPlot leads to the display of
only the corresponding objects in the SuperTable, or marking rows in the SuperTable marks the respective data points
in the ScatterPlot.
The moveable ﬁlters, available in the ScatterPlot, affects the
SuperTable as well. Moreover, it is possible to use different lenses simultaneously, which makes it necessary to add
half-transparent lens colors. If the lens ﬁlters out objects,
the background of the corresponding objects in the table
changes to the lens colour. Please notice that the ﬁlter only
inﬂuences the covered region of the ScatterPlot. The ﬁlters
can be resized an relocated. Fig. 6 shows an example: Two
ﬁlters are activated: The red one ﬁlters all documents with
relevance from 65 to 77; the green one ﬁlters for French
language. This results in a dyed SuperTable. We decided to
use this technique to realize the interaction because a permanent movement in the table by removing objects would
obviously confuse the user. Moreover, the possibility to explore the ﬁltered documents would be taken away. Zooming

Figure 6. Movable Filter interaction with SuperTable. Axes of the ScatterPlot are mapped
to ”Size in Bytes” and ”Size in Words”

to a cloud of points has the same effect in the SuperTable
as ﬁltering out points by a global ﬁlter: only the zoomed
objects are visible in the table. In this context another technique is used to support the user not to lose the track of
things: focus and context using distortion. A light reddish
frame surrounding the white main area of the ScatterPlot
represents this context area (see Fig. 5). Zoomed objects
stay in the focussed centre while the remaining objects are
mapped to the coloured edge. Distortion in x and y direction makes it possible to display all data points in a correct

proportion. Special attention was directed to the problem
of data point overlapping in the ScatterPlot. Objects frequently own the same metadata of speciﬁc characteristics
leading to the same position in the drawing area. Therefore
we introduced a new glyph, the so called Multi Data Point
or MDP to point this fact out to the user. The circles in the
ScatterPlot are replaced by squares that are partially or fully
colour ﬁlled to indicate if some or all underlying data points
are selected. A right click on such an MDP let the user access information about the included documents. Details of
the item being actually in the foreground normally shown
by tool tips can be seen in a special text area.

7. Related Work
Based on a redesign of the Web search system INSYDER [17], we developed VisMeB with different novel features to avoid the cognitively demanding traditional representation of metadata result sets, which often leads to a long
list of document attributes. The SuperTable idea, explained
in detail in [10], was inspired by distortion based overview
+ detail techniques as can be found in a number of tabular
data representations. The Table Lens [16] is a well known
example. In both systems textual and graphical data representations are used simultaneously. The TileBars can be
traced back to the work of [7]. The use of bar charts for visualisation of document relevance is inﬂuenced by the system Inquery [20]. The ScatterPlot was inﬂuenced by different systems as well. Examples are visual information seeking systems like Film-Finder [2], Envision [15] or xFIND
[3] to name just a few. The use of Moveable Filters was inﬂuenced by [6]. The tight coupling between the SuperTable
and ScatterPlot via brushing and linking was inspired by
work of [14]. The use of a granularity concept to present
the information at different levels of detail has been worked
out in cooperation with Maximilian Eibl [5]. The Circle
Segment View uses a similar approach as [4] in their ”Circle Segments” but in contrast to them we use each circle to
show only the distribution of one dimension and not of all
dimensions in the data set. We also offer the possibility to
combine two circles with the help of Boolean operators.
VisMeB is intended to be a scalable visualisation framework for different application domains. A similar approach
could be found in [11]. To reach this purpose we have implemented the Visual Conﬁguration and Assignment Tool
that allows adapting our framework to different multidimensional data sets.

8. Conclusions and Outlook
Well-known and approved visualisations in combination
with powerful interaction techniques have been integrated
in VisMeB in a clever way. A sophisticated data model in

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

combination with a Visual Conﬁguration and Assignment
Tool enables us to adapt the system to a wide range of ﬁelds
like stock market, medical data or spatial data to name a few
(scaleable framework). The following features of VisMeB
allow a visual exploration of multidimensional data sets in
an intuitive and novel way:
A visual query preview functionality based on the CSV to
prevent the user from zero-hit or mega-hit queries,
a kind of ”drill-down and roll-up” functionality based on
the SuperTable using a granularity concept offering the user
step by step more detailed information and vice versa,
a kind of ”slice and dice” functionality on the result set with
the help of 2D and 3D ScatterPlots; which allows the user to
explore the multidimensional information space allocating
interesting meta data on the different axes.
The latest usability tests proved that we are on the right way.
The LevelTable is superior to the GranularityTable. The latter need some design improvements to be an adequate alternative. This will be proven in further user tests. It is also
planned to extend the tests on further application domains
and to evaluate other parts of VisMeB in further usability
studies more deeply. In a ﬁnal usability study we will compare VisMeB with a metadata browser offering only a simple table based presentation to prove if our main hypothesis,
that VisMeB leads to a more effective and efﬁcient retrieval
process compared with traditional retrieval systems using
only list or simple table based presentations of the results,
holds.

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

References
[1] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. The alphaslider: A compact and rapid selector. In Proceedings of the CHI ’94 Conference, pages 365–371. ACM Press, 1994.
[2] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query ﬁlters with starﬁeld
displays. In J. O. E. B. Adelson, S. Dumais, editor, Conference Proceedings Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 313–317, New York, 1994. ACM Press.
[3] K. Andrews, C. Gtl, J. Moser, V. Sabol, and W. Lackner.
Search result visualization with xﬁnd. In Proceedings of the
Second International Workshop on User Interfaces to Data
Intensive Systems, IEEE 2001, 2001.
[4] M. Ankrest, D. Keim, and H.-P. Kriegel. Circle segments’:
A technique for visually exploring large multidimensional
data sets. In Proceedings of Visualization ’96, Hot Topic
Session, San Francisco, CA, 1996, 1996.
[5] M. Eibl. Devid: a media design and software ergonomics
integrating visualization for document retrieval. Information
Visualization, 1:139–157, 2002.
[6] K. Fishkin and M. Stone. Enhanced dynamic queries via
moveable ﬁlters. In Conference Proceedings Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pages 23–29, New York, 1995. ACM
Press.
[7] M. Hearst. Tilebars: Visualization of term distribution in
full text information access. In Conference Proceedings

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 59–66, New
York, 1995. ACM Press.
ISO. Iso9241-11: Ergonomic requirements for ofﬁce work
with visual display terminals (vdts) - part 11: Guidance on
usability. Technical report, ISO, 1996.
D. Keim. Information visualization and visual data mining.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):1–8, 2002.
P. Klein, F. Mueller, H. Reiterer, and M. Eibl. Visual information retrieval with the supertable+scatterplot. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Information
Visualization (IV 02), pages 59–66, 2002.
M. Kreuseler and H. Schumann. A ﬂexible approach for
visual data mining. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 8(1):39–51, 2002.
T. Limbach, P. Klein, F. Mueller, and H. Reiterer. Visualising metadata: Level- vs. granularity concept in the supertable/scatterplot framework. In HCI International 2003,
2003.
T. Mann. Visualization of Search Results from the World
Wide Web. PhD thesis, University of Konstanz, 2002.
http://www.ub.unikonstanz. de/kops/volltexte/2002/751/.
C. North and B. Shneiderman. Snap-together visualizations: Can users construct and operate coordinated views.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, pages
715–739, 2000.
L. Nowell, R. France, and D. e. a. Hix. Visualizing search
results: Some alternatives to query-document similarity. In
Proceedings of the 19th Annual International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation
Retrieval, pages 67–75, New York, 1996. ACM Press.
R. Rao and S. Card. The table lens: Merging graphical and
symbolic representations in an interactive focus + context visualization for tabular information. In Conference Proceedings Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 318–322,
New York, 1994. ACM Press.
H. Reiterer, G. Muler, T. Mann, and S. Handschuh. Insyder
- an information assistant for business intelligence. In Proceedings of the 23 Annual International ACM SIGIR 2000
Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, pages 112–119. ACM Press, 2000.
R. Spence. Information Visualization. Addison Wesley
(ACM Press), 2001.
E. Tanin, C. Plaisant, and B. Shneiderman. Browsing large
online data with query previews. In Proceedings of the Symposium on New Paradigms in Information Visualization and
Manipulation (NPIVM) 2000. ACM Press, 2000.
A. Veerasamy and S. Navathe. Querying, navigating and
visualizing a digital library catalog. In Proceedings of the
Second Annual Conference on the Theory and Practice of
Digital Libraries, 1995, 1995.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

