Colour merging for the visualization of biomolecular sequence data
Mark Alston and Colin G. Johnson
Computing Laboratory
University of Kent
Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NF
England
C.G.Johnson@kent.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel technique for the visualization of data at various levels of detail. This is based
on a colour-based representation of the data, where “high
level” views of the data are obtained by merging colours together to obtain a summary-colour which represents a number of data-points. This is applied to the problem of visualizing biomolecular sequence data and picking out features
in such data at various scales.

1. Introduction
In recent years the science of bioinformatics has come to
prominence. This is driven by the easy accessibility of large
amounts of biological data, e.g. through the human genome
project. One way to cope with the complexity of bioinformatic data is via visualization techniques. This paper gives
a brief introduction to the main problems in bioinformatics,
surveys the role of visualization in bioinformatics and then
introduces a new method for the visualization of DNA and
protein sequences based on merging colours. Applications
are described in finding features of protein sequences and in
public understanding of science.

2. A quick trip through bioinformatics
In recent years vast amount of information about biological systems has been obtained by various sequencing
projects which extract the core information content from
DNA and proteins found in an organism. Understanding the
role of DNA and proteins in the functioning, development
and evolution of organisms is the core concern of modern
molecular biology.
Proteins are the molecules which play the largest role
in the functioning of the body. Many of the struc-

Gary Robinson
School of Biosciences
University of Kent
Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NJ
England

tures in the body are made out of various kinds of protein molecules, and other kinds of proteins are involved
in carrying energy around the body and in communicating chemical signals between organs. The set of protein
molecules encompasses many complex, diverse chemical
structures—yet at the same time the basic structure of protein molecules has a basic simplicity. Whilst proteins are
complex three-dimensional structures, they are made from a
“one-dimensional” molecule which is folded many times to
produce a complex three-dimensional structure. The meaning of one-dimensional here is that the molecule is constructed of a linear strand of basic units, with no branching.
There are twenty of these basic units: they are known as
amino acids.
The order of these amino acids are specified by DNA
molecules in the nucleus of the cell. DNA is another linear chain molecule, however there are only four basic units
in DNA (usually abbreviated to C,A,T and G). The process
of protein production from DNA is in two parts. Firstly
strands of a DNA-like molecule called RNA are copied
from the DNA strand (transcription), and these are carried
to a molecular machine in the cell called a ribosome, which
translates these into protein strands. The order of amino
acids along the protein strand is specified by the order of the
bases on the DNA strand. Three bases on the DNA strand
code for one amino acid on the protein strand, according to
the code given in figure 1 (the amino acids all have threeletter abbreviations).
When this reaches the DNA triple which codes for stop,
the process stops and releases the protein strand. Interactions between the components of the strand cause it to fold
up into a complex three dimensional structure (an example is given in figure 2). Understanding the relationship between the sequence of amino acids and the final structure is
one of the most complex open questions in bioinformatics.
A gene is the DNA which encodes for one protein molecule.
In order to understand these DNA and protein structures
a large amount of information has been measured about var-

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3. Visualization techniques in bioinformatics

Figure 1. DNA to amino acid coding.

ious organisms. Much of this information is in the form of
sequences. A DNA or protein sequence is an ordered list of
the basic units which make up a particular gene. Sequencing
projects are one of the main sources of information in bioinformatics; the most well known sequencing project is the
Human Genome Project, which sequenced the DNA in humans. Another kind of information which feeds into bioinformatics projects is information about the 3-dimensional
structure of proteins, obtained for example by X-ray diffraction or NMR spectroscopy. Databases of these various kinds
of data, in standard file-formats, are a major resource for
bioinformatics.
A number of questions can be approached using bioinformatic data. One of the most important classes of questions concerns the relationships between DNA sequences
or protein sequences. If we put two protein sequences sideby-side, can we identify regions of similarity? If so, do
these indicate a common history for these two proteins, or
is it more likely that the two converged to a similar structure due to the need to provide similar function? Given a
number of seemingly related DNA sequences, can we determine the probability that they have a common ancestor, and
determine the likely order of branching? Given a protein
structure, can we determine qualitatively different regions
within the strand which could map to different functional
domains in the final folded structure? Given a DNA or protein sequence and a corresponding 3-dimensional protein
structure, can we relate features of the sequence to features
of the structure, or predict the structure from the sequences?
Detailed introductions to bioinformatics can be found in
a number of books and web tutorials [1, 2, 6].

A large number of packages are available for the analysis
of bioinformatics data, and many of them incorporate some
way of interacting visually with the data.
One aspect of visualization is viewing the 3-dimensional
structure of protein molecules. A number of programs facilitate this, and an example, viewed using the Swiss pdbviewer program, is given in figure 2. An innovative recent approach to the visualization of such structures is the
use of 3D-printer technology [11, 12]. This produces 3dimensional plastic models of the molecules. These have
been successfully applied in the investigation of “lock-andkey” type matching between molecules. Another innovative
way of visualizing these is by using stereopsis pictures [5],
similar to the system used to give the illusion of depth in
random-dot stereograms.
Another aspect is the display of predicted relationships
between various organisms. The difference between DNA
sequences can be used to predict the order in which species
will have branched off from each other over evolutionary
time. Presenting this data in an intuitive way is an interesting challenge, which draws heavily on work in graph drawing [4].
Perhaps the greatest challenge in bioinformatics visualization is the display of superficially simple sequence data.
The previous examples in the section have concerned structures which have a natural structure to be visualized; in sequence display visual information has to be put in to emphasize appropriate features.
One feature of sequences which can be highlighted using visualization techniques is similarity between similar
regions along a chromosome. For example the MapViz program [9] allows the user to select regions along a DNA
strand and dynamically creates graphs to show which parts
of the strand have some similarity to that region.
One method which is commonly used in the display of
protein sequences is to break the set of twenty amino acids
into a number of subsets so that substitution of one amino
acid for another is more likely within the subsets than between subsets. A number of chemical properties of the
amino acids can be used to create such a set, as can statistical analysis of proteins which are slightly different from
each other in sequence but known to belong to the same
lineage. Over evolutionary time mutations will sometimes
cause a change in the DNA which leads to a change in the
protein; however changes which make radical differences
to the structure of the protein are less likely to be preserved
by natural selection, as such changes are likely to disrupt
the functioning of the organism. Therefore the most likely
substitutions are between amino acids with similar chemical characteristics; a hydrophobic amino acid will probably
substitute for another hydrophobic one, for example. These

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 2. An illustration of a folded protein, created by the swiss-pdb viewer program.
substitution-subsets can each be given a colour in a visualization, as illustrated in figure 3.

Another attempt to visualize such properties is given by
Williams et al. [14]. They represent each amino acid position with five vertical spaces, with the spaces filled according to the chemical properties of the residues (e.g. the
lowest space is filled in if the residue was hydrophobic).
This leads to sequences resembling Morse code, with some
structural features claimed to be highlighted by the resulting pattern of dots. Similarly, Ninio & Mizraji [7] employed
graphical coding of DNA bases; this was effective at highlighting simple, repetitive patterns. Another related representation is the sequence logo developed by Schneider et al.
[10]. The properties of a protein’s amino acids may also be
visualized in the form of a line graph, as illustrated by figure 4 which shows the protein rhodopsin using the Eisenberg hydropathic scale.

However much of this work simply presents small scale
details, and there is little attempt to provide a “higher level”
view which visualizes structural features spanning a number
of positions in the sequence. Trying to pick out mid-scale
features from these kinds of visualizations is like looking
closely at a picture printed in a newspaper, where you see
lots of dots and find it difficult to see the details of the picture. The aim of out current work is to provide visualizations which enable us to pick out such mid-range features.

Figure 3. Using colour to overlay substitutionsubsets onto a number of related sequences.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 4. A line-graph representation of a
chemical property of a protein sequence.

4. Colour and visualization
Clearly colour is an important aspect of visualization
[3, 13]. Colour can be used to highlight features in a complex data set, and to give an illusion of distance, e.g. text
in some colours seems “closer” than text in others. Colour
can be used to label discrete entities by assigning different colours to different data items or different types of data,
and it can be used to label continuous data by assigning values on some continuum through colour space to values of a
continuous variable. People have a natural affinity to colour
(though colour-blindness of various sorts is common), and
colour can be used to add another dimension to a visualization which can be readily perceived orthogonally to other
ways of representing data.
The work below extends this use of colour in a new
way. Individual items from a sequence of data are assigned
colours, however we make use of merging colours together
to get a higher level view of a parts of a sequence.

5. Using colour merging to visualize sequences
We have been investigating how the merging of colours
can be used as a visualization technique in bioinformatics.
By merging we mean the combining of colours representing
various pieces of information into a single colour, as in paint
mixing or the merging which occurs when several coloured
lights are shone on the same area.
This colour merging would seem to have potential as a
visualization technique. The core idea is that a mapping
is established between values which items in a data set can

Figure 5. The mapping from polarity to RGB
colour values.

take and colours. A view of the information can then be created where each item in the set is displayed by displaying a
piece of that colour. Then to “zoom out” to a coarser scale
view of that information, we blend the colours together using some kind of averaging process in colour space.
An application has been created which allows the display of bioinformatic sequence data in this fashion. The
sequence data is read in using the standard FASTA file
format [6]. This data is displayed as a “bar-code” across
the screen. Initially each of the basic units in the sequence (bases for DNA sequences, amino acids for protein
sequences) are allocated a thin rectangle. For proteins a
number of different features of the sequence can be illustrated. In the default view each of the amino acids is assigned a a discrete colour, chosen by picking twenty colours
widely scattered around the RGB colour space. This can be
changed to display one of a number of chemical characteristics of the amino acids, for example their polarity and
hydrophobicity: an example of the scale used is illustrated
in figure 6. These “bar-codes” can be stacked on top of another to compare different properties of the same sequence,
or to compare several sequences for similarity (figure 5).
The user can then adjust the resolution of the image by
choosing a “merge value” m. Starting from the beginning,
the sequence is divided into blocks of length m. These are
then replaced by a single merged colour. This new colour
is calculated by regarding the colours as points in an RGB
colour-space, and taking the centroid of those points to get
a new point which is then interpreted as a colour.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 6. The interface to the application.

Figure 7. The structure of the rhodopsin transmembrane protein.

6. Applications 1: Features of sequences
We can see two main areas of applications for this work.
The first is as an exploratory tool to allow bioinformatics
researchers to pick out areas of sequences which have distinctive features contrasted with neighbouring regions.
As a case study consider the protein rhodopsin, which is
a molecule which plays a part in processing light which falls
on the retina of the eye. This is a transmembrane protein,
which winds in and out of a cellular membrane, as illustrated in figure 7. An interesting question is to work out
which parts of the protein sequence form the (seven) transmembrane regions.
The protein sequence for rhodopsin was loaded into the
program and a number of characteristics examined. the

characteristic which proved to have most distinctive patterns for this protein was hydrophobicity, which is represented in the program using a scale which represents highly
hydrophobic regions as blue colours through to red colours
for contrasting hydrophilic regions. The size of the merge
group was varied from 3 to 15, and regions of high contrast
noted; in particular a number of red-blue boundaries were
identified (at various scales) which indicate a large change
in the character of the protein at that point (figure 8). It is
notable that some regions are more visible at certain merge
values, which demonstrates the usefulness of being able to
adjust the merge resolution.
Table 1 indicates the location of these regions, whilst
table 2 presents a comparison of the consensus prediction
from the visualization compared with actual known values from experimental data. The visualization was broadly
successful at identifying the transmembrane regions of
rhodopsin, and would have enabled an expert (who would
know that sharp hydrophilic/hydrophobic regions are indicative of transmembrane domains) to identify the protein
family to which this belongs. Some of the transmembrane
regions (1,5 and 6) were highlighted across all four merge
levels, and it was these which compared most strongly with
the real data. Regions 2,3 and 7 showed a fair correlation between predicted and actual values, highlighted across
three merging levels. Region 4 was poorly highlighted, being weakly identified at one merge level. It is unlikely that
this would have been easily identified without some knowl-

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 8. Merged sequences at different merge values.
edge of the number of transmembrane regions in advance.
Also, at merge levels 3 and 7, a spurious region was identified between residue numbers 190–196. Nonetheless the
overall results are promising.
In current work on these kinds of proteins, transmembrane regions are identified by looking at data on a number
of hydrophobic scales: each brings a little more confidence
to the interpretation of where the transmembrane regions
are located. A similar situation exists with the current application; higher confidence can be put in data which shows
similar highlights across a range of merge values.

7. Applications 2: An intuitive understanding
of protein translation via colour merging
A second area of application for these ideas is in public understanding of science. The ideas of genetic, protein
biology and bioinformatics are difficult to explain due to
their abstract nature. The idea of colour merging provides
an analogy between a process with which many of the general public are familiar (e.g. through mixing paints) and one
with which they are not familiar (molecular biology).
In particular the process of taking triplets of DNA bases
and converting them into amino acids (as in figure 1) has a
nice analogy with merging colours. A small number of base
colours can be mixed in different combinations to produce
different colours. Providing the proportions are different,
then the order of the three chosen base colours will be im-

portant too.
An interesting challenge would be to calculate a set of
four base colours in an appropriate colour space so that
the results of this merging process produce a set of colours
so that each amino acid is represented by a set of similar
colours.

8. Future work
We have presented a snapshot of current work in
progress on developing a novel visualization algorithm and
an application in bioinformatics. A number of important
challenges remain, such as making a rational choice for
the colours rather than just using arbitrary information→
colour maps, and testing the system with bioinformatics experts who are not familiar with the details of how the system
works.
A full colour version of the paper is available from
the author’s web site http://www.cs.kent.ac.uk/
people/staff/cgj/

References
[1] T. Attwood and D. Parry-Smith. Introduction to Bioinformatics. Addison Wesley Longman, 1999.
[2] A. Brazma, H. Parkinson, T. Schlitt, and M. Shojatalab. A
quick introduction to elements of biology—cells, molecules,

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Merge Value
3
7
12
15

55–60
8–14
57–63
49–60
46–60

Location of red/blue boundary regions (residue number)
94–97
136–139
190–192 271–276 292–294
226–228
305–324
99–105 134–140?
190–196 260–266 316–322
218–224
156–168? 217–228 265–276
92–105 127–140
211–225 256–270

Table 1. The predicted values for the location of the rhodopsin transmembrane regions, determined
by red/blue boundaries at various scales in the hydrophobicity bar-code. A ? next to a number
indicates a weak match.
Transmembrane region number
Actual location
Consensus from visualization

1
37–61
46–63

2
74–98
92–105

3
114–133
127–140

4
153–176
157–168?

5
203–230
211–228

6
253–276
256–276

7
285–309
292–324

Table 2. Comparison of predicted and actual positions of the transmembrane regions in rhodopsin.

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

genes, functional genomics, microarrays. http://www.
ebi.ac.uk/microarray/biology_intro.html.
R. Jackson, L. MacDonald, and K. Freeman. Computer Generated Color. Wiley, 1994.
J. Klingner. Visualizing sets of evolutionary trees. Technical Report CS-TR-01-26, University of Texas at Austin,
Department of Computer Sciences, 2001.
A. Lesk. Introduction to Protein Architecture. Oxford University Press, 2001.
A. M. Lesk. Introduction to Bioinformatics. Oxford University Press, 2002.
J. Ninio and E. Mizraji. Perceptible features in graphical
representations of nucleic acid sequences. In Pickover [8],
pages 33–42.
C. A. Pickover, editor. Visualizing Biological Information.
World Scientific, 1995.
A. J. Robinson and T. P. Flores. Novel techniques for visualizing biological information. In Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology, 1997.
T. D. Schneider and R. M. Stephens. Sequence logos: A
new way to display consensus sequences. Nucleic Acids Research, 18:6097–6100, 1990.
T. S. Shimizu. The Spatial Organization of Cell Signalling
Pathways: A Computer Based Study. PhD thesis, University
of Cambridge, 2002.
T. S. Shimizu, N. Le Nov`ere, M. D. Levin, A. J. Beavil,
B. J. Sutton, and D. Bray. Molecular model of a lattice of
signalling proteins involved in bacterial chemotaxis. Nature
Cell Biology, 2:792–796, 2000.
C. Ware. Information Visualization. Morgan Kauffman,
2000.
A. Williams, K. Chenault, and U. Melcher. Graphic representations of amino acid sequences. In Pickover [8], pages
6–14.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

