Recreating Our Selves: ZENetic Computer
Naoko Tosa
Massachusetts Institute of Technology/JST/ATR
naoko@mit.edu
Abstract
We tried to develop an interactive system that could
help us recreate our conscious selves by calling on
Buddhist principles, Asian philosophy, and traditional
Japanese culture through the inspirational media of ink
painting, kimono and haiku. “Recreating our selves”
means the process of making the consciousness of our
‘daily self’ meet that of our ‘hidden self’ through
rediscovering creative resources deep within us that may
have been forgotten but still resonate with vital meaning.
In other words, this interactive system is based on the
effort to meld our consciousness and unconsciousness in
complete harmony. It is difficult to achieve this through
traditional logic-based interaction. We succeeded in
reaching this goal by setting as our target of scientific
computing images from the above traditional Japanese
media.
Keywords: Narrative technology, Editorial Engineering,
Cognitive consciousness.

1. Introduction
We applied the several processes described below so
that our system could give users the experience of
“recreating our conscious selves.” By completing each
process, the user develops a connection between his or her
hidden self, full of imagination and creative energy, and
his or her daily conscious self, which directly interprets
the ambient reality. This is achieved by stimulating the
imagination through storytelling.

2. Philosophy of The Storytelling System
The user creates a virtual world by manipulating
images of Asian sansui ink painting on a computer
display with an intuitive and enjoyable interface tool.
These images, which typically symbolize nature and
philosophical precepts, provide a dramatic departure from
our view of daily experience. This awakens us from our
daily consciousness and gives free reign to subconscious
imagination.
Based on the user’s sansui design, the system infers
his or her internal consciousness and generates a story that
the user can ‘enter’ via the computer display. This story
further shakes the user’s consciousness. This is not a
complete story, such as those in the movies or novels,
but fragments of short stories. Experiencing these

Seigo Matsuoka
Editorial Engineering Laboratory
kaho@eel.co.jp
episodic stories makes users feel uneasy and arouses their
subconscious desire to construct a whole story by linking
the fragments.
In each of these inchoate stories, the system stimulates
interaction through Zen dialogue or haiku as a form of
allegorical communication. The user is asked questions
that do not have “correct” answers. He or she is forced to
deal with these ambiguous provocations while
subconsciously struggling to answer the questions. This
subconscious effort inspires the user to find ways of
linking the stories into an original whole.
The user responds to objects presented by the
interactive system, whether a graphic image or a
provocative statement, by manipulating input means,
such as a virtual calligraphy brush or rake of a Zen rock
garden, on-screen images, or simply clapping hands.
Coupled with the subconscious effort exerted to link the
fragmentary stories, these user interactions decrease the
gap between our daily self and our hidden self. This
process of bringing our selves together is called MAInteraction; ma is a Japanese concept that stresses the
ephemeral quality of experience.
Finally, the user has a dialogue with a “bull,” which
has frequently been used as a metaphor of our hidden self
in Zen Buddhism. Through this dialogue, users
experience a virtual unification of their daily self and their
unconscious self into a recreated conscious self.

3. Technical Realization
3-1 Input
3.1.1 3D Sansui (ink-painting) Engine
We have developed an original 3D interactive inkpainting engine by utilizing the artistic perspective called
sanen, where a single picture is composed in a way that
allows it to be viewed from three viewpoints. This is the
concept of perspective employed in traditional Japanese
sansui (ink painting).
Depending on how users draw their ink painting, the
engine classifies their hidden personality into one of five
types by using a neural network and applying the
Buddhist concept of goun, which says that five basic
spirits and materials make up our world. These five
concepts of personality based on goun can be summarized
as follows.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

through the presented display. Depending on the
personality type of the user various stories are generated.

3.2 Storytelling Generation
3.2.1 Storytelling network through MA-Interaction
generated by an algorithm using Buddhism
MA-Interaction is an interaction model that uses
symbolism and allegory, and it derives from traditional
approaches in Buddhism. The environmental information
of a story, such as scenery or weather, is used for godai,
which encompasses all elements of structure: water, fire,
wind, sky, and earth.
Figure1 3D Ink painting Sansui Engine

ῌῌῌῌῌῌῌEarth = Cloud (North)

a)✔⍖✔ ✜Shiki) is how nature and materials actually exist.
b)✔

✔ ✜Jyu) is the intuitive impression.

ῌ

ῌῌWater = Rain
ῌῌῌ(West)

c)✔Ε (So) is the perceived image.
d) ✔ ✜Gyo) is the process of mind that activates your
behavior.
e)✔ ✔ ✜Shiki) is the deep mental process that lies behind
all of the above processes.
3.1.2. Mechanism of the engine classifies invisible
personality for user
Personal subconscious information from Ink Painting
by NN
Input---12Elements * 3position = 36 unit
Output---S1(Goun Information) One unit
Teaching data of NN-----10 kinds of +/-Goun

Air

Wind = Mist
(East)

Fire = Snow (South)
Figure3 “Godai”
Context generation depends on the user’s goun
information (see above) from the Zen Buddhism
interaction. The MA-Interaction wakes users from the
chaotic hodgepodge of the fragmentary stories and
compels them to use their heightened imagination to
create a unified story. This response of a clarified vision
is akin to the sudden realization of the nature of things by
a student who is given a confounding koan question by a
ZEN Master.
3.2.2 Generation of MA-Interaction by chaos engine
MA-Interaction
involves
three chaos
agents
Chaos1(ZEN Master),
Chaos2(User Agent) and
Chaos3(Target Agent).

Jyu +

Shiki +

Shiki -

So -

Figure2 Example Composition of the
picture
Accordingly, the system evaluates the drawing produced
by the user and classifies him or her into one of the above
five personality types. This goun data is what determines
the “hidden personality” of the user which is an
important factor in subsequent interaction. After this,
users can enter into, their own 3D ink-painting picture

Input:We provide four types of Zen Interaction.
Each ZEN Interaction has a two-dimensional involvement
model for analyzing a user’s interaction. These
involvement models are briefly defined as follows
ZEN Interaction1: How many times the mouse is
clicked
vs. the distance between the locations of
consecutive clicks on this model’s tablet interface.
ZEN Interaction2: The density of the dots the
user has drawn vs. the angles of curved lines the user has
drawn with this model’s interface tool.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

ῌ

ZEN Interaction3: Which part of the animated
catfish on this model’s interface the user picks up (head
vs. stomach vs. tail)
ZEN Interaction4: Timing of the user’s
handclapping vs. the location on the display where the
user starts to rake in this model’s animated Buddhist rock
garden.
From these models, the resulting data go to the chaos
engine.
The following describes the chaos engines[8][9]
we employed to concretely generate this system’s unique
Ma-Interaction. The algorithm proceeds by following
certain steps at particular parameter points as described
below.
First, depending on the user’s invisible
personality data from the goun analysis, the system
generates the first sentence of the story in a statement
reflecting Zen communication. Then parameter point St(0),
where animation appears on the display, is generated from
the user’s immediate response—given by some input
means like catching a catfish—to the story’s opening line.

is an inverse relationship between this distance and the
amount of influence, or trigger, the Zen Master exerts
over the user.
Far distance (i.e., user consciousness experiences a big
change)
=> Small Trigger (Zen Master will give a small trigger to
User.
Middle distance (i.e., user consciousness experiences a
partial—‘half’—change)
=> Half Trigger (Zen Master and User have an equality
relationship)
Small distance (i.e., user consciousness experiences only
a slight change)
=> Big Trigger (Zen Master will give a big trigger to
User)

The St(1) point (next target) is in turn determined by the
user’s next interaction. So the user data can move from
St(0) to St(1), the Chaos2 (User Agent) tries to
synchronize with Chaos3(Target Agent) [9]. At the same
time, Chaos1 (Zen Master) moves to interfere with this
activity. The change (in goun) of the user data is seen as a
change in animation.
If Chaos2 can synchronize with the user data, the user
data succeeds in reaching the next target. However, if
Chaos1 succeeds in thwarting the efforts of Chaos2 to
synchronize with the user data, the user data is trapped at
a “Compromise” point between Chaos2 and Chaos1.
As can be seen from the above, the process that eventually
generates the personality-based unique story is powered
by both the movement toward targets prompted by user
interaction and the chaos that is variously generated
within all of the players’ agents. In fact, it is the interplay
between these two forces that characterizes this interaction
system.
The interaction between the User Agent and the Target
Agent is influenced by a “trigger” from the Master Agent.
When the trigger from the Master Agent is strong, the
synchronization between the User Agent and Target Agent
is blocked and it becomes more difficult for the User to
reach the Target.
3.2.3 “Trigger level” of Zen Master Chaos
The Zen Master’s “trigger” is determined by the
distance between the user’s goun data (reflecting the user’s
hidden personality) and the target point or compromise
point as a result of the interaction. This distance can be
interpreted as the amount of change experienced by the
user’s consciousness. Essentially, as outlined below, there

Figure4 Story generation and Trigger level
by chaos engine

3.3 OUTPUT
Ubiquitous character: Zen Master Chaos
Zen Master Chaos migrates to a character depending on
the user’s trigger level result. The reached point in the

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

interaction becomes the output data for the next context.
Our system provides three kinds of output:

2)
3)

1) Goun data based on the Zen Master’s position in the
interaction space.
2) Migrated data from the trigger level determined for
the user.
3) Emotion Map from the facial expression of the
character in the interaction.

4)
5)

User’s hidden self is classified according to its goun
by Neural Net.
User enters his or her picture and journey begins.
Haiku is used to generate a fragmentary story that’s
illustrated in sansui painting.
MA-Interaction is generated from the Zen Interaction
along with chaos (then go back to Step 3 several
times).
The Ten Bulls Story Interaction finally takes place
(Zen method by Ten Pictures method).

How the trigger level corresponds to a character
Depending on the user’s trigger level, the next scene will
be generated by using sound and images. Here are some
examples:

5. Hardware Integration:

*In the 3D sansui picture: the Zen Master migrates to a
certain object in the interaction space. Then his speech
changes depending on the user’s trigger level.

System

*In the Zen Interaction scene:
1) Catching the catfish with a gourd: the Zen Master
migrates to the animated catfish. Then he makes
movements as the catfish based on the user’s trigger
level.
2) The Zen Master migrates to the old Storyteller. In this
character, he then changes his speech depending on the
User’s trigger level.

Ethernet

PC for
Rock Garden Interface
Real Computer Graphics

PC for
Rock Garden Interface
Real Computer Graphics

PC for
Ink Painting Engine
Real time
Computer Graphics
Output Sound

Tablet Screen

As a further implementation, the ink-painting engine
based on computer graphics can be integrated with a Zen
Buddhist Rock Garden Interface to enhance the physical
reality of the MA-Interaction.

Rock garden

Z

Tablet Screen

Screen

Figure6 Hardware System

6. Discussion:

Figure5 Rock Garden Interface

4. Software Integration:
1)

User makes ink-painting picture by manipulating
symbolic icons.

This is art & technology research on a narrative way to
use subconscious information in a computerized, chaosdriven experience.[8][9] The operating principle of this
system is “story,” which here means the subconscious
interplay between humans or between a human and nature.
The result of this process manifests in our subconscious
or conscious interpretation of such interactive
communication.
This system prompts users to form relationships from
fragmentary scraps of consciousness and to integrate these
components into a unified self through the mental
“awakening” inherent in Zen Buddhism training.
Therefore, this research makes a clear departure from the
traditional thinking on how to adopt interactive
technology.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

This means that our vision of the human-computer
relationship should not be bound to conventional notions
of the man-machine relationship. This higher vision of
how humans and computers interact is our final goal in
devising a true symbiosis for a system that achieves
satisfying harmony between humans and computers

7. Conclusions and Future Work
We gave a questionnaire to users who had experienced
the ZENetic Computer. From this, we received the
interesting result that everybody felt relaxed in a way that
they had never felt before. A conventional interactive
system works by controlling the user’s behavior. However,
our system allows users extremely wide latitude for free
interaction.

sentence control interactively. Moreover, this future
engine will carry out all story control operations by
incorporating the user’s unconsciousness.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Dr. Peter Davis for helping to design and
tune the chaos engine.

9. REFERENCE
[1] Seigo Matsuoka, “The Science of the beauties of nature,”
Shunjusha (1994)
[2] Seigo Matsuoka, “Fragile,” Chikuma Shobo (1995)
[3] Seigo Matsuoka, “The Editorial Engineering
Knowledge,“ The Asahi Shimbun newspaper (1996)

of

Our revolutionary concept is that a system should not
direct the reactions of user but that users should
continually think about the meaning of their answers and
about the meaning of the interaction itself. This new
approach was applied so that flexible reactions could be
made depending on each person, even with consideration
given to the user’s particular sense of humor expressed in
the interaction. Consequently, a new way of creating
interactive contents also needs to be developed.

[4] Seigo Matsuoka, “Reading the History of Information,”
NTT Publishing (1997)

This system will be exhibited at the MIT Museum and
later at other venues worldwide. Future work will involve
expanding the range of how we apply synchronized chaos,
for example over a networked environment, to the
storyteller engine and real-time computer graphics. Also,
we will develop this engine so that it can perform

[8] Peter Davis, “Adaptive mode selection using on-off
switching of chaos”, International Journal of Bifurcation
Chaos, 8 pp. 1671-1674 (1998)

[5] Seigo Matsuoka, “Japanese Style,” The Asahi Shimbun
newspaper (2000)
[6] Ryohei Nakatsu and Naoko Tosa, “Interactive Movies,”
Handbook of MULTIMEDIA COMPUTING, pp. 701-712, CRC
Press (1999)
[7] Naoko Tosa, Chapter 19: Expression of emotion,
unconsciousness with art and technology, “AFFECTIVE
MINDS,” ELSEVIER, pp. 183-201 (2000)

[9] Y. Liu, P. Davis, “Dual synchronization of chaos”,
Physical Review E, 61 pp. R2176-R2179 (2000)

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

