Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Fingerprint Liveness Detection Using Curvet Energy and Co-occurrence
Signatures
Shankar Bhausaheb Nikam
Department of Computer Science & Engg.
Motilal Nehru National Institute of Tech.,
Allahabad, India
shankar_nikam@rediffmail.com

Suneeta Agarwal
Department of Computer Science & Engg.
Motilal Nehru National Institute of Tech.,
Allahabad, India
suneeta@mnnit.ac.in

Abstract
threats like: spoof finger attack at the sensor, attack on
software modules (e.g. Trojan horse attack on feature
extractor or the matcher), replay attacks, modifying
enrolled templates, attacking channel between template
databases and matching module, etc [1].
This paper proposes a new texture-based method
using newly introduced curvet transform to alleviate
the problem of spoof attacks at the sensor level.
Wavelets are largely used in fingerprint liveness
detection. However, researchers [2]-[5] have shown
that, although wavelets are very effective in
representing objects with isolated point singularities,
these are not efficient to represent line singularities. To
alleviate the problem, recently ridgelet transform
which deals with line singularities in 2-D is introduced
[3]. We know that, natural images often contain curves
rather than straight lines, so Candes and Donoho [4]
proposed another multiscale transform called curvelet
transform, which handles curve discontinuities as well.
Ridge lines in a fingerprint image are oriented curves,
so naturally curvelets are very significant in fingerprint
processing.
A simple visual analysis of real and spoof fingerprint
images (see Fig. 2) shows that, these images exhibit
different textural characteristics. Moreover, inter-ridge
distances and ridge widths are also observed to be
different for real and spoof fingerprints. These
observations motivate us to use curvelet texture
features to characterize textural differences observed in
real and spoof fingerprints.
We decompose an image in various curvelet
subbands, and then we calculate curvelet energy and
co-occurrence signatures as feature vectors. We apply

This paper proposes a new curvelet transform-based
method to detect spoof fingerprint attacks in
fingerprint biometric systems. It uses only one image to
differentiate a real fingerprint from a spoof one. It is
based on the observation that, real and spoof
fingerprints exhibit different textural characteristics.
Textural measures based on curvelet energy signatures
and curvelet co-occurrence signatures are used to
characterize fingerprint texture. Dimensionalities of
the feature sets are reduced by running Pudil’s
Sequential Forward Floating Selection (SFFS)
algorithm. We test two feature sets independently on
various classifiers like: AdaBoost.M1, support vector
machine and k-nearest neighbor; then we fuse all the
mentioned classifiers using the “Majority Voting Rule”
to form an Ensemble classifier. Classification rates
achieved with these classifiers for energy signatures
range from ~94.12% to ~97.41%. Likewise,
classification rates for co-occurrence signatures range
from ~94.35% to ~98.12%. Thus, the performance of a
new liveness detection approach is very promising, as
it needs only one fingerprint and no extra hardware to
detect vitality.
KeywordsCurvelets,
Fingerprints,
Ridgelets, Texture features, Wavelets.

Liveness,

1. Introduction
Due to increasing demand of security and access
control applications, nowadays fingerprint biometric
systems are in great demand. However, although these
systems are extensively being used for authentication
applications, robustness of these against fake fingers is
an important issue. These systems contain
vulnerabilities and are susceptible to various kinds of

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.9

217

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of a proposed liveness detection method.
To alleviate these problems, we propose a new
curvlet-based method that uses only the first captured
image. Since the proposed method detects vitality
using only one image, it is very efficient than the
related works. Moreover, it will also reduce the cost of
a biometric system, as no additional hardware is
required.

SFFS and then we test features on various classifiers
like: AdaBoost.M1, support vector machine and knearest neighbor. Finally, we form an Ensemble
classifier by fusing all the three mentioned classifiers
using the “Majority Voting Rule”. Schematic diagram
of a proposed method is shown in Fig. 1.
The following sections give details of the proposed
method. Related works are discussed in Section 2.
Proposed method is described in Section 3. This
section describes curvelet energy and co-occurrence
signature extraction. Real, Fun-Doh spoof and Gummy
spoof fingerprint databases are also described here.
Experimental results are presented in Section 4.
Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and gives some
future directions.

3. Proposed approach
3.1. Real, Fun-Doh and Gummy fingerprint
databases
Fingerprint images are acquired from 185 real, 90
Fun-Doh and 150 Gummy fingers using Secugen
optical fingerprint scanner (Model-HFDU01). Casts
and moulds are created by using variety of artificial
materials, which are listed in table 1. We call
fingerprints created using Fun-Doh and Fevi-gum as a
mould material as “Fun-Doh” and “Gummy”
fingerprints, respectively

2. Related works
We know that, spoofing biometric systems is a
seriously growing problem. These systems can be
spoofed very easily by using fake fingerprints, which
are made by using artificial materials like clay, gelatin,
etc. To safeguard the fingerprint biometric system,
various anti-spoofing techniques are suggested in the
literature. These techniques use static and dynamic
properties of a finger to differentiate a real finger from
a spoof one. Static properties can be based on:
temperature, odor, impedance and electrical
conductivity of the skin, laser detection of 3-D finger
surface and pulse, spectroscopy, etc. The dynamic
properties are: skin-perspiration, pulse oximetry, blood
pulsation, E.C.G., skin elasticity, etc [6]. Researchers
[7] also proposed texture-based approach for liveness
detection.
Perspiration phenomenon is very significant to detect
liveness of a finger. However, it requires two
consecutive fingerprints captured in 2 seconds (or 5
seconds) to notice perspiration [8]. Therefore, the
method is slow. Some other methods in the literature
need extra hardware to detect liveness [6].

Table 1: Materials used for casts and moulds.
Materials

Use as
a cast

Use as
a mould

Plumber’s putty (e.g. M-seal adhesive)

Yes

No

Dentist’s materials (e.g. Aquasil soft
putty of silicone, PYRAX-RR cold
cure, Zelgan 2002 powder)

Yes

No

Playing clay (e.g. Fun-Doh)

Yes

Yes

Gelatin (e.g. Fevi-gum)

No

Yes

Plastic (e.g. soft plastic used in toys).

Yes

No

General purpose silicone sealent.

Yes

No

.

218

Fig. 2. Fingerprint images of the same person: (a) Real finger, (b) Fun-Doh spoof finger, (c)
Gummy spoof finger
typically curved rather than straight. So ridgelets alone
cannot represent such curves efficiently. However,
curved edge can be viewed as a straight line at
sufficiently fine scale. So to capture curved edges,
ridgelets can be applied in a localized manner.
Therefore, Candes and Donoho [4] proposed another
multiscale transform called curvelet transform to
represent curve discontinuities as well. Curvelet
transform partitions the curves into a collection of
ridge fragments and then uses ridgelet transform to
represent each fragment.

3.2. Texture Feature Extraction
Curvelet transform is specially designed for images
with curves and lines. It offers many advantages over
wavelets.
Wavelets
and
related
classical
multiresolution transform use a limited dictionary
made up of roughly isotropic elements occurring at all
scales and locations. The dictionaries do not exhibit
highly anisotropic elements which are independent of
scale. In contrast, basis elements of the curvelets
exhibit a very high directional sensitivity and are
highly anisotropic [4]-[5]. Since fingerprint is a pattern
of ridge lines which are curved in different directions,
curvelet
transform
provides
more
accurate
representation of fingerprint curves than the wavelets.
Due to multiresolution property of curvelets, minute
textural differences in real and spoof fingerprints are
easy to analyze in the curvelet domain. Researchers [9]
have shown that, information contained in curvelet
subbands
is
very
significant
for
texture
characterization; therefore we use curvelet features for
characterizing textural differences in real and spoof
fingerprints.

3.2.1.1 The Curvelet transform

Implementation of the curvelet transform involves
following steps [4]-[5]:
1. Subband decomposition: An image f is
decomposed into log 2 M wavelet sub-bands,
where M is the size of an image. Then,
curvelet subbands are formed by partial
reconstruction of these wavelet subbands at
various levels.
2. Smooth partitioning: Each subband is
smoothly windowed into “squares” of an
appropriate scale.
3. Renormalization: Each resulting square is
renormalized to unit scale.
4. Ridgelet analysis: Ridgelet transform is used
to analyze each square obtained from the
previous step.

3.2.1. Curvelets: A brief review
To overcome the weakness of wavelets in higher
dimensions, Candes and Donoho have pioneered
ridgelets [3]. Ridgelets deal effectively with line
singularities in two dimensions. Ridgelets are based on
mapping a line singularity into a point singularity using
the Radon transform [2]-[5]. Point singularity in the
Radon domain can be effectively handled by using the
wavelet transform. Thus, ridgelet transform is very
efficient for representing edges and other singularities
along lines than the wavelets [2]-[5].
We know that images contain edges, which are

The ridgelet transform is calculated by computing
the Radon transform Rf (t , θ ) first, and then 1-D
wavelet transform is applied to the slices Rf (., θ ) [4][5]. The Radon transform can be obtained by applying
the 1-D inverse Fourier transform to the 2-D Fourier

219

particular gray levels at particular spatial relationships.
This information can be summarized in two
dimensional gray level co-occurrence matrices, which
can be computed for various distances and orientations.
The GLCM element C (i, j , d , θ )
represent
probability that pair of pixels, which are located with
an inter-sample distance d and a direction θ , have a
gray level i and a gray level j.
We compute 13 texture features from each GLCM,
which are: angular second moment, contrast,
correlation, sum of squares, inverse difference
moment, sum average, sum variance, sum entropy,
entropy, difference variance, difference entropy,
information measures of correlation (two features)
[10]. We use d and θ as 1 and 450, respectively. We
concatenate GLCM texture features computed from all
the subbands to form a curvelet co-occurrence
signature.

transform of an image f, restricted to rectopolar grid
[4]-[5]. The block diagram for the digital
implementation of the ridgelet transform is shown in
Fig. 3. Various steps are [4]-[5]:
1.
2.

3.
4.

Compute the 2-D FFT of the image.
Perform cartesian to polar conversion. This is
achieved by substituting the sampled values of
the Fourier transform obtained on the square
lattice with the sampled values on a polar lattice.
Compute the 1-D inverse FFT on each angular
line.
Apply wavelet transform on the resulting angular
lines in order to obtain the ridgelet coefficients.

3.2.3. Sequential Forward Feature Selection (SFFS)
In Pudil et al.’s [11] SFFS, initially we assume that k
features have already been selected from the complete
set of measurements,
form an optimal set,

Y = { y j j = 1,2,..., D} to

X k . Algorithm consists of two

main steps: Inclusion and Conditional exclusion.
Inclusion is a forward optimization step that
selects best feature, xk +1 from the set of remaining
measurements,

Y − X k to form a feature set X k +1 .

The second step, conditional exclusion deletes the least
significant feature from the set X k +1 . The SFFS
method dynamically changes number of features
included or deleted at each step, hence called floating
search method. We use “1-Nearest Neighbor error” as
a criterion function.
We apply SFFS and then create two libraries of
feature vectors; one for curvelet energy signatures and
the other for curvelet co-occurrence signatures. We use
185 real, 90 Fun-Doh and 150 Gummy fingerprint
images to create feature libraries.

Fig. 3. Block diagram for Ridgelet transform.

3.2.2. Energy
extraction

and

co-occurrence

signature

In the proposed method, we decompose an image in

S = 3 scales using real-valued curvelets. We use

number of angles at the second coarsest level as 16. So
we get 1 subband at finest level L=1, 16 subbands at
2nd coarsest level L=2 and again 1 subband
corresponding to last coarsest level L=3. Thus, we
obtain 18 subbands. We measure energies of subbands
by computing means and variances of curvelet
coefficients. We concatenate these features to form a
curvelet energy signature.
We also compute gray level co-occurrence matrix
(GLCM) for each curvelet subband. Distribution of
pixel gray levels can be described by second-order
statistics like the probability of two pixels having

4. Experimental results
4.1. Classification results
We test two feature sets independently on various
classifiers. The first, AdaBoost.M1 is selected, as it can
be used in conjunction with other learning algorithms
to improve their performance. Using AdaBoost.M1, we
can turn a weak learner into a strong learner that can
correctly classify all but an arbitrarily small fraction of
instances. We use ‘Decision Stump’ as a weak learner.

220

required for co-occurrence signature extraction is
~0.734 seconds. Thus, energy signatures are
computationally efficient.

Support vector machine (SVM) is chosen as a second
classifier, as it is a state-of-the-art linear classifier.
SVM maps input vectors to a higher dimensional space
where a maximal separating hyper plane is constructed.
Radial basis function (RBF) kernel is used with its
parameters ‘C’ and ‘Gamma’ as 1 and 2.3,
respectively. Third, k-nearest neighbor is also used, as
it a well-known decision rule widely used in pattern
classification problems. We choose value of ‘k’ as 2, as
it results in the best performance. Finally, all the three
mentioned earlier classifiers are fused using the
“Majority Voting Rule” to build an Ensemble classifier
[12].
Confusion matrices for 10-fold cross-validation
testing are reported in table 2. We observe that,
performances of both energy signature as well as cooccurrence signature are approximately same. Also, we
notice that, results with an Ensemble classifier are
slightly better than the results achieved with other three
mentioned earlier classifiers.
The experiments are performed on Pentium-4, 2.8
GHz Processor with 2 GB RAM, running Windows
XP. Time required for curvelet energy signature
extraction is only ~0.016 seconds, whereas time

4.2. Comparison with related work
Abhyankar and Schuckers [7] have proposed a
liveness detection method using a single image; so we
select their work for comparison. We use the optical
fingerprint scanner for database creation, so results are
compared for Secugen optical fingerprint scanner case
only (see Fig. 4). We compare overall classification
rates achieved with a proposed Ensemble classifier
with the results in [7].
We observe that, proposed approaches based on both
energy signatures as well as co-occurrence signatures
clearly outperform approach in [7]. Researchers [7]
have obtained texture and ridge frequency information
using wavelets and used fuzzy c-means classifier for
testing. However, we observe that, the proposed
texture-based method employing curvelet transform
provide more accurate results, than the wavelet-based
results in [7].

Table 2: Confusion matrices for 10-fold cross-validation testing.

Curvelet Energy Signature

Curvelet Co-occurrence Signature

Assigned class
True class
Real
Real
FunDoh
Gummy

178
03
06

Real
FunDoh
Gummy

177
07
10

Real
FunDoh
Gummy

181
07
09

Real
FunDoh
Gummy

182
04
04

Overall
Assigned
Success
Class. rate
class
(%)
for
a classifier
Spoof
Real
Spoof
AdaBoost.M1 Classifier
07
96.22
180
05
96.24
87
96.67
04
86
144
96.00
05
145
Support Vector Machine (SVM) Classifier
08
95.68
181
04
94.12
83
92.22
07
83
140
93.33
09
141
K-nearest neighbor (KNN) Classifier
04
97.84
175
10
95.29
83
92.22
06
84
141
94.00
08
142
Ensemble Classifier
03
98.38
182
03
97.41
86
95.56
02
88
146
97.33
03
147

221

Success
(%)

Overall
Class. rate
for
a classifier

97.30
95.56
96.67

96.71

97.84
92.22
94.00

95.29

94.59
93.33
94.67

94.35

98.38
97.78
98.00

98.12

Fig. 4. Comparison with Abhyankar and Schuckers’ [7] method for real and spoof
fingerprint classification.

5. Conclusions and future directions
In this paper, a new single-image-based method
using curvelet transform is proposed to spoof-proof a
fingerprint biometric system. Classification rates
achieved with various classifiers for energy signatures
range from ~94.12% to ~97.41%. Likewise,
classification rates for co-occurrence signatures range
from ~94.35% to ~98.12%. Also, we note that, energy
signature extraction is computationally fast. Thus, the
performance of the proposed method is very
promising, as only one image is sufficient to detect
spoof fingerprint attacks at the sensor level. Moreover,
it will also reduce the cost of a fingerprint system, as
no additional hardware is required.
Following are some future directions:
• In curvelet analysis, performance of the method
relies more on features used to extract information
from curvelet subbands; so one can work on
efficient ways of modeling curvelet coefficients so
that more rich textural information can be
extracted from subbands.
• Also, one can explore further real and spoof
fingerprints of various kinds and study their
textural characteristics. This will help to design
new features based on curvelets, which will
process textural characteristics of fingerprints in a
better way.

[3]

Candes J., “Ridgelets: theory and applications,” Ph.D.
thesis, Department of Statitics, Stanford University,
1998.

[4]

E. Candes, D. Donoho, “Curvelets- A surprisingly
effective nonadaptive reprsentation for objects with
edges,” in Curve and Surface Fitting: Saint-Malo 1999,
A. Cohen, C. Rabut and L. L. Schumaker, Eds.
Nashville, TN: Van-derbilt Univ. Press, 1999.

[5]

J. L. Starck, E. Candes, D. L. Donoho, “The curvlet
transfrom for image denoising,” IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing, vol.11, no.6 pp. 670-684, June 2002.

[6]

S. A. C. Schuckers, “Spoofing and Anti-Spoofing
measures,” Information Security Technical Report, vol.
7, no. 4, pp. 56-62, 2002.

[7]

A. Abhyankar, S. Schuckers, “Fingerprint liveness
detection using local ridge frequencies and
multiresolution texture analysis techniques,” in Proc.
International Conference On Image Processing, pp.
321-324, 2006.

[8]

Sujan Parthasaradhi, Reza Derakhshani, L Hornak, S. A.
C. Schuckers, “Time-series detection of perspiration as
a liveness test in fingerprint scanners,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics-Part C:
Applications and Reviews, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 335-343,
August 2005.

[9]

S. Arivazhagan, L. Ganesan, T. G. Subhash Kumar,
“Texture classification using curvelet statistical and cooccurrence features,” in Proc. International Conference
on Pattern Recognition, pp.938-941, 2006.

[10] R. M. Haralick, K. Shamugam, and I. Dinstein,

“Textural features for image classification,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol.
SMC-3, no. 6, pp. 610-621, November 1973.

6. References
[1]

Nalini K. Ratha, “Enhancing security and privacy in
biometrics-based authentication systems,” IBM Systems
Journal, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 614-634, 2001.

[11] Pudil, Novovicova, Kittler, “Floating search methods in

[2]

Minh N. Do and Martin Vetterli, “The finite Ridgelet
transform for image reprsentation,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing,” vol. 12, no.1, pp. , Jan. 2003.

[12] Robi Polikar, “Ensemble based systems in decision

feature selection,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 15,
no. 11, pp. 1119-1125, 1994.
making- Feature article,” IEEE Circuits and Systems
Magazine, Third quarter, pp. 21-45, 2006.

222

