Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Development of Robot Simulation Software for Five Joints Mitsubishi RV-2AJ
Robot using MATLAB/Simulink and V-Realm Builder
Muhammad Ikhwan Jambak, Habibollah Haron, Dewi Nasien
Department of Modeling and Industrial Computing
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Systems
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
81310 UTM Skudai, Johor Bahru, Malaysia
{mohdikhwan@utm.my, habib@utm.my, dwien82@yahoo.com}
software package called Simulink. The Simulink has
been used to model the graphical design of the
Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robots and its dynamic in a 3D
virtual reality (VR) environment by means of the
provided Virtual Reality Toolbox. Such virtual
programming language, i.e. V-Realm Builder can be
used to apply the virtual reality modeling language
(VRML).
This paper is constructed as following. Section two
introduces the Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robot. The
methodology of this work will be described in section
three. The development, implementation and validation
of the proposed RSS will be reported in section four and
five respectively.

Abstract
The Robot Simulation Software (RSS) nowadays is
paramount important to increase the accuracy and
efficiency of industrial robot. This paper reports the
development of the RSS where a Mitsubishi RV-2AJ
robot has been taken as a case study. The project adopts
the virtual reality interface design methodology and
utilizes MATLAB/Simulink and V-Realm Builder as the
tools. A robot model has been developed and a RSS
software life cycle has been implemented.
Keywords--Robot
Simulation
Software,
Industrial Robot, Virtual Reality Modeling Language

1. Introduction

2. Mitsubishi RV-2AJ Robot

Industrial robot can be defined as an automatically
controlled, reprogrammable, multipurpose, manipulative
machine with several reprogrammable axes for industrial
automation applications. Robot simulation software
(RSS) has been widely used in order to avoid the
collision and to improve the industrial robot accuracy
and efficiency. This software is a robot builder and
motion simulator of robot joints through graphic
representation using solid modeling graphics [1].
Furthermore, the RSS also has been referred to a
simulation process of the robot arm incorporated with the
manufacturing, environment such as conveyer, sensor
and parts [2].
As simulation is the process of designing a model of
an actual or theoretical physical system, executing the
model, and analyzing the execution output [3], therefore
the RSS has two major components. Firstly is a robot
and its environment constructor/modeler and simulator,
and secondly is a virtual reality system to visualize the
model and to observe the dynamic of the robot and its
environment.
This paper reports the development of RSS for
Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robot using a MATLAB based

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.71

Robot Mitsubishi RV-2AJ as depicted in figure 1 is
a jointed arm robot type with five joints that five degree
of freedom (DOF). Each joint has 1-freedom of rotation
around its own axis, and an effector, which is attached at
the top of the arm. The slim design of the RV-2AJ
predestines it for applications in cramped quarters, where
it can perform handling and component placement tasks
with payloads of up to 2kg.

Figure 1 Mitsubishi RV-2AJ Robot

83

With the gripper oriented downwards the RV-2AJ
has a reach of 410mm and combines a maximum speed
of 2,100mm/s with a repeatability of ±0.02mm. Highprecision AC servo motors with integrated absolute
position encoders ensure reliable, maintenance-free
operation of this mighty mouse. The absolute position
encoder technology also makes it possible to switch off
the robot at any time. When the power is switched on
again it simply continues working from the current
position.

freedom and other factors regarding to the animation and
simulation of the robot, the Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robot
components as can be seen in Figure 2 will be
decomposed. In addition, Figure 3 shows the developed
3D graphs of Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robot components.

3. Methodology
This project adopts the Virtual Reality Interface
Design (VRID) from [4] which is divided into two levels
of design phase: high-level design phase and low-level
design phase.
These two levels are different in
abstraction. While the high-level design produces a highlevel representation of data elements and objects in the
interface, the low-level design repeats the two activities
in objects modeling phase and utilizes the result from
high-level design at a lower abstraction in order to
generate fine-grained details of graphics and behaviors.
The high-level design phases consist of three major
phases:
x Identifying data elements
x Identifying objects
x Modeling the objects
a) Graphics
b) Behaviors
The possible incoming data flows into the VR
interface are identified in the first phase. Potential
objects identification, legitimate objects decision, and
virtual and physical objects distinction will be done in
the second phase. The high-level of graphical virtual
objects specification and objects behaviors identification
will be done in the last phase of high-level design.
Based on this VRID, chronologically the
development of Mitsubishi RV-2AJ’s RSS is structured
as: robot design, robot dynamics, integration process,
implementation and test. During the robot design, the
Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robot will be dismantled into several
components such as waist, shoulder, elbow, wrist pitch
and wrist rolls. Subsequently, the components will be
assembled into one integrated robot in robot dynamics
phase where the dynamics of the robot can be observed.
Thereafter, all of robot’s component will be integrated
with VRML language in the integration process phase.
Furthermore, in this phase a scene graph that describes
3D objects and its environment will be developed. In the
implementation phase, the RSS software life cycle will
be implemented.

Figure 2 Mitsubishi RV-2AJ Robot Components

a) Waist Model

b) Shoulder Model

c) Elbow Model

d) Wrist Pitch Model

e) Wrist Roll Model

4. Robot Modeling
The robot modeling process is divided into two main
activities, namely the graphical and behavior design.
With the intention of achieving the actual size, degree of

Figure 3 Developed Robot Components 3D
Models

84

The above developed robot components are
assembled into an integrated robot arm as shown in
Figure 4. The assembly sequence is as following. First of
all, the waist is connected to the base. This way, it will
allow the shoulder, elbow and wrist to turn following any
of waist movement. Similar to the previous step, the
shoulder is connected to the waist in order to allow the
elbow and wrist to follow any movement of the shoulder.
The elbow will be connected to the shoulder and the
wrist will be connected to the elbow correspondingly.
Figure 5 shows the Mitsubishi RV-2AJ robot assembly
process.

The complete assembled robot model has been
integrated with a VRML language and presented using a
scene graph to structure the nodes of 3D objects. The 3D
objects were created with a Group that contains six
components. They are: T. Base, T. Waist, T. Shoulder, T.
Elbow, T. Wrist_Pitch and T. Wrist_Roll. The T. Base
contains the translation and rotation that can be
performed by the base. The T. Base also has a link to
joint1 that is waist of the robot arm. The T. Shoulder has
a link to joint2 which is connected to the waist and
contains joint3 as a child that is the elbow. Additionally,
the T. Elbow is the parent to joint4 which is the
wrist_pitch. Meanwhile, the T. Wrist_Pitch acts as the
parent of joint5, that is wrist-roll as can be seen in Figure
6.

Figure 4 Mitsubishi RV-2AJ Robot 3D Complete
Objects

Figure 6 Mitsubishi RV-2AJ Robot Scene Graph

5. RSS Implementation and Validation
The implemented RSS has four display of view.
They are front view, top view, side view and 3D view.
Moreover, these views are merged into a single window
and can be selected through a list box of the RSS as
depicted in Figure 7.
The validation has been done through a visual
comparison between the robot model in developed RSS
and the actual robot at a certain position. Examples of
validation that have been done are shown in Figure 8, 9,
10, and 11.

Conclusions
This paper presented the development of RSS using
MATLAB/Simulink and V-Realm Builder. Mitsubishi
RV-2AJ robot was modeled for the purpose of the study.
The complete RSS software life cycle has been
implemented and validated.

Figure 5 Mitsubishi RV-2AJ Robot Assembly
Process

85

Figure 7 View Selection

Figure 10 Position at T1= -6.3, T2= 79.32, T3=
76.53, T5= 0, T6= 0

Figure 8 Side View of Robot at T1= T2= T3= T5=
T6= 0

Figure 11 The Actual Robot Position at T1= -6.3,
T2= 79.32, T3= 76.53, T5= 0, T6= 0

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

Figure 9 Side View of Actual Robot at T1= T2= T3=
T5 = T6 = 0

[5]

86

E. A. Orady, and T. A. Osman. Virtual Reality Software
for Robotics and Manufacturing Cell Simulation.
Computers Industrial Engineering. 3(1-2), 87-90. 1997
Jasril. Robot Simulation Software Virtual Reality
Approach. Thesis Master Science, Universiti Teknologi
Malaysia; 2005.
L. Zlajpah. Simulation in Robotics. Mathematics and
Computers in Simulation.
doi:10.1016/j.matcom.2008.02.017. 2008
V. Tanriverdi and R.J.K. Jacob, “VRID: A Design Model
and Methodology for Developing Virtual Reality
Interfaces,” Proc. ACM VRST 2001 Symposium on
Virtual Reality Software and Technology. ACM Press.
175-182. Banff, Canada. 2001.
Dewi Nasien. Conversion and Optimization of Simulink
Model to C Source Code for Robot Simulation Software

(Case Study: Robot Mitsubishi RV-2AJ). University
Teknologi Malaysia, 2008

87

