Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

An Intelligent Tutoring System for Improving Application
Accessibility of Disabled Learners
Hussein Karam Hussein Abd El-Sattar1,2
Ain Shams University, Faculty of Science,
Mathematics & Computer Science Department, Cairo, Egypt
2
Prince Sultan University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
1

[3, 5] as well as human-computer interaction (HCI)
design [10,14,4,1]. Our objective is to create an
educational environment framework that is accessible,
supportive and effective for people (users) who are deaf.
This paper attempts to achieve this goal by implementing
an (ITS) that operates as (HCI) user interface that could
help the deaf users during the rehabilitation process.

Abstract
The field of computer to help users with special needs,
and/or users with disabilities has now reached a very
exciting watershed. Users who are physically disabled
require a variety of access technology and learning
depending on the nature of their disability. The intention
of modern technology policy is to enable users with
intellectual disabilities to have as much choice and
control as possible over their lives, be involved in their
communities, and make a valued contribution to the
world at work. However, in order to achieve these aims,
more effective educational and training media are
needed as well as an intelligent tutoring system (ITS) for
improving their skills and removing the barriers that
turn cognitive impairments into intellectual disability.
This paper proposes an (ITS) framework dedicated to
users who are deaf as a solution for such a challenge.
The proposed system help to meet these needs solves
accessibility problem and enables access to information
technologies by users with disabilities in a simple and
reliable way.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2, gives a
brief introduction to (ITS) and its components. Section 3,
reviews some of the prior research related to (ITS)
applications. Sections 4 and 5, provide a brief summary
of Human–Computer Interaction (HCI), and explains
accessibility problem. The development processes of the
proposed (ITS) framework dedicated to people who are
deaf are discussed in section 6. Section 7 concludes this
paper and outlines some directions for future work.

2. Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS)
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) represent an important
class of educational technology poised to play
particularly critical role helping learners acquire the
skills needed to succeed. Intelligent tutoring systems
(ITS) [12] have been pursued for more than three
decades by researchers in education, psychology, and
artificial intelligence. An (ITS) is a broad term emerged
from Artificial Intelligence (AI), encompassing any
computer program that contains some intelligence and
can be used in learning. The Intelligent Tutoring Systems
[1] development often requires the cooperation between
experts from different fields such as education,
psychology and computer science engineering to design
such systems. The goal of (ITS) is to provide the benefits
of one-on-one instruction automatically and cost
effectively. The traditional (ITS) model contains three
components as shown in figure 1:
1. The “student model” represents the student’s
knowledge, skills, and other attributes that affect
how the student should be taught. It evaluates each
learner’s performance to determine his or her
knowledge, perceptual abilities and reasoning skills.
2. The “instructor model” enables the (ITS) to know
how to teach, by encoding instructional strategies
used by the tutoring system user interface.
3. The “expert model” sometimes called learning
environment or user interface: the interface allows
communication between the student and the other
aspects of the (ITS). It is a computer representation

1. Introduction
Computer assisted learning is a common issue
among the research communities globally. The benefits
of such technologies should be distributed equally
between non-disabled users and disabled one.
Statistically recorded that in the UK as an example,
around 25 people in every thousand have mild or
moderate intellectual disabilities, and about four or five
per thousand have severe intellectual disabilities. By
using computing technology for tasks such as reading
and writing documents, communicating with others and
searching for information on the Internet, people with
disabilities are capable of handling a wider range of
activities independently. Still, they face a variety of
barriers to computer use. These barriers can be grouped
into three functional categories: barriers to providing
computer input, interpreting output, and reading
supporting documentation. The intention of modern
computer technology policy is to enable user with
intellectual disabilities to have as much choice and
control as possible over their lives, be involved in their
communities and make a valued contribution to the
world at work. The expansion of “care in the
community” has highlighted the need for more effective
educational and training media such as intelligent
tutoring system (ITS) [9, 13], interactive environments

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.49

286

of a domain expert’s subject matter knowledge and
problem-solving ability. This knowledge enables the
(ITS) to compare the learner’s actions and selections
with those of an expert in order to evaluate what the
user does and doesn't know.

interdisciplinary, bringing together researchers and
practitioners from fields such as Psychology, Computer
Science and Engineering, Business, Sociology,
Linguistics etc. The different related fields of (HCI) are
shown in figure 2. (HCI) researchers and developers
have a common focus of creating and/or evaluating
technologies which can expand the frontiers of human
capabilities (functionality) while at the same time trying
to match these technologies to the abilities of the people
who will use them. The goals of (HCI) are to produce
usable and safe systems, as well as functional systems.
Moreover, (HCI) improve the interaction between users
and computers by making computers more usable and
receptive to the users needs, in particular, users with
special needs.

Figure 1 (ITS) Components

3. Prior Research
Several interactive environments as learning and
teaching tools for the rehabilitation of people (users)
with various disabilities have been developed. It can be
categorized into (i) education games and learning [7]; (ii)
interactive robotics system [11, 5]; (iii) Authoring tools
[13]; (iv) (HCI) design [4, 10, 1] (v) multimedia system
[6] and (vi) an interactive virtual reality learning
environment [3]. Although these new technologies hold
great promise, the computer revolution has left the vast
majority of user with special needs, and/or users with
disabilities behind. Moreover, there is no model that
proposes an adaptive approach that takes into account the
experts directives in an educational context. The
modeling of this approach requires modeling of the
knowledge of experts, the users profile and the dynamics
of their interactions. The general problems that arise are
(i) how can people with disabilities be fully integrated
into the larger society? (ii) How technology is able to
assist people with special needs, and/or people with
disabilities and improve disability learning skills? (iii)
How technology is able to solve the problem of
application accessibility? This paper attempts to solve
these problems dedicated to people (users) who are deaf.

Figure 2 Fields of (HCI)

5. Usability and Accessibility Problem
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
products and services should be usable by a wide
diversity of users in a wide range of contexts of use. This
is what is called Universal Usability [2]. Usability,
central point of (HCI) designing, is part of a broader
scope of what makes a system good enough to be
acceptable to the end user and other stakeholders,
satisfying the needs and requirements of both. Usability
is defined as, “a broad concept that refers to how easy it
is for users to learn a system, how efficiently they can
use it once they have learned to use it, and how pleasant
it is to use”. Usability can be identified by five attributes
given as follows: (i) Learnability: The user should be
able to promptly start performing their tasks with the
system, (ii) Efficiency: Once the user has learned the
system, a high level of productivity should be possible,
(iii) Memorability: The casual user should be able to
return to the system after not having used it for some
time, without having to relearn everything, (iv) Errors:
Users should not make many errors using the system,

4. Human–Computer Interaction (HCI)
With the use of the computer becoming more
widespread, more researchers began to specialize in
studying the interaction between people and computers,
concentrating on the physical, psychological and
theoretical aspects of this interaction. Thus, Humancomputer interaction was born. Human–computer
interaction (HCI), alternatively man–machine interaction
(MMI) or computer–human interaction (CHI) is the
study of interaction between people (users) and
computers (computing technology) [14]. The field of
human-computer
interaction
(HCI)
is
highly

287

and if they do, they should be able to easily recover from
them and (v) Satisfaction: Users should like using the
system and should be subjectively satisfied when using
it. On the other hand, providing accessibility means
removing barriers that prevent people with disabilities
from participating in substantial life activities, including
the use of services, products, and information.
Accessibility is by definition a category of usability:
software that is not accessible to a particular user is not
usable by that user. As with any usability measure,
accessibility is necessarily defined relative to user task
requirements and needs. For example, a telephone booth
is accessible (e.g., usable) to a blind person, but may not
be accessible to a person using a wheelchair. There are
many ways to improve the accessibility of applications
of users with various disabilities. The most obvious way
to enhance accessibility is to consider the needs of
people with disabilities in all stages of the design
process, including requirements gathering, task analyses,
usability tests, and design guidelines. Other strategies
include evaluating the usability of software in
conjunction with popular assistive technologies, and
testing under simulated disability conditions (e.g., unplug
the mouse, turn off the sound, and use a screen reader
with the monitor turned off). Designing software that
takes the needs of users with disabilities into account
makes software more usable for all users: people with
disabilities who use assistive technologies, those who use
systems “off the shelf”, as well as users without any
significant disabilities. Assistive or adaptive technology
[8] commonly refers to “products, devices or equipment,
whether acquired commercially, modified or customized,
that are used to maintain, increase or improve the
functional capabilities of individuals with disabilities.
Use of assistive technologies varies across users and
tasks. Table 1 show the assistive technology used to aid
people with hearing disabilities.
Assistive Technology
Telecommunications
Device for the Deaf
(TDD)
Closed Captioning

Show Sounds

6. System Development Process
Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) has great potentials in
education in general, and special education in particular.
Based on previous discussed sections, this section
outlines the main design principles used in building our
system from the earlier design phase called process
model up to the final product system dedicated to people
(users) who are deaf.

(ITS) Architectural Design, User Interface
and Specification
Architectural design defines the interconnection and
resource interfaces between system subsystems,
components and modules in ways suitable for their
detailed design and overall configuration management.
Design involves decomposing the system into modules.
The result is a design specification document which
contains a description of the software architecture: what
each module is intended to do and the relationships
among modules. When designing software, human
factors as well as application accessibility must be
considered during the planning stage and throughout the
implementation process. The most obvious way to
enhance accessibility is to consider the needs of people
with disabilities in all stages of the design process. Given
that (ITS) are often described as having three main
components (tutoring module, student model, and
student interface); our system must therefore
theoretically include all the necessary tools for building
these components. In order to satisfy these conditions
and since graphical user interface are very accessible for
deaf users, we designed our system with a multimodal
interface. Multimodal interfaces are the ultimate (HCI)
systems that can manage various and complex I/O
information. Multimodal interfaces can integrate
multimodal features and so make computer behavior
closer to human communication paradigms, and
therefore easier to learn and use. We followed the
Abowd and Beale model of interaction shown in figure 3
for the design of our system. The reason for choosing
such model of interaction is that it forms the most
important fundamentals principles that give the basic for
good design and is very close to the (ITS) components.
Following the (ITS) components that are typically rely
on three types of knowledge for providing hints,
guidance, and instructional feedback to learners, figure 4
shows the architectural design of our system.

Function Provided
Provides a means for users to
communicate over telephone lines
using text terminals.
Provides text translation of spoken
material on video media. Important
computer
applications
include
distance learning, CD-ROM, video
teleconferencing, and other forms of
interactive video.
Proposed standard would provide
visual
translation
of
sound
information. Non-speech audio such
as system beeps would be presented
via screen flashing or similar
methods. Video and still images
would be described through closed
captions or related technologies. This
capability would be provided by the
system infrastructure.

Table 1 Assistive Technologies used for people
with hearing disabilities

Figure 3 Abowd and Beale Model of Interaction

288

proper names, can be shown by spelling and using video
clips which contain the signs for individual letters. These
signs are referred to as the finger alphabet. The complete
finger alphabet also forms a special part of our sign
language dictionary, showing only still images of
gestures for individual letter signs (see figure 6). In this
part of the dictionary, the user can quickly learn the
finger alphabet and also test his/her knowledge of finger
spelling as well as digits. On the other hand, as the sign
language can be best learned in topic groups (i.e. family,
work, nature, animal, colors etc., see figure 4), the user
can select a topic area for more effective search and
navigation through the dictionary (see figure 7 as a
demonstration example).

Figure 4 Architectural Design

Implementation, Testing and Results
One of the most important phases in the software
development lifecycle is the system implementation and
testing phase. In this phase the applicable system will be
created and put to be used by the actual users in the
proposed environment as an output of this phase. The
idea behind implementing our system is based on the fact
that, deaf people (users), as a marginal community, may
have severe problems in communicating with hearing
people. However, deaf people are very skilled in using a
sign language which is their native language. A gesture
in a sign language equals a word in a written language.
Similarly, a sentence in a written language equals a
sequence of gestures in a sign language. Based on
multimedia technology, we developed a multimedia
dictionary of sign language (Arabic/English languages,
in particular Arabic) which supports sign language
synthesis. The reason for choosing multimedia
technology because it is an ideal medium for
presentation, reference, accessibility, usability and
learning of such gestures knowledge as well as it can
also incorporate video material. By considering such
items into account the implementation process is based
on two procedures namely: Sign language synthesis
dictionary and Sign language synthesis using sign video
clips. In the first procedure, the Arabic sign language
dictionary consists of more than 600 entries. Each entry
for the selected word in the dictionary consists of the
video clip showing a demonstration of the corresponding
sign. In addition to the video clip, a drawing illustrating
the selected words is given, where visualization is
possible. Examples of sentences using the selected word
are also included. Words can be searched in the entire
dictionary or only in some selected topic areas (see
figure 4). After a word is selected, the user is presented
with some written examples of sentences that
demonstrate the use of the selected word, and also with a
drawing illustrating the concept (see figure 5 as an
example). Words which are not in the dictionary, or

Figure 5 Sign language syntheses for the word
“Twin” with drawing illustration

Figure 6 Sign language syntheses for the
alphabet letter sign “K” in Arabic language

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 7 Sign language syntheses in some
different topic groups (a) Food [watermelon], (b)
Animal [Dog], (c) Family [Parent], and (d) People
[Boy]
On the other hand, for the second procedure (Sign
language synthesis using sign video clips), Using video
clips of a real person for sign language synthesis requires
a consistent set of sign video clips so that when several

289

clips are glued together, the viewer gets the impression
that he is observing continuous signing of the
demonstrator. This means that all video clips in the set
must be captured using the same sign demonstrator and
under the same conditions (i.e. appearance of the
demonstrator, lighting, camera view) so that the basic
perquisite for consistency among individual video clips
are met. In producing our sign language dictionary, we
achieved the highest possible consistency by video
taping the entire sign vocabulary in one session with just
one sign demonstrator. It is important that the start and
end position of the arms for all gesture are the same on
all video clips. Given these prerequisites, the sign video
clips from a sign language dictionary can glued into sign
language sentences, providing that the gluing of video
clips is optimized. Optimization means redundant moves
the hand between consecutive gestures must be
eliminated (see as an example figure 8 for welcome to
deaf institution).

disabilities which are an aspiring goals and challenging
task. This paper proposed an intelligent tutoring system
environment which provides improved computer access
as well as training media for people with intellectual
disabilities. The proposed (ITS) environment increase
application accessibility of deaf users, enables them not
only to access information technologies in a simple and
reliable way but also help them during the rehabilitation
process. Despite the great efficiency of the obtained
results, further research is still needed to document the
effects of (ITS) on people with intellectual disabilities,
and to ensure that the goals of the application are being
met. Currently, we are working on this direction.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

Figure 8 an example of video clips for
“Welcome to Deaf Institution”

Evaluation and User-Test

[6]

The functionality of the proposed system has been
evaluated according to several criteria: accessibility,
usability, reliability, technical sufficiency, cost
efficiency, competency and more. We developed a
survey and conducted a focus group to evaluate end-user
fulfillment and issues that impact the end users. In
addition we have distributed a questionnaire evaluation
form among some teachers related to the field who are
practically tested the system through some disabled
students. The results of the collected answers were in the
positive side and few of them in the negative one. The
initial summative data collected from both teachers and
students showed that, the system is very useful and the
outcomes are given as follows: (i) Most of the students
and teachers agreed that the system is useful, easy to use,
user-friendly, and have simple content with a good flow
of topics, and (ii) The majority of the students saw that
the examples used in explaining each topic are highly
understandable by them.

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

7. Conclusion and Future work
Older and disabled people need to be able to access
information and communication technology (ICT), and
also have a right to be able to use (ICT) easily and
effectively. This can be achieved by increasing usability
and application accessibility of users with various

[14]

290

Alejandro J. and Nicu S., “Multimodal Human computer
interaction: A survey”, IEEE International Workshop on
Human Computer Interaction, China, 2005.
Ben
Schneidermann
“Universal
Usability”,
Communications of the ACM, May 2000, Vol. 43, No. 5.
Fatima Al-Dhaen and Hussein Karam, “Robust Virtual
Reality Environment for Improving Disability Learning
Skills”, International Conference on Higher Education in
the 21st Century, Bahrain, 2007.
Grynszpan, O., Martin, J.C., and Oudin N., “Towards a
methodology for the design of Human-computer
Interfaces for persons with Autism”, International
Congress Autism-Europe, Lisboa (2003).
James Ong and Sowmya Ramachandran, “Intelligent
Tutoring Systems: Using AI to Improve Training
Performance and ROI”, The Interservice/Industry
Training, Simulation & Education Conf. (I/ITSEC’04).
Khedo K., “A distributed multimedia system for
collaborative teaching and learning”, Advanced
Technology for Learning Journal, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2007.
Karim Sehaba, Pascal E., and Didier L., “Interactive
Educational Games for Autistic Children with AgentBased System”, International Conf. on Entertainment
Computing, ICEC 2005, LNCS 3711, pp. 422-432, 2005.
Lewis, R. B, “Assistive technology and learning
disabilities: Today’s realities and tomorrow’s promises”,
Journal of Learning Disabilities, vol. 31, no.1, 1998.
Lane, H.C., “Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Prospects for
Guided Practice and Efficient Learning”, the Army's
Science of Learning Workshop, Aug 1-3, 2006.
Obrenovic, Z. and Starcevic, D. “Modeling multimodal
human-computer interaction”. IEEE Computer, 2004.
Robins, B., Dautenhahn, K., Boekhorst, R., and Billard,
A.”Effects of repeated exposure of a humanoid robot on
children with autism”, In S. Keates, J. Clarkson, P.
Langdon and P. Robinson (Eds), Designing a More
Inclusive World. London: Springer-Verlag (2004).
Reva Freedman, “What is an Intelligent Tutoring
System?”, Intelligence Vol. 11, No. 3, 2000.
Said T., Mahieddine D., Salima O., and Samir Z.,
“Authoring Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Disabled
Learners”, International Conference on Information and
Communication Technology and Accessibility, April 1214, Tunisia, 2007.
Yusof R., Amin R., Zainudlin R., and Baker F., “Human
Computer interaction (HCI) - aspect in developing
information access
system”,
TENCON IEEE
Conference, vol. 2, pp. 387-390, 2004.

