Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

Automatic Fingerprint Identification Using Gray Hopfield Neural Network
Improved by Run-Length Encoding
Kussay Nugamesh Mutter
Zubir Mat Jafri
Azlan Abdul Aziz
School of Physics,
Universiti Sains Malaysia,
Malaysia
kussaynm@yahoo.com
character never occur even in another finger of the
same person or in different individuals.
3. The fingerprint pattern variations are within a
limit, which allows a systematic classification of
these configurations.
In fact, these principles made the scientific study of
these patterns, an interesting field in anthropology.
Generally, image classification is related to image
analysis, both involve features extraction from an
image and using them to distinguish image objects.
With fingerprint images, although there are a variety of
patterns, they may be divided into four main groups (as
illustrated in figure (1)): ARCHES, LOOPS,
WHORLS, and COMPUONDS.

Abstract
This paper presents a new technique of fingerprint
identification using Gray Hopfield Neural Network
(GHNN) improved by Run-Length Encoding (RLE).
Gabor filter has been used for image enhancement at
the stage of enrolment and vector field algorithm for
core detection as a reference point. Finding this point
will enable to cover most of information around the
core. GHNN deals with gray level images by learning
on Bitplanes that represent the fingerprint image
layers. For large number of images GHNN’s memory
needs very large storage space to cover all learned
fingerprint images. RLE is a very simple and useful
solution for saving the capacity of the net memory by
encoding the stored weights, in which the weights data
will reduce according to the repeated one. Experiments
carried out on fingerprint images show that the
proposed technique is useful in a number of different
samples of fingerprint images in terms of converged
images in quality, encoding and decoding
performance.
1. Introduction
The first major scientific contribution to
fingerprint patterns was made by Francis Galton.
Although he failed to find any ridge heredity
formation, he did establish the fact that no two
fingerprints were a like. Edward Henry made a more
advanced classification method of fingerprints, which
is known as “Henry’s classification”. The real
significance of fingerprint patterns is based mainly on
the following
principles, [7, 8]:
1. Unchangeability: the configuration and details of
the patterns are permanent and never change
through life until the skin disintegrates after death.
2. Uniqueness: the degree of variation of the ridges
is so high that two patterns with the same

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.25

Fig.1. Main fingerprint pattern groups
The importance of the core of the print is
taken as a fixed point for the purpose of further
classification, because it is available in almost every
finger print pattern, except the Arch. In a typical whorl
the core, or hub of the encircling system, may appear

205

The first step in this work is the preprocessing
operation for searching on the core point as a reference
point, which considered as center of Region Of Interest
(ROI). We adopt the algorithm shown in [1] which
represents as fast method, based on the core detection
of fingerprint. Gabor filters are applied here before the
stage of GHNN learning and orientated to different
angles to clean images from noises that can result on
false alarms or authentication mistakes. Through using
the flow field algorithm, we will extract the core and
determine the angle that each vector of the flow field
has with respect to the horizontal. A procedure for
reducing the size of the image into specific ROI area
will be performed to investigate which type of
orientation the fingerprint has, to assist in finding and
determining the core point. From the core, vectors will
be traced to the minutiae for the purpose of image
alignment. A proposed method has been found in [1, 2]
using Gabor filters that have both frequency-selective
and orientation-selective properties and have optimal
joint resolution in both spatial and frequency. Gabor
filters is defined by a sinusoidal plane wave. And the
even symmetric two-dimensional of this filter has the
following form:

as an island, a short straight ridge, a hook-shaped ridge
or staple, or in the form of circle or ellipse.
Characteristics of the core area are of special
importance in single finger-print identification system,
since classification of a single impression must be
based upon the minutiae. It involves the determination
of optimum decision procedures, which are needed in
the identification process. The patterns that will be
identified by an automatic fingerprint recognition
system must possess a set of measurable
characteristics. A correct recognition will depend on
the amount of discriminating information contained in
the measurements and the effective utilization of this
information. The design concepts for automatic
fingerprint recognition are motivated by the ways in
which pattern classes are characterized and defined
[13].
In this work we are facing a problem using HNN in
identification, such problem is the huge data that must
be stored in the net memory. Furthermore, the invariant
localization of fingerprint position and orientation are
an obstacle in recognition operation. There is no
problem for noisy or missing area images that expected
in fingerprints enrolling. HNN can be described as a
nearest match finding network, which alters the input
patterns through successive iterations until a learned
pattern evolves at the output no longer changes on
successive iterations. The net is a fully interconnected
neural net, in the sense that each unit is connected to
every other units, see figure (2). The net has symmetric
weights with no self-connections, wi,j=wji and wij=0,
the two small differences between this net and the
iterative autoassociative net can have a significant
effect terms of whether or not the nets converge for a
particular input pattern. Then the differences in HNN
are that: 1. only one unit updates its activation at a
time (based on the signal, it receives from each other
unit), and
2. each unit continues to receive an
external signal in addition to the signal from the other
units in the net. The asynchronous updating of the units
allows the energy function (Lyapunov function) to be
found for the net. The existence of this function
enables us to prove that the net will converge to a
stable set of activations, rather than oscillating. [9]

⎧⎪ − 1 ⎡ x ′ 2 y ′ 2 ⎤ ⎫⎪
G ( x , y , f , θ ) = exp ⎨ ⎢ 2 + 2 ⎥ ⎬ cos( 2πfx ′)
δ y ⎥⎦ ⎪⎭
⎪⎩ 2 ⎣⎢ δ x
…… (1)
x ′ = x sin θ + y cos θ
y ′ = x cos θ − y sin θ

Algorithm for fingerprint image orientation is as
follows [1, 2]:
1. Divide input fingerprint image into block size WxW
2. Compute gradients Gx and Gy at each pixel in each
Block
3. Estimate the local orientation at each pixel (i,j)
j +W / 2

i +W / 2

Vx (i, j ) =

∑ ∑ 2G (u, v)G

(u, v)

x

y

2
x

(u , v)G y2 (u , v ))

u =i −W / 2 v = j −W / 2

V y (i, j ) =

i +W / 2

∑

j +W / 2

∑ (G

…… (2)

u = i −W / 2 v = j −W / 2

1

⎛ V (i, j ) ⎞

⎟
θ (i, j ) = tan −1 ⎜⎜ x
2
V y (i, j ) ⎟

⎝
⎠
4. Compute the consistency level C(i,j) of the
orientation field in the local neighborhood of a block
(i,j)
1
2
C (i , j ) =
∑ (i′, j′)∈D θ (i ′, j ′) − θ (i, j ) …….. (3)
N
Fig.2. Hopfield Neural Network

2. Fingerprint pre-processing and Core point
detection:

206

Equation(4) represents the general GHNN form, where
feedback input to the i'th neuron is equal to the
weighted sum of neuron outputs vj. wij is the weight
value connecting the output of the j'th neuron with the
input of the i'th neuron, [9].

5. If the C(i,j) is above a predetermined level then the
local orientations around this region are re-estimated at
a lower resolution level, until it is below, see
figure(3) [1].

b

n

n

net ik = ∑∑∑ wij vi + ii ………. (4)
k =1 i =1 j =1

Note that if we use the number of neurons as
n=3, so we will get the simplest and efficient form of
HNN. Moreover, for 8-bit gray images the number of
neuron connections (paths) will be k=8. Therefore,
each layer in the input image can be expressed by
blocks of 3-elements, as shown in figure(4). The
blocks are representing as input vector for learning
process. The weights that results from the learning
process will look like figure(4). Hence, each input
image consists of 8-layers correspond to 8-layers of
weights. There is no limitation for the maximum
number of stored weights in HNN as it is proved
empirically. The general form of the energy function
is, [9]:

⎞
1⎛ b n n
E = − ⎜⎜ ∑∑∑ w ij v i v j ⎟⎟ …….. (5)
2 ⎝ k =1 i=1 j=1
⎠

Fig.3. finding the core and ROI extracting
The algorithm we are going to use is to compute the
orientation field described before, and the application
of a filter to detect the maximum direction change of
the ridge flow. This approach can even locate an
imaginary reference point in an arch type fingerprint
image, the algorithm steps can be found in [1, 2].

where n is number of elements in v, wj is the weight
from the output of neuron i to the input of neuron j,
and k is the number of bits in the gray-level image. The
values of the energy function E for all the possible
input vectors can be calculated for each layer, and then
an energy landscape with maximums and minimums
can be obtained.
3.2. The 8-states Encoding of Weights:
Because the block vector in each bitplane has only 3
elements then there are 8-states with a special property
for each vector of the sign of the elements summation.
Investigation of weight matrix characterizations, the
elements above and under main diagonal are same, and
the diagonal according to Hopfield assumptions must
be zero. Therefore, we can consider an encoding
method by representing each weight by a number of
8-states associated with the original vector’s property,
see table(1). In this method each weight will be
reduced from 9 to 2 elements only, the first is for the
vector state and the second is for the original vector
property before learning, [17].
At this point, we can touch the usefulness of
implementing this approach for gray level images;
however, there is weakness point associated with HNN
which is the huge data required to represent the
fingerprint images as weights saved in the net data
base.

3. GHNN Learning for ROI improved by RLE:
3.1. Extracting the Bitplanes from ROI :
HNN unable to deal directly with gray images as
discussed in [9] and we have solved this problem by
supposing that the 8-bit gray-level image consists of 8layers of bitplanes, each can be represented as bipolar
data. So that it is possible to express each layer as
single binary image for HNN, see figure (4). Hence,
the 8-bit image consists of 8-bitplanes arranged
systematically in its index in the net memory, [9].

Fig.4. Bitplanes of a
gray fingerprint and its
corresponding weights

207

The main idea of RLE algorithm is to replace runs of
the same number of recurrent weighs with a counter
saying how many repetitions we have. As can be seen
in figure(5), if we have weights under 8-states
encoding, for the first 3 stream data we just output '8',
and then a 3, which means that there was 3 weights
more of the same kind, and same the way for the other
data. [17]

Table1. 8-states coding

Fig.5. RLE example
4. Experimental Results:
The system block diagram is shown in
figure(6). In this paper the performance for the
proposed system was compared for 50 different
fingerprint images. As a sample we took 5 different
images and implement noising operation for 5% to
90% of noises. These samples are part of the trained
images, and the converging ratio for each is shown in
figure(7). Obviously, the relationship between noising
and converging ratios are inversely functioning. The
large amount of noising leads to less converging
results.

3.3. RLE technique for weights compression:
We are going to apply RLE for encoding the saved
weights to reduce the amount of data in the data base.
RLE is the basic compression algorithm, it is the first
compression ever invented. This method is just
removing repetition of the same weight number IN A
ROW (continuously). This method will be on final
stage after the learning and 8-states encoding
processes.

Fig.6. Block diagram of the new system

208

Fig.7. Converging Ratio vs. Noise Ratio
for 5 different fingerprint images
6. References:
5. Conclusions:
A new fingerprint image identification
[1] A. C. López, R. R. López, Reinaldo Cruz
technique that uses core and ROI has been presented
Queeman, “Fingerprint Recognition”, Electrical
here. Experiments indicate that the computation of the
Engineering Department, Polytechnic University,
orientation field performs much better than direct
2001.
image learning and identifying (converging) using
[2] Anil Jain, Arun Ross, Salil Prabhakar, “Fingerprint
GHNN, (as alone algorithm). Currently, core
Matching Using Minutiae and Texture”, Michigan
information is being used to align the image and then
State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, Proc. of
trace vectors to the bifurcations. Therefore, it is so easy
Int’l Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp.282to determine the core point as a center of ROI in which
285, Thessaloniki, Greece, Oct 7 - 10, 2001.
the important information will included. Furthermore,
[3] Arun Rossa, Anil Jaina, James Reismanb, “A
applying 8-state encoding followed by RLE shows the
hybrid fingerprint matcher”, Department of Computer
usefulness of reducing very large amount of data in the
Science and Engineering, Michigan State University,
net memory, and this leads to fast recalling of
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA, Pattern Recognition 36
converging process and cope the problem of falling in
(2003) 1661 – 1673
unstable identification.
[4] Colin Molter, Utku Salihoglu and Hugues Bersini,
“Storing static and cyclic patterns in an Hopfield
neural network”, Laboratory of artificial intelligence
IRIDIA cp194/6, Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, 50 av
F.Roosevelt, 1050 Brussels, Belgium, 2003.
[5] Domagoj Kovacevic and Sven Loncaric, "Ct Image
Labeling Using Hopfield Neural Network",
Department of Electronic Systems and Information
Processing, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and
Computing, University of Zagreb, Croatia, 1998.
[6] J.-S. Lin, S. H. Liu, “A competitive continuous
Hopfield neural network for vector quantization in
image compression”,
Department of Electronic
Engineering,
National
Chin-Yi
Institute
of

209

Technology, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China,
Received 1 March 1997; accepted 1 October 1998.
[7] Karthik Nandakumar, “Multibiometric Systems:
Fusion Strategies and Template Security”, PhD thesis,
Michigan State University, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, 2008.
[8] Kussay N. Mutter, “Hopfield Neural Network and
Genetic algorithm Techniques for Fingerprint Image
Identification and Reconstruction”, M.Sc. thesis, AlMustansiryah University, College of Education,
Department of Physics, Iraq, 2002.
[9] Kussay N. Mutter, Imad I. Abdul Kaream, and
Hussein A. Moussa, “Gray Image Recognition Using
Hopfield Neural Network With Multi-Bitplane and
Multi-Connect Architecture”, IEEE, Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computer Graphics,
Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06), July-2006.
[10] Laurence Fausett, Fundamental of Neural
Networks, Architectures, Algorithms and Applications,
Prentice-Hall, 1994.
[11] L. C. Jain and R. K. Jain, “Hybrid Intelligent
Engineering Systems”, World Scientific publishing Co.
Pte. Ltd., 1997.
[12] L. Hong, Y. Wan, A.K. Jain, “Fingerprint image
enhancement:
Algorithms
and
performance
evaluation”, IEEE, Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
20 (8) (1998) 777–789.
[13] Rafael C. Gonzalez, Richard E. Woods, Digital
Image Processing, Pearson Education, Singapore, 2005
[14] R. Ahmed, “Wavelet-based Image Compression
using Support Vector Machine Learning and Encoding
Techniques”, ACTA Press, Australia, 2005.
[15] R. M. Bolle, N. K. Ratha, A. Senior, and S.
Pankanti, “Minutiae template exchange format”, Proc.
AutoID 1999, IEEE Workshop on Automatic
Identication Advanced Technologies, pages 74{77,
1999.
[16] Salil Prabhakar, “fingerprint Classification and
Matching Using a Filterbank”, PhD Thesis, Michigan
State University,Computer Science & Engineering,
2001.
[17 ] Scott E. Umbaugh, Computer Vision and Image
Processing: A Practical Approach Using CVIP Tools,
Prentice Hall PTR, 1998.
[18] Umut Uludag, “Secure Biometric System”, PhD
thesis, Michigan State University, Computer Science &
Engineering, 2006.
[19] Yongfang Zhu, Sarat C. Dass, Anil K. Jain
“Compound Stochastic Models For Fingerprint
Individuality”, Department of Statistics & Probability,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, Proc. of
ICPR 2006.
[20] Zubir Mat Jafri, Kussay Nugamesh Mutter, Azlan
Abdul Aziz, “Hopfield Neural Network (HNN)
Improvement for Color Image Recognition Using
Multi-Bitplane and Multi-Connect Architecture”,
CGIV07, Bangkok, 2007

210

