Fifth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization
Visualisation

The Design, Development and Evaluation of Virtual Reality Learning Environment
for Numeracy Concepts Using 3D Virtual Manipulatives
L. Daghestani1, 2, R. D. Ward1, Z. Xu1, H. Al-Nuaim2
1 University of Huddersfield, UK; 2 King Abdulaziz University, SA

lamya.daghestani@gmail.com, r.d.ward@hud.ac.uk, z.xu@hud.ac.uk, alnuaimh@yahoo.com

called desktop VR environment where the user is still aware
of the outside visual world [5]. Fully immersive VE are
displayed via a Head Mounted Display (HMD), and
interaction may be controlled using a tracked hand-held
input device such as Data Gloves; whereas desktop VE are
displayed on a normal computer monitor and interaction is
achieved by either conventional input devices (e.g. mouse
and keyboard) or six-degree-of-freedom input devices, such
as a space-mouse [6]. Actually VR environments whether
‘immersive’ or ‘non-immersive’ provide several unique
attribute that set it apart from other computer graphical
technologies.

Abstract
Virtual Reality (VR) offers potentials and challenges for
teaching and learning. For learners of elementary
mathematics, it has been suggested that VR offers promising
ways of representing numeracy (number and operations)
concepts in the form of Virtual Manipulatives (VM). This
project aims at investigating VR learning Environments to
elementary numeracy education using 3D VM. This paper
focuses on 3 aspects. The first is the evaluation of an
existing Mathematical Virtual Learning Environment
(MAVLE) in order to analyze and evaluate the current 2D
virtual manipulatives. The results of this study will form the
basis for the design and development of an innovative
conceptual prototype - MAVLE. While the second step is to
construct a framework for the MAVLE prototype by
highlighting other factors that are important for system
implementation. The third aspect will be applying the
outcomes from other two stages and providing benchmarks
and guidance’s to the future design and development of
Virtual Learning Environment.

2. Literature Review
In recent years, Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) has
attracted considerable attention due to its flexibility and
accessibility. Although most of the implementations were
only focusing on their Web-based realization. A few pilot
projects have studied the possibility of bringing Web and
VR together. According to Selwood et al. [2] that VR
technologies are a promising tool for learning and it is
included amongst the computer assisted learning/instruction
(CAL/I) systems. Also [7] concluded that constructivist
learning theory provides a valid and reliable basis for VR
learning environment. On other hand [8] stated that VR
technologies may be used for learning in three ways:
• To learn about VR itself, that is, how to build VE and
how to explore them.
• To visualize or experience phenomena within VE
which are difficult or impossible to illustrate by other
means (an example is varying the force of gravity in a
virtual physics laboratory).
• To train people within VE to perform tasks such as
operating a machine.
However, applications of VR in learning were mostly
concentrated on “immersive” VR environment, where
studies have shown users to experience negative effects,
including nausea, dizziness and headaches, both for adult
populations [9] and school age participants [10]. Moreover,

1. Introduction
Virtual Reality (VR) can be described as a multi-sensory
highly interactive computer environment that makes the user
believe that he/she is actually inside an artificial
environment [1, 2]. VR also defined as three Dimensional
(3D) graphical simulation models, where a user can control
the viewpoints, motion and interact intuitively in real time
[3]. VR environments offer the possibility to recreate the real
world as it is or to create completely new worlds, where the
user becomes an active participant in a virtually real world
[4].
VR environments are generally classified according to
the types of technology employed to develop the VR
environments ranging from ‘fully immersive’ VR
environment in which the user is isolated from influences of
the real world, to ‘non-immersive’ VR environment also

978-0-7695-3359-9/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2008.46

93

current immersive VR systems are costly, fragile, and can be
unwieldy to use and integrate into existing school
environments [1]. On the other hand, desktop VR
environment avoids the possible difficulty of motion
sickness brought on the fully immersive VR variations [11];
also the relatively low cost desktop VR system has made this
technology feasible for widespread used [12].
The VR technologies continue offering new possibilities
and challenges to VLE, whereas an empirical evaluation and
studies on the educational efficacy and effectiveness of
desktop VR environments are still in their infancy, and
requires focus and systematic research [11]. The VR
technology presents the opportunity to excite students and
engage them in learning scientific concepts through the
inquiry-oriented approach, which may lead to enhanced
understanding, especially when the 3D/2D distinction is
finally blurred or removed [13]. Although VR learning
environment provides a new learning opportunity that seems
to offer promising instructional benefits, although there are
still many issues that need further investigation [14].
VR technology allows for the creation of VLE where
students can learn by interacting with virtual objects similar
to the ways they would interact with real objects. The most
important reasons cited for developing VR in education are
[15]:
• Explore things and places that without alterations of
scale in size, time and distances, could not otherwise
be effectively examined.
• Teaching using the real thing is impossible,
dangerous and inconvenient.
• Interacting with a model is as motivating as or more
motivating than interacting with a real thing.
• Experience of creating a simulated environment or
model is important to the learning objective.
• Visualization, manipulation and rearrangement of
information are needed, so as to become more easily
understood.
Computer technology that has been integrated as a
learning tool into the body of the curriculum can have a very
positive effect on student motivation, engagement, and
learning. The most promising result of innovations in VLE
was the virtual experiments. There are two types of virtual
experiments: "Virtual Laboratory" considered as the
simulation of real laboratory experiments by means of
computer support, because of limitations of time, safety or
cost in the real world environment usually used within
science teaching [16], and "Virtual Manipulatives (VM)" are
computer-generated objects or web-based dynamic object
that can be manipulated to allow learner explore in a handson mode usually used within mathematics teaching [17]. VM
having the power for constructing mathematical knowledge
through making abstract mathematical concepts visible, that
which is hard to see and impossible to imagine [18].

The National Library of Virtual Manipulative for
Interactive Mathematics (NLVM) develops at Utah State
University’s is the best VM currently available on the web
(Figure 1). The NLVM is a three-year project funded by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) developed by [19] they
aim to allow learners to explore VM for abstract
mathematical concepts in an interactive way mostly in the
form of 2D VM using Java applets technologies.

Figure 1. National Library of Virtual Manipulative
(NLVM) at Utah University
Moreover [20] claimed that there is a needed to further
investigate the use of VM during instruction, also [18]
concluded that VM may be the most appropriate
mathematics tool for the next generation, but much of this
area still remains to be seen and explored. Accordingly, a
study by [21] investigated the effects of VM upon children’s
spatial visualization skills, where NLVM activities
incorporated into 3rd grade Saudi Arabia mathematics
classroom teaching. This study found to have a statistically
significant positive effect upon learners’ conceptual
understanding of measurement math concepts that helped
learners to visualize abstract concepts in a more concrete
way. Another concept in math is numeracy, the numeracy
concepts is defined according to the National Numeracy
Strategy (NNS) as a proficiency, which requires an
understanding of the ‘number system’, a repertoire of
computational skills and an inclination and ability to solve
number problems in a variety of contexts [22]. Numeracy is
one of the most important mathematics topics taught in the
elementary school that is difficult to accurately represent,
perceive, and visualize with traditional static media [23].
The Base-10 blocks (Figure 2) are examples of concrete
manipulatives that give the impression of being useful when
teaching numeracy concepts such as "place value",
"addition" and "subtraction" [24].

94

design and development for MAVLE. The second stage was
primarily based on the outcomes from the first stage which
was used as guidance in the design and development of 3D
VM MAVLE, a number of possible technologies,
programming libraries and tools for building VR prototypes
were compared. The third stage was a pilot study of
MAVLE prototype implementation for the ‘addition’
operation in order to address the findings and limitations; we
also present out a conclusion and recommendations for
future work (Figure 3).

Actually, children tend to be taught procedures and
algorithms to manipulate numbers and symbols without
understanding the meaning of symbolic representations or
the meaning of mathematical processes. As a consequence,
children come to view mathematics as a collection of facts
and senseless rules to be memorized and filed for future
reference. However, a study conducted by [23] investigates
children's understanding of number system found that
children do not develop sufficient understanding of
numeracy as a system. However, there have been very few
studies which have aimed to evaluate VR affordances in
mathematics learning. Therefore, the purpose of this
research is to systematically explore the feasibility of the
design and development of Mathematical Virtual Learning
Environment (MAVLE) which might be used to represent
numeracy (‘Addition’ and ‘Subtraction’) concepts for 3rd
grade in Saudi Arabia math classroom using 3D VM taken
in consideration the effective use of the extra dimension (i.e.
the third dimension) that VR support, since if an
environment is not designed to make use of the features that
VR can provide then the visualizations produced can be no
better (or even worse) than existing ones (i.e. 2D
representation).

Figure 3. Research methodology frameworks

3.1. Study of 2D VM at NLVM
A pilot study was conducted with the aim to evaluate the
2D VM based on the main numeracy concepts that have
been defined previously: ‘base-10 blocks addition’ (Figure
4), and ‘base-10 blocks subtraction’ (Figure 5). The study
was conducted at one of the elementary private girls’ school
at Jeddah in Saudi Arabia; the participants for this study
were the math teacher’s and the 3rd students at the school. In
the experiment, participants were asked to begin their
interaction session by first completing the exploration phase.
Their interaction sessions were observed, and when
participants had completed the tasks to their satisfaction,
they completed an evaluated paper form and took part in a
de-brief session with the experimenter. The analysis of the
2D VM into the issues behind the interface and according to
the feedback from participants’, there were quite a few
problems into the interface of the current environment:
• All base-10 blocks were shown with the same colour
regardless of what place values they represents (1s,
10s, 100s or 1,000s), this inconsistency could be
confusing for students.

Figure 2. Base-10 blocks concrete manipulatives
used for representing numeracy concepts

3. Project Approach
The research methodology in this research processed
through three stages. The first stage was a pilot study aimed
to evaluate the User Interface (UI) and Interaction Tasks (IT)
of the 2D VM for numeracy concepts (addition, subtraction)
at NLVM in order to explore how best VM can be used in
classrooms to support students’ understanding of numeracy
concepts, also it identified an understanding of which
particular aspects of NLVM can be implemented in the

95

• The interfaces do not provide the user with a
necessary feedback on whether or not the attempt of
moving the blocks was correct.
• When the student moves the block from one place to
the other it may cover another block, hence
obstructing the view of each other. This is because
the 2D VM at NLVM does not support collision
detection between objects. As a result, the student
may make mistakes.

methods taken from various fields: the instructional design
model and metaphors, the cognitive model, and the
Interaction Tasks (IT) within VR environments.
3.2.1. Instructional Design Model and Metaphors.
Laurillard [25] characterized learning experiences delivered
by different technological media as (Narrative, Interactive,
Adaptive, and Productive). The VR learning experiences
within MAVLE can be considered as “Microworlds”
productive media. The key properties of this framework
according to [25] are to provide an electronic context in
which:
• The learner can build something;
• The learner engages with the subject by directly
experiencing its internal relationships;
• The learner learns to represent these relationships in
some general formalism.
The VM were implemented as follows: ‘Unit’
implemented as an outlined Blue box, ‘Rod’ 10 units tiled
vertically, implemented as Green outlined boxes, ‘Flat’100
units implemented as 10 Yellow outlined rods tiled
horizontally, and ‘Cube’ 1000 unit implemented as 10
outline Red flats tiled to form a cube (Figure 6). All blocks
have activities such as: move and collide. There are also
other tools or icons such as (hammer, glue, and broom) used
to change the action that you get from clicking at the mouse,
or you change the mode of the program.

Figure 4. VM base-10 blocks addition at NLVM

Figure 6. MAVLE base-10 blocks
3.2.2. Cognitive Model. In order to design an effective VR
learning environment, a cognitive model is needed to
integrate the theoretical insights about VR’s educational
potential with the principles of design and development. The
VR environments function as a cognitive tool that is capable
of making intangible things tangible, it also can be designed
to make the abstract more concrete and able to be seen [12].
In comparing VR with multimedia [18] stated that VR goes
at least one level above multimedia in terms of perceptual
richness. Therefore, for the purpose of this research we
propose a new VR cognitive model based on Mayer's [26]
cognitive theory of multimedia learning. MAVLE’s

Figure 5. VM base-10 blocks subtraction at NLVM

3.2. Prototyping the MAVLE
A framework for the design and development of the
MAVLE prototype were implemented by drawing attention
to factors that are important in the development of VLE such
as (VR technical issues, VR cognitive aspects, and VR
instructional design). The procedure followed in this
research was a novel approach based on an integration of

96

• The software design was tested to determine (a) if
the interface was clear to the users, (b) if the
program contained any unforeseen errors that needed
correcting, and (c) if any improvements were
necessary to make the software more effective in
teaching the ‘addition’ operation.
• Evaluating students’ achievements’ including asking
participants to carry out addition operation using
MAVLE, also informal interviews will be used to
gather data such as personal satisfaction, particular
difficulties and impressions about MAVLE
interactions.
• During the experiment, the time to complete the
tasks was measured, the participants were observed
and notes were taken regarding their performance
and actions. The teaching sessions investigated
whether time duration of teaching sessions and
interviews was sufficient to show development of
addition understanding.

cognitive model (Figure 7) differs from Mayer’s cognitive
model basically on the type of interactive learning
environment, and on the process of knowledge construction
within the long-term memory.

Figure 7. Cognitive model of MAVLE based on
Mayer’s multimedia cognitive model
3.2.3. Interaction Tasks Model. The Interaction Tasks (IT)
performed accordingly to the inputs generated by the users
inside the VR environment both immersive and desktop VR.
According to [27] there are three types of interaction tasks
that can be implemented within VR environment by using a
given
input
device,
these
are:
‘navigation’,
‘selection/manipulation’, and ‘system control’. Therefore,
the design properties of interaction tasks in this research
provide a broader and comprehensive set of requirements
that are based on theoretical models of interaction adapted
from Bowman's IT [28].

4.1. Participants
The pilot study was conducted at a school similar to that
planned for the main study. The participants profile was of
3rd grade private elementary girls’ school in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia. The participants in the experiment were required to
have experience of computer-mouse usage since navigation
in MAVLE requires good control of the computer mouse.
The participants were chosen according to the following
conditions:
• Due to local customs access to boy's school
wouldn’t be facilitated for females.
• According to study requirements, the students need
to be comfortable with the use of computer. In
Jeddah only girls' elementary private schools teach
computer courses as part of their curriculum.
The school had two 3rd grade classes with approximately
30 students in total. Participant selection was made based on
their teacher evaluation in mathematical abilities, the 3rd
grade students were divided into two equal groups, defined
as being of medium-to-high, and low-to-medium
mathematical achievement respectively. In order to manage
the time needed for data collection and analysis, only two
pairs of participants were selected for the pilot study. Pairs
of students were selected at random from each of the high
and low achievement groups.

3.2.4. Technology and Tools for Building MAVLE
Prototype. The proposed application is an implementation
of the MAVLE prototype as an interactive 3D VR web
application for teaching numeracy concepts. The application
will be able to execute as stand alone application or web
based, and it provides the students with a real time 3D
interactive environment, where they can manipulate and test
the world objects using the mouse and the keyboard of a
common PC, having a 3D accelerated graphics card.
Choosing the right tool to implement the MAVLE prototype
requirements effectively is essential in order to satisfy the
user’s desire for both interactivity and realism.

4. System Implementation
Using the preliminary outcomes from the comparison
study of MAVLE prototype (Java3D vs. VRML), as the
basis for providing guidance to implement the Java3D
MAVLE. A pilot study was carried out to verify the
feasibility of two aspects of the study design: software
design and to asses if the 3rd grade students could use the
‘addition’ exercise using MAVLE successfully to
completion. The two aspects of the study were:

4.2. MAVLE Description
The user interface consists of a three panel’s as follows:
top panel, left panel, and working panel (Figure 8). The top

97

addition of three-digit numbers is generally taught at the end
of the second term of 3rd grade schools.
The researcher interviewed selected students individually
before and after using MAVLE, with the goal of describing
their understandings of ‘addition’ operation. The researcher
led the participants through a series of tasks for three-digit
addition exercises. The exercises were created when the
student presses the new button a new exercise dialog box
appeared allowing the student to enter the name and age,
then he/she chooses the following options from the combo
boxes: grade level (3rd or 4th grade), exercise mode
(classroom or regular), level of difficulties (easy or difficult),
type of operation (addition or subtraction). The student
presses the ‘OK’ button after configuring the exercise in
order to start; the following figures (10, 11) show the
process for solving one of the exercises for using addition
within MAVLE.

panel contains many icons each of them is used to change
the action that you get from clicking at the mouse.

Figure 8. MAVLE user interface
To start a new exercise, student should press the new
icon on the top panel at the most right corner. A new
exercise dialog box will appear (Figure 9) asking questions
such as student name, student age, level of difficulties.

Figure 10. Screenshot shows the moved VM and ‘Glue’
button pressed in order to perform the gluing action

Figure 9. MAVLE new exercise dialog box

4.3. Procedures
The pilot study was conducted with a teacher while the
researcher was present. In the practice stage users were
introduced to and practiced with navigation in a desktop VR
that consisted of a sample environment where each user was
asked to perform a navigation task. The practice stage
ensured that the user would have some knowledge of how to
use the mouse for navigation in a desktop VR. The tasks
were designed to examine the students’ ability to solve the
exercise for ‘addition’ of three-digit numbers. Actually the

Figure 11. Screenshot shows 3D navigation features

98

analyzing think-aloud protocols from sub-groups of
participants in the formal study. Content analysis
will be used to determine the existence of any
differences in their conceptualization of arithmetical
operations. Factors relating to different levels of
ability will be or particular interest.
• Consideration of the educational activities, relating
to number concepts that 3D worlds support. This
will explore: free and structured tasks, individual
and group tasks, activities created by learners and by
teachers, the nature of number concept errors,
differences between new and experienced users of
the software, and other relevant issues arising during
the course of the classroom evaluation.

4.4. Results and Recommendations
The results of this study are a first step in developing an
understanding of future developments of the application. The
results suggested that the proposed methods and tools are
sound. Also, the pilot study indicated that the navigation of
MAVLE could be easily learned by students. Preliminary
results suggest that several users specified that they felt
immersed in the environment, even though no special
immersive VR hardware was used. Yet the results of this
pilot suggest important changes did occur in learning
outcomes that there was a marked difference in performance
between the high-achievement level students and lowachievement level students. It also produced valuable
information for the design of the subsequent studies. The
initial evaluation has indicated that minor changes need to be
made to the software design as a result of the pilot study
results. This MAVLE application can be extended by
addition of many more features and hence has a very big
potential. The key issues for the future of MAVLE
application include:
• The mouse shape will be modified according to the
pressed button (‘Glue’, ‘Broom’, or ‘Hammer’).
• The tens compartment will be enlarged in order to
reflect its place value position when compared with
the ones compartment.
• The left panel will be modified.
• A time constrained mode needs to be added as a
difficulty level.

References
[1] M. Roussou, "Learning by Doing and Learning Through Play:
An Exploration of Interactivity in Virtual Environments for
Children," ACM Computers in Entertainment, vol. 2, 2004.
[2] I. Selwood, T. Mikropoulos, and D. Whitelock, "Guest
Editorial," Education and Information Technologies, vol. 5, pp.
233-236, 2000.
[3] J. M. Moshell and C. E. Hughes, "Virtual Reality as a Tool for
Academic Learning," in Handbook of Virtual Environments:
Design, Implementation and Applications, K. M. Stanney, Ed.:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002, pp. 893-910.
[4] L. Chittaro and R. Ranon, "Web3D technologies in learning,
education and training: Motivations, issues, opportunities,"
Computers & Education, vol. 49, pp. 3-18. Avilable online at:
www.sciencedirect.com, 2007.

5. Future Work

[5] S. Mills and J. Noyes, "Virtual reality: an overview of Userrelated Design Issues Revised Paper for Special Issue on "Virtual
reality:User Issues" in Interacting With Computers (Editorial),"
Interacting with Computers, vol. 11, pp. 375-386, 1999.

The results of this study are a first step in developing an
understanding of future development of the application.
However, this pilot study does provide evidence that 3D
virtual manipulatives technologies do have the potential for
substantially improving student learning. The future studies
include evaluations not just of students’ learning but also of
changes in their attitudes and interest towards mathematics.
The future evaluation procedures for the main study will be
as follows:
• A formal pretest-postest experimental study into the
effects of using the software upon children’s
arithmetical competence. This plans to involve 3
groups of children in 3 different schools: a group
using the 3D environment developed within this
project, a group using an existing 2D environment
and a control group.
• An exploration of the effects of using the 3D
environment upon how children think about number
concepts. This will be carried out by recording and

[6] H. Neale and S. Nichols, "Theme-based content analysis: a
flexible method for virtual environment evaluation," Int. J. HumanComputer Studies, vol. 55, pp. 167-189, 2001.
[7] W. Winn, "A Conceptual Basis for Educational Applications of
Virtual Reality [online]," Seattle, University of Washington,
Human Interface Technology Laboratory 1993.
[8] R. Schroeder, "Learning from Virtual Reality Applications in
Education," Virtual Reality, vol. 1, pp. 33-40, 1995.
[9] S. Nichols, C. Haldane, and J. R. Wilson, "Measurement of
presence and its consequences in virtual environments," Int. J.
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 52, pp. 471-491, 2000.

99

[10] K. M. Osberg, W. Winn, H. Rose, A. Hollander, H. Hoffman,
and P. Char, "The Effect of Having Grade Seven Students
Construct Virtual Environments on their Comprehension of Science
[online]," [online]. Seattle: University of Washington, Human
Interface
Technology
Laboratory.1997.
Available
at:
http://www.hitl.washington.edu/publications/r-97-19/

[20] N. A. Drickey, "A comparison of virtual and physical
manipulatives in teaching visualization and spatial reasoning to
middle school mathematics students," [online]. Utah State
University.2000.Avilable
at:
http://wwwlib.umi.com/dissertations/fullcit/3004011
[21] L. Daghestani, H. Al-Nuaim, and A. Al-Mashat, "The Impact
of a Virtual Learning Environment in Teaching Mathematical
Concepts for Third Grade Students," Proceedings of the second
Saudi Science conference. Jeddah, KAU., 2004.

[11] Y. S. Chee and C. M. Hooi, "C-VISions: Socialized Learning
through Collaborative, Virtual, Interactive Simulations," in
Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning,
Boulder, CO, USA, 2002, p. 687–696.

[22] B. Doig, B. Mccrae, and K. Rowe, "Effective numeracy
strategies from research and practice in early childhood," [online].
Report publication of Project Good Start to Numeracy, a project
funded under the Commonwealth Numeracy and Research
Development
Initiative.2003.
Available
at:
http://www.acer.edu.au/documents/GoodStart.pdf.

[12] C. J. Chen, S. C. Toh, and W. M. Fauzy, "The Theoretical
Framework for Designing Desktop Virtual Reality-Based Learning
Environments," Jl. of Interactive Learning Research, vol. 15, pp.
147-167, 09/10/2004 2004.
[13] C. P. Lim, D. Nonis, and J. Hedberg, "Gaming in a 3D
multiuser virtual environment: engaging
students in Science lessons," British Journal of Educational
Technology, vol. 37, pp. 211-231, 2006.

[23] N. D. Thomas, J. T. Mulligan, and G. A. Goldin, "Children's
representation and structural development of the counting sequence
1-100," Journal of Mathematical Behavior, vol. 21, pp. 117-133,
2002.

[14] C. J. Chen, "The design, development and evaluation of a
virtual reality based learning environment," in Australasian Journal
of Educational Technology. vol. 22, 2006, pp. 39-63.

[24] C. Kamii, B. A. Lewis, and L. Kirkland, "Manipulatives: when
are they useful?," Journal of Mathematical Behavior, vol. 20, pp.
21-31, 2001.

[15] V. S. Pantelidis, "Reasons to Use Virtual Reality in Education,
VR in the Schools," [online]. 1995. Avilable at:
http://www.soe.ecu.edu/vr/reas.html.

[25] D. Laurillard, Rethinking University Teaching: A Framework
for the Effective Use of Educational Technology.: London:
Routledge., 2002.

[16] A. Mahdavi, A. Metzger, and G. Zimmermann, "Towards a
Virtual Laboratory for Building Performance and Control,"
[online]. This paper has been published in R. Trappl (Ed.)
Cybernetics and Systems, Vol (1). Vienna: Austrian Society for
Cybernetic
Studies.
281-286.2002.
Available
at:
http://galway.informatik.unikl.de/publications/publications.1.dir/MMZ02.0/paper.pdf.

[26] R. E. Mayer, Multimedia Learning: New York, Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
[27] D. A. Bowman, E. Kruijff, J. J. Laviola, and I. Poupyrev, "An
Introduction to 3-D User Interface Design," Presence, vol. 10, pp.
96-108, 2001.
[28] D. A. Bowman, "Performance-oriented Interaction
Techniques," in Virtual environment technology handbook, I. K. S.
(Ed.), Ed.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc., 2002.

[17] T. A. Herrera, "The Internet as Instructional Tool: A
Consideration of Its Potential Role in the Elementary Mathematics
Classroom [online]," in The Mathematics Education into the 21st
Century Project, Proceedings of the International Conference "The
Decidable and the Undecidable in Mathematics Education", Brno,
Czech Republic, 2003.
[18] P. S. Moyer, J. J. Bolyard, and M. A. Spikell, "VIRTUAL
MANIPULATIVES IN THE K-12 CLASSROOM [0nline]," in
Proceedings of the International Conference on New Ideas in
Mathematics Education, A. Rogerson, Ed.: In A. Rogerson (Ed.),
2001, pp. 184-187.
[19] L. Cannon, B. Heal, J. Dorward, and L. Edwards, "National
library of virtual manipulatives for interactive mathematics
[online]," [online]. MATTI Associates LLC.1999-2001. Available
at: http://matti.usu.edu/nlvm/nav/vlibrary.html

100

