2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Transformation of Spatial Data Format for Interoperability between GIS
Applications
Rahmat Budiarto, Pradeep Isawasan, Maulana Abdul Aziz
National Advanced IPv6 Centre (NAv6)
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
{rahmat, pradeep, maulana}@nav6.org

two main processes listed below while detail explanations
on each process are discussed on the following sub-sections.
1) Coordinate system transformation from one coordinate
system into another.
2) Converting LoD attributes from one format into a
global LoD.

Abstract—In todays Information Age, an application to be
claimed being interoperable has many benefits and advantages.
Our attempt is to propose transformation methods on spatial
attributes so that interoperability between spatial data can be
obtained. Interoperability state can only be obtained by equalizing two attributes utilized in identifying a location, which are
coordinate of the location and LoD of the spatial data through
transformation processes. We use GLOBALBASE & Google
Maps as the case study to verify the proposed transformations.
Through running some experiments we showed the utilizations
of the proposed transformation.

A. Coordinate Conversion between Coordinate Systems
In geodesy concept, there is transformation formula
known to convert coordinate from one coordinate system
into another, for example transformation formula as (Dana,
1995) (Sudano, 1997) [3][4]. However, this formula is only
able to give mathematical relationship between geodetic
coordinate system that uses latitude, longitude, and height
and ECEF (Earth Centered Earth Fixed) Cartesian coordinate
system that uses x, y and z where both coordinate systems
are having same original point. It will not applicable if
the original point used is different. Moreover, this formula
is more suitable for 3-dimensional space transformation.
Meanwhile, most maps are representing the real world is
a flat image, i.e. a 2-Dimensional space. Some spatial data
based on Cartesian coordinate system also might not use the
center of the earth for its original point, especially for local
map. We propose a transformation method that can be used
to convert a 2-dimensional based coordinate point from one
coordinate system into another. Here, we use two different
approaches;
1) using two pairs of reference points (minimum requirement)
2) using three pairs of reference points
Note that, a pair of coordinates from different coordinate
system can become control points when both points are representing same exact location in the real world. Meanwhile,
linear transformation system is chosen in order to have simplicity in the calculation with less reference points needed
and to keep the new coordinate we got from misguided result
since linear function is a low-level polynomial.
1) Linear Transformation Based on Two Pairs of Control
Points: Linear transformation in 2-dimension space by using
two pairs of reference points is executed by separating the

Keywords-interoperability, spatial data, GIS, linear transformation, Level of Details (LoD)

I. I NTRODUCTION
Expectation toward GIS technology is increased day by
day. Its ability in spatial data management makes GIS
possible to integrate any kinds of information into a common
spatial and visual language. Interoperability between GIS
applications can be defined as the ability of two or more
GIS applications to exchange information and to use the
information that have been exchanged. As for the term interoperability it is used to describe the capability of different
programs to exchange data via a common set of exchange
formats, to read and write the same file formats, and to use
the same protocols[1]. In our case we use GLOBALBASE
(distributed GIS) and Google Maps (web based GIS)[2].
The interoperability between this applications is used as our
sample case study.
II. S PATIAL ATTRIBUTES TRANSFORMATION .
Fundamentally, two attributes are needed in order to
identify a location in GIS uniquely
• Attribute of the location’s coordinate in 2-dimensional
space coordinate system used for the data.
• Attribute that differentiate the level of detail (LoD) of
the location shown, such as scales, resolutions, zoom
levels, and so on.
Therefore, we need to apply some transformation processes into these two properties in order to achieve interoperability between various spatial data with different format.
Succinctly, the transformation process can be divided into
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.65

536

xc = P xc + Qyc + R

transformation process for both axes, i.e. X and Y . Each
process in an axis is dependent from the variable in another
axis. Here, two pairs of coordinate points are representing
two corners in the opposite diagonal of a rectangle form
map. The position of the two points can be in the top-left
and down-right corners or down-left and top right corners
of the map.
For example two reference points (xa , ya ) and (xb , yb ),
are mapped into (xa , ya ) and (xb , yb ). By using linear
transformation, we can calculate a suitable coordinate point
for (x, y) from the first coordinate system into(x , y ) in the
second coordinate system. To transform the abscissa of the
point, we use a 2-dimension transformation equation for two
known reference points defined as
x − xa
x − xa
=
xb − xa
xb − xa
which is used to find the value of x
x − xa
x = b
(x − xa ) + xa
xb − xa

By solving this equation we can get the value of P, Q and
R. The same process is repeated for U, V and W. Hence,
by putting in P , Q, and R values into equation (5) and also
U , V , and W values into equation (6), we can calculate the
coordinate of (x , y ) as the new coordinate for point (x, y)
in a different coordinate system.
B. Transformation on Level of Details (LoD)
Detail value of a spatial data can be identified in various
ways. Here, we propose a method to generalize spatial
datas LoD. By considering that all of digitized images have
resolution values, we use resolution as a standard form of
LoD. In our method we define resolution as number of pixels
needs to cover a single unit scale of an area in the real world.
Thus, it is different with spatial resolution that commonly
refers to Ground Sample Distance (GSD) of a digital orthophoto. Generally resolution in GIS can be divided into
two categories, which are resolution units based on length
units and resolution units based on angle units. Note that,
the term dot can also be referred as pixel. Resolution units
conversions between the same types are straightforward. It is
accomplished by comparing the ratio between both units of
the resolutions since there are standard ratios between them.
Meanwhile conversion between different units of resolutions
type need to examine other properties of the spatial data,
thus do not have knowable standard ratios between these
units. Here, we need to consider the geometric structure of
the angle based resolutions map represented, whether it is
sphere or spheroid. The radius parameter of the globe shall
also be considered.

(1)

(2)

Similarly, we get
y =

yb − ya
(y − ya ) + ya
yb − ya

(3)

to transform the ordinate of the point.
2) Linear Transformation Based on Three Pairs of Control Points: Unlike transformation based on two pairs of
reference points where projected value on each axis is
defined only using values from the same axis, mapping
process based on three pairs of reference points needs to
consider values from both axes to get the projected value on
each axis. Here, both abscissa and ordinate are dependent
on X and Y values of the reference points. To do the
transformation process, we define a function F such that
F (x, y) = (f (x, y), g(x, y)) = (x , y )

(4)

f (x, y) = x = P x + Qy + R

(5)

g(x, y) = y = U x + V y + W

(6)

C. Calculating Resolution of a Location on a Map.
Resolution can be used as a standard form to indicate
LoD in GIS. Nevertheless, not all of GIS applications
store resolution of the spatial data, as metadata. We have
to calculate resolution value of the spatial data manually
because not all of GIS applications store resolution of the
spatial data as metadata. It is tedious to calculate resolution
on each latitude manually and storing all of the resolution
values will require more space. Therefore, we propose a
method in finding resolution value on any latitude based
on several resolution values that is reckoned manually. In
this method, we use resolution values of several latitudes
obtained manually as control points while resolution of
the other latitudes will be calculated through interpolation
process. By considering that resolutions of two locations
with equal latitude coordinate on north and south side of
equatorial are equal, based on Mercator projection, we can
simplify the interpolation process on one side only. Here, we
will focus to interpolate resolution from equatorial towards
the North Pole. Many methods can be used to interpolate
data. In our case, we employ rational cubic spline function.
Compared to polynomial interpolation, spline interpolation

Where

For example three reference points (A, B, and C) defined at
(xa , ya ), (xb , yb ), and (xc , yc ) located in coordinate resource
M are mapped into A (xa , ya ), B (xb , yb ), and C (xc , yc ) in
coordinate resource N. Both triangle formed by the reference
points are not guaranteed to be congruent due to different
geodetic properties employed on these spatial data.
Here, we can assign the reference points into the equation
(3.7) and (3.8) to find the P , Q, R, U , V and W values.
From the abscissas of the reference points, we will get these
three equations
xa = P xa + Qya + R

(7)

xb = P xb + Qyb + R

(8)

(9)

537

can give better result with less interpolation error even
when using low degree polynomial for the spline and
thus, avoids Runges phenomenon occurred when using high
degree polynomials. Meanwhile, rational type of function
will give us more ability to control the oscillations of the
curve so that the result of interpolation is suitable with
characteristic of data. Here, by considering the characteristic
of resolutions on the north part of equatorial, resolution
we obtained have to be positive, monotonically increasing
(first derivatives are always positive), and the increment
will always be bigger at higher latitude, i.e. convexity of
the curve (second derivatives are always positive). For the
interpolation process, the rational cubic spline is defined by
Sarfraz and Hussain (2006)[5].

A. Transformation of coordinates
Coordinate transformation from (Scanned School of Computer Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia level 6 sketch) file
into World Coordinate Resource. In this case, we perform
four coordinate transformations. The result is as Figure 2.

III. E XPERIMENT
To examine the coordinate transformations, we setup our
own server (Figure 1) that is operated in an experimentation
environment. In this Section, we represent and analyze
the performance of our proposed methods in transforming
spatial attributes in GLOBALBASE into appropriate values
of spatial attributes in Google Maps. There are two transformation methods that are going to be tested, which are
transformation of coordinate and transformation on LoD.

Figure 2.

Coordinate transformation result

B. Transformation on LoD
Experimentation on LoD transformation is carried out by
converting several resolution values of a site in GLOBALBASE into suitable zoom levels in Google Maps. Thus,
the result will be represented as a list of resolution values
and the appropriate zoom levels along with exact resolution
value for each zoom level. As our sample, we use a site
located in Penang Island at (15,371.940430, 9,069.102539)
on Penang Island map (obtained from Malaysia Tourism
Promotion Board website) coordinate resource. Through
coordinate transformations, we can find that the coordinate point is equal to (86,813.942960, 183,138.321275) on
Malaysian Peninsular map (published by The Director of
National Mapping Malaysia in 1982) coordinate resource
and (100.318667, 5.401862) on World Coordinate Resource.
IV. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE E NHANCEMENT

Figure 1.

All experiment results showed that the transformation
methods we proposed can be utilized to obtain spatial
data interoperability between spatial data in GLOBALBASE
and Google Maps. Yet, the level of accuracy will depend
on several conditions, such as the correctness of mapping
process between spatial data in GLOBALBASE. The depths
of LoD that are going to be transformed can also influencing
the level of accuracy.
We are working on further improving the system where
the initial focus will be on improving the spatial attributes
transformation methods. The current work uses linear transformation for coordinate conversion between coordinate
system. As the next step we intend to use rotation as the
new case for the transformation.

Server Setup

538

Figure 3.

LoD transformation result

R EFERENCES
[1] www.ariadne.ac.uk
[2] Mori, H. (2004). Protocol Reference Model of GLOBALBASE
Architecture: The Autonomous Decentralized GIS. Proc. of 1st
International Conf. on GLOBALBASE Content Development.
Kyoto, Japan.
[3] Dana, P.H. (1995). ”Coordinate System Overview”. Available:http://www.colorado.edu
[4] Sudano, J.J. (1997). An Exact Conversion from an EarthCentered Coordinate System to Latitude, Longitude and Altitude. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org
[5] Sarfraz, M. Hussain, M.Z. (2006). Data visualization using
rational cubic spline interpolation. Journal of Computational
and Applied Mathematics. 189: 513-525.

539

