2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

The Application of Computer Graphic Technology on Monitoring Roller
Compaction Quality of Rock-fill Dam

Cui Bo, Zhong DengHua, Zhang Ping

Liu Lei

School of Civil Engineering
Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
e-mail:pzhangtju@gmail.com

Information Science and Engineering College
Shandong University of Science and Technology,
Qingdao, China

Abstract—This article technically analyzes the application of
computer graphics on “automatic monitor and feedback
control system for roller compaction quality of rock-fill dam”
by anatomizing the monitor process. The application and
software implementation of computer graphic technology
enable the monitor system for roller compaction quality of
rock-fill dam to realize drawing of tracks and strips of rollers,
calculation and display of control parameters of roller
compaction, which achieves the goal of visual monitor on roller
compaction quality.

compaction control parameters in the compaction quality
control of dam, and hence “the automatic monitor and
feedback control system for roller compaction quality of
rock-fill dam” takes these parameters as main monitoring
items.
The orientation equipments installed on the rolling
machine perform RTK orientation[2] every minute in order
to gain precise data of spatial-temporal location of the
rollers, the exciting force monitor equipments supervise the
state of exciting force in real time, the data transfer
equipments transmit the accurate three dimensional position
coordinate data, instantaneous speed and the signal of
vibration state to the server of monitor system in the
command center through GPRS, which then transmits the
received position and state data to monitor clients and puts
these data into the central database for management. The
monitor client receives the real time position and state data
sent by the server and reads historical quantitative data
stored in the database to draw different tracks of rollers by
connecting coordinate points by order of time and through
state identification of being beyond the speed and vibration
limits, forming rolling strips with the extension of half the
roller width to both sides, making the track as axis. Rolling
passes is calculated and presented through accumulation of
rolling strips, and compacted thickness equals to the
difference of compaction elevations of vertical contiguous
filling layers. The client ought to provide multi-perspective
and multi-resolution human- machine interaction interface,
and also to show the monitor results vividly and directly
through graphs and to output for print as the supplementary
documents of acceptance of work.

Keywords-computer graphic technology; rock-fill dam;
monitor on roller compaction quality; visualization

I.

INTRODUCTION

“The automatic monitor and feedback control system
for roller compaction quality of rock-fill dam” realizes
automatic, refined, visual, real-time and full-time monitor
on roller compaction quality of rock-fill dam by means of
automatic positioning technology, database technology,
network technology, wireless data transmission technology
and computer technology. It plays an important role in the
construction quality control of Nuozhadu core rock-fill dam.
This system is composed of command center, spot
substation, differential reference station and floating
monitor stand, etc. Supervisors of construction monitor the
rolling process on the work face of the dam remotely on-line
through monitor clients installed on computers in command
center and spot substation. Monitor client is the main
embodiment of system function. It accomplishes the
real-time display of rolling process of rock-fill dam and the
visual manifestation of rolling monitor results by using
computer graphic technology in design and R&D of client
software.
II.

B. Technical Analysis of Visual Monitor On Roller
Compaction Quality of Rock-fill Dam
1) Principles and Applications of Computer Graphics.
According to the above analysis of monitor process of roller
compaction quality of rock-fill dam, the definition of visual
monitor on roller compaction quality of rock-fill dam can be
described like this: present three dimensional track data of
the roller with plane graphics by applying computer graphic
and other technology, namely computer mathematical
modeling of rolling tracks, in order to describe rolling tracks
directly, vividly and precisely, to calculate and manifest
roller compaction control parameters, such as rolling passes,
rolling speed, vibration state, thickness of filling layer, and

RESEARCH ON TECHNIQUES OF VISUAL MONITOR ON
ROLLER COMPACTION QUALITY OF ROCK-FILL DAM

A. Analysis on the Process of Monitor on Roller
Compaction Quality of Rock-fill Dam
The compaction technology of forward/back alternate
distance method is used in the roller compaction
construction of Nuozhadu core rock-fill dam, and besides,
the movements of rollers parallel the dam axis. Reference[1]
proposes that thickness of filling layer, rolling passes, speed
and vibration state of the roller should be used as roller
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.26

520

to realize visual query and graphic reports output of the
monitor results of roller compaction.
The transformation of tracks and state data of roller into
graphic and image data falls into computer graphics
category of multi-dimensional scattered points plotting.
Computer graphics is a subject researching on the principles,
methods and technologies that transform data into graphs by
computer and present them on special equipment [3].
Specifically, it presents the necessary information of the
description of graphs, that is, the data, on display equipment
by computer to achieving data visualization. Currently,
computer graphic technology is widely used in industry,
science and technology, education, commerce, art,
entertainment and other trades [4]-[7]. The viewport
transformation, rotational variation and other principles and
technology applications in computer graphics are important
tools in achieving visual monitor on roller compaction of
rock-fill dam.
2) Computational Geometrics. As the sub-branch of
computer science, computational geometrics mainly focus
on the computation of geometric problems. In the fields of
modern science and mathematics, computational geometrics
plays an important role in graphics, automaton technology,
ultra large integrates circuit design and statistic [8]. In visual
monitor on roller compaction quality, computational
geometrics is mainly adopted to judge whether the dot (or
dot group) is in the certain polygon.
a) Judge whether the dot is in the polygon. The
monitor cell, the area demanding sufficient roller
compaction of the filling cell, is usually an irregular zone,
all of whose controlling peaks should be inside the
polygonal scope of construction field. Besides, the
over-speed dot and the unqualified-vibrating dot should also
be judged within the monitor cell.
The conventional way to judge whether the dot P is
inside the certain polygon is introduced as follows: treat P
as the terminal vertex and make a radial L to the left. Then
move from the endless place along L from left to the right.
When the number of intersection points is odd, P is inside
the polygon, and vice versa. However, this method is not
suitable for the concave polygon. Therefore, when counting
the number of intersection points, the horizontal side is not
considered; as for the case of the peak intersecting with L, if
the peak has one of the largest y-coordinates of these sides it
belongs to, it is counted, or it can be omitted; if P is on one
of the sides of this polygon, we can judge directly P is inside
the polygon.
b) Judge whether the dot group is inside the polygon.
Dot group beyond the field of view or filling layer should
not be drawn for its computational and monitor inutility.
The main method is to compute continuously the convex
hull of the remaining dots. By judging whether the peak of
the convex hull is inside the polygon and the peak of
polygon is outside the convex hull, we can make sure which
dots of the dot group are outside the polygon.
3) The flat panel display of rolling track and stripe. The
main point of realizing the visualization of rolling track is
the projection from the multi-dimensional track points to the
two-dimensional panel. When to display two-dimensional

track and calculation of rolling passes, two-dimensional
points can be directly made on display panel corresponding
to the latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates; when to
display the calculation of elevation and thickness, the third
dimension elevation information can be shown in gray scale
pattern on the two dimension panel.
The consisting unit of the rolling track drawn by monitor
client is the track segment per second which is the segment
of the adjacent points. The drawing can be realized through
the adoption of the segment generation technology named
Bresenham [9]. If the coordinates of the adjacent two
seconds points are (X1, Y1) and (X2, Y2), the generation
procedures of the track segment of the two points are like
this:
a) Draw points (X1,Y1)ˈthen make dx= X2-X1ˈdy=
Y2-Y1, and the first numerical slip is P1= 2dy-dx.
b) Making i=1, the pixel of the next point on the
coordinate is (Xi+1,Yi+1); if Pi>0ˈYi+1= Yi+1,otherwise,
Yi+1= Yi.
c) For the next slip, if Yi+1= Yi+1, Pi+1= Pi+2dy-2dx,
otherwise, Pi+1= Pi+2dy.
d) L=i+1; if i<dx+1, the procedure 2 can be entered,
otherwise, the line drawing will be ended.
During construction, the effect area of roller compaction
is the rolling strip expanding vertically in the width of
semi-roller on the axes of rolling track. It can be regarded as
line of which the width is equal to the roller width, and can
be drawn using the method of mobile brush like this:
adopting the square brush, setting the numerical value
representing the roller width as the width of the brush, the
center of the brush moves along the track segment, thus the
rolling strip is produced.
Besides, colors are defined to distinguish tracks of
different rollers under different working conditions.
4) Real-time display of the rolling process state. The
real-time property of rolling process monitor demands that
while the track is drawn dynamically, the speed and
vibration state of rolling machines and the rolling passesˈ
especially the state that did not reach the target prominently
must be displayed on the monitor client. The speed and the
vibration state of the real-time point, the rolling passes of
the inquiry point can be displayed adopting the character
generation technology: when needed, pick up stroke
information of the characters stored in the word bank in the
form of vector, and zoom them according to the numerical
values by calculation and analysis, displaying English words
in italic, and the data conforming to the standard in green;
on the contrary, in red.
5) Visual Query and Output of Monitor Results.
a) The calculation and presentation of rolling passes.
The calculation unit of rolling passes is pixel and rolling
passes is presented by different colors of pixel. Each pixel is
given certain color after the rolling strips passed: first, the
current color of one pixel is judged and the numeral value of
rolling passes represented by this color is got through
conversion; then, give the corresponding color gotten by
plus the numeral value of current rolling passes and 1 to this

521

of the monitor system is: abstract filling subarea, filling
layer, filling unit (monitor unit), and working time period,
track points and track segment of roller and other concepts
into logic models.
View is responsible, on one hand, for presenting the
contents of models, on the other, for transcribing users’
inputs and choices to achieve the interaction between human
and computer. And when models change, view is used to
maintain the representation consistency of data and transmit
users’ requirement to controller.
Controller is used to explain users’ requirement coming
from view and to map this into corresponding behavior,
which is realized by models. In the monitor system, data of
models are read, calculated and selected from database by
controller which changes the data into concrete models.
Meanwhile, controller also has the function of interaction
between client and server, rights validation, alerting solution
and so on.

pixel. When inquiring rolling passes, use return function of
color value to get the color value of the mouse’s position
pixel to manifest rolling passes the color value represents.
Before drawing rolling strips, the polygon area of
monitor unit should be filled with the corresponding color
representing value 0. The theory of filling monitor unit by
adopting seed filling method is that make one pixel in that
area as seed point and give it certain color, and then extend
the color value of this pixel to others within the whole area.
The realization process is as follows:
a. Identify the pixel of the seed point (x, y).
b. Judge whether seed point meets the requirement of
non-frontier and unfilled color; if yes, fill the area to both
sides until the boundary with y as the scanning line.
c. Examine the two scanning lines near the current one,
if there is non-frontier and unfilled pixel, back to b to scan
and fill until all the pixels in this area have the filled color
till the whole operation ends.
b) Calculation and manifestation of roller compaction
evaluation. The calculation of roller compaction evaluation
is accurate to pixel and manifested by gray value. Draw the
superimposing and overlaying of rolling strips with
evaluation information on monitor area and select top track
points’ evaluation data as discrete points for interpolation.
According to interpolation result, perform gray value
assignment to each pixel within the area of rolling strips.
The gray value extent corresponds to the evaluation extent.
When inquiring evaluations, use return function of gray
value to get the gray value of the pixel and transform it into
roller compaction evaluation numerical value.
c) The output of graphic reports of monitoring results.
Based on the graphs gained after drawing rolling tracks and
strips and calculating rolling passes and roller compaction
evaluations, called original drawing, the static graphic
reports output of the monitor results mentioned above can
be got just through adding coordinates, explanation and
cutline information. The compacted thickness of a monitor
unit is the compaction evaluation difference between this
unit and its following several vertical units, and the
corresponding original drawing is got by calculating
corresponding compaction evaluation ones.
Generally speaking, engineering data use local
construction coordinates. So before putting out graphic
reports, screen coordinate should be transformed to
construction coordinate.
III.

B. Data Flow
The data flow of “the automatic monitor and feedback
control system for roller compaction quality of rock-fill
dam” (the client part) in pseudo code format is as follows:
Start
Data initialization of database and dam model,
information initialization of filling subarea
Login validation with user identification
If (valid = false)
Then re-login
Else
Database access for rolling machine
attributes data and monitoring unit information
View opening with trace points and
vibration state data from database and communication
server
Calculation on monitoring unit including
filtration, calculation and disposal of trace points, with
filling layer borderline information
View display
Visual inquiring, graphic reports output
End
End
C. Function Modules
1) Rights validation module. The module validates the
rights limitation of users. Users’ rights limitation includes
browsing, operation and management. Browsing users can
conduct the monitor of rolling process and output of
graphical reports; besides the rights of browsing users,
operation users can conduct the operation of monitor units;
management users have the widest scope of rights and the
highest action priority.
2) Monitor unit operation module. The module operates
the monitor unit. It divides boarder of monitor unit,
excludes non-rolling region from monitor unit, set
properties of monitor unit--- unit name, rolling limit speed,
vibration standard and thickness slip etc, start and finish
monitor and distributes working periods of rollers.

THE SOFTWARE REALIZATION OF VISUAL MONITOR
ON ROLLER COMPACTION OF ROCK-FILL DAM

A.

Design Mode
Software is developed based on Microsoft.NET Platform
with MVC design mode. MVC is a kind of program design
idea which deviates view and model through the
deployment of controller. This kind of abstract structure is
good to the division of application programs into several
logical parts and makes program design easier.
In the MVC structure, model represents the application
program data and the business rules used to access and
modify these data. In actual application, the concept model

522

chosen by the mouse presents as ‘10 passes’.
4) Output module of graphical reports. The module
outputs static graphical of the monitor results during and
after monitor process—the two conditions can be
distinguished by the monitor process end remark. It outputs
the static graphical reports of rolling tracks, passes,
elevations and compacted thicknesses. During the output of
the graphical reports of rolling elevations and compacted
thicknesses, to reduce the slip, the average should be
conducted in the form of square grid on the length of
number of meters to the pixel calculation.

3) Real-time monitor module of the rolling process. The
module monitors rolling process in real time: draws present
and historic rolling tracks and strips, calculates real-time
and displays rolling passes and elevation, shows instant
speed and vibration state of rollers on-line, inquiry present
and historic content of untargeted alarm. Figure 1 is the
monitor interface of the client. Tracks of rollers are shown
as lines with different colors, the roller with attributes of
present position and driving direction is displayed as a black
arrowhead alongside of which lying roller number as
‘C3R08’, vibration state as ‘Low freq. high vibration’ and
instant speed as ‘1.58km/h’, rolling passes at the location

Figure 1. Monitor client interface of “the automatic monitor and feedback control system for roller compaction quality of rock-fill dam”

IV.

CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

The application of the computer graphic
technology provides “the automatic monitor and
feedback control system for roller compaction quality
of rock-fill dam” the function of real-time calculation
and display of the roller compaction control
parameters such as rolling passes, compacted
thickness, proceeding speed and vibration state of
roller, and favorable interaction between user and
computer when conducting monitor on rolling process
on monitor client, which actualizes visual monitor on
roller compaction process of rock-fill dam. With the
development of the computer technology and the
expansion of the applied region of the graphical
display technology, computer graphic technology and
the quality monitor on roller compaction of rock-fill
dam will be combined further more to improve the
dam construction management.

[1]. People’s Republic of China Electric Power Industry Standard.
Specification for Rolled Earth-rockfill Dam Construction
DL/T5129-2001, Beijing: China electric power press, 2001,
pp.31-32.
[2]. B. Holfmann Wellenhof, H. Lichtenegger and J. Collins, GPS
Theory and Practise, New York: Springger Wien, 1997,
pp.186-189
[3]. Steve Cunningham, Computer Graphics, Beijing: China
Machine Press, 2008.
[4]. QU Bo, WAND Yong, WANG GuiXun, “Application of
Computer Graphic Technology in Environment Monitoring”,
vol. 15, Journal of Environmental Management, College of
China, 2005, pp. 114-116.
[5]. Paul E. Debevec, Jitendra Malik. “Recovering high dynamic
range radiance maps from photographs”, In Proceedings of the
24th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques, 1997,pp. 369-378.
[6]. Takeo Igarashi, Satoshi Matsuoka, Hidehiko Tanaka. Teddy,
“A Sketching Interface for 3D Freeform Design”. Computer
Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference Series, ACM

523

[8]. Franco P. Preparata, Michacl I. Shamos, Computational
Geometry: an Introduction, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985
[9]. Colin Flangan. The Bresenham Line-Drawing Algorithm,
Beijing: Science Press. 1990, pp. 1-6.

SIGGRAPH, Los Angeles,1999:409-416
[7]. Alla Sheffer, Emil Praun, Kenneth Rose, “Mesh
parameterization methods and their applications”, vol. 2,
Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision,
2006, pp. 106-171.

524

