2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Interactive Visualization of Normal Behavioral Models and Expert Rules for
Maritime Anomaly Detection
Maria Riveiro, G¨oran Falkman
Informatics Research Centre, University of Sk¨ovde, Sweden
{maria.riveiro, goran.falkman}@his.se
Abstract

further investigation may reduce the operator’s cognitive
load.
The identification of anomalous behavior is strongly
supported as a research topic by multiple civilian and military defense law enforcement agencies around the world,
with a wide range of applications, from network security
to border protection (see for example the 2006 European
Security Research Agenda [15] or the 2008 High Priority
Technical Needs Brochure [7] published by the US Department of Homeland Security). Data mining techniques have
been proved to be very valuable in the detection of anomalies. But normally, anomaly detection is a complex and not
well-defined problem and therefore, automatic data mining approaches do not work well [23]. Furthermore, autonomous anomaly detection systems are rarely used in the
real world [6], since it is difficult to represent the prior
knowledge that the users bring to their tasks [6]. Human
expert knowledge may be very valuable in these cases, as
it can be used to guide the anomaly detection process, for
example, reducing the search space or refining the models
derived from the data. Visualization and interaction techniques are widely recognized to be very powerful in this
domain [8] and may close the gap between the domain experts and the data mining engines. In addition, visualization methods take advantage of human abilities to perceive
patterns and to interpret them [9], which can be critical in
complex situations.
Mining for association rules has been extensively studied by many researchers, but limited work has been done
on how to help the user understand these rules [25]. Approaches that visualize normal behavioral statistical models built from the data (using more than three features) are
rarely seen in the literature. In this paper, we present a joint
visualization of normal behavioral statistical models (for
n-dimensions) and expert rules, using a “scatter plot grid”.
The joint visualizations of normal models and expert rules
represent the knowledge embedded in our anomaly detection system. Such visualizations show clearly, not only
over which areas of the feature space we have knowledge
(coverage), but also how knowledge learned from the data
matches rules created by domain experts.

Maritime surveillance systems analyze vast amounts of
heterogeneous sensor data from a large number of objects.
In order to support the operator while monitoring such systems, the identification of anomalous vessels or situations
that might need further investigation may reduce the operator’s cognitive load. While it is worth acknowledging
that many existing mining applications support identification of anomalous behavior, autonomous anomaly detection systems are rarely used in the real world, since the
detection of anomalous behavior is normally not a welldefined problem and therefore, human expert knowledge is
needed. This calls for the development of interaction components that can support the user in the detection process.
In order to support the comprehension of the knowledge
embedded in the system, we propose an interactive way
of visualizing expert rules and normal behavioral models
built from the data. The overall goal is to facilitate the
validation and update of these models and signatures, supporting the insertion of human expert knowledge while improving confidence and trust in the system.
Keywords— interactive visualization, normal behavioral
models, rules/signatures, anomaly detection, visual analytics,
data mining, maritime situation awareness, AIS data

1

Introduction

Our capability to generate and store data has seen an explosive growth during the last decade. Higher data storage
capacity, cheaper devices and better database management
systems have enabled the storage of huge volumes of data.
However, our ability to generate and store data has outpaced our ability to analyze and exploit it [8, 24].
The surveillance of large sea areas with a multitude of
sensor (radars, cameras, automatic identification systems,
etc.) typically generates vast amounts of heterogeneous
data. Human operators trying to establish maritime situation awareness may be overwhelmed by it or by the traditional manual methods of data analysis. In order to support
the operator while monitoring large sea areas, the identification of anomalous vessels or situations that might need
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.54

459

This paper continues our earlier efforts to facilitate
the introduction of human expert knowledge during the
detection of anomalous behavior in maritime traffic (see
[33–35]), focusing on the visual representation of data
mining outcomes (normal behavioral models) and expert
rules. Our aim is to assist the human analyst to comprehend the normal behavior models created by the data mining engines and how they relate to the rules/signatures that
capture expert knowledge, in order to support the validation and update of such models and signatures. Moreover,
visual representations of the data mining outcomes may increase user confidence and trust in the whole system, since
the detection process becomes transparent to the user.
The contribution of our work is twofold: (1) within
visual analytics, contribute to the understanding of outcomes and intermediate steps of the data mining layers in
order to support the human analytical reasoning process
and (2) within anomaly detection, facilitate the design of
future anomaly detector systems when fully automatic approaches are not viable and human participation is needed.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 presents a brief introduction to visual data mining
and visual analytics. Section 3 reviews relevant work regarding the visual representation of normal models and association rules. Section 4 describes the maritime scenario
and the data used in this project. The visualization of normal models and rules is introduced and discussed in section 5. Finally, future research directions and conclusions
are presented in section 6.

The use of solely automatic data mining techniques over
large amounts of multidimensional data reduces our possibilities in the discovery process, since the user is estranged
from the process of data exploration. The integration of
data mining and information visualization techniques has
received a lot of attention in recent years [29]. The need to
tightly include the human in the exploration process is now
recognized by many authors (e.g. [11, 16, 22, 42]). Visualization can contribute to the data mining process in two
ways: (1) it can represent the results of complex computational algorithms and (2) it can be used to discover complex patterns which cannot be detected automatically but
by the powerful human visual system (visual data mining).
Visual data mining focuses on integrating the user in the
knowledge discovery process using effective and efficient
visualization techniques and interaction capabilities.
In order to support the analytical reasoning process and
having the science of analytical reasoning as a framework
upon which one can build technologies, visual analytics
has grown recently from information visualization. Visual
analytics is defined as analytical reasoning supported by
highly interactive visual interfaces [40]. Visual analytics
strives to facilitate the analytical reasoning process by creating software that maximizes human capacity to perceive,
understand and reason about complex and dynamic data
and situations. It is an iterative process that involves information gathering, data preprocessing, knowledge representation, interaction and decision making, it combines the
strengths of machines with those of humans.

2

2.2

Background

2.1 Visual data mining and visual analytics

Anomaly detection methods

The concept of “anomaly detection” is hard to clarify
(for further discussion on the definition of anomaly see previous publications [34, 35]). It appears in multiple areas,
like network security, video surveillance, human activity
monitoring, fault diagnosis, maintenance, etc.
Many approaches for anomaly detection use statistical
based methods. In these cases, anomalies are defined as
deviations from normality. Everything that does not match
the normal models, is defined as anomalous. When statistical methods are used for anomaly detection, the data is
classified either with the regular majority (defined by the
built profiles) or with the minority, assuming that we have
enough and valuable training data to make such distinction. These methods are used when very little is known
about what we are actually looking for. But even if we
can do such classification, the minority group may be difficult to characterize or define, or may not include anomalies at all. In other situations, more is known regarding
what we are actually looking for. In these cases, the data is
analyzed looking for the features that fit these anomalies.
When anomalies can be characterize completely, rules or
signatures can be defined.

Exploring, analyzing and finding relevant information
in vast amounts of multidimensional sensor data are complex tasks. Different disciplines are concerned with extracting information among the data. Since the 80’, exploratory data analysis (EDA) [41] was used to analyze
data for the purpose of formulating hypotheses worth testing, complementing conventional statistical tools. Based
on the conceptual principles of EDA but focusing on the
application rather than in the basic nature of the underlying phenomena, data mining has emerged as an important
discipline in all data intensive domains. Data mining is
defined as the process of identifying or discovering useful and yet undiscovered knowledge from the real-world
data [19]. Data mining is often placed in the broader context of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). KDD is
an iterative process consisting of: (1) data preparation and
cleaning, (2) hypothesis generation (data mining is used
basically in this phase) and (3) interpretation and analysis.
Data mining algorithms can be classified according to the
task they are solving in predictive, exploratory and reductive data mining algorithms [17].
460

Anomaly detection has been an active research area of
computer science and security for a long time. Most of the
published work regarding anomaly detection is related to
intrusion detection applications for network traffic. Algorithms used in the detection of intrusions/attacks are traditionally classified in three main groups [30]: anomaly1 ,
signature or hybrid. Two interesting classifications of
intrusion detection systems and anomaly detection techniques can be found in [30] and [2]. Systems based on
anomaly detection schemes look for abnormalities in the
traffic, assuming that something that is abnormal is probably suspicious [2]. Such detectors are based on what constitutes normal behavior and what percentage of the activity we want or are allowed/willing to flag as abnormal. A
review of the most well-known anomaly-based intrusion
detection techniques, platforms, systems and an outline of
the main challenges in the area is presented in [18].
In other domain areas, anomaly detection is not as mature as it is in the network security field. In the maritime
scenario, few anomaly detection systems that monitor maritime traffic can be found in the literature. Kraiman et al.
present in [26] an anomaly detector processor using Self
Organizing Maps (SOM) and Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM) for the analysis of vessel tracks. In [3, 32], the authors introduce a anomaly detection system that uses neurobiologically inspired algorithms that learn motion pattern models of vessels on-the fly. Other methods used to
find anomalous behavior in maritime data are the trajectory clusterer described in [10] or the work reported in [27],
where the normal model of the vessels behavior is built using a combination of the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm and GMMs. A rule-based situation assessment
system for sea-surveillance is presented in [12]. Based
on an agent framework and using an ontology geared toward sea surveillance, the authors described a rule-based
reasoner that analyzes situations that develop over time.
Examples of methodologies for anomaly detection that
include human expert knowledge to any extent are rare.
An exception is the work presented in [21], where a solution based on Bayesian networks uses the user input
to build a normal model of the maritime traffic. An interesting contribution is presented in [38], where a general method, conditional anomaly detection, is introduced.
This method makes use of domain knowledge provided by
the user that selects which attributes are directly indicative of an anomaly. In [13], the authors present a tool
for classification and detection of anomalous patterns using
Bayesian inference. The application, ISC-tool, provides an
interactive graphical user interface that presents the degree

Antecedent

C

C
B
A

A
A

B

B

C

Consequent

Figure 1: Basic representations of association rules: directed graph (on the left) and two-dimensional matrix (on
the right). In the directed graph representation, the nodes
depict the items and the edges represent the associations.
Two association rules are shown: A → C and B → C. On
the right, the matrix represents B → C (the bars may depict different metadata, such as the support and confidence
values).
of anomaly of a pattern and how it is classified.
To the best of our knowledge, theories, techniques and
methods developed within visual analytics have not been
used in the detection of anomalous behavior in the maritime domain. We believe that visual analytics is a key enabler to meeting the demanding requirements of this problem domain.

3 Related work
Although a wide variety of solutions have been proposed for visualizing high-dimensional data sets, and visualization has been an important aspect within data mining (for the representation of data mining outcomes see,
for example, [25]), there has been very little effort focused
on visualizing learned models from data. A significant
exception is the work presented by Rheingans and desJardins in [31], where the authors describe a set of visualization methods that help users to understand and analyze the behavior of learned models. The article focuses
on classification tasks (accurate prediction of class membership from census data) and the models are constructed
using Bayesian networks. The visualizations correspond
to the following model characteristics: class probability,
decision boundary, misclassification and meta-attributes of
the model (such as the distribution and density of the training data used to build the model). The visualizations used
are mainly 2D feature selection displays, contour maps and
SOMs. Focusing on supporting the user while building
normal behavioral models, two worthwhile contributions
are [28] and [20]. In these cases, visualization is used to
support the construction of normal behavioral models from
data (nevertheless, no final representation of the built models is given). In [28] the authors describe an interesting
approach for learning individualized behavior models for
Web users. Here, visualization is used to identify different
behavioral models among users (clusters) using a simple

1 In [30], the authors use the expression “anomaly-based” methods
referring only to data-driven approaches. For us, the concept of anomaly
is broader and anomaly detection methods include both knowledge-driven
and data-driven approaches.

461

action-color mapping (each user session is represented as
a row of colored squares, where each square corresponds
to an action). In the same line is the work presented by
Iwata and Saito in [20], where 2-3D graphical representations of the data based on the probabilities of belonging to
each mixture component and the probability of not belonging to any component, support the user in the selection of
the number of mixture components in the final model (K).
On the other hand, extensive work has been done on
the representation of association rules extracted from large
data sets (a recent review of visualization techniques for
association rules is included in [4]). An association rule
is an implication of the form A → B, where A is a set
of antecedent items and B is the consequent item. The
two most common approaches to visualize the usual huge
number of association rules extracted from data are: the
two dimensional matrix (or table-based method) and the directed graph (see figure 1). An extension of the matrix solution using 3D representations is described in [43]. Many
graphical tools and visualization methods have been used
for pruning2 . Examples of this kind are the parallel coordinates based representation introduced in [44] and the
combination of graph-based and parallel coordinates representation suggested in [5]. A tool for visualizing mining association rules, VisAR, is introduced in [39]. VisAR
supports managing and filtering association rules through
interactive visualization.
While is worth considering the former approaches for
the visualization of association rules, most of them fall into
the category of exploratory analysis or knowledge discovery methods, since the aim of such suggestions is to extract
significant information in large amounts of data (discover
patterns, relations, new properties, correlations, etc.) or reduce the number of meaningless rules. In our case, we are
interested on finding deviations from the expected values
in the data. In order to achieve that, the association rules
embedded in our system represent human expert knowledge regarding the abnormality of certain feature values
(the generation of new rules extracted from the data is
out of the scope of this paper). In this work, two important characteristics of the expert rules must be considered:
(1) all expert rules share the same consequent (B), since
B = anomalous and (2) the number of expert rules is not
large and thus, simple visualization approaches are optimal
(e.g. table/matrix-based methods). Similar examples of the
use of rules that capture human expertise are presented in
[12] and [37].
Regarding the combination of both aspects, to the best
of our knowledge, joint visualizations for normal models

Figure 2: Example of the maritime traffic data analyzed:
vessel tracks extracted from AIS messages. The values
plotted correspond to five days of AIS messages broadcasted by vessels navigating on Swedish waters (training
data).
and expert rules have not been suggested in the literature
up to date.

4

Scenario and data

Real Automatic Identification System (AIS) broadcasted messages have been used during the analysis. AIS
is the most important self-reporting maritime system and it
is compulsory for most commercial ships (more technical
information can be found in [14]). There are various types
of AIS messages that are sent with different frequencies
(the details regarding the communication and the content
of the different messages are throughly described in [1]).
The data set used in this project is a collection of messages
broadcasted by vessels traveling along the west part of the
Swedish coast, including Gothenburg port area and parts
of the coast of Denmark, Germany and Norway. The data
corresponds to 17 days during the winter (January). The
first five days of the data set are used as training data, i.e.
they are considered to model the normal vessel behavior
(see figure 2 for a depiction of the training data). Each
daily activity involves over 600 vessels and more than 3.5
million messages. Table 1 contains the data fields of the
AIS messages used. Three types of messages where considered, two that we refer as dynamic (MessageId numbers
1 and 3, that report basically, position, speed and heading)

2 Pruning is defined as the task of discarding rules derived from data.
Normally, rules are pruned if they are considered meaningless, i.e. they
do not reach minimum thresholds for support and confidence.

462

Table 1: Content of the AIS broadcasted messages.
Type

MssgId

Content

Dynamic

1,3

MMSI; Latitude; Longitude; Heading; Navigational status; Speed over ground (SOG-

by the dispersion of training data around the model vector.

Knots); Course over ground (COG); ReceiveTime
Static

5

MMSI; Callsign; Name; IMO; Cargo; Destination; Estimated Time Arrival (ETA)
(fields ETAmonth, ETAday, ETAhour,
ETAminute); Dimensions; Draught; IsCargoShip; Length; ReceiveTime; ShipType

and one static (MessageId number 5, that includes static
information, e.g. the name of the vessel, its callsign, IMO
number, etc. and voyage related data, e.g. destination, estimated time of arrival, etc.)
The files have been sampled down, since messages
from the vessels are reported every 2-3 seconds. Instead,
we have considered updates every six minutes. Vessels
have been classified regarding type and navigational status. Thus, normal behavior models are constructed for each
type of vessel and navigational status. The normal models
capture the dynamic behavior of the different types of vessels (cargo, tanker, passenger, pilot, high speed craft and
fishing boat). For that, the following features are used: latitude, longitude, heading, speed over ground (SOGKnots)
and course over ground (COG).

5

Figure 3: This interactive module builds the normal behavioral models from the training data (the picture depicts the
analysis of cargo vessels).
The biggest challenge we have faced while trying to
represent the normal behavioral models built for different types of vessels (cargo, tanker, passenger, pilot, high
speed craft and fishing boat) was the fact that we would
need a six-dimensional space to represent such probability density function. Therefore, we have implemented an
interface (“scatter plot grid” like), that displays all possible two-dimensional combinations (feature vs. probability
values). Clicking on any of the two figures displayed, a
three-dimensional representation is shown (see figure 4).
The signatures or rules capture the knowledge of experts in the maritime domain regarding different common characteristics of maritime traffic (e.g.
maximum and minimum speed for different types of vessels, normal navigational channels, forbidden or dangerous zones, etc.). The rules can be syntactically expressed
as: IF <condition> THEN <result>, confidence
(%).
The <condition> includes the features involved (antecedent) and if the evaluation is positive, the
<result> is that the vessel should be considered anomalous (consequent).
Figure 5 visualizes the normal model built from
the training data regarding the speed values and the
knowledge-based rule associated. The knowledge rule indicates the maximum speed value that is consider to be
normal by the operator (IF < SogKnots ≥ 22 > THEN
< anomalous = true >). This threshold indicates when
the user wants to be alerted, not that higher speed values
are not physically/mechanically possible. Three interesting
aspects should be considered in figure 5 (highlighted with
black squares and from left to right): (1) there is a large
number of observations that present speed values near 0.

Visualization of normal behavioral models
and expert rules

In order to detect anomalous behavior, a hybrid approach, i.e. a combination of a data-driven method with a
knowledge-based detection module (signature/rule based)
has been used. The data-driven based method uses Self
Organizing Maps (SOMs) and Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) to build models of normal vessel behavior (a detailed description of this technique and its performance can be found in an earlier publication [36]).
The normal behavioral model is a probability density
function synthesized from a weighted sum of individual multivariate Gaussian distributions: P (x1 , ..., xn ) =
D
D
j=1 pij Pij (x1 , ..., xn ). The individual distribui=1
tions, Pij , in this case correspond to the model vectors that
were the output from the SOM. Each model vector is characterized by a n-dimensional Gaussian probability density
function (in the practical scenario, n = 5 when calculating the kinematic behavioral models). The mean of each
individual probability density function is given by the final
weights for the model vector, while the variance is given

463

Latitude

Longitude

SogKnots

Cog

Heading

Probability
Prob (GMM) vs position

Observations and rules (position)

Longitude

Lat

Prob

Latitude

SogKnots
Lat
Long

Long
Prob (GMM) vs position

Prob (GMM) vs position

Prob

Cog

Prob

Heading

Probability
Long

Long

Lat

Lat

Figure 4: Visualization of the normal behavioral model for the cargo vessels. The grid on the left side displays the scatter
plots of the kinematic features involved (latitude, longitude, speed, course over ground and heading) and the correspondent
probability value (GMM value). The four figures on the right side correspond to different views of the selected combination
on the left figure: latitude, longitude (i.e. position) and probability. Thus, we can identify which areas present higher/lower
probabilities of encounter a cargo vessel (e.g. zones closer to the coast line are less probable than open sea areas). On the
top right, the 2D normal model (representing the vessel tracks) and the knowledge-based rules regarding dangerous zones
(red) are presented.
Since we have only considered vessels that reported “navigational status = under way using engine” it is obvious
that this field is unreliable, since many vessels that are not
navigating are reporting the opposite. This fact demonstrates that the AIS can be manipulated, as many data fields
must be updated manually by the crew. (2) A group of
observations present higher values than the threshold expressed by the rule, which means that even if such values
are included in the training data and therefore, will be considered normal by the data-driven approach, they would
not be regarded as normal behavior by an operator. (3)
There are few samples that present extremely high speed
values (and very low probability values). Such values do
not correspond to a typical cargo vessel, and therefore this
situation may be an example of a spoofing case, where
wrong information is broadcasted (e.g. smuggling situation). Despite the origin of these outliers, we think that
these observations should be removed from the training
data. Thus, the normal model would represent properly
the majority of observations, classifying, thereby, similar
samples as anomalous.
The joint representations of normal behavioral models
and the corresponding rules portray the system knowledge
space. Such visual representations show which areas of
the features space are covered by rules or by the normal
models built from the data, displaying clearly over which

areas the system has or not knowledge about. Furthermore,
these representations show how well expert rules match the
normal behavioral models learned from the data. The normal models are built under the assumption that the data
(the training set) contains only normal observations. Nevertheless, this assumption may not hold, since the training
set may include abnormal observations. In addition, the
training data set may not be a good estimate of the normal behavior in all the cases (one possible reason may be,
for example, the need of considering more training samples). The mismatches among normal behavioral models
and expert rules are clearly identified in the proposed representations, allowing the update and further refinement of
the normal behavioral models and rules, that might reduce
the number of false alarms.

6

Future work and conclusions

The interactive visual representations presented in this
paper are integrated in a anomaly detection prototype,
called VISAD (see [35]). We feel that the evaluation of
our suggestions is a crucial part in our research and, therefore, we would like to collect the opinions of domain experts and perform user tests regarding the usability of our
suggestions. During the requirements specification phase
of VISAD’s design, we have visited different vessel traffic control centers and interviewed experts in the field (see

464

References
[1] Technical characteristics for a universal shipborne automatic identification system using time division multiple access in the VHF maritime mobile band. Technical Report ITU-R 232/8, document 8/BL/5-E, International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Radiocommunication study groups, 2001.
[2] S. Axelsson. Intrusion detection systems: A survey and taxonomy. Technical Report 99-15, Chalmers Univ., March
2000.
[3] N. Bomberger, B. Rhodes, M. Seibert, and A. Waxman. Associative learning of vessel motion patterns for maritime situation awareness. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Information Fusion, July 2006.
[4] D. Bruzzese and C. Davino. Visual mining of association
rules. In Visual Data Mining, pages 103–122. 2008.

Figure 5: Visualization of the normal behavioral model
(blue samples) and the knowledge-based rule (green line)
regarding the speed values of the cargo vessels. The knowledge rule indicates the maximum value of speed that is consider to be normal by the operator (IF < SogKnots ≥ 22 >
THEN < anomalous = true >).

[5] P. Buono and M.-F. Costabile. Visualizing association rules
in a framework for visual data mining. In From Integrated
Publication and Information Systems to Information and
Knowledge Environments, pages 221–231. 2005.
[6] Y. Cai, R. Stumpf, T. Wynne, M. Tomlinson, S. H. Chung,
X. Boutonnier, M. Ihmig, R. Franco, and N. Bauernfeind.
Visual transformation for interactive spatio-temporal data
mining. Journal of Knowledge and Information Systems,
11(5):119–142, 2007.

[34]). We are planning to contact them again, in order to
evaluate our proposals. Furthermore, the prototype offers
much scope for enhancements and further developments.
For example, a rule-builder interface that will facilitate the
creation of new signatures based on new detected anomalies is going to be developed.
The main contribution of this paper is a interactive visualization module that represents normal behavioral models
and rules, used in the detection of anomalous behavior in
maritime traffic data. We believe that this phase is necessary for facilitating the comprehension of such models
and supporting the insertion of expert knowledge during
the validation and update of the normal behavioral models
and expert rules. In addition, visual representations of the
data mining outcomes may increase user confidence and
trust in the system, since the detection process becomes
transparent and accessible to the user.

[7] J.M. Cohen. High priority technical needs. Technical report, US Department of Homeland Security, Science and
Technology, 2008.
[8] P. Compieta, S. Di Martino, M. Bertolotto, F. Ferrucci, and
T. Kechadi. Exploratory spatio-temporal data mining and
visualization. Journal of Visual Languages & Computing,
18(3):255–279, 2007.
[9] M.-F. Costabile and D. Malerba. Editor’s foreword. Journal
of Visual Languages & Computing, 14(6):499–501, 2003.
[10] A. Dahlbom and L. Niklasson. Trajectory clustering for
coastal surveillance. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Information Fusion, Quebec, Canada,
July 2007.
[11] M.C. F. de Oliveira and H. Levkowitz. From visual data
exploration to visual data mining: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 9(3):378–
394, 2003.

Acknowledgements

[12] J. Edlund, M. Gronkvist, A. Lingvall, and E. Sviestins.
Rule-based situation assessment for sea surveillance. volume 6242, page 624203. SPIE, 2006. Multisensor, Multisource Information Fusion: Architectures, Algorithms, and
Applications 2006 1.

This work was supported by the Information Fusion Research Program (University of Sk¨ovde, Sweden) in partnership with the Swedish Knowledge Foundation under grant
2003/0104 and carried out in collaboration with SAAB Microwave Systems (Gothenburg, Sweden). We would like
to thank Thomas Kronhamn, Martin Smedberg and H˚akan
Warston (SAAB Microwave Systems) for their valuable
feedback. Thanks also to the other members of the ground
situation awareness scenario, for their suggestions and
fruitful discussions.

[13] J. Ekman and A. Holst. Incremental stream clustering and
anomaly detection. Technical Report T2008:1, Swedish Institute of Computer Science (SICS), 2008.
[14] T. Eriksen, G. Høye, B. Narheim, and B.J. Meland. Maritime traffic monitoring using a space-based ais receiver.
Acta Astronautica, 58(10):537–549, 2006.
465

[30] A. Patcha and J.-M. Park. An overview of anomaly detection techniques: Existing solutions and latest technological
trends. Comput. Netw., 51(12):3448–3470, 2007.
[31] P. Rheingans and M. desJardins.
Visualizing highdimensional predictive model quality. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization, pages 493–496, 2000.
[32] B.J. Rhodes, N.A. Bomberger, M. Seibert, and A.M. Waxman. Maritime situation monitoring and awareness using
learning mechanisms. Military Communications Conference, 2005. MILCOM 2005. IEEE, 1:646–652, Oct. 2005.
[33] M. Riveiro, G. Falkman, and T. Ziemke. Improving maritime anomaly detection and situation awareness through
interactive visualization. In 11th International Conference
on Information Fusion (ICIF 08), pages 47–54. ISIF, IEEE,
June-July 2008. Best Student Paper Award.
[34] M. Riveiro, G. Falkman, T. Ziemke, and T. Kronhamn. Reasoning about anomalies: a study of the analytical process of
detecting and identifying anomalous behavior in maritime
traffic data. In W.J. Tolone and W. Ribarsky, editors, SPIE
Defense, Security, and Sensing 2009. Visual Analytics for
Homeland Defense and Security, volume 7346, Orlando,
Florida, USA, 2009.
[35] M. Riveiro, G. Falkman, T. Ziemke, and H. Warston.
VISAD: an interactive and visual analytical tool for the detection of behavioral anomalies in maritime traffic data. In
W.J. Tolone and W. Ribarsky, editors, SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing 2009. Visual Analytics for Homeland Defense and Security., volume 7346, Orlando, Florida, USA,
2009.
[36] M. Riveiro, F. Johansson, G. Falkman, and T. Ziemke. Supporting Maritime Situation Awareness Using Self Organizing Maps and Gaussian Mixture Models. In 10th Scandinavian Conference on Artificial Intelligence (SCAI 2008),
pages 84–91, May 2008.
[37] J. Roy. Anomaly detection in the maritime domain. volume
6945, pages 69450W1–14. SPIE, 2008. Optics and Photonics in Global Homeland Security IV.
[38] X. Song, M. Wu, C. Jermaine, and S. Ranka. Conditional
anomaly detection. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, 19(5):631–645, 2007.
[39] K. Techapichetvanich and A. Datta. VisAR: A new technique for visualizing mined association rules. In Advanced
Data Mining and Applications, pages 88–95. 2005.
[40] J.J. Thomas and K.A Cook, editors. Illuminating the Path:
The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Society, Los Alametos, CA, 2005.
[41] J. W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley,
1977.
[42] P. C. Wong. Visual data mining. Computer Graphics and
Applications, IEEE, 19(5):20–21, 1999.
[43] P. C. Wong, P. Whitney, and J. Thomas. Visualizing association rules for text mining. 1999.
[44] Li Yang. Visual exploration of frequent itemsets and association rules. In Visual Data Mining, pages 60–75. 2008.

[15] European Security Research Advisory Board. Meeting the
challenge: The european security research agenda. Technical report, European Union, 2006.
[16] U. Fayyad, G. Grinstein, and A. Wierse, editors. Information visualization in data mining and knowledge discovery. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA, 2002.
[17] A. A. Freitas. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery With
Evolutionary Algorithms. Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2002.
[18] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Macia-Fernandez,
and E. Vazquez. Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, systems and challenges. Computers &
Security, 2008. In Press, Accepted Manuscript.
[19] D. J. Hand, H. Mannila, and P. Smyth. Principles of Data
Mining. Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2001.
[20] T. Iwata and K. Saito. Visualization of anomaly using mixture model. In Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information
and Engineering Systems, pages 624–631. 2004.
[21] F. Johansson and G. Falkman. Detection of vessel anomlies - a Bayesian network approach. In Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor
Networks and Information Processing, 2007.
[22] D.A. Keim. Information visualization and visual data mining. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 7(1):1–8, 2002.
[23] A. Kerren, J.T. Stasko, J-D. Fekete, and C. North. Workshop
report: Information visualization – human-centered issues
in visual representation, interaction, and evaluation. Information Visualization, 6:189–196, 2007.
[24] S. Kimani, S. Lodi, T. Catarci, G. Santucci, and C. Sartori.
VidaMine: a visual data mining environment. Journal of
Visual Languages & Computing, 15(1):37–67, 2004.
[25] I. Kopanakis and B. Theodoulidis. Visual data mining modeling techniques for the visualization of mining outcomes.
J. Vis. Lang. Comput., 14(6):543–589, 2003.
[26] J.B. Kraiman, S.L. Arouh, and M.L. Webb. Automated
anomaly detection processor. In A.F. Sisti and D.A. Trevisani, editors, Proceedings of SPIE: Enabling Technologies for Simulation Science VI, pages 128–137, Jul 2002.
[27] R. Laxhammar. Anomaly detection for sea surveillance. In
11th International Conference on Information Fusion (ICIF
08), pages 47–54. ISIF, IEEE, June-July 2008.
[28] E. Manavoglu, D. Pavlov, and C. Lee Giles. Probabilistic
user behavior models. In Proceedings of the Third IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining. IEEE Computer
Society, 2003.
[29] G. Manco, C. Pizzuti, and D. Talia. Eureka!: an interactive and visual knowledge discovery tool. Journal of Visual
Languages & Computing, 15(1):1–35, 2004.
466

