2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Visualization Techniques on the Examination Timetabling Pre-processing Data
J. Joshua Thomas
School of Computer Sciences
University Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
joshopever@yahoo.com

Ahamad Tajudin Khader,
School of Computer Sciences
University Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
tajudin@cs.usm.my

Bahari Belaton
School of Computer Sciences
University Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
bahari@cs.usm.my

Abstract- This paper follows a method to effectively provide
useful visualizations to the examination timetabling
problem. The results are some interactive visualization that
should provide a much more sensible way of analysis, since it
requires having to pay more attention for a complete
understanding of the data and also, offers more data at the
same time frame and space for the schools. We present the
analysis we have made to effectively provide the
visualization that built-in us, the Prefuse Visualization
Toolkit to develop within tree view on the data and other
information visualization techniques are being handled
based on the suitability.
We call this raw data as
preprocessing since it is not put into any scheduler to
generate timetables. Finally, interactive visualization has
helped timetablers, to improve on assigning of timeslots for
the exams in a particular school.

perceptual capabilities on the analytical process, while
allowing them to apply into advanced computational
capabilities. In common, visual analytics can be described
as “the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by
interactive visual interfaces” [8]. To be more precise,
visual analytics is an iterative process that involves
collecting information, data preprocessing, knowledge
representation, interaction, and decision making.

Keywords- Information visualization, Graph visualization,
Examination timetabling, visual analytics

Our objective is to further current adaption of the role that
interaction engage or plays in Infovis which facilitate to
analyse the examination timetabling problem into stages.
More specifically, we searched to identify the basic ways
that interaction is used in Infovis systems and the benefits
it provided to the timetable designers (users), timetabling
systems. In the next section, we investigate prior research
on interaction in Infovis techniques and examine how
other researchers have represented the characterized [4].
In Section 3, we describe the examination timetabling
problem, where lies the suitability of visualization assists.
In Section 4. We describe the research methods used and
analyze the interaction techniques. In Section 5, we
describe the results of a general investigation of
interaction and introduce how interaction contributes to
the explorations and analyses timetablers (human)
perform while using Infovis systems.

In this research work, we adapt visual analytics with
classification of interaction techniques assisted with
Infovis. These novel efforts, we believe that a science of
interaction would expand a core benefits to the timetable
designers and value of interaction in these fields.

I. INTRODUCTION
The intention is to turn the input information on
the timetabling conflicts data into visualization. It has
given a chance for the timetable designer and decision
makers, should be able to examine substantial,
multidimensional, highly constraint oriented, data stream
to make effective decisions in terms of institutional
requirements based upon time-critical situations [1].
Visualization means representation of something and how
that representation rendered on the display. Another
aspect is interaction that is positioned the involvement of
human computer interaction (HCI) the interaction make a
bridge between the user and the system as the user
explores the data and learn the uncover insights which is a
value of visualization.

II. RELATED WORK

Fundamental part of information visualization technique
is interaction. However, without interaction, a system
becomes a static or separately animated image (e.g.
InfoCanvas[3]). Even though it is of static nature it has
analytic and expressive value, the benefits are limited to
the data set provided. If the data input is growing with
more variables the usefulness becomes restricted. In
reality, consider an advertisement banner with static
images will perform several interactions however it is
limited.

Sophisticated
devices create
meaningful
visualizations and allow us not only to mentally visualize
data and concepts, but to actually see and explore the
representation of the data under consideration on a
computer screen. However, transformation of data into
meaningful visualizations is a non-trivial task that cannot
be automatically improved through steadily growing
computational resources. Often, there are many diverse
ways to represent the data and it is unclear which
representation is the best one. Visual analytics is more
than just visualization and can rather be seen as an
integrated approach combining visualization, human
factors, and data analysis.

To achieve a specific challenge of visual analysis is that
decision makers may focus their full cognitive and
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.23

454

framework Prefuse (Java) that helps for the raw data
representation the other methods and categorical methods
are discussed in the next section.

A solid background work on the complex
problem solving can be identified with the course time
tabling problem in during the process with the help of
visualization techniques [6]. These groundbreaking works
clutch the challenge with visual analytics to develop a
visual framework [1] for the examination timetabling
problem. The visual representation on the problem model
[1] illustrates the nature of visual aspects on this problem
domain.

IV. METHODOLOGY
In order to build a visual framework [1] more
meaningful we understand and identifying mechanisms of
various interactions, with the goal of building a broad list
of Infovis interaction techniques which is beneficial for
the scheduler and the semi-automatic timetabling systems.
However, it would not be possible to explore, examine
and evaluate all existing systems and methods; we have
instead on review the existing literature which is available
on social network analysis, gene analysis, and network
analysis field areas and identified the suitable interactions
that can be adapted for our novel visual framework here
again, the interaction would be focusing on the
usefulness, beneficial aspects. A related work on the
complex problem solving can be identified with the
course time tabling problem with visual optimization
interaction techniques [9].

III. EXAMINATION TIMETABLING PROBLEM
The problem involves timetabling exams into a
number of periods within a defined examination session
while satisfying a number of hard constraints. Like other
areas of timetabling, a feasible solution is one in which all
hard constraints are satisfied. The quality of the solution
is measured in terms of soft constraints satisfaction. For
example, in terms of hard constraints room numbers and
sizes are provided. In terms of soft constraints, much
more practical information is provided in terms of how an
organization measures the overall quality of a solution.
3.1 Problem description
An examination session is made of a number of
periods over a specified length of time. A set of
exams that are to be scheduled into periods.
A set of students enrolled on individual exams.
Students enrolled on an exam are considered to
take that examination.
A set of rooms with individual capacities are
provided.

V. CATEGORIES
The categorical illustration is based on the user
intent to perform interactions. Each category will be
discussed in the sub sections. We describe each category
to provide a definition of what it means individual
interaction techniques.
Category
Selection
Explore
Encode
Filter
Connect

A feasible timetable is one in which all examinations have
been assigned to a period and room and all the following
hard constraints are satisfied:
1. No student sits more than one examination at the same
time.
2. The capacity of individual rooms is not exceeded at any
time throughout the examination session.
3. Period lengths are not violated.
4. Satisfaction of period related hard constraints e.g.
Exam I after Exam II
5. Satisfaction of room related hard constraints e.g.
Exam I must use Room 201.

Description
Mark something interesting(Graphviz)
Show me something else(Prefuse)
Show me a different representation(Daisychart)
Show me something conditionally(VAE)
Show me related items

Table-1 Visual Interaction Performance Methods

A. Select: make the data interesting and mark it
This will provide the user with the ability to
mark data values of interest. When too many data values
are presented we can change the view of representation.
The main idea is to making the values of interest visually
distinct, and each to track.

The soft constraints can be outlined as follows:
1. Two exams in a row
2. Two exams in a day
3. Period related soft constraints
4. Room related soft constraints
Institutions may weight these soft constraints differently
relative to one another in an attempt to produce a solution
this is appropriate for their particular needs. Above
mentioned the examination timetabling problem, for the
visualization suitability we use an extensible software
455

C. Encode: show me a different representation
These techniques allow the user to alter the basic
visual representation of the data into different type of
visualization with color, histogram and view of each data
element.

Figure 1.0 Cluster graph view

In Figure 1 it shows the order between the enrolled
candidates with the course registered for a particular
semester. The arrow head indicates the link between enrolled
candidates with a course. For example, Student number 306
registered for FCP537, FCP554, FCP552, LKM100, 25967
registered for LKM100 and so on. The diagram illustrates the
courses verses the student number for the same semester or
current semester which is one of the significance of
visualization on this pre-processing stage.

Figure 3 Daisy Chart circular view

B. Explore: show me something else

The data relates to the subject enrolled verses studentid.
Note the histograms on each node, which show how many
subjects are enrolled by a semester for the current
semester. Each arc of nodes is linked to records that have
the same values. As you examine this chart, look at the
values on the histograms and the detail in the nodes and
links. In Figure 3 illustrates the studentid in the red box,
the green color histograms represented how much paper
that the studentid has registered for the current semester
and the links shows the detail of the related students
enrolled for the subject. The subject name has been tooltip
once you move the mouse over on any red box containing
studentid.

Here we use Prefuse a visualization toolkit to
explore the sample data items. We identified tree view as
it displays the subset of data values. The most common
explore interaction technique is panning. It works like a
camera across the viewpoint. Many InfoVis systems use
panning techniques for example Vizter[14].

D. Filter: show me something conditionally
Filter is an important technique for any type of
visualization. Here the technique allows the user to
change the set of data values based on certain criteria.
After the condition has been set, the visualization will be
presented based on the criteria are presented. The data
outside the condition will be hidden outside the display.

Figure 2 Tree view of the data values

In figure 4, basically three types of data items are loaded
rooms, subject and time slots. The criteria over the data
set as follows:

In figure 2 the interaction is toward on the subject
LKM100 which can be color coded as Red. The
exploration are identified such as; Exam data from SCHLANGUAGE the papers are LKM100 and LKM110.
LKM 100 to be schedule for foreign students whereas
LKM110 is a different subject.

1.
2.
3.

456

Display the room with the subject allocated
Display the subject with the room assigned
Display the subject, room and timeslot

VI.

The above criteria has been achieved once you move the
slider or move the mouse cursor on the dataset, it has a
very useful tooltip interactions.

Preprocessing phase, the hypothesis/approach consists of
developing graph visualization techniques and tools to
effectively analysis the dimensions values within nominal
raw data. The techniques enable the users to visualize the
information in a graphical pattern to interact with the
information spaces in a sensitive way, these visual
representations make it easy for users to distinguish
prominent aspects of their data quickly and involve the
user to explore the data.
This exploration requires the user be able to interact
with the data and understand trends and patterns and
engage in the analytical reasoning process. It is a
challenge
to
create
well-constructed
visual
representations. However, most visual analytics problems
deal with abstract information so the researcher is left to
select the best representation for the information. We
believe that this will help the visual modelers to
understand the nature of data then apply into the timetable
scheduler for producing time tables involving
visualization as a good communication medium.

Figure 4 Visual attribute Explorer after change limits

E.

DISCUSSION

Connect: show me related items

VII. CONCLUSION

This type of interaction will highlight the
relationships of the data which has already represented
and hid the irrelevant data values. In figure 5 illustrates
the situations involving the concurrent subject has to be
assign the examination schedule.

In this paper, we presented five different grouping of
interaction techniques based on the user benefits over the
problem domain. This novel approach involves InfoVis as
an important medium to make a bridge between the user
and the scheduling systems. However, the categories are
fit for the purpose on the examination timetabling data set
which has not fully automated systems. The benefit of
these interactions will provide the novel user guidance for
preparing the timetable and it ease the timetable scheduler
using these categories, it would be useful and meaningful
to lend a hand towards information visualization
interaction techniques adapted to the examination
timetabling systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been carried out in A.I lab, School of
Computer Sciences, University Sains Malaysia.
REFERENCES

Figure 5 Topological graph views

[1] J. Joshua Thomas, Ahamad Tajudin, Bahari Belaton, A Visual
Analytics Framework for the Examination timetabling problem. Proc.
5th International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and
Visualization. CGIV, ISBN: 978-0-7695-3359-9 on page(s) pp, 305-310
IEEE CS.
[2] A. Buja, D. Cook, and D. F. Swayne, "Interactive High-Dimensional
Data Visualization," Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics,
vol. 5, pp. 78-99, 1996.
[3] T. Miller and J. T. Stasko, "The InfoCanvas: information conveyance
through personalized, expressive art," presented at Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '01), Seattle, WA, USA, pp.
305-306, 2001.
[4] Chi, E.H (2000): Taxanomy of Visualization Techniques using Data
Stage Reference Model in Proceedings SymposiumInformation
Visualization (Info Viz ’98)
[5] Keim, D.A.; Mansmann, F. and Schneidewind, J. and

Figure 5 illustrates Nodes with courses the arrow links the
constraints with slots which is not available to allocate
examination. The colour coded nodes explains the courses

which has to be running concurrently in the semester.
This will be affecting the constraint dataset with the slot is
not available for the period allocation. The white color
square with a slash (/) has not related with the time slot so
it is not connected with the graph links.

457

Ziegler, H., Challenges in Visual Data Analysis, Proceedings
ofInformation Visualization (IV 2006), IEEE, p. 9-16, 2006.
[6] J.J. Thomas and K.A. Cook, eds., Illuminating the Path: TheResearch
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics, IEEE CS Press, 2005.
[7] James J. Thomas and Kristin A. Cook., IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, 26(1):10-13, January/February, 2006.
[8] Tsang, E. Foundations of Constraint Satisfaction, in
Academic Press, 1993.
[9] Alexander Hinneburg, D.A. Keim(2003) Visual Interaction to
solving complex optimization problems : DataVisualization: The Stateof-the- art Kulwer academic press London.
[10] Alexander Hinneburg Daniel Keim Markus Wawryniuk
(2003) Using projections to visuallly clustering highdimensional data
Computing in Science and Engineering archiveVolume 5 , Issue 2
Pages: 14 - 25 ISSN:1521-9615 Publisher IEEE Educational Activities
Department Piscataway,NJ, USA
[11] Wenjun Zeng, Daly, S. Shawmin Lei(2000) Visual
optimization tools in JPEG2000 Image Processing, Volume 2, pp 37-40
[12] Batista, G.D, Eades. P. Tamassia R and Tollis(1999)Graph
Drawings: Algorithms for visualizing graphs Prentice Hall
[13]R. Spence and L. Tweedie, "The Attribute Explorer: information
synthesis via exploration," Interacting with Computers, vol. 11, pp. 137146, 1998.
[14]J. Heer and D. Boyd, "Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
Networks," presented at IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis'05), Minneapolis, MN, USA, pp. 33-40, 2005.

458

